culture

Dethroning Art / Sharing the Responsibility

This month, Big Mama Rag is devoting more space than usual to a regular feature - culture. Over the last few months, we have begun working towards a more comprehensive definition of women's culture, and have made the conscious effort to integrate the culture section into the politics of the rest of the paper. It is our belief that culture is much more than what is usually limited to overt, artistic expressions. It includes the ways we live and relate to each other, even the ways we choose to communicate.

Used as a powerfully moving force, culture can be a determining factor of our effectiveness as feminists. In creating alternatives for ourselves, we must also question the dominant, popular culture, and push to understand how we can create a world for ourselves that is both challenging and fulfilling. This issue is far from comprehensive; it is just a beginning. We as a collective are only starting to work out what culture means in the context of the paper; and likewise, what Big Mama Rag means in context of shaping feminist politics and culture. We encourage our readers to join us in this struggle, and hope that in the future, this section will take on new meanings for all of us.

Constance Perenyi

ART. The word inverted and reversed becomes TAR. This is an important realization, not unlike the one that explains the human condition because god spelled backwards becomes dog.

Yuck - we've got to get ourselves unstuck!

The following is an attempt to jar loose the concept of art, to pry it out of the hands of the powerful and put it into the care of the creative. Conversely, it is a way to take the heavy burden of culture off the shoulders of a few in order to distribute equally, and in some way to everyone.

"What is the explanation of the seemingly insane drive of man to be a painter and a poet if it is not an act of defiance against man's fate and an assertion that he return to the Adam of the Garden of Eden?" - Barnett Newman (a painter)

"The First Man Was An Artist"

The other night, I was telling someone that in the 60's and early 70's there were these demi-gods of the art world who could make art just by thinking about it, without actually having to go through the earthy mechanics of making it. These men did not have to get their hands dirty - they would just call some colleagues and admirers over to their lofts (or have non-existent openings) and tell everyone what it was they'd been thinking about. Sometimes, they would even graph it out so that people who were less cerebral would have something to see; and a lot of times, they did not even try to find a means to share it. The point is that there was not a real art-making process, just abstract thinking. Conceptual art, it was called - art in concept, not in reality. The artist had become truly divine, released from reality.

And further from his subjects, his subjected.

Somehow, this seems to be the pinnacle of male-defined art history - like all those centuries of self-aggrandizement pointed to the moment, the movement in which the artist no longer had to make art to be powerful. He simply had to exist. In a satire called The Painted Word, art critic Tom Wolfe describes this phenomenon:

"So it was that the art-making ritual developed early in the century - in Paris, in Rome, in London, Berlin, Munich, Vienna, and not too long after, in New York. As we've just seen, the ritual has two phases:

(1) The Boho Dance, in which the artist shows his stuff within the cliques, coteries, movements, isms, of the home neighborhoods, bohemia itself, as if he doesn't care about anything else; as if, in fact, he has a knife in his teeth against the fashionable world up-town.

(2) The Consummation, in which curators from that very same world, le monde, scout the various new movements and new artists of bohemia, select those who seem the most exciting, original, important; by whatever standards - and shower them with all the rewards of celebrity.

This is as much energy as I want to give the male avant-garde. Luckily, most of this era evaded women, as it was meant to. But there are still lessons to be learned, and a lot of precepts to be examined if we, as feminists, are to dethrone ART and give it an appropriate place in our own culture.

WHAT WE HAVE LEARNED FROM MEN

Obviously, the whole concept of art remains somewhat romantic. Growing up in this culture, we have been influenced by its glamorous glow. Either we were encouraged to become artists (or at least to learn about art), or we were steered away from it because we were not talented enough, or because our teachers still believed that women had no place in the art world (a pretty wise observation at that). Either we decided to compete in the male-dominated art scene, or we walked away, unwilling to deal with the implications of it in our own lives. Yet, for all the romanticism, the equally idealized figure of the starving artist has always been popular too. And between these extremes and contradictions, the myths took root and flourished.

She's got everything she needs,  
She's an artist  
She don't look back.  
Bob Dylan  
"She Belongs to Me"

Myth #1:  
The artist is a highly privileged being.

The reality of this is that often, great artists attain their status because they are privileged from the start. Most of the women artists who have surfaced from the obscurity of the past were women who had access to money and therefore time (through marriage and/or inheritance). They had resources to develop their skills; and while this does not discredit their achievements (or minimize their struggles which were real and difficult), it does put their lives in perspective.

A disadvantaged male artist has now, and probably always will have, a greater chance of transcending his poverty than does a woman of similar standing. Women have never been encouraged to strike out alone; are frequently tied inextricably to economic reality because of dependents; have rarely considered art as a means of personal fulfillment (how is that possible when so many women have to struggle just to survive?); and ultimately, have had to work impossibly hard to prove themselves in a competitive and biased culture.

Myth #2:  
The “good" artist is a popular and worshipped being.

The reality of this grows, unfortunately real, out of the male-defined absolutes of greatness. Artistic power is accidental, a matter of being in the right place at the right time. It is largely a manipulation of public opinion, an extension of popular culture. It is obvious that meaning “real” art is not necessarily well-known art, and that the two adjectives usually exclude each other.

-Kathy/BMR

Fashionable art rarely represents struggle, or for that matter reality; instead it functions as an anesthetic, as a way to dull the pain of authenticity. And because they assume no one will buy significant art (significant in the sense that it conveys more than surface meaning), artists not only cater to popular culture, they play a role in dictating it. And in so doing, they guarantee themselves a place in somebody's hall of fame, even if temporarily.

From a feminist point of view, the traps inherent in this cycle are easy to discern. But not so easy to break through because we too exist in a society that is hungry for heroes. Growing up, I was aware of the conspicuous lack of women role models, and that seemed unfair. Later, as I was coming out as a feminist, I learned that there were women who had "made it", but they had been hidden from me as a child. However, in uncovering the past and affirming the present, women were letting something even worse than obscurity cloud the picture. Successful women were being put on a pedestal by a culture that was superficially atoning for its sins of omission (why else was the literary market suddenly glutted with books by and about women?)

And still worse, many women who called themselves feminists were buying into this as well. They too were becoming idol-worshippers - I am talking about what I saw a few years ago. I am also talking about what I see now. The way we as women "stoke the starmaking machinery" among ourselves is destructive to our movement and needs to be criticized. The parallels to mass culture are clear. We also have learned that struggles as a cultural expression do not sell, so we have created our own pop culture, our own pop heroines. In many ways, we have established our own hierarchies, which is as unfortunate as it is dangerous. We also can become (are becoming?) anesthetized, unable to pick up our own struggles, unable to distinguish myth from deeper reality.

In order to make those vital distinctions, feminists must push even further into the assumptions of what it means to be an artist. We have examined the "glamor" side of the definition, but what about the other side of the coin, the one on which the artist's face is lined with anguish, loneliness, defeat? There are more myths to be debunked before we as women can even be willing to take the responsibility of culture.

"So much the worse for you, you'll never be a poet. No poet was ever happy. I don't say that meaning myself," she added rather sadly. "I have never laid any claim to that sacred title, to which I have no right. And anyhow, no one is ever a poet or a saint while they're still alive. But you won't be one even after death, because you have never known how to love (read: suffer)."

Renee Vivien  
A Woman Appeared to Me

Myth #3:  
To be an artist, a person has to be miserable, in a constant state of pain.

Unfortunately, this myth is as pervasive as the rest, and is one of the most forbidding. It is romantic on the surface, but discouraging to people who are seeking balanced, healthy lives. It grows out of the art-hysterical accounts of men like Michelangelo who suffered through every day of their long existences. But it too has been embraced by women in history.

Like a lot of girls who dreamed about being artists, I was both attracted to, and terrified by the prospect of living so unhappily. But, I have come to realize that there is an enormous difference between constant suffering and steady struggle. The first is as dramatized and unreal as the second is challenging and worldly. Furthermore, the first tends to keep starving artists isolated in their garrets; but the second can help us break through our aloneness while it makes our struggle seem even more worthwhile. We open ourselves to human contact, and our lives, as well as our art, become richer, more substantive. We accept that we can become artists while we are living, and that we don't have to waste ourselves by committing literal or figurative suicide.

The day is coming when talent will no longer be measured by sweat and nest eggs and piles of one's shit. So why not unencumber us from the system of test and introduce the system of pure thought, pure idea - employing the entire body of human -

MORE ON PAGE 18