- letters

Keep It Coming

Dear BMK:

I was receiving the Big Mama Rag, which I enjoy immeasurably, while I was at the Oklahoma County Jail.

I have been transferred to the Oklahoma State Penitentiary waiting to be released on my appeal bond.

Would you please send my subscription to my new address.

Thank you much.

Sincerely yours,

Rita Silk Nauni  
McAlister, Oklahoma

ed. note: BMR is free to women incarcerated in prisons and other institutions.

Mistaken Identity

Dear Big Mama:

We would like to call your attention to an error in your November calendar listings. The Cris Williamson concert on November 15th is sponsored by the Student Union Board of Colorado Women's College and the Capitol Hill Community Center, not Sage Productions. We understand that it was an easy mistake to make. Perhaps you can prevent future errors by verifying these listings with Sage.

Thank you for printing the article on the Benefit for Janet Sergi. In addition to this event, our current schedule includes:

--The Leaping Lesbian Follies, Feb. 14, 1981, 8pm, First Unitarian Church. Auditions for the Follies will be held during January.

--Sweet Honey in the Rock, May 9, 1981, time and place to be announced. We will be scheduling more events for next year and will keep you advised of performances, dates, etc. Thank you for your continuing support.

Sincerely,

the Women of Sage  
Denver, Colorado

ed. note: Big Mama apologizes for the error. She would also like to take this opportunity to remind all community groups that items for the calendar should be sent in (we like them in writing) by the 15th of the preceding month. If you forget and want to try to get something in later than that, you can call and leave a message on the tape machine or bring your item by, but we don't guarantee anything.

COLLECTIVE

Come to mama

Clausen Takes Exception

To the Editors:

Constance Perenyi's discussion of my new short story collection, Mother, Sister, Daughter, Lover (October, 1980 BMR), not only presents a severely distorted impression of the two stories out of nine which she chooses to examine, it fails entirely to give an adequate sense of the themes of the book taken as a whole. A reader of Perenyi's review would probably assume that the volume is a catalog of “political stereotypes." She would certainly never guess that the main character in two of the stories is a girl child; in another an elderly woman; in yet another not one woman, but three sisters living vastly different lifestyles in three widely separate American cities.

Nor would she imagine that the stories about "downwardly mobile white lesbians in their late twenties/early thirties" are centrally concerned not only with political conflict, but also with parenthood and with emotional/sexual connections and conflicts within the lesbian-feminist community.

Perenyi complains that I “stereotype political women," yet she fails to note that the “passive” protagonists Alice and Amanda are each presented as politically active. To consider in detail Amanda in "Thesis/Antithesis": Amanda's conflicts with the sectarian Jean intensify precisely at a point where Amanda is becoming "more political," more sure of her own ideas. Later, she is clearly presented as doing "issue-oriented political work." It is Jean's sectarian “Organization"--not, as in Perenyi's mangled version, activities such as "writing leaflets, designing posters, living collectively"--which Amanda and her friends judge "misguided, crazy, divisive, dangerous, and above all irrelevant." It is Perenyi, not I, who has insisted on equating “politics” with sectarian dogmatism.

Political commitment was essential to the writing of this book, as it is essential to my life. It is inseparable from my woman-identification. To claim as Perenyi does that I'm telling my readers that "politics is (a) monster" or that I would like to separate art from politics is just as absurd as it would be to claim that I'm saying lesbians are monsters because some of my lesbian characters are less than one hundred percent "correct" and lovable.

But, incredibly, Perenyi wasn't content simply to denounce my writing; she somehow felt justified in mounting an attack on my character as well. From the headline which

BMR's phone number: (303) 322-2020

Susan Goding, Vicki Piotter, Lori Bradford, Eileen Bresnahan,

Constance Perenyi

SUPPORTERS

Susanna Smith, Bobbe Ross, Kate Sharp, Judy Barlow

CONTRIBUTORS

Carol Herman, Carol Reynolds, Sarah Withers, Phyllis Crawford, Ellie Burton, Nancy Blood, Marilyn Shatzen, Kathy Riley, Mel, Bobbe, Connie

INSIDE BMR

Local News  
National News  
Hot Briefs  
The Right Wing  
Greensboro

Big Mama Rag is a feminist periodical published monthly for women by Big Mama Rag, Inc., a non-profit corporation.

Manuscripts and all work (please!) may be submitted to 1724 Gaylord St., Denver, CO 80206. Deadline for material will be announced each month in Where We're At--it's generally the 15th of the month preceding. Please enclose a self-addressed envelope with all manuscripts. We reserve the right to edit all material for length.

Subscription rates are $6 per year (11 issues) for individuals in the US, $10 outside the US and $18 to institutions. BMR is free to all women incarcerated in prison and mental institutions.

BMR is on sale at the New Alexandria Library for lesbian women in Chicago and will soon be available on microfilm through Bell and Howell. Box 7229, Baltimore, MD 21218.

We are indexed by the Alternative Press Center, P.O. Box 300, New York, NY 10003.

questions my feminism to the concluding paragraph, she reiterates her implication that I'm out to destroy a movement which, in fact, I've worked hard and will continue to work hard to help build. She even twists “Thesis/Antithesis" into a supposed attack on counter-establishment feminist institutions like BMR--failing to note (though the information is provided on the back of my book) that I work on another, in many ways similar counter-establishment feminist periodical, Conditions magazine. Under the circumstances, I'm astounded at her talk of "accountability" and "constructive criticism."

I hope and trust that BMR readers will choose to form independent opinions of Mother, Sister, Daughter, Lover.

Sincerely,

Jan Clausen  
Brooklyn, NY

Connie replies:

I chose to focus on two out of nine stories in the anthology because they are representative of a view of politically active women that crops up in all the stories. While not every main character is the same by any means, each relates in some way to a woman who represents (as Alice refers to Morgan in "Today is the First Day of the Rest of Your Life") "the principled," and the “real politicos." And while I agree that the characters in the stories deal with issues of parenthood and community, I maintain that they are not shown as "centrally concerned" with feminist politics.

In regards to Alice and Amanda: it escapes me how the two are politically active in any way other than struggling counter-productively with their own liberal guilt. I am unclear as to what Amanda's ideas are about, other than her relationship with Jean. And if I connected Jean's "organization" with her activities, I meant to. For women like Jean, politics are inseparable from action. It is an insult to judge Jean, and other women, as sectarian because they adopt, and live, a certain "line."

I am not questioning your commitment, nor am I implying that you intend to destroy the women's movement. I am concerned, however, by the fact that these stories do not convey an active involvement with political issues. I ask again: if Amanda and Jean disagree, what is the substance of their conflict? What divides them as friends, and forges them as individuals? What are their politics? None of this is clear.

When I speak of accountability in this case, I am asking for clarification. If the characters in these stories are struggling with political issues, I want to know what the issues are, and I want to feel more included in their struggle. I look forward to knowing more about your characters as well as the politics behind them in a future anthology.

I stand by the criticisms made in my review of Mother, Sister, Daughter, Lover.

Just for Kicks

Hi:

Very glad to have been introduced to your paper by women in Durango. Please send me BMR--$10 enclosed.

I am in Rangely, CO, teaching at Colorado Northwest Community College as an exchange teacher. I am from Hayward, California, and the East Bay women's community and I miss women! So I am looking forward to BMR.

Where's the closest women's organization, community, bar? Is there anything in Grand Junction, or must I go to Denver? Or start something in Rangely? Wouldn't that be a kick? In sisterhood,

Pat Pickett  
Rangely, Colorado

ed. note: The only thing that we know of in Grand Junction is something called the Women's Resource Center, 1059 Rood, 243-0190. You might also want to contact Lesbians Colorado, P.O. Box 18767, Denver 80218, 355-3732, or Woman to Woman Feminist Bookcenter, 2023 E. Colfax, Denver 80296, 320-5972, for further listings.

As to your idea of starting something in Rangely--have at it. Let us know how it works out.

MORE ON PAGE 13

Mon-Th 10am-8pm  
Fri-Sun 10am-7pm

WOMAN  
To

WOMAN

MEMORIAL

“For HOLIDAY GIFTS, SEE OUR SELECTION OF NEW AND OLD FAVORITES

2023 E. Colfax 320-5972