more letters home

"Madness" Revisited

enough. Other allusions to mental illness in your article seemed to be: "The practice of psychiatry is to drug, shock, etc. women right back into the lifestyle that “drove them crazy." This is a typical radical/feminist analysis which I find oppressive. I don't believe that I or my ex-inmate friends ever were "crazy in the first place.” It's a way of invalidating our experiences.

(My own experiences I wrote about in the Vol. 3, 1976 issue of Madness Network News with the ink blot on the cover which I sent to you but it might take a while to arrive. I don't think the experiences described by any of the women in the pages of MNN--and there are quite a lot over the years--can be described accurately as "crazy").

There are a couple of references to “cures” in your article which are confusing. If mental illness doesn't exist, how can there be a cure for it? For example--"ECT is rarely a cure." On the contrary, if the symptom is rebelliousness, then ECT is a powerful cure. If there is no symptom (because people's pain is natural), then ECT can be seen for what it is--a form of torture. To talk about cures confuses the issue. Again in the quote you use (from the Madness Network News Reader?) about lithium: "If there is too little it doesn't work." There is a subtle implication here that if you find the exact right amount, lithium does work, and there are a lot of potential hazards...work to do what?

Again when you say poor people more often end up in institutions “even though their problems are no more severe" than rich people's. I think poor people's problems (problems in staying alive, etc.) are a lot worse than rich people's. However the implication here is that you're talking about "mental" problems, as if these were somehow divorced from survival problems.

I know that saying that there is no such thing as mental illness is hard for most people to swallow, because there are people who go around acting in extremely bizarre ways. I think part of the de-mystification of "mental illness" is to put out that these bizarre ways of acting are more often than not caused by the psychiatric system, which inflicts the horrible treatments that you so well described in your article. I also didn't agree with your statement--which I hear bandied about that the upper class is considered eccentric but the lower class is considered psychotic.

Numerous wealthy people are subjected to psychiatric diagnoses and tortures--One of the Kennedy women is supposed to have had a lobotomy, and Jackie Onassis was subjected to shock treatment. Many wealthy movie actresses such as Vivien Leigh and Marilyn Monroe have been subjected to psychiatric torture; the most famous being Frances Farmer.

I also have friends who are from wealthy backgrounds who have undergone the most horrible forms of diagnosis and “treatment” in institutions.

I think the key to who is labelled a psychotic has more to do with who is challenging the role expected of them. Naturally since there are a lot fewer rich people than poor people, a lot fewer rich people get incarcerated. One of the symptoms of psychosis for a rich person is if she or he stands on a street corner and hands out money to passers-by, which has been known to happen. 

I didn't like your analogy about feminist therapy/psychiatric oppression and ERA/women's oppression. At least the ERA addresses the oppression of women. Feminist therapy does not even address the problem of psychiatric oppression, in fact feminist therapy reinforces psychiatric oppression (see my article about Women Against Psychiatric Assault in No More Cages). It's too bad you didn't mention that the vast majority of feminist therapists are not even willing to see former psychiatric inmates as clients.

I also didn't like the dichotomy presented in your closing paragraph about "women in therapy" being able to work with women who are demanding an end to capitalism and patriarchy, as if somehow being in therapy precluded one from already having a radical analysis--Well maybe it does at that. Did you see the article "Therapy As Oppression" in Vol 6, No. 1 of Madness Network News?

In Struggle,

Arrow

P.S. I didn't mean this to be so critical. I especially liked the part in your article where you talked about your own experiences. Please keep in touch--and thanks for your work.

Dear Arrow,

Thank you very much for your letters. I thank you for your obviously careful reading and response to my article. It meant a lot to me to get letters from women long involved in the mental patient's liberation movement. It has lessened my sense of isolation.

Your letter hit me really hard, for lots of reasons. It's not easy to give or get criticism, and yet a commitment to criticism--self-criticism (see Constructive Criticism by Gracie Lyons) is necessary for my own personal/political growth and collective process as defined and re-defined by the BMR collective.

I also know that as my writing went to press, I was not satisfied with it and felt that there were "things" missing although I could not have detailed them for you, and also could not get any further with the subject of feminism/therapy in that writing. I had to let it go. I was frightened to see it in print.

And perhaps most important was my personal response to my writing process and the issues I am wanting to struggle with. It has been about five years since I have been in a psychiatric hospital...have tried to kill myself; and have been out of therapy for about four years.

Five Years! Now that's a long time. And yet in the writing of this article I was amazed at how frightened and angry and depressed I am, was, and got. I remembered scenes better forgotten. People seem to punish themselves in such extreme ways, for not fitting into our established system of oppression. I took time off work to write and then cry a lot and be real angry, not getting much writing done, (Making long distance phone calls to mental patient's liberation groups when I got to feeling so isolated.) I am pissed off that I am still so affected by my experience with psychiatry.

Women have said to each other in my presence, "remember when all Lori could talk about was being in the hospital?", a backhanded compliment, reinforcement that I no longer behaved that way...now being a political woman instead.

And I used to think to myself "Yeah, that's really an indication that I'm better (i.e. saner). I progressed from having all these ex-inmates for friends to having dykes and feminists for friends. I feel ripped off by that line of thinking now.

I know it was a situation that allowed for my survival and change. I just had to talk about being locked up to get rid of it, feeling like there are all these hands inside of you pushing out. The reputation of "crazy" dyke about town preceded me. Once at a dance a woman who had heard of me told me she was afraid to sit next to me, wasn't sure what I would do. Labeled "crazy" when I was most actively dealing with myself after being incarcerated. Now my personal change is given validation as "political growth." I can note the different respect in the women's community to this latter process.

So for me I started using the word crazy like I do the word queer--both involve some rather stereotyped behavior and yet oppressed communities have taken to using certain terms that come as a slur from outside the community, and yet are used with a whole different feeling behind it. I used to feel I was crazy in the more traditional sense of the word (i.e. schizo or psycho or something). I dealt with this by feeling real actively that I was two different people. That I used to be this suicidal nut and then somehow that was behind me some...I felt no sense of growth no connections, it was no good.

It took a long time working to be able to feel that I was not a divided self from self. This came after I had finally rejected therapy and gotten over the trauma of that.

I realized that I had worked real hard to learn to live outside my family's narrow definition of me, when I knew I could decide what was better for me than anyone else I felt unified and in control. When any woman or ex-inmate feels in control--then you know that something political is happening.

I was engaged in politics a lot longer than I would first ever acknowledge. For a long time I would date my involvement with politics with my involvement with the lesbian feminist movement; but in fact my politics have a stronger earlier base as an ex-inmate of the psychiatric system.

I don't like the dichotomy I presented in the last paragraph of my writing either. I do not like it, but I feel that is in part how I have been split by the women's community, I hope this clarifies what I only began to explain at the closing of my writing. I went from "crazy" to "too radical" with no rights left to feel like I have a connection, always, with both ends. I think that lots of “crazy women" have lots of radical political understanding of their oppression, you just wonder if anyone would bother listening to you if you are speaking from the wrong side of the fence.

In Denver, and probably other places as well, there is this sort of imaginary dotted line that separates "service groups" or "consciousness raising groups" or "groups of women struggling against alcohol or drug addiction" from "projects whose focus is political", acting like there is this "reasonable and natural split". In fact it seems so unnatural, for the oppression we all work to undermine comes from a shared political source. I tell you it is not natural, because I feel caught in the middle and it pisses me off. I feel like the decision for me to deal with my psychiatric history and my feminist involvement occurred for me in a vacuum with very little support.

I write all this to finally say that I accept much of the criticisms: in that I used the word "crazy" in a way that would invalidate the experience of some ex-inmates. I backed off from making it real clear that I believe that the women I described, that I lived with, to be engaged in active rebellion. They were all saying in a real noticeable way, NO! I ain't gonna live like this any longer, ain't gonna take this shit anymore! The crime of their therapy is that they got no support for that but only got told that they should continue to turn their rebellion and anger back on themselves. No, not insane in the first place.

I don't believe in “mental illness" or in "cures" for it. The ideology of “mental illness" is based on a medical model that cannot be carried over into psychology and used to diagnose and fix somebody's "sick" mind. For the roots of problems and the struggles that people go through cannot be called an individual, personal concern any more. The psychiatrist is responsible not to his patient in the therapy situation, but rather to the society. Society demands that the mental institution make people behave in an "acceptable" manner that is not determined by the patient as to what is best for herself. So from both ends it is the society that sets the pace for so-called health or illness.

And if you, or they, can't make your behavior right, then you are discredited or completely removed. There is no shot in your ass that is going to "cure" problems generated outside the individual. They are shooting at the wrong people, if it's change they really want. I have been real angry with myself for vacillating from a denial of ‘mental illness' and "medical models.” Indeed it does take a lot to say that there is no such thing as mental illness, I wasn't ready at the time I wrote, I am now.

In rejecting all this language that is oppressive, it is hard to know how to make sure that we don't emphasize the change in society and fail to come up with words that support people now in alternatives to the psychiatric system. It is a difficult balance.

The class issue in developing a feminist politic and response to psychiatric oppression is difficult and confusing. The tortures of psychiatry cut across class lines. And yet I am convinced that any medical profession practices classism, racism, and sexism in the kind of, and the quality of care that is given. Invalidating the suffering of “rich women" however is no way to go about dealing with the class issue.

And, dammit, the last thing I intended to do was to imply a split between "mental problems and survival problems". I know that part of the classism inherent in the "therapeutic state" is that professionals do not come equipped with any understanding of the attitudes of the working classes, the oppressed of any class, which includes all women. I wish I had a more definitive analysis of how all this comes together in the active oppression of all inmates in institutions and our necessary political response to it. I stand behind my perception of the political dynamic of the ERA and Feminist Therapy Movements. I don't believe that the ERA addresses the oppression of women any more than feminist therapy addresses the oppression of psychiatric inmates or ex-inmates. The ERA movement does in fact reinforce the oppression of women, in that it advocates equal access into capitalism as a way for women to reach equality. Any political movement that supports the system that already oppresses us, like Feminist Therapy or the ERA, continues the oppression of everyone. Racism was no more eliminated by the Civil Rights Act than sexism in the job market will be eliminated by the passage of the Equal Rights Amendment. We must demand a more basic change that would be certain to really generate change in our lives rather than just a new adjustment to an old exploitation. Thanks to you, Arrow, and DeeDee (see BMR letters June 1981) for helping me to finish my writing (for the moment) through the letters page. I thank you so much for responding to me, I needed it so much.

All this struggle gives me only an inkling of the work yet ahead to fight racism, sexism, and classism in the women's movement, in all radical political movements.

I respect all women who have defined their political priority to be in the Mental Patient's Liberation Movement and hope that feminists can learn enough to give you real support in your work. Not giving up yet,

In Struggle, Lori 

Big Mama Rag, July, 1981 - Page 21