Man Drops Suit Against Woman He Raped

Marilyn Gayle

Riley W. Henderson of Portland, Oregon, has just dropped his lawsuit for malicious prosecution against Lori K. Johnston, who had accused him of raping her. Lori paid no settlement, but she agreed not to bring suit against Henderson or his attorney Larry Sokol. Now freed from pending legal action, she can tell her full story. (See Lori's account of her legal ordeal on this page.)

Lori was raped by Henderson on August 19, 1976, and pressed charges against him the next day. The woman with whom she shared her house witnessed both Lori's departure with Henderson that evening and the condition in which Lori returned many hours later, vomiting, sobbing uncontrollably, her dress torn and her purse broken. An immediate medical examination confirmed that Lori had been raped.

With evidence clearly weighted in favor of Lori's charges, a grand jury indicted Henderson on Oct. 22, 1976, and the trial was scheduled for Dec. 9, with the Portland District Attorney's office handling Lori's case. On the day of the trial, the case was dropped and the reason for Henderson's acquittal officially downplayed. But in fact, the District Attorney's office had struck a bargain with Henderson's lawyer: both Lori and Henderson would take polygraph tests and the test results would determine whether or not the case would go to trial. Henderson's test was inconclusive. Lori failed hers.

Soon after this ultimate humiliation, Lori fell prey to constant illness, which rendered her unable to hold a job, culminating in a probable stroke at age 28, on August 19, 1978, the second anniversary of the rape. At the time she did not associate these illnesses with the rape case: "I just kept blocking out, for some reason, the rape."

Then on Dec. 8, 1978, Henderson's lawyer served papers on Lori for malicious prosecution, one day before Henderson's statute of limitations would run out. This bit of legal maneuvering made it impossible for Lori to counter-sue. Her own statute of limitations had already expired, since it dated two years from the crime itself, while Henderson's dated from the court action. The counter-claim suit filed by her lawyer was thrown out of court.

The lawsuit jolted Lori. "I felt like this person was doing something to me all over again." Every night for two weeks she relived the rape in her nightmares. Then she got mad. She joined rape discussion groups and started taking self-defense classes. And she helped launch and has been the motive force behind a campaign to fight the lawsuit and to reverse the legal practices that have caused her so much personal anguish and financial loss. Lately she has called for a boycott of the polygraph test.

Since Lori began composing fliers and news releases naming Henderson as her "alleged" rapist, she has suffered deliberate harassment. There have been two attempted arsons on her home, numberless phone calls, a break-in during which "kill you" was written in lipstick on her vanity mirror. And cars occupied by gun-toting men keep following her.

On police advice, she bought a gun and now never leaves her house without it, tucked into a holster under her left arm. But the sight of her weapon so alarms her fellow citizens that she has been frisked twice. Though now she is a crack shot, practicing weekly at a public shooting range, she's been unable to obtain a concealed weapons permit. Thus, she is in danger right now even from her means of self-protection.

Her Self

Talks About a Nightmare With the Law

This test, the Multnomah County District Attorney already had papers made up, and I was told they already made a "deal" with Henderson's attorney, Larry Sokol of Portland.

I was not even consulted before this "so-called deal" was decided upon. I was not told that it is my constitutional right to decide whether to take this test or not. It was implied that I was required to take this test. I was not told that if I refused that it could not be mentioned in court. Nor was I told that I could be prosecuted (by the police and/or DA) or sued at a later date by the accused for malicious prosecution for having given false information if I happened to fail my test.

I was told nothing and wasn't aware of all my options pertaining to my rights and trusted the assistant district attorney deputy to make the right decisions for me and to protect my rights! At a later date, I found out that a release of liability in connection with the filing of the complaint could have been made part of the condition to the dismissal of the rape. Had this been done by the Multnomah County District Attorney, I would have been protected and could not have been sued by my rapist. A release of liability in connection with the dismissal of the complaint is not unusual, particularly where the county wants to protect the arresting police officers. What about the victim's protection?

My doctors were willing to testify that all my illnesses were as a result of my trauma of my rape. A counterclaim for my damages caused from the rape (in the amount of $422,288) was submitted against Henderson but it was thrown out of court in May of 1979. This was because Henderson timed his suit just right. He timed it so that he signed the papers on the last day of his time period in which to sue me, but I was unable to counterclaim for my damages caused by my rape because more than two years had passed since the time of my rape. (In Oregon, a victim has two years from the time of the crime to sue for his/her damages caused from a crime. The accused has two years from the date of the trial in which to sue the victim for malicious prosecution.) Is this justice?

Rapists and their attorneys must be stopped from taking advantage of the loopholes in the laws. Henderson's attorney, Larry Sokol, was the same attorney who represented Henderson on the original rape charge.

August 7, 1979, just before the depositions of Henderson and I were to be taken (at which time we were to be put under oath and questioned), Henderson agreed to dismiss his case against me without costs. Part of the

More on page 25.

Firebombing Remains a Rubble

Judith Miller

Muriel "Mac" McCann, manager of the recently fire-bombed Mor or Les women's bar in St. Louis, Missouri, was finally cleared of the arson charge thrown at her for allegedly blowing her own tavern up.

Citing lack of evidence, the St. Louis Circuit Attorney's Office on October 16, closed its case on the fire-bombing and refused arson warrants against Ms. McCann, the only suspect in the case.

Assistant Circuit Attorney Michael L. Sullivan said there is no doubt the fire was caused by arson but he noted that police had failed to provide evidence that would connect anyone to the incident.

The fire and explosion that destroyed the bar occurred in the early morning hours of September 11. There was evidence of arson, including two 5-gallon plastic gas containers that were found on the second floor of the building, where Ms. McCann had been living until several weeks before the fire. If she had not moved out, it is quite possible that she would have been killed in the blaze.

The tavern's license was to have expired September 4 in the face of opposition in the neighborhood to its feminist and lesbian patronage. A majority of first-floor tenants living near the bar signed a petition opposing license renewal, but a suit was filed on behalf of Bonita Stephens, the bar's owner, challenging the constitutionality of the petition, and the license was extended after a restraining order was secured in behalf of the owner.

"The Concerned Citizens Against Violence," an ad hoc group made up of patrons of the bar and sympathizers, blamed tension and hostility in the conservative neighborhood for the fire-bombing. According to police, there had been a series of phone threats made against continued operation of the bar.

Neighbors reported that a man with the name Ernie on his shirt said he saw three men leave the scene in a pickup. He thought it was strange that they didn't get out of the truck but left a moment after the blaze erupted. One neighbor reported, "I heard the explosion and I saw the man who did it leaving the scene."

So why has the arson case been closed leaving McCann as the only suspect in the case? In the public's mind is McCann still guilty, since she was only cleared due to "lack of evidence"? "I feel like I've been crucified by the press and TV, all of whom have named me as the primary suspect...the police and press have made me out the culprit,” stated Ms. McCann.

Although the media had not reported it, Ms. McCann was never booked for arson. She was simply held on suspicion and then released. The press had further charged that McCann had "mysteriously" moved out of her apartment the day before the bombing. She had, in fact, moved out three weeks before, after a bomb threat which she had reported to the police.

Since the opening of the Mor or Les bar in March 1979, there have been repeated harassments of women with increasing incidences of violence. Verbal harassment of women finally mushroomed into threats of bodily harm, destruction of property, sniping at the bar during business hours, and repeated bomb threats, and finally the actual fire-bombing that turned the place to rubble.

For eleven years Mac McCann has fought many battles in the much-needed war against injustices toward women. Is it for this reason that the media has "crucified" her? McCann, however, will keep on fighting. Says McCann, "Through all our history women have been filled with guilt and fear, made to feel helpless in the face of constant injustices. I say no more. We must stand up and fight. I believe with all my heart that if we stand together we cannot be defeated."