resources

publications

It's time to break the silence... Sin Fronteras: A Gay Latino Journal begins publication Feb. 1984. Check out what's coming--State of The Movement/Denver, Los Angeles, and Mexico City: Coming Out As Gay and Chicano/Mexicano; Building Bridges Between Movements; Poetry, Graphic Art, Personal Experiences; Recent Documents From Central America. If you want to contribute in any way, write: Sin Fronteras, Box 1551, Denver, CO 80205 USA. If you want to receive your contribution back, send proper postage and return envelope. If you want to receive the first issue, send 50¢ in stamps, or just send in your name... whatever. There's a lot to be done.

The Lesbian Frequency; A Journal On Cassette edited by J. Haggard and Sidney Spinster, for lesbians only. Recorded to preserve and share the many kinds of lesbian sounds that reflect our diverse energy, experience, creativity and perspective. Each issue features lesbians from all over sharing of themselves. Two great fascinating tapes--3 hours worth. Comes out quarterly. Available with braille label. Two "issues" of the Lesbian Frequency are now available. For more info--to subscribe write: Radical Rose Recordings, Box 8122, Minn., MN USA 55408.

Most prisoners confined against their will must rely on lawyers as their sole link to the courts and any hope of "justice." Prisoners are prey to unscrupulous court-appointed lawyers who show more concern for the payment they get than in getting justice to the prisoner. United Prisoner Personnel International (UPPI) has prepared a scathing essay detailing such practices and is of interest to anyone trying to help a prisoner through the legal system. Write for "American Justice: ABC's of How It Really Works" from UPPI, c/o William Sawyer, Ariz. State Prison, Box B40424, Florence, AZ 85232. Include an SASE.

A new poster distribution project is being sponsored by the Northland Poster Collective (NPC). Socially committed artists have a hard time getting our work out to a wide public. We believe that by pooling our efforts, we who create radical art can have a greater impact on our people's consciousness and increase the income that sustains our work. We've decided to expand our mail order distribution brochure, begun 4 years ago, into a larger catalog which can encompass the work of other artists from across the US and hopefully beyond. For more info write the NPC 1519 East Franklin Ave., Minn., MN 55404.

looking for

Radio Manuscripts Wanted. Original half-hour and hour long radio plays by women of color or adaptations of works by women of color for possible summer production. Submission Deadline March 30, 1984. SASE accompanied works will be returned. Please include brief bio statement. Yenga Productions, PO Box 25216-K Durham, N.C. 27702.

The Lesbian Inciter is back! A core group of 7 women have come together to continue the Inciter. We're committed to putting out 5 more issues. We're working on #12 to be mailed Feb. 29th. We need articles, stories, reviews, pictures, graphics, news, etc. for the next issue. So don't let your subs die! Or re-subscribe and get the next 5 issues. Write: Inciter, Box 7038, Minn., MN, 55407.

Writer/editor seeks women who have given children up for adoption--either legal or covert (for example, a child raised by another member of the family or a friend of the family as their own, without formal adoption procedures taking place) - willing to write or talk about their experiences for an anthology bringing together women's voices and historical, cross-cultural, legal and feminist perspectives on the institutions and customs surrounding adoption. I hope to focus on the complex forces, overt and tacit, social and economic, brought to bear on women's choices or lack of choices in adoption situations. Inquiries from any other women interested in working on the anthology are also welcome. Contact: K. Kaufman, c/o Plexus 545 Athol Ave., Oakland, CA 94606.

Plans are underway to publish the first national newspaper for women of color. A flyer announcing the expected fall 1984 arrival of Between Our Selves identifies the paper as by, for and about women of color--"It is for feminists. It is for womanists." Organizers seek financial contributions of any size, mailing lists, office equipment and production materials. Also needed are distributors, correspondents, graphic artists, and photographers. To contact the paper, write Between Our Selves, Box 3277, Durham, NC 27705.

organizing

Los Angeles, CA is not only the host for the 1984 Olympics, but also the annual meeting of the American Psychiatric Association and also LA will host the 1984 annual psychiatric inmate demonstration against the APA, to protest psychiatric oppression. The APA epitomizes the dehumanizing attitudes and practices of institutional psychiatry: incarceration and forced "treatment," sanism, and the medical model explanation of problems of living.

We need help. We need money to cover organizing costs. We need your physical help...people who are willing to go to Los Angeles especially as the time of confrontation grows nearer, the APA Conf. runs May 5-11. (Travel tip: You can go from LA to Pueblo, CO for the 12th Ann. Inter. Conf. for Human Rights And Against Psychiatric Oppression June 1-6,

JOIN US HELP US. The major event in LA this year should be vast and present psychiatric inmates raising their voices in anger--and truth. For more info, or to send donations write: Coalition For Human Rights In American Psychiatry, Box 38302, LA, CA 90038, or call (415) 548-2980 or (213) 464-5659.

The call is going out, initiated by the African People's Socialist Party and the Committee in Solidarity With African Independence, for all people wanting to work hard and take an active part in building a social movement to come to the front line in Oakland this summer. In Oakland, where there are 10,000 homeless black people the demand for Black Community Control has gone out and actual programs and struggle for housing is being carried on, teaching and involving the community and exposing property relations. Oakland is the national headquarters of the APSP and Black Community Control Committee which has the strategy, organization and tools to make the struggle and call for national and international participation and to make the battle of Oakland spark a nationwide movement. CSAI calls on North Americans to come to the Oakland Summer Project and participate firsthand in the solidarity movement. If you want to support the Project but can't come yourself, you can contribute to its success by sending donations, contacting organizations and institutions in your community that may want to send a representative or sponsor someone to come. Call or Write: CSAI c/o Uhuru House, 7622 MacArthur Blvd., Oakland, CA 94605-- (415) 562-1920 or (415) 282-7670.