Colorado Feminist Credit Union: One Year Later

Big Mama Rag Vol. 5 No. 6

Survival Needs Undercut Political Goals

By Vicki Piotter  
and Kathy Riley

When the Colorado Feminist Federal  
Credit Union opened in Denver last  
August, it had established a set of  
principles, priorities, and goals in the  
area of women and money. One purpose  
of the credit union was to be a place  
where women could get loans—particularly  
survival loans—establish credit  
and pool their money in a woman-controlled  
institution. Further, it was  
to be a place where the contradictions  
of operating a feminist credit union  
within a capitalist economy could be  
confronted. Big Mama Rag talked with  
Donna Good and Julie Robinson, CU  
staff members, about how the credit  
union has developed, both as a service  
and as a political group.

During the past year, the credit  
union has grown as a financial institution  
and is moving toward becoming  
a self-supporting, "common woman's  
alternative." In the first nine months  
of operation, 148 women have received  
loans totaling nearly $70,000. Each  
loan has averaged roughly $500, and  
according to Donna Good, "the majority  
of loans we've given out have been for  
some sort of maintenance purpose—for  
someone to buy a car, a sewing machine,  
to buy something for their business, or  
something they have to pay to get  
through the next month." Most of these  
loans went to women who couldn't have  
gotten them elsewhere—because they  
had no collateral, no credit rating,  

a low income, or because their loan  
request was too small for a bank to  
"bother with."

During the next year the credit  
union plans to “pull out the stops" to  
become a self-sustaining institution.  
In May, it received a $34,500 salaries  
grant from the Manpower Administration  
of the City and County of Denver; the  
grant will provide four women with  
$785 per month for eleven months. The  
CU sees the grant money as crucial to  

its survival. Until the Manpower grant  
came through, the volunteer staff was  
feeling the pressure of trying to run  
a service that must be staffed on a  
daily basis, and must meet strict fed-  
eral bookkeeping requirements.

"The thing we do is so different from  
just about any other feminist organiza-  
tion. We are federally regulated; we  
have books that we have to keep; we  
have credit verification. Our mainten-  
ance effort requires daily delivery,  
and there's just no way we can get  
around it," Julie said.

The credit union also received a  
CETA grant which will pay a woman to do  
a feasibility study on the possibility  
of opening a branch office in Colorado  
Springs. They'd like to do the same  
thing in Larimer County, provided an-  
other CETA position comes through.

While the CFFCU is trying to come up  
with salary grant money for the next  
year, it wants to grow at a rate that  
would allow them to pay two full-time  
workers and cover the cost of running  
the office, which has recently expanded  
to three rooms at 1458 Pennsylvania.

To do that, they need to attract  
$13,500 in new savings each month and  
get it loaned out. The result, at 12%  
interest on the loans, would be earn-  
ings of $1500 a month: $700 for over-  
head expenses and $800 for two salaries.

SURVIVAL VS. POLITICS

The credit union said its survival  
needs center mainly on three issues:  
maintaining a paid staff, keeping its  
delinquent loan rate to a minimum, and  
attracting women with money to save.  
These survival issues have influenced  
certain decisions the CU has made the  
past year in regards to its initial  
politics and goals and the hopes of  
resolving some of the contradictions of  
operating a feminist credit union with-  
in a capitalist economy.

One decision concerns the CU's divi-  
dend and interest policy. The feminist  
credit union had hoped to challenge the  
method in which credit unions reward  
their savers with dividends from the  
interest people pay on money they bor-  
row—in other words, the method of  
taxing people in need to the benefit of  
people with a surplus of money. Wanting  
to meet the issue of class head-on, the  
CU's initial goal was to not pay divi-  
dends to its savers the first year of  
business, and then declare a dividend  

of 2 or 3% the next year. It also plan-  
ned to refund any extra earnings, after  
overhead, to borrowers who had been  
saddled with the fixed 12% interest  
rate, (the maximum a credit union is  
allowed to charge). Eventually, the CU  
hoped to charge just 3% on loans and  
declare no dividends.

"At this point we are hoping to de-  
clare a 3% dividend at the end of 1977,  
and we want to do that for more psycho-  
logical reasons than anything else,"  
Julie explained. She cited the problem  
of getting women with money to save,  
without the attraction of dividends.

Delinquent loans. Donna said, "If a  
payment is due June 1 and I haven't  
seen a payment by August 1, she'll be  
in court... We have women who call  
late and say, 'I lost my job', and to  
these women we'll say, ‘Come on in and  
we'll talk it over’; the people who end  
up in court are the people who hang up  
on us, who won't come in, who won't  
tell us what's going on." Donna added  
that several other women would be  
taken to court if the CU could find  
them.

Although its abortion repay rate is  

one of the best in the country, the  

credit union decided it necessary to  
add a new restriction to its loan pol-  
icy, intended to further curb the de-  
linquency rate of abortion loans, as  
well as other kinds of loans. The  
new restriction requires a woman to be  
a member of one of the CU's four fem-  
inist membership groups for at least  
three months before she is able to ap-  
ply for a loan. Julie herself raised  
the question, "What does that say for  
the 18-year-old off the street?" re-  
garding the obvious fact that time is  
a crucial issue when a woman needs an  
abortion.

“We've thought about every woman  
we've had to turn away, and we've  
taken it to heart that we've had to do  
this, but it will do no one any good  
(if we close)," Donna explained.

The only exception to the three-month  
wait, Julie said, is that "a woman  
can walk in off the street and borrow  
if she is willing to share secure the  
loan." That is, she must find someone  
who will deposit the amount of the  
loan into an account to guarantee her  
repayment. Julie added, “From what  
we've been told, if a woman doesn't  
have any money, she can get an abor-  
tion," referring to Medicaid and Colo-  
rado and Denver General hospitals.

Another objective of the three  
month wait restriction is to get rid  
of people "who are just coming in to  
fuck us over; people who figure out  
how to lie and cheat through the ap-  
plication form and then become a bad  
loan." According to Julie, the waiting  
period also "weeds out a lot of people  
who are automatic rejections—people  
who don't earn enough income to pos-  
sibly pay it back." Faced with a three  
month wait, those women would probably  
not even join or apply for a loan, so  
it saves the CU a lengthy intake pro-  
cess.

Despite the new waiting period,  
Julie said the CU is still able to  
serve feminists who are already  
members of one of the four membership  
groups. One note about those groups:  
they are (1) NOW (all seven local chap-  
ters), (2) The Colorado Women's Polit-  
ical Caucus, (3) the Colorado Commission  
on the Status of Women (only those  
women appointed by the governor),  
and (4) the Colorado Springs Women's Health  
Service clinic. Those groups (with the  
exception of NOW) are not groups an  

active feminist is likely to belong to  

before she joins the credit union.

The CU has submitted applications from  
eight other local groups to federal  
administrators, in hopes of broadening  
its membership base. But according to  
Donna, those applications have been  
rejected by the feds, and that de-  
cision is being appealed. Donna spec-  
ulated that federal administrators  
just don't want the CU to expand its  
base.

POLITICAL OUTREACH

The political outreach of the CU  
has included regular monthly work-  
shops on a variety of subjects dealing  
with women and money: how to buy a  
house has been among the most popular.  
The CU also does class and feminism  
workshops, discussing how privileged  
women can use the CU to benefit other  
women not as privileged. Staff mem-  
bers have spoken at such places as  
the recent Colorado Women's confer-  
ence and the gay symposium. This  
month they will be doing a special  

workshop, in cooperation with NOW,  
on how to organize a union or use  
existing unions to the best benefit  
of women. (See calendar).

Another area of success has been  
the creation of the Feminist Economic  
Fund, through which grant monies and  
tax-deductible donations can be chan-  
neled into feminist projects. The  
Fund, which was restructured from the  
Aton Foundation, is still getting off  
the ground, but should be operating  
soon. (BMR will cover the Fund in  
more detail in subsequent issues).

Some areas of outreach have been  
curtailed due to lack of energy and  
time. CU organizers had hoped to pre-  
sent a series of papers analyzing the  
history of financial institutions as  
well as current feminist businesses  
from a variety of perspectives—  
capitalist, Marxist, anarchist—and  
to share this research with the femin-  
ist community. The papers have been  
written, but have not been published  
or presented.

Believing it crucial for the femin-  
ist movement to develop an economic  
analysis, credit union board members  
had planned to hold weekly study  
group meetings in pursuit of develop-  
ing an economic analysis for publica-  
tion and distribution. According to  
Julie, this has been impossible due  
to the "time crunch"; however, there  
are still individual commitments to  
that project.

Colorado Feminist  
Federal Credit Union

Asked about  
her personal politics  
in relation to  
the CU, Julie said,  
"I see my work  

in the CU as a way of  
scratching the surface, of spending  
the rest of my life—and that's no  
goddam joke—developing a feminist  
economic analysis. I'm learning  
skills here that I couldn't learn  
anywhere else... Every day, I learn  
something new about how to manipulate  
the economic system, so I can share  
that. When I say money is power, not  
only do I want to take it away from  
them, I want to do it better. And  
there isn't any economic analysis that  
addresses the issue of women—neither  
capitalism nor socialism meet the  
needs of women because we get trapped  
as a class. I'm working with a group  
of women of diverse backgrounds, of  
diverse privilege, and we trust each  
other politically, and the goal of  

my life is every day seeing what those  
contradictions mean, and still seeing  
a future and growth..."

A principle of the CU is that "as  
part of the overall feminist movement,  
feminist credit unions can strengthen  
the economic power base of the femin-  
ist movement." As such, the CU had  
planned to participate in the develop-  
ment of the Feminist Economic Alliance  
of feminist CUs and businesses. How-  
ever, Julie said there has been no  
energy expended by the CFFCU or any  
other credit union in the direction  
of FEA. In addition, the major focus  
of the CU is its survival as a viable  
feminist institution, so right now  
its primary concerns are local, rather  
than national.

Eventually, the CU hopes to find a  
woman who's willing to be a legisla-  
tive lobbyist to “make our voice known  
as a feminist credit union." For ex-  
ample, the CU is seeking a change in  
the federal regulation prohibiting  
automatic payroll deductions for fed-  
eral employees who want to deposit  
with a feminist CU.

MINORITY REPRESENTATION

One of the credit union's major  
disappointments has been its failure  
to recruit Spanish-speaking women for  
office staff positions, despite its  
efforts. However, in determining who  
would get the paid Manpower positions,  
the CU gave first chance to those who  
had consistently worked without pay  
during the first year. The process  
worked smoothly—those who got the  
paid positions had wanted them, and  

More on Page 14