ae

editorial  
Funding Feminism  

The recent success of the Rita Mae Brown benefit on behalf of the  
Rachele Yaseen Defense Fund is encouraging news for feminists. A total of  
$2500 was raised for this lesbian mother custody battle, which is expected  
to cost a great deal more by the time it's over.  

Equally encouraging was the fact that much of the benefit money—as well  
as an additional $2500 the Fund has received in small amounts from individ-  
ual contributions and smaller fundraisers—has come from women who don't  
have much money to spare after the rent is paid.  

The fact that the benefit was one of the most successful ever held in  
Denver raises several questions. A key one is, Why is it usually so dif-  
ficult to raise money for movement projects?  

Most local benefits are lucky to raise more than one or two hundred  
dollars. While expenses are usually minimal, so are the donations given  
at the door. Projects or organizations without an active fundraising  
program often don't get community financial support at all.  

Economic Vulnerability  

That's the way it's got to be, we are often told, because women simply  
don't have much money. Statistically, that's true. Women still earn far  
less than men do for comparable work, and women workers are still clus-  
tered in low-paying jobs, where a twist of the national economy can mean  
sudden layoff. Add to that the fact that a sizeable number of all women  
in the labor force are heads of families, and it's obvious that economic  
vulnerability is a reality for most of us.  

Nevertheless, it's also true that collectively, we often have more  
money to spare than we think we have. At the Rita Mae Brown benefit, a  
number of women apparently spent more money than they anticipated after  
paying the $3.00 admission price. While gate receipts grossed $1200, the  
auction brought in $1300. (See Struggle column.) Given the fact that a  
good many of the audience were young, employed and childless, chances are  
the money spent that night was not borrowed from next week's groceries.  

So the question becomes, Why is "spare" money usually not spent on  
feminism? Several possibilities come to mind.  

As we've said already, women are economically  
vulnerable in the job market. Consequently, saving some spare cash is  
a necessity. However, the process of deciding just how much reserve is "enough" can sometimes  
lead to a refusal to part with any money—all in the name of "security."  
Yet we know that real security can't be bought in the context of the  
American economic system. (i.e. Small fortunes can be wiped out by a  
week's hospital stay).  

Resources Unused  

Another rationale for the lack of movement financial support is the fact  
that as a group, women are often simply not aware of how much financial  
resources we do have—resources in the sense of surplus money after  
survival bills are paid. There are reasons for this.  

First, for many of us, just out of school, our parents' homes or a  
marriage—having our own money is a relatively recent experience.  

Second, the fact that we are collectively without real financial  
power in this society gets carried over into a feeling of powerlessness  
within our own communities. Sometimes that feeling of powerlessness hap-  
pens because we are not used to working together for a larger, shared goal.  
(For example, a $5 donation to Big Mama Rag may not seem significant to  
the donor, unless perhaps she knows that eight other women are also  
sending in $5 apiece that month. The result: BMR's rent is paid.)  

Another possible reason behind the lack of financial support for fem-  
inism is lack of commitment to the movement. To the extent that this is  
true, it means that as a group, we haven't yet identified feminism as in-  
tegral to our lives. When there is a refusal to put time and/or money  
into feminism, we know that the personal has yet to become political, and  
feminism remains merely a “cause."  

It's true that there is no systematic or accepted means of offering  
recognition to women who give money to the movement. This raises the  
question, Do feminists need recognition? And if so, what kind? Business  
and industry have practiced this ad nauseam: certificates, plaques, cere-  
monial dinners and building dedications all go along with the business of  
corporate gift-giving. Neither this sort of thing—nor any so-called  
feminist equivalent (gold-plated first editions of The Feminine Mystique?  
maybe?)—are what we have in mind.  

Recognition Counts  

Women who donate time to projects receive a recognition of sorts: that  
is, either a public recognition that comes with having one's name attached  
to a project, or the more private recognition that comes from having one's  
work acknowledged and appreciated by co-workers. We are not suggesting  
that this is a prime motive for feminists to continue the struggle;  
rather, this kind of shared recognition—or mutual support—makes work  
easier, more stimulating and more likely to continue. A woman whose  
primary commitment is in money rather than time seldom gets that kind of  
support, even though the $10 check she sends to a project may represent  
half a day's work at a job she barely tolerates. We need to find ways to  
acknowledge that.  

The other side to the recognition issue is the fact that often it is not  
necessary. Hundreds of dollars have come to the Rachele Yaseen Defense  
Fund in small contributions from women who expect nothing more than a  
thank you note. In one way or another they have made a personal connection  
with an issue that somehow touches their lives.  

The Rachele Yaseen drive has been a highly visible and well-organized  
one. The response is amazing, considering that the movement has a lot  
of needs, and the sheer number of valuable projects requiring support  
can be bewildering to a feminist who wants to contribute something, but  
doesn't know quite where.  

Groups involved in fundraising need to be both visible and accountable  
for how money is spent. When this is so, women with money, time or  
skills to donate have a much better sense of what's going on in the  
community and what particular projects best fit their own priorities.  

In turn, all of us need to examine where we put our money and energies.  
We are not suggesting that women “sacrifice” for the movement; rather,  
we need to make sure that we are putting our resources in places that  
reflect our real values and concerns.  

Benefits Raise $ For  
Lallo Defense Fund  

On November 1st, 1976, one hundred  
people paid $2 admission to attend  
a benefit for M.J. Lallo, the Denver  
lesbian feminist who is fighting  
police harassment of people at gay  
bars in Denver. This benefit was  
the first effort to raise money  
for her defense against two jay  
walking and one disturbing the  
peace tickets. In September 1975,  
police officers gave out hundreds of  
jay walking tickets in front of the  
Broadway Bar in a blatant effort  
to harass people going to this bar.  
(See November issue of BMR for a de-  
tailed history of this case.)  

The benefit was a successful event  
which raised approximately $250  
for the $300-plus that will be  
needed for the defense. The evening  
was a warm, creative political ex-  
perience as members of the community  
came to share their talents and en-  
joy themselves.  

photo by Pat Lang  
Lallo read poetry, played piano,  
sang and did some lively comedy.  
She is obviously very talented.  

The songs which she wrote and performed  
were titled: “Here's to Your Sad  
Moments; May You Wear Them Well,"  
and the timely song, “Just Can't  
Keep Us Down."  

Friends of Lallo gave enthusiastic  
and enjoyable performances. Ellen  
Marsh was mistress of ceremonies.  
Carol Hanson played the flute and  
the saxophone and these instruments  
sounded beautiful in the still room.  
Sylvia Brady, a former member of B.  
S. Sugar, played bass guitar accom-  
paniment to Lallo's songs. Suzanne  
Pierson and Jacqueline Early (Soupy  
and Saba) gave their usual electrifying  
performance of songs, dance  
and poetry. They moved the audience  
with their high energy, political  
statements, and love of life.  

Gerald Gerash, Lallo's former attor-  
ney described the case. The  
issue is discrimination against  
people leaving the "gay" bar. So far there have been  
one pre-trial hearing and one trial.  
The trial was declared a mistrial  
because one of the defense witnesses  
used the word homosexual. The judge  
had refused to allow the word “homo-  
sexual" in the courtroom.  

This ruling by the judge prevented  
the defendant from raising any of the  
issues of selective law enforcement  
by the police and certainly limited  
her right to free speech. In order  
to bring up any of the real issues  
of the case, the word homosexual had  
to be used.  

Recently Kathy Bonham has replaced  
Gerald Gerash and Ruth Buechler as  
the attorney for the case. This was  
partly due to concern over the poss-  
ibility of contempt charges being  
brought against Ruth and Gerald. The  
publicity around the benefit (leaf-  
lets) implied that the two attorneys  
were willing to try to bring up the  
issue of homosexuality despite the  
judge's order. The publicity with  
its implications of intent to be  
found in contempt would have made it  
more difficult for Ruth and Gerald  
to effectively defend Lallo than the  
presence of a new lawyer. (Please  
see the letter by Gerald Gerash on  
page 2 of this issue of BMR.)  

The trial scheduled for November  
3rd was postponed due to the change  
of counsel. The trial will now take  
place on Monday, December 27th at the  
County Court, General Sessions, Court  
room A in the City and County Building  
in downtown Denver at 9 A.M.  

All supporters are urged to come.  
Christmas With Eve  

Lallo and Company are planning  
another evening of entertainment  
with a show called “Christmas with  
Eve.” It is rumored that Eve her-  
self may appear. The performance  
and holiday celebration will take  
place at the Oxford Hotel, 15th St.  
at Wazee, Sunday, December 19 at 5 p.m.  
Plans for the show and party include  
Lallo, Marilyn Martinez, Carol Han-  
sen, Sylvia Brady and other amazing  
local characters performing comedy,  
music and vocals and poetry.  
Admission is $2.50 at the door of  
the Regency Room, which will open at  
4:30, showtime 5 p.m. Proceeds will  
first be used to pay expenses and  
performers, then to pay further costs  
of Lallo's trial on charges of "jay  
walking" and disturbing the  
peace. (Send contributions to Lallo  
Defense Fund, P.O. Box 18165, Denver,  
CO 18165) For “Yule Laugh at the Ox-  
ford" information, call 832-9767.  

2’s Bookstore Opens In Boulder  

A new treat for all of us in the  
area is Lilith, a woman's bookstore  
in Boulder. The store located in a  
blue house at 1743 Walnut St. opened  
the first of December. The store  
is the fulfillment of a dream for  
Emily Crushy, the founder of the  
store who lives in the back of the  
house. As part of her commitment  
to the feminist movement and the  
bookstore, she feels it is important  
that she not separate her personal  
life from her life at the bookstore.  
With this in mind, the store plans  
to be open 7 days a week, Monday -  
Saturday 10-8 p.m. and Sunday noon -  
5 p.m.  

Lilith carries “everything” from  
the feminist presses, some books by  
women published with the "straight"  
presses, and records from Project 1,  
Olivia, and Schroeder Records. The  
store has one room set aside as a  
lounge for women and children only.  
Emily has also subscribed to a large  
number of feminist journals which  
will be available to read or buy.  

Emily started this store on her  
own, borrowing the $8000 she needed  
for buying stock and making repairs  
on the house. The store is non-pro-  
fit, with the money going only to  
meet mortgage payments on the house,  
utility bills, and the buying of  
new books. Emily is receiving no  
money from the store and will staff  
the store herself, with the help  
of volunteers.  

If you have energy to put into this  
bookstore, go by or call Emily at  
449-9497.  

The new magazine of women’s culture  

Each issue provides 150 pages of  
feature articles  
investigative reporting  
reviews  
criticism  
historical analysis  
theory  
creative writing  
visual art  
representing the broadest spectrum  
of feminist thought  

plus  

access to practical resources following  
the model of Chrysalis’s predecessors  
The New Woman's Survival Catalog  
and  
The New Woman's Survival Sourcebook  

Subscribe now — charter price $8  
c/o The Woman's Building -  
1727 N. Spring St., Los Angeles, CA 90012