Cyclar: Women’s Community Calendar

Travelinglight, 1975

Kate Sharp

Cyclar: Women’s Community Calendar is a delightful combination of exciting and moving photographs as well as both obscure and well-known herstorical facts.

The calendar contains a great many photographs reflecting both concerns within the women’s community and also photographs of individual women or groups of women engaged in a great variety of activities. The women pictured are engaged in such activities as musical performances, athletic endeavors, feminist rallies and demonstrations, working on the job, and interacting with children, among many others. The photographs represent the work of ten different photographers and perhaps this is why the photographs themselves are so diverse both stylistically and thematically.

The herstorical information contained within the calendar (dates on the calendar correspond to important dates in herstory) covers as wide a range as do the photographs. Some events and persons mentioned are familiar to all of us, though some are new and extremely obscure. The facts are often (although, unfortunately, not always) fascinating and keep one flipping through the pages feeling amazed by and proud of the infinite variety of things women have accomplished throughout herstory.

The calendar also contains a minimal amount of information on astrology and biorhythms.

In the words of the introduction to Cyclar, “Women’s community is woman-oriented, based on the experience of our lives and souls: a self-identification of our needs and desires.” Alas, Cyclar is a truly beautiful work we can all identify with, on at least some level. We recognize some part of ourselves in the photographs and we realize the scope of our heritage in the text.

Copies of the calendar can be gotten at Woman to Woman Bookcenter here in Denver or by writing to: Travelinglight, P.O. Box 6063, Austin, Texas 78763. They're also planning a women’s photo journal (see Hot Briefs, this issue).

BMR APOLOGIES

The photographs which appeared with our Minneapolis Women’s House article last issue were not by Blue, as credited by us. They were provided by Chrysalis, one of the groups using the house.

Feminist Alliance Against Rape Bi-monthly Newsletter

Over 200 groups worldwide are organized against rape. Their political and tactical struggles are of interest to all feminists. Read F.A.A.R. News for:

news of innovative anti-rape projects being developed by women.

analysis of issues and problems which face women committed to stopping rape... prisons, reformism, professionalism, funding, rape prevention, etc.

Annual subscription rates: $5/individuals, $10/institutions

P.O. Box 21033 Washington, D.C. 20009

paula wallace

Big Mama Rag Vol. 4 No. 1

Sibyl-Child Double Issue Disappoints

Blue

Sibyl-Child's special double issue, “Women: Their Art, Their Image” promises a lot. The journal is founded, written, illustrated, and distributed by women for women. It is named to stress the thrust toward becoming, the search for selfhood, in women’s art; its stated aim is to provide “a strong image of womanpower”; and its thick covers enclose poetry, graphics, photographs, reviews, information, and three lengthy workshop-discussions. It is a shock, then, to find the content overwhelmingly timid and if not male-identified, at least establishment-oriented.

The feminists in the volume stick out like sore thumbs. There are the staff members of Quest, Desperate Living, and Women: A Journal of Liberation involved in the final, redeeming workshop on women’s publications, and there are one or two poets who rise above sweetness and sorrow. There is, finally, one of the editors who writes brief, affirmative reviews of Alta and the Nomadic Sisters, and who tries valiantly to herd the first two workshops into a discussion of feminism and feminist art.

The participants in the first two workshops, whose work dots the rest of the issue, seem to cringe at the mere suggestion of feminism. “I just don’t buy this feminist trip,” says one; “I wouldn't want to be labeled anything,” adds another; “I’m an individual,” crows a third. These are active, effective women teachers, critics, playwrights, directors, editors, working artists. The reasons they shrink from identifying themselves with women are evidently practical, personal, and political.

The practical reason is easy. The art world is controlled by men. To be woman-identified is to find one’s work excluded from galleries and mocked by audiences, one’s career “curtailed by its feminism.” The alternative, of course, is to find one’s consciousness curtailed by one’s career — and in some cases, this seems to be just what has happened here.

A personal consciousness exists, though it is tepid, quickly intimidated by humanism (“I would never say it’s harder for a woman than it is for a man”), and easily deflected into such trivia as a discussion of Cary Grant vs. Fred MacMurray. It is an uneasy, unrelieved consciousness, one which betrays the participants’ radical inability to affirm their womanhood and to release their anger.

What is it to be a woman? Most of the participants seem bored or irritated by the question. One writer suggests that “women aren't particularly interesting in and of themselves.” Another says she doesn't know “if I even want to find out what the link is between sexuality and what I create.” No one can seem to find a positive term for women: “feminine” indicates self-indulgent narcissism, “female” suggests soft submissiveness, and, most threatening of all, “feminist” seems to them to mean mindless, indiscriminate anger. Their rejection of feminism may derive, in fact, from their embarrassment about anger. It's not that their anger doesn't exist: there are complaints about having to clean the house, find the babysitter, and listen to their artwork described as a hobby; there's a low rumble of jealousy over the money, time, and dignity automatically accorded the male artist; there’s even a protest over exclusion from an exhibition (though it was organized and supervised by a husband).

The problem is that they seem afraid to tap their anger as a creative source, almost as if to do so would explode the structures of their art. What are they left with? “We have to make many, many compromises,” says one; “I try to keep myself happy most of the time,” adds another. They all avoid writing about “those horrible, awful, nasty, neurotic things in my own life,” and they all seem to agree that anger makes “lousy” work.

Anger, on the contrary, might make the work here stronger, clearer, more substantial. It would also expand the political consciousness of the volume beyond the woes of white middle-class suburbia. The problems of blacks, lesbians, working-class and third-world women are, with the virtual exception of the final workshop, wholly ignored. The only solution suggested is the individual solution, and it doesn’t seem to have solved anything, even for the women who suggest it.

Sibyl-Child has a rich subject. It has strong, whimsical graphics by Juanity Mondello and a serious, informative final workshop. For the rest, however, Sibyl-Child, perhaps because it promises so much, proves extremely disappointing.

“Sometimes it takes a rainy day, just to know everything's gonna be all right.”

“Dream Child” and “Song of the Soul” are inspiring in their spirit of celebration. “Sister” I find to be the most moving harmonically of any song on the album.

Other memorable moments include a number of purely delightful piano intros and breaks, backup vocal contributions that are sheer genius, and moving soarings of Cris’ flawless voice.

Cris and the women at Olivia have produced a gem. Thank you one and all.

RIP BOOKSTORE
737 E. 17th Ave.

LANCE WOODAS SECTION

ALSO BOOKS ON GAY LIBERATION, CUBA, PITTMAN, MARXISM, FEMINISM, U.S. IMPERIALISM,

ALL BOOKS 20% OFF AT ALL TIMES

The Natural Birth Control Book

New Woman, New Earth $8.95
Loving Women $6.95
The Magic of Findhorn $8.95
Keys to Innerspace $5.95
Biorhythm: A Personal Science $8.95