10

Against Our Will: Men, Women, and Rape

Susan Brownmiller, 1975  
Simon & Schuster $10.95

Carol Lease

Rape and sexual assault are two issues that the women’s movement has seen as vital to the lives of all women. Rape crisis centers, task forces, 24-hour hotlines, court watchers, emergency room victim assistance programs, self-defense classes, deadbolt locks, warnings or caution over every dark tree, street, and bedroom have all been part of efforts to prevent rape, assist its victims, and to hopefully ultimately destroy it. Lately, the rehabilitation of the rapist has become a focal point in means to stop rape. But the incidence of rape has not stopped or even declined but has, in fact, increased.

Whether or not a woman has been personally sexually assaulted, she lives with the knowledge that she can be raped, even murdered merely because she was born female. Her gender renders her body an available object for violent sexual abuse, contempt, and hatred. “Little rapes,” the wolf-whistles, cat-calling, the debasement of women in movies, pornography, the second-class position of all women in this country remind women who has power over their lives.

Women are re-examining rape and seeing it from different perspectives. An understanding of rape as a political power relationship is emerging. And the fall publication of Against Our Will: Men, Women, and Rape by Susan Brownmiller has provided the women’s movement with an analysis of rape from a historical point of view and is an invaluable tool for women to have in developing theory, solutions, and actions concerning rape.

Everyman As Rapist

Rape is closely scrutinized as the pervasive, logical relationship between all men and women, not as the aberrant behavior of some men. Of course, all men aren't criminal rapists (as currently defined in terms of the law). But all men benefit from the “service” that criminal rapists perform. The rapist that we read about in the paper serves as the “front line shock troop” for the entire army of men.

Brownmiller’s book is very well documented and researched. It is hard, if not impossible, to read it without putting it down and taking walks at regular intervals, especially in the chapter on war. It is a factual book; her interpretation is fair, not polemical or boring. It is not a book of rhetoric but calm, logical writing and argument. For the first time, the “masculine ideology of rape” is examined and a political analysis of rape emerges. There are many conclusions with which a reader may leave the book, but ambivalence won't be one of them.

It is the hope of the author that women will be able to learn about our present condition by using the tools of historical analysis to give rape a history. She begins at the beginning and surmises that “man’s discovery that his genitalia could serve as a weapon to generate fear must rank as one of the most important discoveries of prehistoric times.” Since then, rape served a critical function that men used to keep women in a state of constant fear. Women couldn't retaliate because female anatomy made women “unequal before the law” of retaliatory force, which was primitive society's system of justice. Woman could not rape men. She could not call on other women for protection because other women were as powerless as herself. And so, Brownmiller concludes, women became estranged from other women because of the “inherent female incapacity to protect,” a problem that women still face today.

Women then turned to men, and men forcibly took women for exclusive sexual relationships so that property could be inherited by “son” from father, thereby consolidating power. Women were reduced to chattels, and the price women paid for protection from rape was chastity and monogamy. Man’s concept of ownership began with his acquisition of woman. His rape and marriage of her constituted his first forcible extension of his boundaries, that later included her offspring. Brownmiller concludes: “Concepts of hierarchy, slavery, and private property flowed from and could only be predicated upon the initial subjugation of woman.”

The Victim As Criminal

Since women were owned by men, rape became a property crime of man against man. Under ancient Babylonian and Hebraic law, a married woman who was raped was as guilty as her attacker. She was either thrown in the river or stoned to death. A virgin who was raped wasn't punished unless she was raped inside the walls of the city, in which case she was punished since, the thinking goes, she could have cried out and been saved. Of course, a defiled virgin couldn't get as much money from her father for her marriage (usually 50 pieces of silver) due to her ruptured hymen. She was often sold for a lesser amount of silver in marriage or sold as a concubine. Women of captured tribes were freely raped no matter who they were, thereby providing more soldiers and slaves.

Under feudal law, if a propertied, high-born heiress were raped, her rapist could be killed or the ravished virgin might be permitted to marry her rapist. Keeping property consolidated was very important. There is little record of what happened to raped women who were not propertied virgins.

By the end of the 13th century, Edward I decreed that the Crown take interest in all kinds of rape prosecutions if the raped woman and her family didn’t initiate action. This action made rape more than a private tragedy: it became a matter of public concern. It also served to consolidate power in the hands of the king. And yet, the woman's charge of rape was unduly challenged, just as it is today.

Rape and War

“Rape in war is more than a symptom of war or evidence of its violent excess.” It provides men with the perfect excuse to act on their hatred of women. Ancient and modern wars have the same patterns of rape and murder. Its outlawing in international law is completely ineffective. The issue of rape in war has been used by the men on one side against the men on the other side as propaganda to try to convince the world of the atrocity of the enemy. For example, Belgian men used the rape of Belgian women by invading German armies in World War I to show how horrible the Germans were. To the Belgian men, rape had nothing to do with hostility towards women.

In the war for independence in Bangladesh, between 200,000-400,000 women were raped by soldiers from both sides. 80% of the women were Moslem and, by tradition, no Moslem husband will take back a wife who had been touched by another man, even if she had been subdued by force. Even though International Planned Parenthood and other agencies set up abortion clinics and offered adoption services and rehabilitation for Bengali women, the torture that these women suffered led many thousands of them to kill themselves by rat poison or drowning.

The important thing about Bangladesh, Brownmiller writes, is that the incidence of rape there was no higher per capita than rape in other countries during the world wars. The Bangladesh experience is not unique.

In Vietnam, rape was not reported in the daily press even

More on Page 12

Vol 3-A, No. 12

Women Show

Photo Works

Kate Sharp

Occasionally, Denver is blessed by a real treat in the realm of visual arts. And even less frequently is Denver blessed by a show composed solely of works by women. Photography: A Woman's Show, which hung for nearly the entire month of November at Zach’s Restaurant, and which included only the works of Colorado women photographers, was just such a rare event.

The show comprised fifty works which unfortunately were hung both in a dimly lighted room and primarily above crowded tables and booths. Ah, the inevitable pitfalls of hanging a show in a restaurant/bar! But once I stopped being embarrassed about having to say, “Excuse me,” to every tableful of customers whose heads I peered over, I found myself enjoying a very well-juried, visually pleasing, and technically proficient show.

The show was judged by Anne Noggle, whose two photos set apart from the rest of the prints and marked, “Jurer,” were two of the most memorable photos in the show. Ms. Noggle has a definite photographic sense of humor which reveals itself markedly in her portrait of a middle-aged woman standing in nothing but the shirt to a set of long underwear, a pair of knee socks, and a cap. Although I admire Ms. Noggle as a photographer, I found the photos she judged “Best of Show” to be not exceptionally exciting. One of the “Best ofs,” Jan Zita Grover's, Linda was a good portrait showing both the ease of her subject and a good handling of single side lighting but was certainly not one of the more memorable photos in the show.

Most characteristic of the show was the recurrence of portraiture. There were few landscapes or abstract photos compared to the number of portraits shown. And in the area of portraiture, the subjects were mostly women, with also a fair number of photographs of children, and self-portraits. One particularly indelible portrait was one entitled, My Aunt Theresa, shot in Spain by Lennen King showing a very personable elderly woman sitting on a stone bench with a broom propped against the wall behind her. Pamela Bamert’s, Playmates, was certainly one of the better portraits in the show.

Very little color photography (that is to say, solely one piece) was included but some superb photographs that incorporated also watercolor or colored pencils in the print were to be found. One ingenious work by Judy Brown entitled, Steamboat Springs, included the use of feathers along with colored pencils.

Another theme somewhat prevalent in the show was that which I shall call “making noticeable the commonplace.” Most striking of all of these was a photo entitled, Sink, by Marcia Wallace showing little more than the name would imply. Visually, emotionally, and technically the show could have been little improved upon. Thematically, however, it could have been somewhat more varied. (But anyone with as profound a taste for portraiture as myself would not have found herself complaining). Photographs that captured “the decisive moment” and compositionally memorable photographs were also lacking but, all in all, Photography: A Woman’s Show warmed the cockles of this reviewer's celluloid heart.

Note: After this review was written and typeset, it was learned that there were three judges and three ‘Best of Show’ awards.

1976: A Calendar for Women is a beautiful way to organize the new year. Containing 13 photographs by Jeb capturing women in a variety of moods and activities, each month is its own page with daily boxes sizable enough to record any upcoming event.

The calendar costs $3.50 and can be ordered from First Things First, 2334 Ontario Rd., N.W., Washington, D.C., 20009. Bulk orders are available through Women in Distribution, Box 8858, Washington, D.C., 20003. In Denver, the calendar is being sold by Woman to Woman Bookcenter, 2023 E. Colfax.