BMR, Lambda Question Unwritten Rule

IRS Denies Tax Exemption

Cherry  
The IRS has again denied tax exempt status to Big Mama Rag for “advocating the equality of homosexual lifestyles to heterosexual lifestyles." In addition, the lesbian & gay men's group Lambda had its tax exempt status revoked in March this year for advocating an “unsupported opinion," i.e. homosexuality is as valid a lifestyle as heterosexuality. The IRS has no written policy barring the granting of tax exempt status on the basis of views on homosexuality. The IRS may be shown to be infringing on the 1st Amendment right of free speech by denying tax exempt status to groups who come out in support of homosexuality.

Besides the legal issue involved, the granting of tax exempt status would have immediate economic implications for Big Mama. The newspaper would become eligible for the Post Office's much cheaper non-profit rates. This benefit would be in addition to the more obvious ones of not paying taxes and the tax deductible nature of any money given to BMR.

BMR has been turned down repeatedly, first at the local level, then at progressively higher levels at the IRS over the last four years in its attempt to attain tax exempt status. The latest appeal in Washington D.C. was rejected Sept. 2 this year. Nan Hunter, the feminist lawyer who is representing BMR in Washington D.C., was informed that the denial was due to the newspaper's alleged lobbying activities, and its advocacy of the equality of homosexual to heterosexual lifestyle. This was the first time that BMR has learned about the IRS's position on homosexuality. Since then, Ms. Hunter has filed a new brief stating that 1) BMR does not put a substantial amount of its energy into lobbying, in fact, less than the 5% allowed under the regulations; 2) BMR, as a feminist newspaper, is reporting the relevant news in the feminist community and is not advocating any position. At this point, BMR does not expect to have its appeal granted. The next legal 

Help For Lesbian Mothers

Research Project

NEW YORK (LNS)--A research project of potential value to lesbian mothers in child custody hearings is being undertaken by members of the Long Island Institute and the Department of the State University of New York (SUNY) at Stony Brook. The researchers, funded by the National Institute for Mental Health, intend to conduct interviews and collect data in an attempt to compare lesbian and non-gay mothers, and their children's adjustments to living in a family where no adult male is present.

The sample will include families from rural as well as urban areas, in both the North and South. Results from those interviews will later be compared with previous studies in which men were present in the home setting.

Since no such comparative studies exist, lesbian mothers involved in legal action are forced to rely on the testimony of "expert witnesses," who are often disregarded by the judges of the case.

The research is likely to negate the concern of some courts that lesbianism makes a woman an unfit mother, according to Jean O'Leary, co-director of the National Gay Task Force, which is cooperating with the project.

The researchers are seeking women who describe themselves as lesbians and have at least one child, ten years of age or younger, living with them. The mother and children should have lived as a family unit for at least two years with no adult males (18 years of age or older) in the household. Other adult women may live with the family.

The interviews will be arranged by appointment for convenient time and location, and all information will be kept confidential. Women interested in participating or finding out more about the study should write to Jane Mandel or Mary Hotvedt, c/o Long Island Research Institute, Central Islip, New York 11722 or call collect to Mary Hotvedt at (516) 444-2429. Women in the Midwest can call as well.

Struggle

A Continuing Forum

Woodwoman  
The women’s movement today has spread itself over an incredible range of activities: feminists are operating health clinics, bookstores, newspapers, restaurants, therapy groups, recording companies, presses, radio shows, credit unions. Movement theory has developed to confront serious issues of race, class and sexual preference. Already last year's catalogues are out of date as the movement proliferates, nationally and internationally.

Since women's oppression has to be fought on so many levels--psychological, emotional, physical, cultural, social--our ideology has tended to focus somewhat diffusely. Our struggle has been directed broadly at the many expressions of woman-hatred entrenched in this culture.

We have come to a point, however, where we can develop no further without addressing the very basic issue of economics. In a capitalist society, everyday survival can almost always be broken down to dollars and cents. The concept of class itself, currently a heated topic within this movement, is tied to the existence of groups of people who traditionally have money and groups of people who don't.

Every women's project operating used money to get itself off the ground, and is using money to keep itself going. We have no unified approach to the use of money. Some projects operate as capitalist businesses, sowing their profits back into the project. Some charge just enough for their products or services to meet operating expenses. Some are supported financially by the women who run them, and some depend on donations or grants from other sources.

Thus far there has been no widespread effort to examine these and other methods of economic survival in terms of a feminist ideology. Because we have no guideline, any women's business can call itself feminist and set itself up to exploit the women's community. Many do.

Some businesswomen, genuinely politically motivated, do turn their profits back into the movement. The point is not whether there are enough of them to justify the existence of “feminist” businesses, but that we are dependent on these women's goodwill for the money they make from our patronage. We have no structure to ensure that feminist-oriented intent or assurances are carried through.

“WE'VE DECIDED TO GROW UP TO BE A FANTASTIC, SEXY CREATURE WHO MARRIES A MILLIONAIRE TO HELP FINANCE THE REVOLUTION”

Use of profit is not the only area where political principles are called into question. Many “feminist” businesses employ workers, and here again we have no consensus on employer-worker relationships. Some contend that feminist ideals can be served only through collective structures. Others insist that hierarchical setups don't necessarily contradict our ideology. Some maintain working structures indistinguishable from traditional patriarchal hierarchies and still call themselves feminist.

Another issue we need to confront is that of the traditional opposition of employers to workers' unions. What is a “feminist” employer's position when her workers organize, when they strike?

Again, we have no basis for criticism nor rationale for change as long as we have no feminist-informed economic analysis.

Examination of capitalist realities and our relationship to them as feminists uncovers questions of vital importance to the course of our revolution. One example is the fact that many commodities now sold by “feminist” retail outlets are made available through a long chain of exploitation and imperialism.

Another is the existence of a disproportionate number of “feminist” businesses offering luxury goods and services rather than meeting the urgent needs of most women. There is also the question of how to deal with the competitiveness inimical to a free enterprise system. What structure prevents women from cutting each other's throats in competition for the same slice of the market?

And finally, we cannot afford to ignore the fact that no revolutionary ideology will have relevance to the mass of people until it addresses everyday economic realities.

It is often boasted that feminism cuts across lines of class. This diversity of experience is of no use to us if we cannot reduce our struggles to the level of day-to-day reality. Some have money and some have access to money; some can barely feed themselves, and some fall in between. What does all of it mean in terms of cash flow, individual survival and the survival of our movement? How do we make sense out of it enough to finance a revolution?

Attempts have been made to arm the women's movement with economic direction. Recent dialogue sparked off by an article on feminist businesses (LNS, July 1976), the failure of the Feminist Economic Network to offer us an alternative to traditional male strategies, the work of socialist-feminist groups, and the efforts of “feminist” credit unions across the country have provided us with needed information and viewpoints. But a great deal more work needs to be done before we can be sure of our own direction. The feminist movement is stalemated until that work is done.

A study/work group is forming in Denver to begin exploring the questions raised in this article. Interested women are encouraged to get in touch by writing to the feminist economic study group, c/o BMR.

*I would like to note that my use of quotation marks is not intended to imply cynicism or scorn. I use them to emphasize the point that, without an economic analysis, we have no way of knowing what is feminist and what is not.