bmr: where we're at

The whole concept of community meetings to discuss pro-
cess and content of a political project is traditional in the
feminist movement, as well as expecting to give and receive
criticism/self-criticism. We try monthly to use "where we're
at" as part of that process so that our accountability can
be checked/challenged by our readers. But community meetings
are another thing!

Sometimes trying to be accountable politically to Denver
feminists is a hard row to hoe. At our last community meeting
(March 13) only a few loyal supporters showed up. We had de-
cided that our community meetings should be more issue-orien-
ted and we still think it's a good idea. To prepare a meet-
ing where we tell women what our needs are, what we do on the
Paper, who we are, what the paper stands for, just isn't en-
ough to add up to an interesting meeting. We have all been to
community meetings that we felt we had to attend to give crit-
icism and to show support, and with all good intentions--
were bored to death. Even though many women didn't show up,
we are determined (at this point—with gritted teeth) to con-
tinue to use the concept of community meetings.

Although the response to our community meeting fell short,
we have all decided that we are certainly going to continue
publishing the paper. In addition to our work, the women who
make up the supporters are trying to do outreach and are
writing, doing layout, typing, proofing and meeting with
each other monthly. We still invite, coax, wheedle and wel-
come all women to join us.

Each month, the second Monday of the month, we have a
critique of the paper. At that time the meeting is open to
all women, to come and discuss the most recent issue of the
paper. We feel it is necessary to go through the paper, page

OOPS!

The Hard Times Rally article (Page 8) should have had Kim
Womantree's byline. The graphic for that article should
have been credited -CPF/ZNS.

Hexes To Holy Wars-Nonpolitical "Pure" Spirituality Has
Never Existed (Page 15). The sentence (2nd para. 1st col)
should have read "Also spiritual movements have racial
(typo-radical) politics attached to them..."

In our Criticism/Self-Criticism (Page 5), (1st para. 4th
col.) our sentence was incomplete. It should have read "Not
only in this headline did we do injustice to movements en-
gaged in armed struggle, we didn't cover where repression
really happens."

On the ad page (Page 23) the camera lost the full title
of Pamela "Hurrican" Marshall's book, it should have read
clearly OIKOS: sinkholes & seeps.

COVERS original drawing by Laurie B. White,
San Francisco, CA.

collective:

Sue Goding, Bobbe Ross,

Supporters: Atverta Gallardo, Judy Barlow,

Eden Stone, Kim Womantree,
Wendy Highby

contributors: Priscilla Canney, Kathy Riley,
Blair Northwood, Candy McCullough, Vickie Barriga,
T. J. Feuerborn

Liz Lewis, Lori Bradford

Susanna Smith, Deb Luger,

Big Mama Rag is a feminist periodical published monthly by
Big Mama Rag, Inc., a non-profit corporation. Manuscripts
and artwork (please!) may be submitted to 1724 Gaylord St.
Denver, CO 80206. Deadline for material submission will gen-
erally fall between the 15th and 19th of the preceding
month. Please enclose a stamped self-addressed envelope with
all manuscripts. No responsibility is accepted for unsolici-
ted material. We reserve the right to edit all material for
length with the input of the author. Subscription rates are

Page 2 - Big Mama Rag, April, 1982

by page, looking not only at the content but how well we've
lived up to the style. Much of the talk is that page isn't
square enough or picking out the typos that weren't correct-
ed or finding out we had left a sentence out of an article.
It doesn't make for whoopee time but it's important to us.

We realize that when supporters or readers are at the meeting
it would be good (as in a community meeting) to discuss some
of the articles/issues of that paper or upcoming papers. We
feel that all of us; supporters, readers, collective members,
have to take the initiative to make the meetings have some
meaning.

The critique for this issue will be April 12, 7:00 p.m at
BMR's office. Production for the May issue will be April
24-25 and mailing will be April 27.

Amazingly, during the past several productions, nothing
has broken down, typewriters and strip printer have acted
friendly—our lives have been made much easier.

The bill we have that is outstanding is our rent. Our land-
lord is patient and supportive, our rent is $65. We owe from
November, 1981 to present. Anyone who would like to donate
money to that—please earmark the donation, it's tax deduct-
ible.

May in Denver is a beautiful time. For us this year it is
busy, it means that we have a theme—Women in Prison and
Psychiatric Institutions, we will be at the Capitol Hill
Peoples Fair and National Conference Against Repression and
Fascism will be held here in Denver.

Our deadline for articles and graphics for the theme is
April 20. Keep those articles coming in! We are hoping (ever
hopeful) that women will call in and volunteer to help with
silk-screening the clothes we hope to sell at the People's
Fair.

Reviewing what were our hopes for the religion issue and
what we have produced is certainly not the definitive issue,
but at least we haven't bored ourselves or our readers with
lengthy epistles. Taking into consideration that many femin-
ists have divorced themselves from the traditional religions
that have suppressed, oppressed and depressed them—judge for
yourself this issue. As usual—comments, criticism and praise
are welcome.

We've seen some daffodils coming up—Spring is getting
around to do its thing. The Rag

Credit lost

inside BMR:

Where We're At......-eeeeee 02
et so oben 0 + 0.a:6 2 ce
MEGACHAL . . «Suny cwwncecces cre
Haydee Torres
Conference
Sisters United
America Held Hostage........4
HGS Eis Oye cee See ye oD
National
International
HOG sBeEGE Ss onc ss be eo a ORT

RELIGION in or tases Oro pueane

Central America

Peru

Book Reviews
Internationals...s.s+lUyLivie

Women in Poland m
Culture.. 35 3<.0s stn so ee

Movie Reviews
Calendar peeecs 0 sn.s s dhevatpetn eee
MOrG SONS Peg a= ose co's Wh bereeee i
Classies & Ads..........18&19
oe nach agg cae ay 6)

$7/year (11 issues) for individuals in the U.S., $14 (in U.S.
funds) outside the U.S. or for plain brown wrapper, and $21
to all institutions. BMR is free to all women incarcerated
in prisons or psychiatric institutions. BMR is on file at
the New Alexandria Library for Lesbian Women in Florence, MA
and is available on microfilm (Vol.1#1 Oct. 1972 through
July 1979) directly from Big Mama Rag for $60. BMR is indexed
by the Alternative Press Center, P.O. Box 7229, Baltimore,
MD 21218. Our phone number is (303) 322-2010