Bullet Shelley,  
Ace Reporter  

CR  

(This is the first in a series of columns reporting on the battle of the  
sexes as it is being waged throughout the world.)  

Hero Ditches Damsel:  

Oscar Cheatham, a black truck driver, was instructing his white apprentice  
along the approach to the Bay Bridge. A woman came up to his truck and beat  
on the door, yelling for help. She was being followed by a black man in an  
Eldorado Cadillac, so Oscar sized her up as a whore and the man as her pimp.  
He refused to let her in. The pimp decided he was meddling nonetheless, took  
out a shotgun and fired into the cab of the truck. Oscar threw his appren-  
tice down and covered the white man's body - but lost his own life in the  
process.  

The San Francisco “Chronicle” article implies that Oscar would have been a  
fool to intervene on behalf of the whore, lauds him for saving his buddy.  

You Can't Jail a Madonna:  

After hounding her for four years, the Genoa police finally sent Rita  
Luciani Gemignani to jail for prostitution. Under Italian law, you can't  
imprison a woman who is pregnant or who has given birth within the past six  
months; and Rita had managed to have four children in the last four years.  
Finally she ran out of energy or ova and the Pussy Patrol nabbed her.  

Dead Madonna Eludes Fetus-Fetishists:  

The Colorado General Hospital tried to keep an accident victim alive in  
order to save her fifteen-week-old fetus. The woman had no neurological act-  
ivity, which means she was legally dead, but they hooked her to a heart and  
lung machine and to intravenous feeding. The doctors hoped to keep her alive  
for five more weeks and then to remove the fetus by Caesarean section, but  
the woman only lasted a few days.  

Foot Fetishism Kicks Back:  

The spike heel has returned, complete with hammer-toes, bunions, atrophied  
tendons and spinal curvature. It's sexy, it combines elements of sadism and  
masochism, as the L.A. "Times" puts it, spiked heels “jut her rear end out  
back, her bosom out front, and cause her to take small, mincing steps."  

They also make the foot look about one third smaller. (Foot binding is even  
more effective.) In other words, more tits and ass and less freedom.  

And Will Foot Binding Return?:  

Not likely, says our resident Peking pundit and fortune cookie reader.  
But the attacks on Chiang Ching, widow of Mao, presage a demotion in the  
status of Chinese women. Chiang is being attacked as a witch, a snake-woman,  
dragon-lady, courtesan lusting after the US dollar, lazing on a sofa while  
men kiss her feet. Remember that there was an Empress in China during this  
century, and that the cult of Kuan Yin, Goddess of Mercy, has not been com-  
pletely suppressed. (At the recent archaeological exhibit in San Francisco,  
people were forbidden to take pictures of her statue.) Remember that there  
was a great persecution of witches in China, much like the European Inquis-  
ition.* Remember too that men used to kiss the putrefying bound feet of  
courtesans and aristocratic ladies. And what is a whore? A woman who takes  
money for her services rather than giving it away.  

We bring up these matters because the images on the wall posters come dir-  
ectly from Chinese traditions, from the long, long war against matriarchy.  
And Chiang Ching, the most radical feminist in China, seems destined to an  
even harsher fate than Nadezhda Krupskaya, Lenin's widow, who was silenced  
and ignored. Chiang may be executed - perhaps she really was trying to seize  
state power!  

And what does it mean to the average Chinese woman? Bullet's rapid-fire  
analysis is that the nations which have had socialist revolutions have taken  
the road of rapid industrialization. Meaning that everyone busts ass,  
either for wages or in Stalinist-type labor camps. Everyone must learn to  
read and count, everyone must keep fit in order to work. Footbinding is out.  
The availability of birth control and abortion may vary with the require-  
ments of government policy, not with the demands of women. In China, the  
Pill is distributed by barefoot doctors... never mind the side effects...  
forget about “confidentiality” between patient and physician. A Chicago  
report notes that policy is to sterilize women rather than men, in spite of  
the greater risk, difficulty and expense of a tubal ligation, because men's  
egos would be hurt if they were sterilized.  

Although women, as producers and reproducers, hold up more than half the  
Chinese sky, the men still hold the strings on their IUDs, as well as the  
reins on the economy, the military, and the wall-poster printing presses.  

Addendum: In celebration of the downfall of Chiang Ching and her friends,  
the Chinese government just exploded its largest hydrogen bomb which will  
no doubt add to the world supply of genetically-defective fetuses.  

* Documentation of the Chinese war against matriarchy and persecution of  
witches will follow in future articles.  

a journal of women studies  

® Bridging the gap between community and  
university women  

e Featuring articles on women and  
economics, the politics of reproduction and  
mental health from a feminist perspective.  

Available by subscription ($3.25 per issue, $9 per volume, — three  
issues — for individuals and $15 per volume for institutions) by writing  
FRONTIERS, Women Studies Program, Hillside Court 104, University  
of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado 80309; or available at Boulder  
bookstores and these Denver bookstores: Together Books, Woman to  
Woman, Hatt GU Denver Center bookstore, and the University of Denver  
bookstore.  

Big Mama Rag” Yo! 4 No. EL  

What’s In Store For Madame Mao?  

China Purges Chiang Ching  

Deboran Taylor:  

Since Mao's death in September  
1976, China has been in a leadership  
crisis. Chiang Ching, Mao's widow, is  
at the center of the controversy.  
She has been a leader of the Cultur-  
al Revolution and the "leftist fac-  
tion" of the party for years. She is  
the only woman to have reached the  
highest echelon of government power  
in China. However, she has recently  
been officially purged in one of the  
most intensive political attacks  
since the revolution in 1949.  

Reports differ on Chiang Ching's  
recent position. American intel-  
ligence reports say that she and  
Mao split up two years ago and  
that she has been kept in isolation  
since then. Americans visiting  
China have been unable to visit  
her. When Pat Schroeder went to  
China in January 1976, she was re-  
fused permission to see her and no  
explanation was given.  

After Mao's death, Premier Hua  
immediately denounced the leaders  
of the leftist faction, especially  
Chiang Ching. Chiang Ching was  
singled out for the most personal  
villification and most of it was  
sexist. She has been accused of  
neglecting Mao, of wanting to be  
an Empress, of nagging Mao, etc.  
Radio reports currently playing  
in China say that when her husband  
was dying she insisted on playing  
poker two more hours, etc., ad naus-  
eum.  

This misogynist attack clearly  
is meant to undermine any power  
she may have as Mao's widow. Sent-  
imental attachment to Mao would  
accrue to his wife as happened to  
John Kennedy's widow. But more  
importantly, it is Chiang’s leader-  
ship role in the Cultural Revolu-  
tion which is the threat to the  
current leadership.  

To understand this controversy,  
we must look at the basic conflicts  
in China since the revolution.  
China is an underdeveloped country  
of 800 million people. The govern-  
ment has had to choose continually  
between two different priorities:  
increasing industrial development  
and production or increasing the  
power of the peasant and following  
the "ideals" of the revolution.  

The first alternative would strength-  
en the position of those in power,  
namely the party bureaucracy. The  
second alternative would increase  
the power of the people.  

In the last ten years China has  
been going through an intense idea-  
logical struggle over which alter-  
native to follow. The Cultural Rev-  
olution from 1965-69 was an attempt  
by some leaders of the government  
to take power away from the party  
bureaucracy and give it to the  
people, the masses. In the Cultural  
Revolution, Chiang Ching, Mao, Chou En  
Lai and several others turned to  
the people and encouraged them to  
“bombard the headquarters" of the  
party itself. They encouraged stu-  
dents to quit school and join the  
Red Guards. Huge posters of Mao  
proclaimed slogans inciting people  
to rebel against the bureaucracy.  

The Cultural Revolution Group  
gained power and many rightist lea-  
ders of the party were purged from  
their positions and required to  
do self-criticism.  

This revolution against the party  
leadership was unprecedented in  
history and very risky, since the  
party was so powerful. It was suc-  
cessful because of Mao's magnetism  
and the non-violent manner in which  
the leaders of China fight politi-  
cal battles.  

The people had absolute trust  
in Mao and he took advantage of  
this by using huge pictures of him-  
self and by publishing his writings  
widely in order to reach them. This  
cult hero-worship was effective in  
changing peoples’ consciousness, but  
it was also patriarchal and elitist.  

In China, leaders have rarely been  
killed in ideological disputes.  
Rather they are denounced in the media  
and asked to do self-criticism.  

Often they return to power later.  
People accept that the country is  
in a state of continual flux as new  
things are tried out. So much has  
changed in such a short time that  
there is no status quo of entrenched  
attitudes yet. Thus Mao's request to  
try something new to change the coun-  
try was accepted.  

The Cultural Revolution was a time  
of profound reexamination of the di-  
rection in which all segments of the  
society were moving, a reexamination  
of the role of the Communist Party  
and of the techniques for running  
institutions within the society. It  
was a rebellion against elitism, pro-  
fessionalism and credentialism for  
their own sake. More specifically,  
the Cultural Revolution reaffirmed  
Mao's principle of "putting politics  
in command"; being “red" took prece-  
dence over being "expert".  

Since the Cultural Revolution, the  
Chinese have been attempting to  
fashion a human being who will put  
the needs of society before her own,  
who will identify with those in the  
society who do menial labor, who will  
integrate intellectual labor and phys-  
ical labor, and who will be motivated  
by altruism rather than by self-inter-  
est. (Thanks to Ruth Sidel in Women  
and Childcare in China.)  

Chiang Ching is the only woman who  
has gained a position of national  
leadership and this is because of her  
relationship with Mao. China is a  
sexist country and there are still clear  
definitions of sex roles. But we  
must remember that women have made  
more gains in China in the last thirty  
years than in any other country.  

(We will run an article on women and  
sexism in China in a future issue).  

After Chiang Ching married Mao in  
1939, she remained in the background  
until the Cultural Revolution. When  
she married Mao she was a well-known  
actress and political activist. In  
the Cultural Revolution, Chiang Ching  
was appointed a member of the Central  
Party Committee and a deputy leader  
of the Cultural Revolution Group.  

In 1966, she became the cultural  
adviser in charge of changing opera,  
drama, films and music so that they  
would include more material about  
the peasants - their history and  
struggles. She created opera-dramas  
known for their political content  
and quality such as the “Red Detach-  
ment of Women".  

Chiang Ching became famous as a  
spokeswoman for the leftist faction  
for the Cultural Revolution Group.  

Her speeches were studied and discus-  
sed. After the victory of this group,  
however, there was a swing back to  
the center by the end of the sixties  
in order to stabilize the country.  
In the seventies, Chiang Ching re-  

More on page 14