Big Mama Rag Vol. 8 No. 8

The Unhealthy Business Of Making Clothes

Editor's Note: The following article
is reprinted from the Canadian news-
letter, Healthsharing. Although it
deals with the Canadian garment indus-
try specifically, the working condi-
tions it describes are widespread

in the garment industry throughout
the world. This article could as eas-
ily be describing the U.S., Mexican,
Peruvian, Indian, Korean, et al,
garment companies' policies towards
workers.

Susan Wortman

Imagine you work in a men's clothing
factory. You sit all day bent over a
sewing machine, putting collars on
coats. You don't make the collars, or
assemble the coats, just stitch the
collars onto the coats at a rate of
twenty per hour. You have to do at
least that many, or you are let go,
and you try to do more, because you
are paid by the piece. You dread the
busy season, because you start at 7:00
in the morning and you don't stop un-
til 7:00 at night, but you pray that
you aren't laid off when it is slow.
The lighting is poor; you often leave
work with a headache. The heat is

their fingertips and hands which may
result in wearing the smooth cartilage
of the joints, contributing to osteo-
arthritis.

Noise and vibration can both be re-
duced by better designed and properly
mounted machines.

Old, defective machines may pre-
sent electrical hazards. One woman
explained how she now sits on cush-
ions to "protect" herself from shocks
she received through her chair. Fire
is an ever-present danger in an indus-
try with combustible goods, fabric
dust in the air and sparking from
old electrical machinery.

— a a oe ee

The garment industry is rife with
problems in the design of machines
and tools, workspace and work process.
(In the jargon of occupational health,
these are referred to as ‘ergonomic’
hazards.)

For example, the work of making a
garment has been divided into jobs
that require continual standing
(pressers), or sitting (sewing machine
operators). At certain times of

the year, the pressure of production
prohibits even a momentary rest to
sit or walk around to ease weary or

-D. Luce/LNS

Women workers at a sweater factory, Taiwan

oppressive. The woman across from you

put a needle through her finger yes-
terday. The boss wanted her to go to
the hospital alone. You can see how

the older people are bent and stiff;
you wonder if you will look like that

in thirty years.

Many garment workers across Canada
do not have to imagine this. It is
their work, their life. There are
115,000 garment workers in Canada,
concentrated in Montreal, Toronto and
Winnipeg. Most of these workers are
immigrant women. They work in an in-
dustry which has a history of intol-
erable working conditions, excessively
long hours and extremely low wages.

Summer is the worst. We are making
winter coats. They are heavy and hot
and the dust from the coats flies
around. There is just one fan for the
whole factory (50 people). When we
open the windows, the dust blows up
from the coats. On days there is not
wind, no air blows in. We joke about
getting air conditioning some day."

Women who work in hot, poorly venti-
lated shops sometimes faint from heat
exhaustion. They suffer constantly
from the effects of heat stress -
headaches, fatigue, apathy, irritability.

Some shops remain dark and dingy.
However, even in those which are
more brightly lit, lights may be poor-
ly positioned, causing glare and
shadows. Fatigue and eye strain re-
sult from trying to work in these
conditions.

Noise is a problem in many shops.
While the levels are not high enough
to cause hearing loss, the women work-
ing in a continually noisy environment
get headaches, are fatigued and have
other stress-related conditions.

There are also less well-recognized
physical hazards. Some shop floors
actually vibrate when all the machines
are being used. This "whole body vi-
bration" can cause nausea, disorien-
tation, an inability to focus properly
and chronic lower back pain. Women who
operate button and button-holing mach-
ines experience local vibration of

cramped muscles. Standing for hours
at a stretch results in pooling of
blood in the veins of the lower legs,
leading to edema (swelling) of the
feet and ankles. Many women develop
varicose veins. Many of the jobs that
involve constant standing could be
performed at least in part, seated.

Any knowledge of comfortable and
healthy seating design is sadly ne-
glected in this industry. Women sit
all day, on hard cheap chairs, piled
with pillows to cushion and/or raise
themselves to the proper workspace
height. Adjustable chairs with ade-
quate back support and cushioned
surfaces are essential in any indus-
try where workers are seated for most
of the day.

Poor design is evident in foot-pedal
sewing machine controls which are
overly sensitive.

"Practically a touch on the pedal
makes the needle move very fast.
This is how accidents happen. You
have to be concentrating all the
time.

Operators have frequent hand and
finger injuries. Puncture wounds
from needles are not uncommon. These
injuries are often belittled - the
potential for serious infection is
ignored. Many cutting tools are design-
ed such that the blade guards hamper
the speed and ease of the task.
Because of the pressure for rapid
production the guards may be lifted,
resulting in serious cuts.

Sewing shears are designed for the
“average" male hand, and are there-
fore frequently too large for women.
They must grip the shears tightly,
causing the handles to cut into the
flesh. This restricts circulation
and causes numb or tingling fingers.

Knee controls on sewing machines
cause bruising of soft thigh tissue
unless they are properly padded.

Innovative design has not been ne-
glected everywhere in the garment
industry. In the interests of increas-
ing productivity, work processes have
been restructured, often resulting in
new ergonomic problems.

The Ettron Line is an example. By

this system, the partly finished gar-
ments are delivered automatically to
the side of the sewing machine opera-
tor via overhead racks. She now must
work constantly without her usual paus-
es to get or deliver garments, thereby
depriving her of a stretch, a rest
and a sense of accomplishment. In ad-
dition, she is isolated from her fellow
workers by the rack of clothing sur-
rounding her. She sees nothing, and
hears only the repeated smack of each
new article as it arrives at her side.
Cramped muscles and fatigue are obvi-
ously not the only results of this
new process. Isolation, speed-up and
the elimination of visible goals are
destructive to the emotional and psy-
chological well-being of the garment
worker.

—_—<——- . . . .

Job sex-typing is evident in the
garment industry. Cutters (using vibra-
ting cutting tools) are almost invari-
ably men, while choppers (using shears)
are usually women. In most shops sewing
machine operators and finishers are
women. There is no physical rationale
for this segregation. The 'male' jobs
are better paid than the 'female' jobs.

The attitude that women are working
just "for frills" or extras is also
prevalent on the shop floor. In coat
factories men as well as women operate
sewing machines. Men are often given
the easier, faster styles by the (male)
foreman.

The women are aware of, and resent,
this kind of discrimination. Stressful
tensions, frustration and suppressed
anger can result in physical health
problems such as ulcers, muscular ten-
sions, migraine headaches and high
blood pressure. This situation also
hinders all workers, male and female,
from fighting together for better work-
ing conditions and pay.

In the modern garment industry, the
creative job of making an article of
clothing has been subdivided into many
comparatively simple tasks. Because
of this, the owner is able to hire
people for very low wages, and under-
utilize their skills (and discourage
acquisition of new ones). The worker
has little control then, as she may
be fired and easily replaced from the
large pool of unemployed workers. In
addition, because of this division of
labor, the work is made repetitive and

dull. The worker is seen as unskilled
and ignorant. The paternalistic atti-
tude evident in many shops is indica-
tive of this concept of the worker.
These attitudes promote feelings of
inferiority and dissatisfaction in
women, who in other aspects of their
lives are seen as competent, worthy
adults.

"I like piece work because you can
make more money (than on hourly wage).
Do you work faster on piece work?
"Yes, I get more tired, but I make

more money. The older people don't
make so much money because they can't
run so fast. But it is still better
for them on piece work."

Piece work means rapid production.
It comes under the guise of allowing
the worker to go at her own pace, but
in practice, she will work as fast as
she can, to earn as much money as
possible. The hourly wages are kept
low, so that the piece rate system
is attractive. The physically exhaust-
ing pace promoted by the piece rate
system results in chronic fatigue,
high tension (nervous breakdowns are
not uncommon), and, according to a
British Columbia study, an increased

rate of stomach ulcers.

The majority of the workers prefer
piece work. The need and desire to
earn a decent wage overrides comfort
and health considerations. Most gar-
ment workers accept the ideology that
the "good (fast) worker" is rewarded
by the piece rate system. They believe
that having the same hourly wage for
all will lower their individual take-
home pay. This keeps them from uniting
to fight for a decent hourly wage and
work pace.

-<—---— .. . .. .

The garment industry is not usually
considered as having chemical hazards.
Yet harmful dyes have always been used
in clothing manufacture and a host
of new chemicals has been introduced
in recent years.

For example, beta-naphthylamine and
benzidine dyes, still widely used
in the industry, are absorbed through
the skin. They cause bladder cancers
that do not appear for 10-15 years
after exposure. Styrene and chloro-
prene are sprayed on edges of cloth
to prevent ravelling. Both cause
dermatitis (skin rash); chloroprene
is a respiratory tract irritant and
a suspected cancer-causing agent.
Benzene, known to cause leukemia (a
blood cancer) can be found as a sol-
vent or a contaminant in leather
glue.

Some chemicals and fabric produce
allergic reactions in workers.

"One girl opposite me, she puts
bandages on each finger every morn-
ing. I asked her, ‘Why do you do
that?" and she showed me the skin
rash all over her hands from the
mohair."

Can she ask for different material
to work with?

"Yes, but she likes mohair best
because it is so light (weight) and
fast. She can make more coats and
more money. We all like mohair even
if we are always itchy."

In addition to chemicals used in
the work process, pesticides are
frequently used to control rodents
and insects. Among the many effects
of the different classes of pesti-
cides are nervous excitation, tremors,
seizures, dizziness, vomiting and
drowsiness. To minimize worker

-LNS Women's Graphic
Women workers in a Philadelphia suit factory

exposure to these chemicals, spraying
should be done on weekends and the
shop well aired.

In the past century in Canada,
garment workers have led intermittent
struggles for better working condi-
tions. And yet, most workplaces re-
main unhealthy and unsafe. The 19th
century free enterprise model of small
family-run shops still characterizes
garment manufacturing today. The
high level of competition, both na-
tionally and internationally, makes
it a cutthroat business.

In this context, industry owners
prosper by abusing the workers - by
keeping wages low and minimizing ex-
penditures in the factory.

The garment industry has tradition-
ally employed immigrant women who
are least able to fight for their
rights. Their natural insecurity in a
new country with a new language is
played upon. They may be subtly or not
so subtly intimidated. The fear and
threat of deportation is ever-present.

Although forty percent of the
garment industry is unionized, the trade
union organization parallels that of

MORE ON PAGE 17