education

Florida Southern says, because “‘it’s the
‘real world’...you learn how to handle
yourself in all kinds of situations and deal
with people of all sorts.” Mary Ann Pearce,
a graduate of Indiana University says “‘it’s a
more natural environment,” and ‘good
experience in real-life interaction with both
sexes.’ Beth Ellis a sophomore at Colby
College said ‘‘young men have a different
attitude towards life than young women do,
and I felt it was important to be exposed to
this.””

Linda Tsang, a graduate of Simmons
says the disadvantage of women’s colleges
lies in the fact that it is “not a true
assimilation of the world in general’ and
that social life is a ‘“‘complete divorced
aspect of living.’’ But the ‘advantages
outweigh the disadvantages; they are gen-
erally smaller, more protected and comfort-
able environments; women don’t have to
bother to impress men; and women have the
chance to take up leadership.”

Several of the women who had chosen a
women’s college said that it was not so much
a ‘*sex’’ consideration, but the fact that the
particular college had, as Kristine Dever
said of Emmanuel, ‘offered exactly the
program I wanted at the right time.”
Deirdre Dempsey who went to Barnard said
she had the advantages of Columbia,
“superb library and hundreds of courses,’’
but that Barnard provided a more individual-
istic, sensitive program than Columbia could
have, especially in terms of advisors and
counseling for personal problems and job
hunting.”

An interesting aspect to this informal and
impromptu survey was the reaction from
some of the Harvard/Radcliffe women
students who reflect the school’s identity
crisis. While the majority of the women
prefer to say they go to Harvard College,
30% say they go to Radcliffe. In an article in
the Crimson last spring, Diane Englander
said ‘‘I still say I go to Radcliffe...’? because
“a women’s college like Radcliffe once said
to a men’s college like Harvard, ‘You may
not realize this, but women deserve to be
educated, too.’ The all-maleness of early
schools was at least an implicit denial of that
affirmation. And because some women saw
their sex as more than a collective of
academic basket cases, they set up shop on
their own. In honor of that spirit of defiance
(though I know Radcliffe’s founders were far
from revolutionaries), I say I go to Rad-
cliffe.”’

But aside from her feminist stance,
Englander adds, ‘I think I'd rather go to
Radcliffe than to Harvard. Radcliffe athletes
don’t throw food at each other. Radcliffe
doesn’t even have sororities, let alone final
clubs. Radcliffe has nowhere near the

proportion of children of alumnae that
Peggy McMahon

Harvard does. Radcliffe’s relative lack of
wealth may explain some of these differ-
ences, but whatever the reason, it seems
that ‘Radcliffe’ has many fewer of the
qualities I find objectionable at ‘Harvard’.””

In contrast to this view, Kathy Abrams a
junior at Harvard says, ‘‘The issue of
equality is at the heart of my insistence that I
go to Harvard rather than Radcliffe. The
standard set on the case of racial integration
is equally applicable to the issue of sex:
SEPARATE does not mean EQUAL. Rad-
cliffe may represent an attempt by women to
thumb their (collective) nose at the supposed
superiority of all-male schools, but I do not
believe it ever met the high standards set by
Harvard. It is not Radcliffe that was the first
school established in the nation; it is not
Radcliffe that students battle and connive to
gain acceptance to; it is not Radcliffe that
boasts the largest library collection of any
university in the country: it is HARVARD.

“I was thrilled to learn that I was
accepted into the first open-admissions,
totally co-ed class of Harvard-Radcliffe; I
was crushed when I found that my accept-
ance certificate said ‘Radcliffe.’ To me
Radcliffe was a consolation granted to bright
women who were unfortunate enough to be
of the wrong sex to qualify for Harvard...a
consolation which is now anachronistic and
unnecessary. If it is now possible for me to
participate in the educational experience
once granted only to men, I want to do it ALL
THE WAY. The fewer distinctions made
between men and women, the closer to
equality we are. And I believe the Harvard/

I'M RADCLIFFE! FLY ME!
Liva Baker

Macmillan Publishing Co.
1976 - $9.95

It’s unfortunate that Liva Baker gave her
book the silly title, I’m Radcliffe! Fly Me!,
which overshadows the more serious and to
the point subtitle, The Seven Sisters and the
Failure of Women’s Education.

I came across the book on the ‘‘mark-
down” table at the Coop a few weeks ago.
The book contains a wealth of information on
the history of women’s education in the
United States. Baker, a Smith alumna, spent
a considerable amount of time between
October 1973 and August 1975 on the Seven
Sister campuses formally interviewing and
informally talking with the administration,
faculty and students.

The results are an extremely well
documented, interesting and informative
account of women’s education from the time
when a “‘college education for a woman was
not much less shocking than a life of
prostitution,’ up to the present time when
the ‘‘important question now confronting the
Seven is whether they can still serve a
meaningful purpose or whether they are an
anachronism.”’

In spite of the fact that the Seven Sisters
were born in intellectual radicalism and
“overcame all manner of resistance in order
to take women’s education out of the female
seminaries where it had been essentially
decorative and to endow it with academic
respectability,’ the adventure was, says
Baker, not an unqualified success. ‘‘Before
they could follow through with social
political and economic emancipation, the
adrenaline ran out, and they became victims
of their own ethos.”’

Baker points to many instances where

the Seven Sisters were followers, not

Radcliffe distinction is one whose time has
passed.”’

The end of the Harvard/Radcliffe distinc-
tion may mark the end of the coed/single-
sex college distinction. While Mount Holy-
oke is still the oldest continuing college for
women in the United States and recently
reaffirmed its commitment to the concept of
separate education for women, it partici-
pates in a cooperative program with surroun-
ding coed schools. Smith College collabor-
ates with the same coed schools, as well.
Wellesley College recently decided against
admitting men to its degree-granting pro-

I’m Radcliffe! Fly Me!

leaders. She says the Seven are not and
never have been truly feminist institutions.
While many of the leaders of feminism in the
past and now came out of these colleges —
Lucy Stone, Carey Thomas, Gloria Steinem
and Betty Friedan — a Mount Holyoke
survey in 1971 showed only 3.3 percent of
those returning their questionnaire had ever
participated in a women’s liberation group.
The Seven aimed to prove from the
beginning that women were the intellectual
equal of men. “Having completed this
mission,’’ says Baker, ‘‘They abandoned
ship in much the same manner women in the
larger society abandoned feminism for a
third of a century as soon as they got the
vote.”’

Many problems have beset women’s
colleges over the years. While priding
themselves on the diversity of their enroll-
ment they have not been equipped to deal
in a meaningful way with the social
revolution, ‘‘which came clothed in the
persons of a critical mass of students who
had prepped not at Dana Hall or Miss
Porter’s, but in the public schools and in the
streets of Harlem, Watts, and North
Philadelphia.’’ Along with conservative
curriculums, disproportionate shares of
grant money, lack of wealthy alumnae
(husbands give the bulk of their money to
their alma mater), many of them are
beginning to price themselves out of the
“middle-class-income-family market that
they have traditionally relied on as clien-
tele.’ Added to this is the fact that they are
not able to compete salary-wise with the
public universities for the best-qualified
professors and administrators.

But, according to Baker, these problems
are perhaps solvable. The real problem
however, is more complex. ‘The real
problem of the Seven Sisters is that singly
and collectively they found themselves
consistently faced with the same dilemmas
women in the larger society faced, and they

gram but has a cross-registration program
with MIT and membership in the Twelve
College Exchange. The rest of the Seven
Sisters have gone coed. Women’s colleges
have declined over the past decade from 259
to 193, and coeducational schools are on the
rise.

But as long as coed schools continue to
reflect the imbalance of the sexual equation
in the rest of our society, women’s colleges
will continue to flourish, offering a vital, if
somewhat limited, alternative to women who
can afford to take advantage of it. 

Peggy McMahon

chose to solve them in the same way,
demonstrating institutional timidity and
humility and becoming severely limited
within the obvious societal and academic
parameters. Their survival depends less on
whether they adopt some specific methodol-
ogy or whether they can secure certain
foundation grants and more on whether they
can liberate themselves from a hundred
years as second-class citizens. And if they
do, whether they can become truly innova-
tive, can begin to think in terms of lowering
the water instead of routinely raising the
bridge, in terms of curriculum, faculty,
financing, administration; whether they
have dreams in their heads, and whether
they can discover the means of making them
come true.’’

The problem which Baker refers to is
“deeply rooted in the institutional psyche
and has little to do with such specifics as
coeducation versus single-sex...it is a more
serious imbalance within the organism.”’ In
searching for the answer to the question
asked in the beginning of the book: ‘Are
these institutions becoming an anachron-
ism?”’, Baker comes to the conclusion that
‘the answer lies in the ability of the
institution, as institutions, to shed their
century-old habits of dependence and docil-
ity and to become truly self-reliant so that
they can lead their students into similar
self-reliance.’’

This book was published almost two
years ago, but it’s well worth searching for.
It contains some interesting women’s his-
tory, sprinkled with an easy humor which
doesn’t detract from the seriousness of the
subject. It can be read in one sitting (246
pages — including a lengthy Bibliography)

— and if you can find it at the reduced price,
it’s an incredible bargain. And don’t be put
off by the funny cracks you get (Is that a new
airline?) from the salesperson when you ask

for ‘I’m Radcliffe! Fly Me!’

Equal Times September 11, 1978 9