bmr:

This has been a short month for us. At first we found our-
selves low on original articles this month, and wondered what
kind of an issue we would pull together. As usual, we read
through everything in our copy box, which consisted this
month mostly of articles one of us, or someone else had pulled
from another publication. And, found a very intense col-
lection of articles. BMR this month seems very heavy, but we
think that it is a collection of articles that is strong and
inspiring. Women are fighting all over the world, and some-
times we get so caught up in our more immediate struggles,
we lose perspective, and a sense of the fact that we are only
portions of a much larger “movement” of women, and all
oppressed people.

We could have called this an "international" theme issue.
Though we didn't plan it that way, it seems certainly to
make a strong statement about the diversity of the world,
of women's realities, of the choices they make, and the
struggles they (individually and collectively) take on. And,
U.S. American white women need to confront ourselves on our
ignorance of other cultures, our national chauvinism, our
racism. The "nuclear freeze" movement, for example, is such
a big deal now for white Americans. Why now? Because it's
starting to be real to us that, yes we may be affected.

When other, and not coincidentally people of color, have been
the targets of nuclear “experimentation" for many years. And,
we need to make some big changes in how we “move". Keep work-
ing to incorporate an understanding of racism, classism,
anti-Semitism, and imperialism into our understanding of

the oppression of women, make our goals include liberation
for all oppressed people(s). And, change our work to further
these goals.

So, of course this is not always cut and dry. We need to
keep dialogues (fights, discussions) going in many different
directions, keep challenging ourselves and each other to
make good decisions in our work. BMR is planning to hold a
community meeting on January 15 at RIP (Radical Information
Project), 2412 E. Colfax, from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. Childcare
provided. We hope women from the local community will come
and talk with us about BMR, and its political direction.
And, we always hope that women not from our local community
respond through letters. A major thing for us this year has
been "how do we understand and work with other movements"?
The two big ones for us have been the anti-psychiatric move-
ment--as feminists, developing working politics around the
issues of professionalism, being locked up, being drugged;
And, National Liberation Movements--developing working pol-
itics around how imperialism works, how white people support
it, and how the oppression of women ties into this system.

COVERS this month's cover is an oil painting
by Sudie Rakusin (4'x6'). The photo is by
Beth Karbe.

COLLECTIVES Susanna Smith, Bobbe Ross, Deb Luger,

Lori Bradford, Liz Lewis

SUPPORTERS Theresa Moore, Claire Ellington,

Kim Womantree

contributors: Wenay Studinski, Kathy Riley,

Natalie Phillips, Candy McCullough, Sue Goding,
Joan Pettijohn

Big Mama Rag is a feminist periodical published monthly
by Big Mama Rag, Inc., a non-profit corporation. Manuscripts
and artwork (please!) may be submitted to 1724 Gaylord St.,
Denver, CO 80206. Deadline for material submission will gen-
erally fall between the 15th and 18th of the preceding

month. Please enclose a stamped self-addressed envelope

with all manuscripts. No responsibility is accepted for un-
solicited material. We reserve the right to edit all mater-
ial length with the input of the author. Subscription

Rates, December, 1982

mythology filled with rituals

where we're at

How have we/should we make changes in our political work?
We hope many women will come. We are going to try for comm-
unity meetings every 6 months and organize and use them as
critiques. So, specific reaction and feedback to individual
articles is encouraged, also. And, we will talk about future
theme issue possibilities.

Thank you to everyone who has responded to our sustainer
fundraising letter. Please keep it coming!

And, big thanks to the BMR supporter group who held a raf-
fle to raise money to pay the back rent (we made enough!).
And, to those who donated goods and services to be raffled.

As your insert says, we are offering another new year
subscription special this year. You can get three one year
subs (for yourself, or your friends) for the price of two
--$14. Such a deal. Please take us up on it!

Well, this collective held steady at five members for a
short time, but now will be dropping back down to four. Liz,
who has been a collective member for two years, will now be
a supporter. She'll still be doing monthly tasks and will
help at production, but will be missed at weekly meetings.
Boo hoo.

We want to say thanks to Judy, who has done America Held
Hostage for so long. Bobbe has now taken on that one.

The supporters group will be meeting this month (Monday,
December 13, at 7:00 here at the office--1724 Gaylord) to
decide how they as a group will function. We have the ongo-
ing question/problem of how supporters function as political
members of a political project (as opposed to doing mechan-
ical functions with little political input.) Future fundrais-
ing projects will be discussed. Women interested in being
BMR supporters, please give a call. This is a good time to

get involved (well, yeah, any time is a good time actually...)

Forward!

about the cover artist

I am a Lesbian, an artist
and a Jew.

I live in the woods, with my lover, Beth, and our
three dogs. I try to transpose
what I discover into my pot-
tery, drawings and paintings.

Being Jewish and feeling
proud of it, for the first
time in my life, has added
another dimension to all
this.

There is an ancient mytho-
logy of womyn filled with
goddesses, rituals and sym-
bols. Each of us has our own
and symbols as well... I am
drawn to the past and to the

There is so much more to
learn and to discover.

inside BMR:

Where We're At........64- Anti-psychiatric.......14&15

About The Cover Artist..... 2
Guatemala.........16&17
Book Review..........18
Hot Briefs... ....6&7
New Zealand..........6
Puerto Rico..........10
America Held Hostage......10
Marshall Islands.......12&13

Calendar...........20
Classies & Ads.........22&23
RESOURCES........24.

Rates are $7/year (11 issues) for individuals in the U.S.,
$14 (in U.S. funds) outside the U.S. or for plain brown
wrapper, and $21 to all institutions. BMR is free to all
women incarcerated in prisons or psychiatric institutions.
BMR is on file at the New Alexandria Library for Lesbian
Women in Florence, MA and is available on microfilm (Vol.1,
#1 Oct. '72 through July '79) directly from BMR for $60.
BMR is indexed by the Alternative Press Center, P.O. Box
7229, Baltimore, MD, 21218. Our phone no. is (303) 322-2010.