hot briefs

Rapist Killed

According to New York police, a 17
year old girl was dragged into a
darkened Brooklyn alley and raped.
"He said he was going to kill me,"
she told police. She seized her at-
tacker's knife and killed him by
slashing his throat. "We don't know
how she did it," a detective said.
No charges have been filed against
her as yet. The detective said, "We
are going to present it to a grand
jury to see what happens.”

-National Now Times

Rape All the Same

The Canadian government is propos-
ing to eliminate the charge of rape
and replace it with two new charges
for sexual offenses.

One of the new charges would be
called "sexual interference"— clas-
sified as touching a person for sex-
ual purposes without the person's
consent and would be punishable by
up to five years in jail. The other
charge is "sexual aggression," which
would be punishable by up to 10
years for using or threatening to
use violence to obtain sex.

-Her Say

Police Voyeurism

The American Civil Liberties Union
in Illinois says that as many as 65
women may join in a class action suit
against the City of Chicago in connec-
tion with strip searches of women
arrested, often for minor traffic
offenses. The suit will ask $1 million
in punitive damages for each victim of
the searches.

ACLU spokeswoman Sheila Meyer re-
ports that often women who have been
arrested with men are subjected to
strip searches while the men are "pad-
searched" over their clothes. She said
many women, including pregnant and
handicapped, were routinely subjected
to humiliating searches of their body
cavities during minor arrests such
as traffic violations. Authorities
investigating the strip searches are
also looking into charges that male
officers watched the strip searching
on closed circuit TVs.

-Her Say

Pregnant People

Discrimination against "pregnant
people" is now prohibited by a new
federal Pregnancy Disability Bill,
overturning previous Supreme Court
rulings which claimed that denial of
medical benefits and earned sick
leave for hospitalization and recov-
ery from childbirth did not consti-
tute discrimination under Title VII
of the Civil Rights Act.

The law also guarantees seniority
rights for women on maternity leave
and the same or comparable employment
upon returning to work after a rea-
sonable period, prohibits employers
from setting arbitrary time periods
for maternity leave, from firing and
other discrimination.

-Union Wage

Mothers Fly High

In Richmond, Virginia a U.S. District
judge ordered Eastern Airlines to
revise its policy which requires
female flight attendants to take ma-
ternity leave as soon as they know
they are pregnant. In ruling on the
class action suit brought by three
women flight attendants, the judge
found that a pregnant stewardess can
perform all her normal duties until
the 20th week and can still serve in
a limited capacity until the 28th
week.

-Pandora

Prostitutes Scaring
Lawmakers

By a 130-50 vote the British House
of Commons ratified the first stage
of the "Protection of Prostitutes
Bill," which would repeal laws making
prostitution a crime. The bill would
protect prostitutes from police har-
assment, exploitation and victimiza-
tion; would abolish imprisonment for
soliciting and would get rid of
the police description "common prost-
itute."

The campaign by British prostitutes
follows similar drives in Spain and
France where prostitutes threatened
to publicly name their better-
known clients.

Gay Community News

BMR: WHERE WE'RE AT

Good news! BMR is no longer in such desperate straits. At the March 19th
community meeting so many women came to give us their support. What a
boost to our morale. We also received a long distance call from a woman in
Madison, Wisconsin who sent us wonderful encouragement. The result: there
are now seven women on the collective, Fran Day, Beverly Sorensen, Lisa
Gould, Maggie Newton, Lisa Miehle, Susan Goding and Constance Perenyi. This
is our first issue working together, we hope you enjoy it.

Vicki Piotter will be rejoining the paper as a collective member with
the next issue. After leaving the BMR collective a year and a half ago
she's helped out as a friend during that time. (Once is not enough.)

We never properly said our goodbye to Susanna Smith. (Alas, she really
meant it when she said she was leaving the collective.) Susanna will
continue working on circulation for the paper though.

Another result of the community meeting is that several women will be
editing an issue of Big Mama Rag. It's not decided whether they will do
the May or the June issue. They will be developing an issue on the theme

of “Disillusionment."

Last month in the “Questions from U.S. History" quiz there was a ques-
tion that will bring the woman with the correct answer a Lifetime subscri-
ption to Big Mama Rag. So far no one has answered it correctly. Some
have been close though. There's still time to answer, the contest ends
May 31, 1979. Speaking of subscriptions, people should check their label
if it has expired please renew. Don't miss any issues, then you'll never

get the question correct next time.

Almost forgot, Judy Barlow will be returning to the paper. She will
not be able to rejoin the collective yet, but will contribute to the

paper each month.

If you received your tax return already and are wondering how to spend
it, Big Mama Rag always seems to need something. Why don't you consider
buying her a 6 month subscription to Liberation News Service for $90 or to Hersay
for $20 (both are necessary sources of news) or a month's rent at $45.

Or renew your subscription for several years in advance.

Something else we need badly is letters. Tell us what you think of the
paper, what issues or news would you like to see covered more? Big Mama
Rag is an open forum for feminist ideas and theories. Feel free to

send us any of yours!

Affirmative Sex

Earlier this year, Pennsylvania
Commerce Secretary asked an aide for
a “list of male and female employees
in the department, broken down by
sex," for an affirmative action
study. Reece received a reply from
the aide which read: "We have no
male or female employees broken down
by sex, but we do have alcoholics."

-GPU News

ERA Boycott A-OK

A U.S. District Court judge recently
ruled in favor of a woman's group
to push a boycott against states
that have not ratified the Equal
Rights Amendment. The State of Mis-
souri had filed suit against NOW
for enlisting over 480 organizations
to deny their convention business
to the states that have refused to
approve the ERA.

The boycott appears to have cost
those states millions of dollars,
particularly such popular convention
sites as Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas
City and Miami.

-Boulder NOW Newsletter

No to Nudes

The Chief U.S. District Judge in
Philadelphia has ordered a series of
paintings of nudes banished from the
courthouse. Judge Joseph Lord said
he felt the paintings of nude men and
women could be offensive. He added
that he felt some of the paintings
expressed a “lesbian theme."

"They wouldn't be offensive in an
art museum, where people go voluntar-
ily," Lord said, “but people come
here involuntarily— nuns, priests
and children.”

-Gay Community News

Coyote Fire

Police claim that they have no
leads on the fire which destroyed
the central offices of Coyote, the
national prostitute organization
in San Francisco. Margo St. James,
a Coyote official, said the fire,
which destroyed the records and
files of the organization, followed
a number of threatening phone calls.
The San Francisco Arson Department
is continuing its investigation.

-Off Our Backs

Big Settlement

A federal judge has ordered the
City of Chicago to pay $2.98 million
in damages to 225 women employees of
the Department of Public Works. The
women had brought a class action suit
charging the department with sex dis-
crimination in both job classifica-
tion and pay. Judge Grady found the
city guilty of violating federal
civil rights laws and the women are
to be paid $1,000 to $52,000.

-New Women's Times

Big Mama Rag Vol. 7 No. 3

Bathroom Opportunity

More than 130 women have been rein-
stated at the Cagle Poultry and Egg
Company in Macon, Georgia, after they
were fired for attempting to negotiate
with the company over a rule which
allows them to use the company bath-
room only eight times a month.

The rule, which went into effect
several weeks ago, allowed assembly
line workers eight visits to the rest-
room in a four-week period, with a
five-trip limit in any two week
period.

The rule has been amended to allow
the women 16 visits to the restroom
for a four week period. The women will
be filing a discrimination complaint
with the Equal Opportunity Commission.

-Her Say

Court Custody

An Ontario, Canada lesbian mother
won a partial victory recently when
a judge awarded her custody of her
two children. The "catch" is that
the judge made it a condition of cus-
tody that the mother could not live
with anyone prior to court approval.
In other words, she has to ask per-
mission to live with a friend, lover,
boarder, or whoever.

-Kinesis

“Mystical Cat”

The “watch cat," an aluminum key
ring with cat's eye holes to put
two fingers through for a firm grip,
and pointed metal ears, the better
to puncture with, has been designated
a "dangerous weapon" and illegal un-
der California law.

A spokesman for the San Diego
sheriff's department said the pro-
duct was obviously made for women
only since the holes were too small
for men's fingers. The "mystical cat,"
he said, is placed in the same cate-
gory as brass knuckles, time bombs
and blackjacks.

A woman was arrested on a felony
charge for carrying the key ring.
There will be a hearing to determine
whether the key ring was bought to be
used as a key ring or a weapon. The
woman commented that similar hearings
could be held on keys, pencils, boots
or anything else a woman might ingen-
iously turn into a weapon when
necessary.

-Off Our Backs

Infant Mortality

A study published in New Delhi re-
veals that India and Iran have the
highest rate of infant mortality
among Asiatic countries— 13.9%.

One of the main causes for high
infant mortality rates, says the
study, is the neglectful treatment
which baby girls receive from their
parents, who are still enslaved to the
tradition which says a girl is a bur-
den on her family.

-al-raida

Activist Murdered

Native American activist Tina Tru-
dell was burned to death along with
three of her children and her mother
in a suspected arson attack on the
family's home on the Duck Valley
Pajute-Shoshone Reservation in New
York. At the time of her death, Trudell
was active in the reservation's
struggle over water rights in the Wild
Horse Reservoir.

Women are increasingly becoming the
victims of assaults on the Native
American movement. An investigation
into the deaths of Trudell and her
family is now being conducted by in-
vestigators from the Center of Consti-
tutional Rights, representatives of
the Congressional Black Caucus and the
National Council of Churches.

-LNS