hot briefs

Let Them Eat Cake

Eighty percent of the world's pop-
ulation lives in housing inferior to
that of the average farm animal in
the United States.

~--INS

Racism Conference

The National Black Feminist Organ-
ization and Sagaris Institute are
sponsoring a conference on Racism and
Sexism from August 21 - 23. The
conference will be held at Riverside
Church, 91 Claremont Ave., New York,
N.Y. 212. Registration fee: $10.00.
For more information, call: Joy
Barnes 687-5870.

Denver Custody Battle

A Denver lesbian mother has tem-
porarily lost custody of her 6-year-
old daughter. Her ex-husband, who
lives in Illinois, has charged that
she neglected the child's education
and that his own home provides a more
suitable environment than hers. The
mother is fighting the temporary
custody order through the Illinois
court system.

Oh, Yeah?

Publicity for Birch Bayh’s presi-
dential campaign has included a but-
ton that says “Susan B. Anthony
would vote for Birch Bayh."

Easter Bunny vs. Santa

A California labor department of-
ficial rejected sex discrimination
charges by female San Jose department
store “Easter Bunnies" who walked off
the job because they were getting
$2.10 an hour while male Santas earn-
ed $3.06. The state ruled that Santa
"worked harder," had to talk to more
children, and sold twice as many
snapshots with kiddies on his lap.

N.M. Football Victory

When the New Mexico Activities As-
sociation barred Sally Gutierrez from
playing on the Quemado varsity team
last fall, Sally, her parents and
Quemado's principal and football co-
ach went to court and won a tempor-
ary restraining order allowing her
to play in the last three games of
the season. As a result, the NMAA
has dropped its rule prohibiting
girls' participation on boys’ teams
in contact sports, at least for now.
The State Department of Education,
whose rule 73-1 forbids sex discrim-
ination in noncontact sports, is con-
sidering a new rule on contact sports.

Peer Perspective,
Washington, DC

In The Blood

Recent statistics indicate that
cases of leukemia run three times
higher among rubber workers than a-
mong the general population.

INS

Studies Fiddled

Dr. Sidney Wolfe, a member of the
Health Research Group, claims that
there is “increasing evidence of
toxicity" in the pesticide DDVP,
which is found in the Shell "No-Pest
Strip" and in pet flea collars. Dr.
Wolfe is one of twelve present and
former Environmental Protection Ag-
ency scientists who have challenged
the reliability of pesticide studies
done by the Agency, claiming that
statistics have been manipulated and
tests terminated prematurely to make
the results appear favorable for the
pesticides.

--LNS

Rape Alert

A woman who was helping the Bi
Mama staff with production of this
issue on Saturday, July 31, barely
escaped being raped while hitching
home that night. She was picked up
on Colfax and Pennsylvania by a big,
beefy man with wavy brown hair and
bristly sideburns. He was driving
a dark green pickup with a white
camper, and told her he worked at
Giambrocco Produce Wholesalers, 3555
Wazee. When he reached the woman's
neighborhood, he refused on Wazee St.
to stop. She jumped out at a stop-
light and ran down the freeway, with
the would-be rapist in hot pursuit.
She finally escaped, but not before
he had grabbed her breasts and ripped
off her shirt.

Surprise, Surprise

Here are the figures to prove what
everyone has been saying--women and
third world workers have suffered
most from New York City's massive
budget cuts.

According to a report from the ci-
ty's Commission on Human Rights re-
leased April 15, whites represented
67% of the city agencies' work force
sixteen months ago, but they have ac-
counted for only 52% of the 46,435
“separations.”

By contrast, third world workers
accounted for 43% of the layoffs al-
though they made up only 42% of the
city work force.

Similarly, the report says, women
accounted for 33% of the job losses,
although they represented only 28%
of the work force. Men made up 71%
of the work force and 63% of the job
losses.

Particularly hard hit by layoffs,
the Commission reports, are Hispanic
workers, whose numbers were reduced
by 51.2%. Black workers lost 35% of
their jobs.

The three categories in which wom-
en and third world workers were most
heavily represented--paraprofession-
als, clerical and service/mainten-
ance--made up 52.6% of the city work
force, but sustained 73% of the lay-
offs.

--LNS

TV. Antilesbian

The National Gay Task Force (NGTF)
is protesting the CBS television
program, "Cannon", which on February
8 depicted the murder of a woman by
her former lesbian lover. Numerous
other TV programs in the past two
years, including two segments of
NBC's “Policewoman" and ABC's "Mar-
cus Welby, M.D." have depicted les-
bians as murderers and child moles-
ters.

NGTF urges people to write letters
demanding a moratorium on programs
showing lesbians as murderers, vil-
lains, and sick people until network
TV stations provide frequent and
regular positive images of gay peo-
ple on their programs.

Address letters to Tom Swafford,
Vice President, Program Practices,
CBS, 51 W. 52nd St., New York, NY
10019.

And Classist

"The real bias on TV news is not
a political bias, it's a class bias.
For example, when I found out that
the government was about to raise
the cost of Medicare premiums, I
couldn't get the story on the air.
The Cronkite crowd couldn't have
cared less. Twenty million people
were affected, and the Westport
crowd didn't care."
--Daniel Schorr, journalist recently
suspended by CBS for releasing the
secret House report on the CIA, in-
terviewed by Harrison Salisbury in
March, 1976.

~-LNS

Scraps From Mama’s Table

Chocolate Waters

Even if it isn't it is--A satiric lesbian film by Jan Oxenberg called A Com-
edy in Six Unnatural Acts was recently banned at a woman's bar in Province-
town, Mass. When Oxenberg called the P-town police department and offered
to show them the film, they said that even if the film wasn't obscene, "the
title made it sound like it would be." (¢ Lesbian Tide, July/August.)

No Comment--(The following excerpts are from an article in Cosmopolitan en-
titled "The Classic Bitch") "...Angela is decolleteed almost to the point of
nudity...As she circulates through a party, she methodically flirts with all
the men, treating each one as if he were the sexiest, wittiest, most impor-
tant man in the world, and condescends outrageously to all the women, talking
down as if to a mentally retarded cripple...Pretty soon she gets what she
wants--a tete-a-tete with one or two male admirers, and no feminine competi-
tion..." And from the same article: "...The ability to manipulate is almost
inherent in the female. Between the ages of three and six, little girls
blossom out with a full complement of ‘feminine wiles'. To get something
they want they will flirt, cajole, wheedle, flatter, threaten, throw tantrums
and use several lines of contradictory arguments all at once..." Cogent exam-
ple of a "classic bitch"; Carol Matthau's husband, Walter "was indulging in
a flirtation with another woman and happened to ask the lady, ‘How old are
you, dear?' Quickly, Carol suggested, ‘Why don't you just cut off one of her
legs and count the number of rings?'" ("The Classic Bitch" by Junius Adams,
Cosmopolitan, August.)

Horses Hairy Rear End of the Month Award--Goes to Dr. Ivor Mills, professor
of medicine and director of fertility research at Cambridge University. In
an article entitled, "Aggressive Women's Libbers Risk Both Infertility and
Early Menopause" Millsie offered the following remarks: “The women go thro-~
ugh a personality change and become very aggressive, like the male, with an
increase in testosterone (the male hormone) and a decrease in estrogen (the
female hormone)...This imbalance attacks the ovaries, stopping the production
of female eggs--thus making the women unable to have children...The higher
up the ladder of Women's Lib that they have reached, then their potential for
reproduction is reduced... (sic, seems Ivor has trouble talking right--proba-
bly due to a hormone imbalance)...very, very many of these women's libbers
grow an excess of hair, both on their chest and on their face, and it is not
unusual for them to shave with dissolvents every day. If they did not get
rid of the excess hair, they would have beards..." (The National Enquirer,
July 6, 1976)

This Isn't Even Funny or It Could Only Happen to Me--I was standing at the
lingerie counter at May D&F when an older woman came over and asked the
clerk if they still carried rubber inserts for bras (i.e. "falsies"). "Oh",
I remarked casually, "Nobody wears those anymore." "Well!" she snapped, "You
do if you've had both your breasts cut off!" "Aggghh," I screamed, grabbing
for my pectoralis majors and running off to hide my head unobtrusively in the
underwear department.

Boys will be men and Women Will Be Girls--It is refreshing to see how much
more coverage of the women's Olympic events in Montreal there are this year.
The sexism seems slightly minimized even though the commentators constantly
refer to the boy competitors as "young men" and to all the women competitors
as “girls”. One commentator, reporting on Princess Anne's fall (from her
horse) and subsequent recovery noted that, "Princess Anne is a gritty little
princess." (!)

P.S.--"In real love you want the other person's good. In romantic love you
want the other person...Don't be afraid of a tragic ending. Romantic love is
a tragedy to begin with...Freedom is the only bond that could ever utterly
bind me to another human being." Margaret Anderson, (1893-1973) editor of
the Little Review.

P.P.S.--"A woman is only a woman, but a good cigar is a smoke" (imprinted on
an ashtray advertised by the Nat Sherman company.)

And Ageist and Looksist

The Denver Post has reported in a
copyrighted story that the Nippon
Television Network has been ordered
by a Tokyo judge to put 39-year-old
Setsuko Murakami back on camera de-
spite its contention that she is too
old and too plump for the job.

Ms. Murakami, hired as an announ-
cer 17 years ago, was transferred in
May to a script-editing job on the
grounds she was no longer photo-
genic. The court upheld her argu-
ment that her contract did not men-
tion weight, age or personal appear-