WOMEN AND JOBS

From Page 4

That’s no Lady—That’s Ma Bell

Trying to find out what's going on to improve employment for women at the Big Lady is like talking to a white-sheathed maiden about abortion. You feel like she doesn't know what you're talking about, but she’s offended anyway.

A good portion of Mountain Bell's employees are women, and a union is supposed to represent the workers, right? Well, Karen Vannoy, the Traffic Vice President of the Communications Workers of America, doesn’t know of any women’s group within the company (there is one, albeit run by management), and makes it quite clear that her union represents both male and female workers and it would be inappropriate to talk about women specifically. The end.

There was a NOW member working with Mountain Bell, but she got so discouraged she hasn’t done anything for the last six or eight months.

Yet something is happening there. At the suggestion of the Vice President General Manager (a male and the top Colorado executive of the company) after a NOW presentation, a Women's Advisory Board was set up. Headed by Connie Brage, a personnel supervisor, the WAB works in a number of different areas. In terms of employment, it seems to be largely concerned so far with getting female representation on important committees that affect job training and promotion, and expediting job discrimination complaints (actually handled by the Equal Employment Opportunity coordinator). It has also designed a project to help move women into non-traditional (i.e., “male”) higher paying jobs; which “for all intents has been approved.” In other areas involving working conditions for women, Mountain Bell seems to be moving very slowly. Although she has for some years granted maternity leaves for up to a year with an equal job guaranteed upon return, she will probably agree to paid maternity leave only when a final irrevocable court decision is in. (There are several cases in the courts now.) Also, although she looked into day care, it seems that that's just not in the stars for the near future, for various reasons.

It's hard for me to believe that with all those women running around at the phone company, their only organization is a management-sponsored board. I keep thinking there must be some groups that I just haven't been able to discover that are really trying to do something about their employment.

Are any of you out there?

Private Industry: If a Mouse Roars, Can a Lion Squeak?

The first law of capitalism, as we all learn in week one of economics, is profit. The second law is that change does not, in the short run, maximize profit. Those two sentences summarize what is happening in private industry, for the most part. “All this women’s lib stuff” just does not end up in a bookkeeper’s ledger as a great plus, if you're going for this quarter or this year instead of the long pull.

But, like with Mountain Bell, there are rays of light here. About two years ago, Samsonite got together some interested people in industry to form the Affiliates of Affirmative Action. This group meets either monthly or bimonthly to share knowledge and programs with each other about the status of both minorities and women. It seems hard to pin down what they have actually accomplished, but perhaps it is indicative of a change in attitude. (As an aside, Samsonite also looked into starting a day care center at about the same time. It may be a firm to watch.)

Maybe it would have been more accurate to say “photons” rather than “rays” of light. Great Western Sugar, which is a member of Affiliates, was able to name me five women in positions of any leadership at all, and these included the secretary to the president and a “girl” accountant. One of the five had come to her job in the last year, hardly an indication that GW has made a dramatic new commitment to advancing women. My searches located no industry-sponsored day care, although the Child Care Project at CU Med Center has received “10 or 12” serious requests for help in this area. What change has come and will come to private enterprise is almost entirely due to the federal government. The terms “affirmative action,” “Equal Employment Opportunity Commission,” and “federal contract compliance” have been mentioned earlier; they now should be explained fully.

The halcyon days of the early ‘60s saw the first important legislation in the Equal Pay Act of 1963, which became effective in 1964, and Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Together these outlawed discrimination in both employment and wages. In 1965 the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission was created to “persuade” employers to obey the law. Of course, we all know how effective persuasion is in affecting the law of profit (watch Nixon persuade the oil companies to hold down prices); for several years, EEOC was little more than a gadfly. Then in 1972, strengthened by the power to bring class action suits, EEOC won the historic ATT case, in which the phone company was ordered to pay more than $30,000,000 in back wages to women employees. For reasons best known to itself, Congress saw fit at that time to pass the Equal Employment Opportunity Act of 1972. This had two important effects. One was to increase EEOC’s budget by $12,000,000, with which it was able to hire more excellent lawyers. In addition, the law empowers the EEOC to attack patterns of discrimination in specific industries, with the review of statistics as a critical tool, a precedent set in the ATT case. Hence, since March of 1972, we have had a federal agency with the power and money to enforce the employment laws.

Less than a month before Richard Nixon was first voted into the White House, President Johnson's Executive Order 11246 went into effect. This order “prohibits employment discrimination based on sex, as well as on race, color, religion, or national origin, by federal contractors or subcontractors and contractors who perform work under a federally assisted construction contract exceeding $10,000.” Now every employer of more than 50 people can be reviewed by one of the 20 agencies of the Office of Federal Contract Compliance. (For example, the airlines are regulated by the office in FAA, banks by Treasury, DOW Chemical by AEC, etc.) It is the OFCC that is responsible for the affirmative action plans, by which employers must set up goals and methods of increasing employment of minorities and women. As could be expected, the OFCC agencies in Denver have concentrated on the large employers: IBM, Honeywell, Western Electric, and several banks are among those who have shown some improvement through the efforts of OFCC. Unfortunately, the office in Denver does not have current figures to show exactly what gains have been made.

Getting private industry to accept social change is like persuading high school students that “they gotta do their homework.” It goes over only with either a veiled or present threat of the stick. As employed women, we are lucky to have the federal government's Office of Contract Compliance to urge preventative action, and the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission for punitive measures. Hopefully it need not be pointed out that law enforcement is always a selective process. It is important to elect politicians whose priorities in the law lie with equal employment.

Day Care Makes a Tentative Beginning

The bread and butter issues of employment — who's being hired for what jobs at what salary — are obviously of primary importance. But anybody who’s ever worked knows that the fringe benefits and working conditions are also terribly important in the day-to-day living at the job. For women, the question of what to do with the kids while you're at home looms today as probably the greatest job-related concern.

In this area, Denver is far behind other sections of the nation, particularly the East and Far West. As well as I could ascertain, only two employer-related day care centers are currently operating: one at the CU Medical Center (the older of the two), the other at the Federal Center on West 6th Avenue. As stated before, the Med Center Child Care Project has received about a dozen serious requests for help in starting centers, and several companies looked into the idea before dropping it.

To understand the problems involved in getting an industry day care center going, it is illuminating to look at how the Med Center managed theirs, and why the Chalet Child Center, planned for the Greenwood Plaza area, has floundered.

The story of the Child Care Project will stir any feminist’s heart — nay, the heart of any activist, of whatever sex. For it is a story of folks getting together over a common need and winning. In early 1972, a group of women formed a committee to try to found a day care center. In a shrewd move that some of us might learn something from, they rounded up some smart people who already knew what day care was about. They proceeded to set up model services: a day care center and a system of satellite family day care homes (personal homes recruited to take several children, to whom they gave help, loaned toys and equipment, and relieved for ½ day a month). The Med Center group then wrote a grant proposal, submitted it to HEW’s Office of Child Development, received approval in June, and started flying. The project is now involved in both classical research on day care and its demonstration model. Nice story, isn’t it?

Too bad the other story isn’t so rosy. In fact, it is abominable.

The Chalet Child Center is the brainchild of Mimi Wegrzyn, an experienced teacher and community action worker. When Ms. Wegrzyn arrived here with her husband, she looked for a job in her field. When she realized the futility of that, she started on the day care merry-go-round. Before long, two facts hit her in the face: many kennels in Denver offer better facilities than do many day care centers; and Greenwood Plaza, employing many young mothers as well as fathers, had no facilities whatsoever. And so she began.

Several months and at least $7,000 later (fees for engineering surveys, etc.), the Chalet Child Center remains a good idea. It has recently been rejected by the Arapahoe City Commission for not conforming to zoning regulations. The plan will have to be revised and resubmitted.

Who has $7,000 sitting around to even apply for a permit for a center? In addition, Colorado law has stringent regulations requirements for new day care centers — but they don’t apply to those already in existence. How will the new centers, which will obviously cost much more to conform to the rules, compete with the established ones that can continue business as usual?

The Med Center's project has federal funds. The one at the Federal Center is run by private people eligible for Small Business Administration loans. With costs what they are, will any employers be able to supply day care without governmental subsidies?

To Conclude: I Don’t Know Where That Filmstrip Got Its Information, But It Wasn’t Here

There is no question that things on the women’s employment front are moving. Government, education, industry, do have affirmative action plans. You do see those revealing percentage points moving upwards, slowly, slowly. Women are joining together to fight for improvement in hiring, upward mobility, and child care, as well as issues such as self-defense that they feel affect them particularly. And this article has certainly not been exhaustive in covering what’s happening; rather, it has sought to highlight. Finally, space has not permitted mentioning such groups as the Colorado Civil Rights Commission, the Colorado Commission on the Status of Women, or Better Jobs for Women, all of which are among those doing important work in this field.

Yet none of that can hide the inescapable fact that for the overwhelming majority of employed women, things have not tangibly changed. Most of us are not Great Western’s “woman chemist in Loveland,” nor are we among the 59 women out of 1,928 highest paid employees in federal government in Colorado, nor does our employer provide day care nearby.

Over and over comes the refrain: “over the next four or five years...” and “tremendous strides really are being taken...” and “women power is just coming into its own...” Can it be believed? The question is irrelevant. Whatever the prognosis, women have only one choice: to keep on plugging, working for the small gains, and working, and working, and working: in their places of employment, in politics, and in unions.