bmr:

where we’re at

Hello again! Just as our spring has brought hot and sunny
days, so are our perceptions of this month.

This issue focuses on the many brutal attacks by the police
and government. Our centerfold article on Canadian activists
gives a vivid account of police attacks. The Canadian police
(and their FBI) have harassed and now arrested 2 women and 3
men who have histories in different political movements. Our
anger towards these fascist government attacks on radical act-
ivists is red hot & bursting! The right-wing world-wide gov-
ernments' security investigations squads are deliberately
arresting political activists as alleged suspects to many
anti-imperialist & anti-sexist "crimes". They react harshly,
without any evidence; they harass and intimidate all those
picked up. The five arrested in Vancouver have had many other
political connections. They have worked in a variety of pol-
itically active groups... Leonard Peltier Defense, Women Agai-
nst Prisons, anti-nuke groups, solidarity groups of Third
World struggles throughout the world. So the government cont-
inues to affect and create fear and vulnerability within many
of our radical movements. But they need to know too that it
fires our anger. The government actions only reinforce our
existing knowledge that they are practicing fascism in the
name of democracy. And the governments need to know that
their oppressive actions will not keep us down—but just make
us more angry and more strong.

Other letters and hot briefs speak of women being imprisoned
for fighting back against her rapist. And then the long-going
continued attack against people's liberation movements through
threats of life imprisonment to Chicano/Mexicano men and wo-
men defending their independence. Grand Jury proceedings once
again being used against "the people".

Some struggles with BMR these days involve the use of our
standing head “women in cages". We have had discussions with-
in the collective of whether we are using the head to cover
too broad a range of issues. For example; in this issue does
it work to use "women in cages" over Jenny's article on the
history of psychiatric atrocities and the Mental Patients' Liber-
ation Movement? We've also recently been criticized from a
woman “inside" that the slogan is dehumanizing, by projecting
an image of caged animals. She also felt that by referring to
“women in cages" as a focus we negate the active fighting
back that goes on within prisons. Please write to us on how
to better use standing heads and what ones to use. We need
your input.

On the "sunny" side of things, here at BMR, our local sup-
porters are really a boost. While we're still very low (& in
debt) monetarily, the supporters have successfully raised
$350 through a garage sale. $200 will go directly to the pa-
per and $150 toward the film festival coming soon (see ad).
Besides the financial help, our supporters have really been

cover:

Ink drawing by Laurie White, San Francisco
artist.

collective:

Bobbe Ross, Lori Bradford, Deb Luger, Susanna Smith

Supporters:

Joan Pettijohn, Linda Lane, Liz Lewis, Sue Goding, Kay

Young, Candy McCullough, Claire Ellington, Clara Kaplan

Kathy Riley, Patricia Silva, Vickie Barriga, Tea Schook,
Natalie Phillips

Big Mama Rag is a feminist periodical published monthly
by Big Mama Rag, Inc., a non-profit corporation. Manuscripts
and artwork (please!) may be submitted to 1724 Gaylord St.,

Denver, CO 80206. Deadline for material submission will gen-
erally fall between the 15th and 18th of the preceding
month. Please enclose a stamped, self-addressed envelope
with all manuscripts. No responsibility is accepted for un-
solicited material. We reserve the right to edit all mater-
ial for length with the input of the author. Subscription

Page 2 - Big Mama Rag, May 1983

here before, during, and after production; in full force and
support. Thanks again!

Susanna is missing from production this month but with a
worthy reason and cause. There's a gathering at Big Mountain,
a Dine and Hopi reservation in north central Arizona. (See
BMR March 1983). The gathering is to protest uranium mining
on Native lands. Besides her support there, we hope to bring
information about the gathering to you next month.

And speaking of next month, we probably won't be at the
Peoples Fair. We're trying to get some space at the RIP (Rad-
ical Information Project) table, but their space is limited.
It seems the Peoples Fair is becoming more "hoity-toity" and
coincidentally didn't send us or the New Movement in Solidar-
ity with Puerto Rican and Mexican Revolutions our usual year-
ly notice of deadline dates for table space. Classism, homo-
phobia and reactionary politics sometimes work in subtle ways.

And on that note may we say not so subtly... thanks for read-
ing us, writing for and to us, and keep those bucks and graph-
ics coming in. Remember our subscription rates have just gone
up (see ad).

Keep Up Your Activism!

And Ours... BMR Collective

new sub rates
individuals

within US

1724 Gaylord Street

Canada, Mexico, Plain Brown Wrapper

$18

Overseas

$22

institutions

within US

$24

Overseas

$26

u.s. $$$ only

Sample Copies and Back Issues... $1.25
(to cover issue and mailing)

Canada, Mexico

PAY $15

Free to Prisoners and Psychiatric Inmates

inside BMR:

Where We're At

Letters.........

America Held Hostage.....4
Struggle...........
Hot briefs...........
Music Festival........8 & 19
Prison letters...
International...........
Movie Reviews...........
Classifieds & Ads.......22 & 23
Resources...............24

rates are $9/year (11 issues) for individuals in the U.S.,
$15 for Canada, Mexico and plain brown wrapper, $18 over-
seas, and $22 for U.S. institutions. BMR is free to all
women incarcerated in prisons or psychiatric institutions.
BMR is on file at the New Alexandria Library for Lesbian
Women in Florence, MA and is available on microfilm (Vol. 1, 
#1 Oct.'72 through July '79) directly from BMR for $60.

BMR is indexed by the Alternative Press Center, P.O. Box
7229, Baltimore, MD 21218. Our phone # is (303) 322-2010.