culture

Cris Williamson in Boston

Women Kept As “Strangers In

Marie Cartier

The following is a review of a Cris
Williamson concert at the Savoy Opera
House in Boston. It is reprinted in
full from Gay Community News, May 10,
1980. Williamson's Boston stop was
part of the national Flying Colors
Tour which will also bring her to Den-
ver at the end of May.

In the introduction to the Changer
and the Changed, Cris Williamson's
first album, released in 1975, Will-
iamson is defined as focusing "her en-
ergy on making and helping to define
Women's Music - pinning her faith to
a culture she considers strong, broad
and beautiful enough to speak meaning-
fully to all of us." With songs like
"Sweet Woman," “Sister,” and “Having
Been Touched (Tender Lady),” there
was no need to doubt this statement.

"I'm not going to stand up there
and sing 'womanwomanwoman' for two
hours," says Williamson today. "I
don't speak for women's music... I'm
continuing on my journey."

Cris Williamson is entering the
mainstream on her journey. However,
the message she sings she wants hand-
carried “like a treasure item and not
hustled." This message is, “not on-
ly for women, but for all humanity.

An all women's world is not my idea
of heaven, my idea (of heaven) is
body-less heaven... however, we're not
there yet."

No, we are not. Of being in the
mainstream, June Millington, guitar-
ist currently touring with Williamson
says, “... working in the mainstream
sometimes you are treated like FDS or
Kleenex. However, whatever way we can

Williamson says that she has no objections to

being labelled “feminist,” although she says she is

also a “humanist,”

and even a “cute little Western gal.”

There was part of us that also want-
ed to love Williamson's music, that
needed to find women's culture - that
was, indeed, starving for it. (Marge
Piercy's poem "The Nuisance" comes to
mind, although it was certainly not
intended to be about women's music,
the lines could also be applied to
it: “I carry my love for you/around
with me like my teeth/and I am star-
ving.")

I don't think women thought they
were wrong in starving for their cul-
ture and searching to be fed. William-
son was singing, “Lean on me, I am
your sister/Believe on me, I am your
friend./Lean on me, I am your sister
... I will fold you in my arms like
a white winged dove..." ("Sister").

But that was 1975. And now, in 1980,
we are looking at Cris Williamson and
singing to her the lyrics from the
'75 melody "Hurts like the Devil":
"...it hurts like the devil not having
you around/...Oh you left too soon and
I wonder if you were just a nice sur-
prise/Oh it really seems that you were
just a dream, or can I believe my
eyes?"

Williamson's new album Strange Par-
adise has no upfront sister/woman ly-
rics spinning from its vinyl - and it
is hard to believe her when she says
that the albums are "part of the same
journey," especially when she says
that "Twisted Love," off of Strange
Paradise, is about what “women's
music" concerts mean to her: “Women
at my concerts," Williamson says, "were
like baby birds crying 'feed me, feed
me." That's what 'Twisted Love’ is
about - I felt like I was being pulled
by a huge undertow. I couldn't meas-
ure my success by their hunger. When
someone's really hungry, all of a
sudden it's 'Oops...I didn't mean to
eat you'!"

Women, then are the “Beast/Who sat
on my immediate right/There was poison
bait on the silver plate/And I knew
I was ‘in for a night/Then the dinner
bell rang, and the hunger pangs/Pulled
like an undertow/I was the winner/
They wanted for dinner/They shouted
‘Yes you will!'/I shouted 'No, no, no!'/
You do not score what you came here
for/ All alone on the shore like a
castaway" ("Twisted Love").

Personally, I find it very difficult
to identify with that "Beast." After
all in 1975 Williamson was singing,
"What do you do for your living/Are
you forgiving, giving shelter?.../Why
don't you sing this song, why don't you
sing along?/And we can sing for
a long, long time." ("Song of the
Soul") (Well then, I guess that meant,
"Yes, do sing along, but please not
for too long.")

get that message of ours across and
out there without debasing ourselves

..." I am not against music in the
mainstream, necessarily. However,
there seems to be a direct conflict
between being treated like FDS and
getting one's music “out there" without
debasing oneself. In any case, is this
what is meant by "being hand carried
like a treasure item?"

Williamson says her music is an “an-
odyne" (a measure which relieves pain)
and that “music is not the place to
have competitive feelings." Her re-
cent concert here at the Savoy Opera
House however denied the anodyne qual-
ity. And denied that music, for her,
is not competitive.

Williamson demanded that the inter-
preters for the hearing-impaired who
had been originally hired - be fired,
Nancy Becker explains. Becker is an
American Sign Language (ASL) teacher
at Northeastern, and has worked on ma-
king women's events available to the
deaf population for the past five
years. Therefore Becker had strong
feelings about the change of inter-
preters: "The ones, originally hired
moved a lot," signed Becker. "They
were too showy, too enthusiastic. Cris
thought they would take away from her
performance." Becker signed that she
ended up daydreaming through most of
the concert because she could not
"hear" the rhythm and was bored. “It
was translated word for word in
English, not in ASL, which imparts
the rhythm of the songs." Becker ex-
plains that like Japanese or Russian,
ASL is its own language. To translate
from English into English words only
without translating the rhythm and
meaning of the words loses the lan-
guage understood by most deaf people,
Becker feels. Responsible for bringing
a substantial number of people to the
concert from the deaf community, Beck-
er is now "angry" about the perfor-
mance.

Early in the concert, Williamson
said that “people better learn to re-
late... there is room enough for every-
one in this world." She compared the
world to a small room in which there
is “always room for someone else,"
and that it's important to be “happy,
even if that happiness is sometimes
an act." The song, "Last Chance Sa-
loon," a well-played rhythm piece,
sang out that, “There's plenty of
room in the Last Chance Saloon." Well,
that may be true. There is plenty of
room in that little Saloon. However,
I'm not sure that I want to go in
there if I have to act happy. I would
definitely not advise going in there
if someone was deaf - or lesbian. Some-
how, I don't think there is really
that much room.

"I'm really upset," said one woman
after the concert. "I bet this audi-
ence is 90% lesbian and we got no re-
cognition." She shook her head, "Why?"

Williamson sang "Twisted Love" to
those 2700 people who packed the
Savoy Opera House. She introduced it
saying, “Lest we forget that everyone
doesn't know what a good time is."
There was no mention made that this
song symbolized to her a feeding of
so many starving birds.

Olivia, the woman-owned company,
with whom Cris records, says in a
press release that Strange Paradise
"marks an important turning point for
Cris and women's music. It is an al-
bum with a woman's voice and woman's
heart which reaches out to all people
with its musical sophistication and
message of humanity." Olivia quotes in
its press material a review by Rich-
ard Cromelin, Los Angeles Times,
"Williamson's music is simply too
good, and her themes too universal,
to remain a secret." However, Cris
is also hailed as, “the largest-selling
artist in women's music." That
hardly seems a secret to me. Olivia
also quotes from the Kansas City Times
that, "If you must label her, you
might as well call her a feminist,
but that's really too confining."

Williamson says of Changer and the
Changed that “It was riding me. I
pulled back until I could ride it."
The medley of warmth was followed by
the "Last Chance Saloon,” with its
command to relate, to make room for
everyone. Maybe that's why most of
her songs were prefaced with these
commandments - to relate, not to make
people feel guilty (as in the song
"For the Children” which included
excellent accompaniment by Robbins
on the cello), and the exonerating
Jimmy Cliff, "born to win."

The second set showed promise, op-
ening with "Marcy," where Williamson
shone on piano, playing solo. “Come
on home to the light/Can't you see
I'm singing for you?/Sing your heart
out for me,/I'll sing for you." This
was followed by "Twisted Love" and
"Strange Dream" - a disconcerting
arrangement of tunes. On the one
hand, "Can't you see I'm singing for
you/Sing your heart out for me,”
("Marcy") and on the other a song meant
for hungry birds who "shouted, ‘Yes,
you will!'/I shouted, ‘No, no, no!'"
("Twisted Love").

Cris Williamson and the Flying
Colors Tour are very professional.
They know what they're doing, and
“how to get it if you really want

-Susan Fleischman/Gay Community News

Cris Williamson

Williamson says that she has no
objections to being labeled "fem-
inist," although she says she is also
a "humanist," and even a "cute little
Western gal." However, Williamson's
desire to communicate with "humanity"
is not evident, especially in concert.
Although her encore was a lullaby
which she ended by whispering "Take
care of yourselves," the concert pre-
ceding that encore was not one of
caring.

"Gosh, a lot of people are cough-
ing," Williamson said mid-concert.

"The water fountains are broken."
"It's New England cold season,” the
audience bantered back.

"Are we having a dialogue?" William-
son reprimanded. "Because before you
know it, you're in dialogue with some-
one..."

In the beginning of the concert
Williamson was welcomed to the stage.
She did a medley from Changer and
the Changed. It was wonderful to
hear "Sweet woman/rising so fine...
Singing to them soft words, taking
me to your secret.../Oh the warmth
surrounding me/It just won't let
me be, just won't let me be..."
(“Sweet Woman“) There was warmth that
surrounded Williamson through most
of the concert - simply because that
warmth had been carried through the
past years on strong lyrics, which
as Williamson says, "have their
own life."

Whatever happened at this present
concert, it was hard to deny the
warmth inside oneself for this woman.
It was with surprise that we asked,
"...can I believe my eyes ("Hurts
Like the Devil")?"

There is nothing wrong with be-
ing professional or getting what one
wants, however what Williamson "wants"
is confusing.

In the Savoy Opera House, the exis-
ting set was one for "The Flying
Dutchman." A huge boat effect adorned
the stage, at the helm of which stood
an immense concrete man with finger
pointing downward to the stage. The
set was extremely effective - espec-
ially when combined with the fine
lighting designed by Candy Harring-
ton of Brava Productions.

When Williamson rocked to "Anger
Takes the Wheel," the concrete man
seemed especially huge. "Well, if
you hate something/Chances are you
fear it/And fear means forever on the
wheel /Kill them with kindness/That's
what Daddy said..."

"That's what Daddy said..."

In fact, though, kindness does not
kill. "Daddy has told us for a long
time that hate and fear should be
transformed to kindness, love, put-
ting-up-with-it - a “transfer of emo-
tions which perpetuates the cycle of
rape, abuse and battery. You can't
believe "what Daddy said." Fear and
hate are real, healthy emotions. (So
healthy in fact that according to
the Denver Institute on Sexual As-
sault, 45% of those women who fight
back get totally free from their
assailants; over 50% of the women
who don't fight back receive injuries
more severe than bruises.)

“When Anger Takes the Wheel," is
currently hitting national airplay. The
message it sings of killing them with