16

Class Struggle: Our Shared Responsibility Cont.

Big Mama Rag Vol. 8 No. *

that class which has nothing but its power to labor—that power
(capital) for survival. The capitalist buys the worker's labor
in periods of prosperity the fight
for higher wages and better jobs—
class women have had to
fight -to work, there can
be no real freedom (on
any level) for working
class women under cap
italism, it is not
possible to have 100%
employment, therefore
some workers will
obviously be unemployed.
The working class as well,
has no power except to
labor; labor is not in con-

ua. sheng Tlats
rod Las
power like any other commodity,
of working class women is for
in economic crisis working
class women fight to retain the
right to work; there can
be no real freedom (on
any level) for working
class women under cap
italism, it is not
possible to have 100%
employment at any given time,
some will be unemployed, obviously
must be seen as work
because it too has no
constant demand.
Middle Class—works
but also a share in
the crumbs that fall from
the tables of the rich;
they get more of the "good
things in life"; the middle
class values—they fear
losing their "respectability" back into the work-
ing class; for middle
class women their oppres-
sion is primarily based
on sex and can best be

>) >) a > <mc
a

symptom of capitalism.

1 1) OA DO) ED 1 OED

as a: ean

The problem with even beginning to talk about the political issues that
divide the women's communities is that it is very difficult and frightening.
We are afraid to hurt one another and confront ourselves. We are sure we
will be accused of creating divisions in the community, which are already
there but not discussed openly. Yet to give in to these fears and not dis-
cuss issues is liberal and gives an easy victory to a system that oppresses
working class women. Even discussions between the three of us around the
issues of professionalism and class divisions have been very hard to deal
with. Perhaps in the back of our minds, we can hear echoes saying, "If you
can't find anything nice to say, don't say anything."

The fact is that unconfronted political differences have not given the
movement a strong political base, nor have they made anyone “nicer for it.”
The women's movement must begin building a strong political base in order to
fight against our movement reflecting the oppressions of the society at large.
Radical feminists must see the need to understand classism and racism in
our own movement and confront ourselves and each other directly around these
issues.

We must emphasize group struggle over individual struggle. Individual
solutions will not save us. Although we must confront each other on specific
behaviors and attitudes that serve to support the system through the direct
oppression of individuals, we must, at the same time, assure that our struggle
exists as an organized confrontation of capitalism/patriarchy. There can be
no individual solution to the problem of classism because classism is a symp-

tom of the problem of capitalism. As such, we must confront the system,
as a group, with a unified politic. As a group we must be accountable for
our politics, strong and unified politically, able to share information
without creating an “informational hierarchy" and committed to doing the
kind of concrete organizing that will most directly include and affect the
lives of working class, poor, and minority women.

The women's movement must make itself well defended by the strong politics
of all women who strive to maintain or achieve a radical feminist under-
standing of our abuse; if not, our movement will be co-opted and we will find
ourselves slowly drawn in to support our own oppression and the class and
race oppression of working class, poor, and minority women. We must be able
to discern that some political lines are correct, some incorrect. Classist,
sexist, and racist politics and attitudes are not okay; we must not allow
them acceptance in any mutant forms. The personal is the political and our
lifestyle must reflect our politics.

We set up a chart for ourselves to help us visualize the realities of the
women's movement and problems we see as an extension of these realities. We
found through the following chart that many areas overlap in terms of the
underlying elements that create conflict in the movement and that these
elements are connected to defining men as the primary enemy, racism, and
classism.

REALITIES OF THE WOMEN'S MOVEMENT

The Radical women's Movement may
not survive.

Cultural ideology (the belief in
culture as a tool for change, in
and of itself, as opposed to
culture as a reflection of
political ideology) is more
central to the white middle class
women's movement.

The movement is dominated by women
who have access to greater class
privilege based on their family
background and race.

Liberalism of the movement.

The existence of "feminism" as a
profession.

Movement lacks in addressing the
needs of a broad range of women.

Conflicts exist between dykes and
straight women.

Many women in the movement have
children.

PROBLEMS

Basic unwillingness to deal with
internal politics in a radical
manner.

Individual solutions over group
solutions.

Fosters a false sense of unity.
Culture is non-threatening to
capitalism and patriarchy.

Culture builds stars—values some
work over others.

Alienation due to class attitudes,
education, and unwillingness to
share skills.

Protecting self-interest.
Movement does not threaten
capitalism.

The receipt of grants is non-threatening
to capitalism because it can
control the project by its require-
ments. Capitalists will never pay
people to overthrow capitalism.

Some women's work and time is more
valued.

The movement generates in-system
type jobs.

Not enough organizing around issues
concerning class, poor, minority,
and older women.

Racism and classism.

Minority women feel their struggle
must be in their national movements.
Survival issues are not a priority.

Straight women don't want to give
up male privilege.

Dyke chauvinism.

Wanting to build a Lesbian Nation
which excludes straight women.

The line held by some leftists that
lesbianism is bourgeois decadent be-
havior and will disappear with cap-
italism.

Straight women don't understand and
see dyke oppression.

Oppression of male children and
their mothers through defining men
as the primary enemy.
Responsibility for children is not
shared.

Providing child care at conferences
and concerts is not enough.

On the chart that was expressed in general terms we felt the need to be
specific about concrete behaviors in ourselves and others.

The result.

Specific Classist Attitudes And Behaviors

1. The belief of middle and upper class people that they possess greater
innate intelligence, the desire to always be seen knowing as much about some-
thing as everyone else.

2. The belief of middle/upper class people that their time is more valuable
than other people's time—the fact that they are liable to demand more time
for themselves while having less respect for the time of others.

3. The belief that education and credentials are an indication of intel-
ligence.

4. The greater likelihood of middle/upper class people to respect someone
for, and desire to be themselves, traditionally attractive because attract-
iveness is associated with class standing (straight teeth, healthy hair,
clear skin, slim figure).

These standards of attractiveness are economically determined by such things as the diet of the middle/upper classes (less fats and starches) and greater availability of good medical and dental care.

5. The lesser likelihood of middle/upper class people to be comfortable with
confrontation due to an upbringing that says “nice people" don't lose their
tempers or become unreasonable—that such behavior is unbecoming and un-
dignified.

6. Excess financial generosity, more selfishness due to a middle/upper class
ideology that says—hold on to what you have so you won't lose any of it, as
opposed to the working class ideology that says—share when you can because
someday you may need something from someone yourself. The latter ideology
is a product of having less overall economic control in life.

7. The greater likelihood that middle/upper class people will give orders,
will be in leadership roles and will perform tasks with notably greater con-
fidence—all because of a lifetime of societal respect, leadership expect-
ations, and acquisition of social skills.

8. The greater likelihood that middle/upper class people will feel that
their egos are on the line, more worry about how what they say or do will
affect how others feel about them or how certain things will make them appear
in the eyes of others—in short, they are more self-possessed and image
conscious.