Just What Can Feminists Afford?

The aim is to be direct. The criticisms are overt. There are no hidden agendas. I expect a political response to the contents of this entire article. Specifically, I believe that I have a right to hold you politically accountable to the WLM because of the following: Daughters Inc. defines itself as a feminist business; feminists, such as yourselves, are involved in Daughters; Daughters publishes books with political - feminist - content; capital for the maintenance and growth of Daughters has been generated partially from within the WLM; you have been actively involved in setting up the feminist-press network; you are individual and collective public voices within the WLM; through participating in the Times article you became movement voices to the general public; you are lesbians; and you possess varying degrees of professional and economic privilege greater than that which most grassroots feminists possess, affording you structural advantages (see Introduction).

Insofar as a feminist can never speak publicly about politics for only herself, whether you wanted the option or not, you implicitly became WLM spokeswomen with the attendant responsibilities. Even if you had limited yourselves to talking about Daughters Inc., you would have unavoidably involved the WLM since Daughters Inc. defines itself as a "feminist business" and not as a “women-owned business." However, you did not limit yourselves to talking about Daughters Inc. - you ignored movement precedent and actively participated in discussing both the WLM and women's vulnerabilities to a mixed, public audience.

1. Why did you allow yourselves to be set up as movement spokeswomen?

2. Even if you thought you would be able to discuss Daughters without discussing the WLM, why did you not live up to these convictions and instead actively volunteer information about the movement - information that could hardly be interpreted as "outreach"? For example, why did you make public definitions and judgments about lesbian separatism when none of you are lesbian separatists?

3. Politically justify your use of the New York Times as an arena for the discussion of WLM politics and women's vulnerabilities. How did you determine the political appropriateness of such an action? What did you materially get out of the interview? Was it publicity? Was it money?

If it was money, “women have to learn they can afford to say no" (to quote June Arnold). Why didn’t you take your own advice?

Lois Gould - Your New York Times Interviewer

Why did you join with Lois Gould and explicitly discuss any aspect of the WLM, especially lesbian separatism? Even if you had limited yourselves to discussing Daughters, it is foolish and potentially dangerous to allow an interviewer who is not a political peer to have any editing power, direct political discussion, or make comments on any subject which could be seen to have political implications - in the establishment press.

She presents an image of herself as a woman who does not consider herself as being primarily involved with feminism - with women; and heterosexually identified.

Lois Gould, who excuses herself and rids herself of all responsibility by first proclaiming that she is not primarily a feminist, proceeds to try to analyze, dissect, and criticize the WLM politically. On the surface, she seems to mean well; if one reads the quotes one might feel that she is expressing concern for the WLM and she does raise some important questions. However, if we more thoroughly examine the tone and style with which she makes the criticisms and asks these questions, we find her tone is distinctly trivializing and disrespectful - we are in effect being treated like little girls.

Here are some examples that back up my opinion.

I am the only woman at the table who is not clearly "woman-identified" ... a woman whose primary working relationships are with and for women - with and for feminism. I live with a husband and two adolescent sons.

The ironic fact is that I would not even be here were it not for an "establishment" newspaper - one of the many that do not review the books these women publish or report on their activities. Still, the mass media, and their audience are intrigued by the phenomenon of women like these retreating - advancing? - into brave new feminist worlds of literature, health, sexuality, and politics. I am here to ask what they are up to, and if it is really a significant trend, or merely another passing strangeness in a “movement” some say is already tearing apart over strangeness of one kind or another. (my emphasis)

She presents herself as wanting to know what feminists are "up to" so that she can fulfill her journalistic obligations by giving the "mass media and their audience" what they want. In doing so, she presents the WLM as a "strangeness" - a perversion - to which the public is invited as voyeurs. Furthermore, she talks disrespectfully about the WLM to the Times readership by revealing what may be seen as a lack of WLM maturity:

The one area (in Quest) in which I find the thinking blurry and uninspired is "future visions"... There were childlike drawings of cities with womb-shaped “feminist undergrounds”... Nobody came up with a clear practical structure or technology...

I mention that I have heard stories about "separatist" women's bookstores that will not sell books to men, will not even allow men inside to browse, and some that refuse to admit a woman accompanied by a teenage son.

In addition, Gould exploits intra-movement splits in order to contrast the "mature" caliber of you Daughters women to the "immature" caliber of “separatist" women. In differentiating you from us - with your help, of course - she gains for you the respect of the Times audience, at the expense of the WLM.

In its publishing operation, too, Daughters Inc. acts according to judgments and priorities that occasionally clash with those of more separatist feminist groups... (my emphasis)

Furthermore, this is a dynamic prevalent throughout the entire article. All of you remain closet lesbians, your past marriages and the children you have mothered are emphasized, as well as the fact that all of you are “past youth."

Lois Gould publicly ridicules feminists: If they say where they are, huddling together for warmth and support, playing hide-and-seek like little girls, then aren't these “independent feminist enterprises merely toys and pastimes after all? (italics mine)

Charlotte, it was unthinking of you to add, "We are beginning to ask that question ourselves. It's a very good sign." What did you expect to accomplish by treating with respect Lois Gould's unpolitical, public ridiculing of feminists? Where were your political sensibilities during this interview?

Lois Gould publicly trivializes the WLM. She is obviously more dedicated to her style as a writer - the development of imagery - than to developing a political presentation respectful of the WLM.

Wouldn't it be pretty to think that the women's movement is not in the least shattered, but only divided into valuable fragments, like pieces of an immense interlocking picture puzzle...(my emphasis)

I also take exception to her description of "revolutionaries" as "dreamers." This trivializes political activity:

Four of the women at the table are revolutionaries of a different but no less unusual stripe: June Arnold... dreams... Parke Bowman... dreams... Bertha Harris... dreams... and Charlotte Bunch... dreams of what must be done with dreams.

Lois Gould publicly makes definitions and judgments about lesbianism and (lesbian) separatism when she is neither:

We (Lois Gould and you) agree that the term lesbian is no longer just a sexual definition.

It strikes me that separatist women rarely talk about the strong ties they still have with men in their own lives.

Furthermore, Gould reveals her lack of caring for the WLM, as she announces its “life and death” to a public audience:

Some critical observers of feminist enterprises (such as Daughters, Inc.) have dubbed them "toys" and ridiculed the women involved in them for wasting precious time playing at autonomy. They are damned for dabbling in a make-believe female culture, while the "real" women's movement hovers between life and political death. Yet, at the same time, the women who succeed in these ventures are also attacked for surviving and making money - for imitating male-model capitalism instead of finding the true feminist way to liberation. (my emphasis)

It can be assumed that either Lois Gould kept her printed sentiments a closely guarded secret - which is hard to believe - or that you did not have strong enough political objections to her shoddy treatment of the WLM to have disassociated yourselves from her article by discontinuing the interview and retracting your words.

Showing Respect for Oppressed Peoples

I have discussed this aspect of your article with other Jewish lesbian separatists, and we have all come to similar conclusions about this exchange between Charlotte and Parke:

Charlotte explains..."that if your life is not bound up with men, then in men's eyes you might as well be a lesbian."

Patty says, "It's a political stand to call yourself one - like the King of Denmark wearing a yellow armband to declare himself a Jew, when the Nazis ordered all Danish Jews to be marked."

It's a feminist's responsibility to study the oppression of all oppressed peoples to learn more about how the oppressor works and to learn to be more sensitive to members of different ethnic or racial groups. But it is wrong to use the pain of any ethnic or racial group as an illustration of a point that has nothing to do with that group's ethnicity or race. We should feel free to call on examples of our own oppression for better understanding, but this must be done with a sensitivity to the differences between the oppressions of different groups.

In fact, this responsibility is not lived up to. The practice of using the oppression of a particular people is a frequently occurring dynamic, amongst non-Third World feminists, as well as within the broader society (including the Left).

Black people, for example, are consistently brought up in an exploitative way while the oppression that is specific to them as a group is ignored. In this way they are targeted as the group to be used to strengthen unrelated points and to delegitimize the oppression of the group in question.

For example, over and over again, non-Third World feminists have ridden on the backs of Black women and all Black people by ignoring their hard-to-come-by political gains with such racist remarks as: Our feminist struggle should be recognized; after all, we have to win our civil rights just like the Blacks in the sixties.

When Black women are used in this way it falsely gives the impression that there are no Black feminists. Thus, while Black women are used, they are, at the same time, made invisible.

By the same token, the oppressions of other Third World peoples are rarely mentioned in spite of the fact that those people are oppressed and may also be non-white. And even when the oppressions of other Third World peoples are brought up in a so-called serious way by non-Third World feminists, a lack of genuine information is revealed. Being a New Yorker, I see this dynamic very clearly in my own city.

For example, even though there are many Puerto Rican people - including Puerto Rican feminists - living in New York City, the oppression that is specific to them is too often either disregarded or incorrectly seen by non-Third World feminists as well as by the larger racist society - even on the most basic levels.

For example, the majority of Puerto Rican people are not only forced to live and work under extremely oppressive conditions, they, as a people, are specifically used to maintain the institution of a cheap labor force.

These dynamics (and others) which generate Third World invisibility are particularly regrettable when they occur amongst white feminists who presumably have a commitment to fighting racism. In actuality, this commitment usually amounts to only lip service, at best.