bers:

where we're at

BMR continues to struggle - both within the collective
(as brought to you through Where We're At) and within the
pages of the paper. We have received feedback that the way
we write about some of the issues with which we are dealing
is unclear, or that an issue seems to be "internal" or "in-
group" - not made understandable to our readers in political
terms. In other words, what is really going on? We will try
to be clearer.

In last month's Where We're At, we wrote about our use of
criticism/self-criticism to work towards the most revolu-
tionary politics we can. Each of us use/used criticism/
self-criticism in ways we felt most comfortable with, yet
we were often hurting and frightened. So we changed our
format to become more informal, less rigid about our pro-
cess - talking more about our lives and how we felt about
each other and how we were relating to each other personally
and politically in the collective. We also talk about this
kind of stuff at the beginning of meetings instead of at
pale ker a eT between
meetings to think about what went on the last meeting and
what we need to/want to talk about with each other. We're
still not satisfied. Some of us talk more than others, some
of us are more confrontative than others - we each have
certain issues which are incredibly personal to us. How
can we deal with our differences in ways which are not per-
sonally threatening to ourselves or each other?

When we talk about "lack of trust" within the collective,
that's too vague. We really do trust each other in many,
many ways. Our basic politics are very similar - we don't
often have a lot of trouble coming to consensus around what
will be printed in BMR. Major issues with which we are
struggling right now are anti-psychiatric politics, Nation-
al Liberation Movements and Zionism/Israel/Palestine/the
Middle-East. We want to come to the most revolutionary
politics possible around each of these issues, the greatest
political understanding; and in ways which take into con-
sideration who each of us is and what our experiences have
been, what our/others oppressions and experiences are, who
really holds/wields the power in this world and how we can
claim and use our own power.

In the October issue, we printed an article about the
work that the African People's Socialist Party (APSP) and
the Black Community Control Committee were doing around
homelessness in Oakland, CA. They were taking over aban-
doned houses and fixing them up in order that people with-
out homes would have a place to live. In the November issue,
we reprinted an article from the African Women's Committee
for Community Education, criticizing Joseph Waller (now
Omali Yeshitela), chairman of the APSP, the APSP and the
African People's Solidarity Committee for sexism and opp-
ortunism, among other things. BMR recently met with a mem-
ber of the African People's Solidarity Committee (APSC) to
discuss our contradictory stand (support for the APSP in
one issue, strong criticism in the next). We received crit-
icisms from her for (1) not checking out the charges against
Joseph Waller (Omali Yeshitela) and the APSP and (2) for
furthering the interests of the state by printing slander-
ous charges against a Black Liberation Movement.

When these charges against Waller and the APSP were first
made, almost four years ago, BMR printed nothing about it,
feeling as though we didn't have enough information and
that it was an internal struggle in the APSP, not a strug-

cover:

original pen and ink by Anne Hathaway Swift

collective: Bobbe Ross, Lori Bradford, Susanna

Smith, Deb Luger, Joan Pettijohn, Sue Doell

Supporters: Sue Goding, Linda Lane, Kay Young,

Ye Claire Ellington, Liz Lewis, Candy McCullough,
Rozz Lieght, Dee Berman, Kathy Riley

contributors: Vickie Barriga, Patricia Silva

BIG MAMA RAG a feminist periodical published monthly
by BIG MAMA RAG Inc., a non-profit corporation. Man-
uscripts and art (please!) may be submitted to 1724
Gaylord St., Denver, CO 80206. Deadline for material sub-
mission will generally fall between the 15th and 18th of
the preceding month. Please enclose a stamped, self-add-
ressed envelope with all manuscripts - No responsibility is
accepted for unsolicited material. We reserve the right to
edit all material for length with the input of the author.
subscription rates—one, $9/year; (11 issues) for individuals

Page 2 — Big Mama Rag, February, 1964

gle that we as white women should take sides on or get in-
volved in. Last fall, we received an article from the
African Women's Committee for Community Education (AWCCE)
repeating the charges, and an article from them about "Up-
front", "a progressive Black women's newspaper", which they
were publishing. We made the decision to print both articles.
We wanted to publicize the newspaper, and we decided
to print the criticism of Waller and the APSP because it
appeared that Black women were opening up the discussion
to the women's movement as a whole, and that the charges
were serious and long-standing and needed to be addressed.

We are in a dilemma. We think it is a political strategy
to publicize "internal" struggles - both for accountability
and so we can learn from each other's struggles. So BMR does
that as much as we can around our own issues. Yet what are
our motives, as white women, for publicizing criticism of
a Black nationalist movement, especially the way the crit-
icisms were raised and without more information? We would
like some feedback on this.

We are also in the process of attempting to re/define our
politics around support for National Liberation Movements,
especially within the U.S. We have pretty much been printing
articles on National Liberation Movements which we have re-
ceived from groups (May 19th Communist Organization, Women
Against Imperialism, New Movement in Solidarity with the
Puerto Rican and Mexican Revolutions) with which we have
some personal contact and basis of unity. We rarely receive
or thereby print articles from other National Liberation
Movements and support groups with which we have little or
no personal connection; though we occasionally reprint or
edit articles from their publications (such as the APSP's
Burning Spear).

BMR talks about the socialist reunification of Mexico -

a socialist revolution which will return the Southwest to
Mexico and the Chicano/mexicano people: We also support the
Republic of New Afrika, a 5 state area in the south for a
socialist Black nation. The APSP is working for a Black
working class international revolution, to free Blacks
everywhere from colonialism and imperialism. We support

(by printing articles in BMR) National Liberation Movements
and self-determination for all peoples, both within and out-
side of present U.S. borders. Questions that we are in pro-
cess about include: Are autonomous nations the answer to
colonialism/racism/anti-semitism? What does “ownership” of
land really mean? Land rightfully “belongs" to those who
live on it, work on it/with it - it belongs to those whose
labor built the wealth of this country - Black people,
Chicano/mexicanos, Asian people, the working class. And to
Native Americans, who are the original inhabitants and have
been forced off the vast land they once lived on to the most
barren parts of this country (so-called until energy re-
sources were discovered).

We know that imperialism must be destroyed, but what will
we build under socialism/communism? What is the "best" way(s)
to fight white supremacy? To fight colonialism and imperial-
ism? Both the left and the women's movement have been/are
racist and anti-semitic. But we do need to develop connec-
tions among all of us working towards revolutionary change.
We need to fight against our own racism, sexism, anti-semi-
tism, et al, in order to build revolutionary movements.

MORE ON PAGE 19

inside BMR

National
Anti-Semitism......10,11,15
America Held Hostage......5
Voices From Our Lives
Writing On Madness....12,13
Calendar..............17
Classies and Ads......18,19
RESOURCES.............20

Where We're At........22
Letters Home...........3,16
International

Drugging of the Elderly....4,5
Mercury Poisoning.......8,9
Palestinian Prisoners....14
Hot Briefs..............5

in the US, $15 for Canada, Mexico and plain brown wrapper,
$18 overseas, $22-US institutions, $24—Mexico, Canada and
$26 overseas. Free to all US women incarcerated in prisons
or psychiatric institutions. BMR is on file at the New
Alexandria Library for Lesbian Women in Florence, MA and is
available on microfilm (Vol.1/#1 Oct. '72 through July ‘79)
directly from BMR for $75. BMR is indexed by the Alternat-
ive Press Center, P.O. Box 7229, Baltimore, MD 21218. Our
phone # is 303-322-2010.