IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Struggling In and Around the

Kim Womantree

Feminists from all over responded
to a call to gather in South Dakota
last July 8-9 to support the Black
Hills Alliance, an organization work-
ing to save the Black Hills of South
Dakota from destruction. Over 25 mul-
tinational corporations plan to strip
mine the Black Hills for uranium to
fuel nuclear reactors, and for iron
ore. This will deplete and irradiate
the water supply, pollute the air
with dozens of coal-fired mills, and
irreversibly contaminate the environ-
ment with radioactive mill and mine
tailings. A secret study by the Ford
Foundation designated this area as
a “national sacrifice area," to
supply U.S. energy needs to maintain
our status as a superpower. If the
multinationals succeed, this area,
the Lakota Indians' sacred and beau-
tiful country, in 25 years will not
support human life. Clearly this will
affect the quality of human life in
the West generally, as we not only
must wage similar struggles here,
but share the same air and water,
walk the same earth.

The Black Hills Alliance (BHA) is
composed mainly of Native Americans
and ranchers and other local people.
Their aim is to prevent the rape of
the Black Hills by any means necess-
ary. The BHA called for the National
Gathering of the People from July 8-
9, organized a 20 mile walk from
Rapid City to show the strength and
determination of supporters and org-
anized a day of workshops at the
campsite in the Black Hills.

Others were criticized for proclaim-
ing and pushing their own programs,
themselves out front, at the cost of
focusing away from the survival is-
sues, and at the possible cost of
losing local support. One rancher
said, “When you 7,000 people leave,
we will have the same conservative
population that we started with."

Planning began for a Survival Ga-
thering next year in the Black Hills.
Women are encouraged to come. There
is a lot of support in the BHA for
work around women's health, forced
sterilization and child-snatching.
The credit for this must go to Women
of All Red Nations (W.A.R.N.), a
group of Native Women who work on
the issues in the lives of women as
well as being leaders in the fight
for their people's survival. I
recommend the W.A.R.N. pamphlet for
anyone who wants to understand the
struggles of Native Women. It is
available at the Radical Information
Project and at Woman to Woman Book-
stores.

Other focuses at the Gathering will
be self-defense (against the multi-
nationals and their practices to ex-
terminate the Native People), self-
determination (education for survi-
val; peoples governing themselves),
and self-sufficiency (practical know-
how of alternative technology). Plan-
ning meetings for the Gathering are
now taking place in Denver and Boul-
der. Call Kim at 477-0103 for info-
rmation on when - we need more femin-
ist input.

At the campsite, 7,000 people with
incredibly diverse backgrounds camped,
ate, chanted, sang, talked, argued,
organized, and made connections
across the country. The workshops
were on Indian water and treaty
rights, and the effects of uranium,
and on racism in organizing. At this
workshop, which Marty Mathers attend-
ed, respect for Native culture and
traditions was stressed, and the
necessity of winning the local popula-
tion over was discussed. In this
context, socialists, lesbians, and

The Dedicated Feminists Guide to
Working in Coalitions
or what I learned in South Dakota

Kim Womantree
1. Find your common ground and expand

on it by doing concrete work and fol-
lowing through on commitments.

2. Respect the Ground Rules - such
as a decision that all banners will
focus on one issue only. If you
cannot respect the ground rules, be-
cause of sexism or political disa-
greements, communicate your disre-
spect in a respectful manner, without
self-righteousness.

3. Communicate your ground rules. Do
not assume people know anything.

4. Confront sexist and heterosexist
statements, explain why such things
hurt the Movement as a whole. Group-to-group,
arrange for time to talk if possible.
Lesbians and feminists need each
other for support and energy. We can
take this energy to the movement and

5. Confront rumors - get the facts.
Don't take anything for granted.

6. Remember that guilt is only use-
ful as a fundraiser; any other use
backfires into apathy and liberal
mushiness.

7. Be very, very patient. Remember
you are not dealing with the enemy
but people you need to be allies
with.

8. These words mean as much or as
little as the practice to which they
are put.

The threat is real and immediate, the issues
are basic, like life and death.

There was also a lot of frustra-
tions and tensions, rumors and mis-
communications. Real political dif-
ferences never got explored, con-
flicts were not resolved, existing
sexism and racism, especially between
the BHA and lesbians who attended the
gathering was reinforced by bad com-
munications.

Lesbians and feminists who came to
the gathering had to deal with the
fact that most of the people there
did not understand their politics;
and that was a priority to do so.

The priority was immediate survival
of a) the land itself, b) the people
on it, the survival of Lakota culture.
This meant a different atmosphere
than the one feminists work in politi-
cally; much less concern with process,
political theories and “correctness”,
and practicality. The “comprehensive
strategy" for the Black Hills includes
media exposure, lobbying, and fund-
raising, through civil disobedience,
up to sabotage and armed resistance.
This last is not a romantic revolu-
tionary fantasy. Many people, mostly
Native Americans, are prepared to
fight for the Paha Sapa, the Black
Hills, with their lives. This will
probably happen in the next 1-2
years. What kind of support will fem-
inists and lesbians give?

A focus for feminist frustration at
the gathering was the treatment of
lesbians who held a sign in the Walk
that said, “Lesbians support BHA."
They were asked to take it down (and
refused). This was interpreted as
discrimination against lesbians by
me as well as other lesbians there.
What we didn't know is that the BHA
had made a decision, which no one
knew about, to only allow signs that
focused on the issues of the Black
Hills. 3/4 of the people on the march
had signs touting their various
groups. There were a lot of anti-nuke
groups and a lot of leftists. Social-
ists and anarchists were also asked
to lower their signs, and also re-
fused.

Lesbians met in a group that night
to express anger and talk strategy,
but came up with nothing concrete al-
though many suggestions were made. A
network of lesbians in the pro-survi-
val movement will have some organized
presence at the Survival Gathering.
For more information about this,
send a self-addressed stamped envel-
ope to Carol Stern at 1553 High St.,
#5, Denver, Colorado 80218.

There was a women's circle the
following morning. 60 women were co-
ming from very different places and
we found too much to talk out. Witches, radical dykes and Native Ameri-
can women, anti-nuke hippies, and
leftist women, and ranchers' wives
from the area had little common
ground except a commitment to the
earth. So we reaffirmed that commit-
ment, sang, chanted, and walked down
the hill singing, “You can't kill
the spirit, she's like a mountain,
she is old and strong, she goes on
and on." (From a song by the Iz-
quierda Ensemble).

A women's workshop was planned but
was pulled apart by the fact that
the Survival Gathering planning hap-
pened at the same time; by miscommun-
ication in which I had a part; and by
getting bogged down in discussion
about process and the lesbian issue,
so there was little done on the fem-
inist issues.

Feminists made almost no impact on
the sexism there. The people who
are making headway against sexism
in the pro-survival movement are the
many strong women who write and speak
and lead the movement, such as Winona
LaDuke and the women of W.A.R.N., who
speak of genocide and their survival
as a people, how the multinational
corporations affect their lives, and
how to fight back.

Sexism is not being attacked head-
on. It is a side issue, being dealt
with by individuals. The process is
slow, and it may be very hard for
feminists to be patient, to explain
and educate and work hard and slow-
ly gain trust and respect. We want it
NOW.

But the multinationals are survey-
ing the Black Hills and building
roads NOW. Indian people and their
culture are being exterminated NOW.
There is very little time.

I believe it is necessary and pos-
sible for feminists, lesbians and
the pro-survival movement to work
together. We do have to behave with
respect for another culture and we
also have to have self-respect
and political integrity. I have some
ideas on this which are included
in a separate article on this page.

I will close with a quote from a
woman who works on a rocky farm in
Craven Canyon where the surveying
teams are beginning to set up. She
said, "Well, if the government wants
to do something about this (the strip
mining) then maybe we should do
something about the government." I
like that quote. I liked her. With
enough like her, we may have a
chance.

Note: The above article was written
based on the work of Carol Stern,
Marty Mathers, Michelle Feingold,
and Canok Dougherty.

Paha Sapa Report

The Black Hills - Paha Sapa report
is published monthly by the Black
Hills Alliance. A newspaper that
covers information about the Black
Hills and surrounding areas in So.
Dakota, it also is a valuable re-
source for coverage of other anti-
nuclear and environmental issues
around the country. Annual sub-
scription cost is $5. Write: P.O.
Box 2508, Rapid City, S.D. 57709.