Today in America; everyone says there is a resurgence and re-emergence of the Ku  
Klux Klan. They wear the same uniform and carry the same tools they have for 100 years  
—a white robe, a torch, and a lynch rope. But today in America, the Klan has an added  
face. That face is the current program of the U.S. government led by the Reagan regime.  
That face is the military used in the Klan paramilitary training that came from the U.S.  
army reserves and the U.S. National Guard. That face is the actual combat of men from the  
ranks of the KKK in U.S.-sanctioned mercenary attacks from Dominica to El Salvador.  
That face is the active organizing of women by the Klan. And finally, it is the calm, cool  
3-piece suit approach that argues on national television and gets equal time to oppose bus  
ing, affirmative action, voting rights, abortion, and so-called “illegal aliens.”  

Are the “unsolved” murders of Black people in Social Circle, Georgia; Atlanta;  
Boston; and New York City unrelated to the re-emergence of the Klan? Are the recent  
lynchings of Black people in rural Mississippi and Mobile, Alabama mere isolated  
incidents? Are the killings of Mexicano undocumented workers in Texas and Arizona just  
more crime statistics? Not when these killings are happening with increasing regularity  
in major Klan organizing centers and in close proximity to Klan paramilitary training  
camps. Not when the Klan brags that it is training men, women, and children for race  
war. The Klan actively engages in and builds support for violent attacks against Black,  
Chicano/Mexicano, Native American, Puerto Rican, and all people of the Third World. The  
Ku Klux Klan is a terrorist organization.  

Why is it that the U.S. imperialist state, with all its legal and military might, does not  
stop the racist attacks against Third World people? Not only has the state failed to stop  
the Atlanta murders, for example, but it has also led the cover-up of these murders by pin-  
ning the whole thing on Wayne Williams. Since Williams has been in custody, there have  
been over 25 more killings. In April 1982, three young retarded Black men were found  
hanged and castrated in Atlanta.  

Why is it that the U.S. imperialist state does not shut down Klan paramilitary training —  
camps that operate in Texas, Connecticut, California, Alabama, Georgia, New York, and  
other states? Instead of shutting them down, the federal government assists the training in  
many ways. In some cases, the training is actually done on federal land, such as the LBJ  
grasslands near Ft. Worth, Texas. And frequently, the leaders of the training are U.S.  
military personnel. At Dekker Lake, near Austin, Texas, for example, the leader of a  
paramilitary training exercise was a marine recruiter. And at Camp Puller, on the Texas  
Gulf Coast, CIA-trained mercenaries, National Guardsmen, and members of the Army  
Reserve from Fort Hood served as instructors. The Texas Klan has also bragged about ob-  
taining weapons from Fort Hood.  
There are many examples of the federal government actually promoting the Klan and  
giving it direction. Invisible Empire leader, Bill Wilkinson has been exposed as an FBI  
“informant.” In the 1950s and 60s, 1/3 of the Klan was made up of FBI agents. Forty-one  
chapters of the Klan were started by the FBI during this time. The FBI was not informing  
on the Klan. It was building the Klan. In 1979, federal agents were involved in the  
Greensboro, North Carolina, massacre. FBI “informant” Ed Dawson rode in the lead car  
of the Klan and Nazi 10-car caravan, and Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms  
agent Bernard Butkovitch participated in planning the massacre. In countless situations,  
Klan violence, lynchings, and firebombings have gone unprosecuted, and Klan rallies and  
leaders are given unlimited protection.  

What we are seeing is a growing unity between the Klan, other fascist organizations,  
the Army Reserve, the National Guard, the police, the FBI, and the CIA. Members of the  
Klan, Nazis, police, and members of the National Alliance (a neo-Nazi group) collaborated  
in the CIA-backed attempt to invade Dominica. Paramilitary forces and official  
military forces are uniting on an international level, as illustrated by the recent conference  
in Canada that was attended by paramilitary and military fascist forces from 20 different  
countries.  

The U.S. state will never ban or reform the Klan, especially while opportunist forces  
such as the American Civil Liberties Union vigorously defend the constitutional right of this  
terrorist organization to operate. Even if it could, the U.S. state would not stop the Klan  
because it needs the Klan. The Klan and the other organized white supremacist forces are  
part of imperialism’s international strategy of building fascism. The state can and does rely  
on its official police forces to act as domestic armies against the liberation struggles, but it  
also needs the Klan’s vigilante armed forces to act as shock troops to terrorize the popula-  
tion and destroy potential resistance. At a time when Black voting rights are being taken  
away, Third World people are being forcibly removed from their communities through ur-  
ban gentrification, and the Immigration police (Migra) are conducting massive Gestapo  
raids, the U.S. needs Klansmen in police departments, in the military, in the Migra, in  
prisons, to ensure that the system of white supremacy and continued exploitation will be  
enforced with an iron hand. It needs Klansmen like Tom Metzger and mercenaries like  
Robin Moore running for public office to make their white supremacist programs  
legitimate and acceptable to masses of white people. It needs to consolidate a mass fascist  
base to defend the U.S. empire. It needs the Klan to fight for white supremacy and Amer-  
ikkka in every way.  

The KKK has always risen when the system of imperialism is in crisis. This was true  
during Reconstruction in the 1870s when the Klan rose to wage war against the new  
social order that Black people were creating after the defeat of slavery. It was true in the  
1920s and again in the 1950s and 60s when economic crisis was deep and Black  
resistance was strong. And today, as the U.S. empire is plunged into its deepest crisis, the  
Klan emerges again.  

At a time when victories of national liberation struggles in Vietnam, Zimbabwe, and  
Nicaragua mean that imperialism is losing its ability to reign supreme, we are seeing ac-  
celerated revolutionary struggle in this country. The Black Liberation Army has shown its  
determination to fight by any means necessary for the liberation of the New Afrikan ne-  
tion. The struggle for independence and land—the five states of Louisiana, Mississippi,  
Alabama, Georgia, and South Carolina—is a historic and continuous struggle. A mass  
resistance movement is being built against killer cops, the Klan, and genocidal conditions in  
Black communities across the country. The historic and growing resistance of the Puerto  
Rican people is being channeled towards people’s war for independence and socialism for  
Puerto Rico through the heightened actions of the FALN and the armed clandestine forces  
of the Puerto Rican revolutionary independence movement. The Chicano/Mexicano people  
are struggling to reclaim U.S.-occupied northern Mexico (Southwest U.S.) and for the  
socialist reunification of all of Mexico, in the process destroying the illegally imposed U.S.  
border. They are fighting for their nationhood and human rights, and against U.S. coloniza-  
tion, exploitation, and violent attacks by immigration police and the Ku Klux Klan. Native  
Americans, resisting forced removal from their land at Big Mountain and reclaiming land in  
the Black Hills, are struggling throughout the country for their right to sovereignty. These  
are the national liberation struggles that threaten to destroy the U.S. empire by literally tak-  
ing it apart. And the Klan is part of the overall fascist strategy of the U.S. to contain, sup-  
press, and destroy these struggles.  

FIGHTING AGAINST THE KLAN  

Today in America, a fierce struggle is being waged against the Klan and white  
supremacy. The fight is being waged on many fronts, and the Black Liberation movement  
is in the forefront of the struggle, as it has always been. Since Reconstruction, Klan terror  
has been met with resistance. This spring, Black people confronted the Klan in Social Cir-  
cle, Georgia, as they demonstrated against the unsolved killings of Black people dating  
back to 1946. And in Jacksonville, Florida, Black demonstrators ran the Klan out of town.  
Police terror has also been met with mass demonstrations from Milwaukee to Los Angeles  
and has been answered by Black Liberation Army freedom fighters as well. Today BLA  
freedom fighters are waging armed struggle to “stop the flow of uncontested violence and  
repression against the Black community.” The BLA communique says that one reason the  
Oct. 20th Brinks expropriation in New York was attempted was to finance people’s self-  
defense units. Such units are being formed in many Black communities. And when Black  
people have practiced armed self-defense, such as in Tupelo, Mississippi, Klan attacks  
have been beaten back. The long and bitter fight of Black people against the Klan will only  
be won when the New Afrikan nation wins its independence and controls its own land. Un-  
til this happens, U.S. imperialism will have the basis to maintain a system of white power  
and the Klan will continue to re-emerge. The liberation of the New Afrikan nation will lead  
to death to the Klan and will be instrumental in destroying the U.S. empire and its system  
of white supremacy.  
This is the time for white people to support Black liberation and to take action against  
the Klan—organized action—strategic action. It is time to push forward the building of a  
militant national mass movement that will fight uncompromisingly against the Klan and  
will expose and isolate the real terrorists—from the KKK and killer cops to the FBI/U.S.  
political repressive apparatus. It is time to answer the government's attempts to isolate  
freedom fighters and jail their supporters through the grand juries by building an offensive  
to stop the grand juries, support the freedom fighters, and resist the fascist build-up. The  
white combatants in the Revolutionary Armed Task Force who attempted the Brinks ex-  
propriation charted a new direction for white anti-imperialists in this country by fighting  
under the leadership of the Black Liberation Army. The anti-Klan movement that we build  
must contribute to advancing the revolutionary struggle. It must be based on the revolu-  
tionary principles of following Black revolutionary leadership, support for self-  
determination, and fighting white supremacy.  

The John Brown Anti-Klan Committee is building a movement against the Klan and  
the whole system of white supremacy. When we fight the Klan, we are part of the revolu-  
tionary struggle to destroy the U.S. imperialist state. When we fight the Klan, we fight to  
stop the genocide of Third World people. When we fight the Klan, we fight to stop  
fascism. The Klan is not the friend of white working-class people—it is the enemy. It  
organizes people to fight for an oppressive, exploitative system. It organizes women to  
build a fascist support network, to accept passive and dependent roles, and to transmit  
white supremacist ideology to young children. We are struggling to actively intervene in the  
strategy of U.S. imperialism to consolidate the white working class into a fascist mass base.  
At a time when the Klan is waging a major struggle to win the hearts and minds of white  
working-class people to fight for the empire, we are struggling to rob the Klan of their  
mass support. At a time when the Klan has filled 1/3 of its ranks with women, we are  
organizing women to understand that by fighting the Klan and white supremacist violence,  
we are striking at the very heart of imperialism, the system that is the enemy of all women.  
It is our job to organize women and all white working-class people away from U.S. im-  
perialism. We are organizing white people to take the side of the Black, Chicano/Mexicano,  
Puerto Rican, and Native American struggles and to join in the struggle to defeat the U.S.  
empire. The fight against the Klan and white supremacy is a fight for our liberation.  

We are calling this National Conference to build a broader and stronger movement  
against the Klan. We invite everyone who wants to join this movement to fight white  
supremacy and the Klan to come to this conference. If you are already doing any kind of  
anti-white supremacy work, we especially welcome your participation. This is a conference  
to build a year-long national program of action to fight the Klan, killer cops, mercenaries,  
the Migra, and all forces of white supremacy and to support national liberation struggles.  
We will have workshops on these subjects and also workshops on forming new chapters,  
student campus organizing, high school organizing, research and documentation, and  
women’s liberation and the fight against white supremacy.  

July 4th, 1982—Help us turn the Klan’s national day of celebration of U.S. patriotism  
into a day that leads to their defeat. DEATH TO THE KLAN!  

WHAT WE DO  

In the seven cities where we are located (Chicago, New York, Washington, D.C.,  
Houston, Western Mass., Austin, and Bowling Green, Ky.), we do solidarity work with na-  
tional liberation struggles and agitate, educate, propagandize, and organize against the  
Klan, killer cops, mercenaries, and other white supremacist forces. It is our aim to restrict  
the ability of these forces to operate and grow. We have found that we have the ability to  
change the political climate, block their organizing strategy, expose them, put them on the  
defensive, and to put a stop to many of their activities.  

We do our anti-Klan work in solidarity with the New Afrikan Independence move-  
ment. We organize to shut down paramilitary training camps in Texas and to oppose  
Klansmen running for office in Bowling Green. We have organized to get Klan guards out  
of the prisons at Napanoch, New York. We participate in mass demonstrations against the  
Klan such as in Hartford, Connecticut, San Antonio, and Dallas, where we helped to run  
the Klan out of town. We held a national demonstration at Reagan's 1980 Inauguration to  
oppose Reagan and the Klan.  

Our campaign to stop killer cops—from the Pentagon to the Precinct—is conducted in  
solidarity with the struggles of Third World people for human rights and self-determination.  
We recognize the police as occupying armies in Third World communities and major  
repressive forces against national liberation struggles. We have demonstrated to bring killer  
cops to justice in many cities. We have exposed the unity of the police and the Klan and  
are demanding that specific Klansmen be removed from the police force in Bowling Green.  
We are organizing to stop the campaign to purchase bullet-proof vests for Chicago police.  
And we organize people not to participate in law-and-order Crime Watch programs from  
Austin to Western Mass.  

We work in the Coalition to Defend the October 20th Freedom Fighters, distributing  
the Resistance newsletter and organizing against the escalating government campaign of  
torture and isolation of freedom fighters. We are mobilizing to stop grand jury repression  
and to organize people not to collaborate with the state’s attempt to destroy revolutionary  
forces. We have participated in forums and demonstrations in support of the freedom  
fighters. We are mobilizing for the National Conference against Repression to be held in  
Denver, May 28-30.  

An anti-Klan movement in this country cannot divorce itself from the struggles being  
waged against U.S.-led imperialism and colonial domination in the white settler colonies of  
South Africa and Israel. We do solidarity work with the struggles in Southern Africa, such  
as participating in the Dollars for Bullets Campaign in solidarity with SWAPO, and we  
organize to stop mercenary recruitment and training. We have done pickets against the  
movie, Dogs of War, and against the mercenary magazine, Eagle. In New York and  
Chicago, we mobilized to stop the Springbok rugby tour. We are working in support of the  
Anti-Springbok 5, the five anti-imperialists who took militant action against the Springboks  
in solidarity with African liberation struggles and who are now facing imprisonment.  

The fight against Zionism—the foundation of imperialism in the Middle East and the  
oppressor of the Palestinian people—is inextricably linked to the fight against white  
supremacy and racism here in the U.S. We have done demonstrations and forums in  
solidarity with the Palestinian struggle and against Zionism. We participated in the  
November 29th Coalition for the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People  
and mobilized nationally for the November 29th demonstration.