criticism / self-criticism

“We must not mislead people about what armed struggle really is....”

Dear BMR Women,

I meant to write a few months ago when I saw, to my surprise, my article from ARM Action, newsletter of the Abortion Rights Movement of Women's Liberation (June 1979) reprinted in BMR's State of the Movement issue (August 1981). I have some criticisms around the reprinting of the article.

Since the article was written in June 1979, you should have dated it, and identified where it came from. Also, since it was a year later, I would have liked to have been notified that you were going to reprint it. Then I could have added a short update on my analysis and evaluation of ARM.

More importantly, titling the article "A Year and a Half of ARMed Struggle" did an injustice to the seriousness of armed struggle—an issue that feminists must take positions on. We must not mislead people about what armed struggle really is. With the recent revolutionary attempted expropriation on October 20, 1981 of a Brink's truck and the subsequent terrorist attack of the state on the Black Liberation Movement and its white anti-imperialist allies, it becomes all the more important to state our support of the right to armed struggle. BMR should have more articles about the relationship of armed struggle to political organizing, and should reprint the Black Liberation Army communique of November 5, 1981. We must name things as they are. And ARM of Women's Liberation was not anti-imperialist, not revolutionary, and certainly not about armed struggle! Had you wanted to use the name in the title you could have called it "Building Strong ARMs" or "Fighting Flabbily ARMs" or "ARM Gets Weak." Along this same line the title of Sara Grusky's recent article on fighting racism in the women's health movement made it sound like an organizational analysis, instead of a hard look at the women's health movement particularly, and the WLM specifically.

I have appreciated BMR's recent series of articles challenging the women's liberation movement to deal with white supremacy and the building of fascism. What we need now is a revolutionary anti-imperialist women's liberation movement that pays more than lip service to fighting racism and engaging in solidarity work. Fighting imperialism and white supremacy and male supremacy are the ways we will build the basis for our own liberation. Without a diligent, intensified struggle against all of them, we will not break out of the reformist, white-centered view of some white women gaining some power in this same system.

A further evaluation of ARM shows how the fight against white supremacy must be incorporated into the basis of the women's liberation movement. One of ARM's main strengths was putting Self-Help, particularly menstrual extraction, forward as a strategy to fight for control over our bodies. We should have recognized our responsibility to share those Self-Help skills with Black and Third World women, to do more ongoing training, and to acknowledge that Black and Third World women have always been self-helpers out of a need to survive. We must not repeat past mistakes. In the Jane collective, (a feminist abortion underground which performed 10,000+ abortions pre-1973) only white women were trained to do the abortions (i.e. have power). Self-Help groups around the country should make it a priority to share their skills with women of color. Washington (DC) Women’s Self-Help is struggling to have as one of our top priorities to use our resources, including time, to train Black and Third World women in skills we have, to include combating racism in everything we do thereby making our group more open to Black and Third World women to join, to respect the formation of autonomous self-help groups of Third World women when they want to form them. We'll keep you posted on our progress.

The white women's movement must break with its white-defined practice. Revolutionary acts by national liberation movements inside and outside the current borders of the U.S. are heightening. We can follow their leadership by fighting imperialism and white supremacy. If we don't, we will discover one day that we are on the same side as the state, helping to build fascism.

In struggle,  
Marion Banzhaf  
Washington DC

“with the hope that we can struggle against racism with more understanding and clarity...”

Dear BMR,

I was infuriated that my article was retitled on the front page as "Racism in the Abortion Rights Movement (A.R.M.)." Obviously the person who retitled it did not even bother to read the article. The organization A.R.M. was never mentioned in the article. With careless and irresponsible journalism BMR added to the unconstructive, sensationalist, name-calling methods of dealing with racism. This was exactly what I was trying to avoid in my article. Enough of name-calling!! Enough of guilt!! What I attempted to do in my article was to analyze ways the women's liberation movement had been racist in our practice with the hope that we can struggle against racism with more understanding and clarity in the future. But, this effort was substantially undercut by BMR's erroneous retitling of the article.

It is rather ironic that BMR chose to retitle my article “Racism in the Abortion Rights Movement (A.R.M.).” The organization A.R.M.—which has been defunct for 2 years, was started primarily with people and money from the Federation of Feminist Women's Health Centers. As a woman who worked for 4 years with the Feminist Women's Health Center (FWHC) in L.A. and later with A.R.M. in Washington D.C., I know that the FWHC worked to develop a very clear analysis of population control and did groundbreaking work in exposing the racist population control ideology behind the

CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE