12

West Germany

Woman Court Martialed  
For Fighting Discrimination

LANDSTUHL, West Germany — Babette Peyton, a black woman in the U.S. Army stationed in West Germany, faces a court martial for being absent from her base without leave. Peyton went AWOL after the army ordered her to submit to a psychiatric examination — a result of her complaint against job discrimination.

Peyton's problems in the Army started in August, 1973. After working for two weeks in the children’s psychiatry clinic, where she was also training as a social worker, she was ordered to fill in “temporarily” as a receptionist. Fifteen months later, however, she had still not been returned to her first job.

In September, 1974, Peyton filed an official complaint after discovering a discrepancy in her first job evaluation. In one area, her work was rated “superb,” but the computer-rated section of the evaluation described her work as below average. Instead of considering her complaint, however, the Army disciplined her for wearing her hair in cornrows.

A month later, Peyton complained to the Equal Opportunity Office about the Army’s harassment. At the meeting, an Army psychiatrist termed her a chronic schizophrenic, and Peyton was subsequently ordered to submit to a psychiatric examination. When she requested an investigation, the commander-in-charge said she would first have to comply with the order.

ERA...

From Page 5

the mails with petitions and letters of the horrors of the ERA to state legislators.

Some of the main objections to the Equal Rights Amendment will be examined here since, according to many involved in the ERA battle, misinterpretation and ignorance of the law are chiefly responsible for most fears concerning the ERA.

Alimony and Children

One objection to the ERA that instills fear into the woman who is a dependent housewife is that husbands will no longer have to support their wives and the family will therefore be weakened. The opposition also claims that alimony laws would be invalidated and men would no longer have to pay child support.

In reality, the rights of women and children to be supported are very limited and enforcement is inadequate. A married woman living with her husband can get only what he chooses to give her. She can legally force him to support her only through a separation or divorce action. The data available shows that a wife's ability to support herself is a factor in determining the amount of alimony she receives, that alimony is awarded in only a small percentage of cases, that fathers contribute far less than half of child support, and that alimony and child support awards are very difficult to collect.

The effect of the ERA on divorce and child custody laws could be to make those laws more realistic. It could be used to require both spouses of divided families to contribute equally to the support of the children so that one spouse is not bearing a larger share of the responsibility for support than the other. It would not invalidate alimony laws but would extend them to cover both sexes.

Protective Legislation

Another objection is that the ERA would nullify special state protective laws for women.

Having exhausted legal channels, and familiar with psychiatric methods in the Army, Peyton decided to go AWOL.

“I know that if you're not crazy when you go there, (the psychiatric ward),” she explained, “you're crazy when you get out.”

Fighting Back, a GI organizing project, is helping to build support for Peyton's trial and the right to fight sexism and racism in the military. For information about a petition asking that charges be dropped, or other ways to offer support, contact Fight Back, 69 Heidelberg, Ingrimstrasse 28, West Germany. In late March, a U.S. Army court-martial decided not to punish Peyton for being AWOL to avoid transfer to a mental hospital. “I’m happy about no punishment but disappointed about the conviction,” she said.

LNS

However, minimum wage laws and rest period and lunch period laws would be extended to men. Laws that prohibit night work, hours of work, and weightlifting restrictions for women would be invalidated. It is unlikely that any of the prohibitive laws will be in effect by the time the ERA is ratified because of the enforcement of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.

Maternity Benefits and Rape Laws

Laws that provide for special maternity benefits and prohibit rape would not be affected by the ERA since they can apply to only one sex no matter how they are phrased. To extend these laws to both sexes would be purely academic since men don’t get pregnant and are the rapists.

The enforcement of the ERA would require that men and women both be given the equal opportunity to serve in the military and thereby receive its benefits in education, training, medical care, and loans.

It would invalidate laws that give women larger prison sentences than men for the same offense and laws that allow women to be imprisoned who have not committed any offense. For example, a New Jersey woman was convicted of bookmaking and sentenced to a maximum of five years in prison. A man, convicted of the same crime, could not be confined for more than 2 years.

The ERA would get rid of the special restrictions on property rights that married women now have. A wife could also engage in business as freely as men do and manage her own property.

Laws which make an age distinction by sex would be changed by extending the benefits under the law to both sexes. For some laws, the lower age would apply to both sexes. For example, the lower minimum age for marriage for women would also apply to men, and the lower minimum age for boys under child labor laws would apply to girls as well.

LNS

about a petition asking that charges be dropped, or other ways to offer support, contact Fight Back, 69 Heidelberg, Ingrimstrasse 28, West Germany. In late March, a U.S. Army court-martial decided not to punish Peyton for being AWOL to avoid transfer to a mental hospital. “I’m happy about no punishment but disappointed about the conviction,” she said.

LNS

Other laws would have the higher age apply to men and women. For example, a higher cut-off rate to the right of parent support for boys would also apply to girls, and a higher age for girls in juvenile court jurisdiction would also apply to boys.

The 5th and 14th Amendments

Another popular argument against the ERA is that women already have equal rights under the 5th and 14th amendments. But women have been highly unsuccessful in winning sex discrimination cases by invoking the equal protection and due process clause of these amendments. In fact, some court decisions have upheld sex distinctions in the law, in spite of these restrictions in the constitution. If in the future these amendments would be interpreted as eliminating all sex distinctions in the law, then the ERA would only make these rights doubly secure.

The simple fact that women have yet to receive equal rights under the law and therefore equal protection as citizens and individuals blatantly illustrates the all-pervasive sexism rampant in this patriarchy. The vigor and venom of the opposition shows how deeply woman-hatred has left no institution untouched — especially that of the housewife.

Separation of the sexes would be allowable if it is shown to be necessary due to “overriding and compelling” public interest and “does not deny individual rights and liberties.” In other words, public bathrooms segregated by sex will still exist.

Big Mama Rag

Vol. 3-A No. 3

het brieis

LOCAL

Rape Law Revisions Revised

The bill that would thoroughly revise the state’s rape laws was itself revised and unanimously approved by a Colorado House Judiciary committee. The major provisions of the bill include ruling out most trial evidence about a victim's prior sexual history, providing closed hearings whenever such evidence was admitted, ruling out the use of the “Lord Hale” instruction to the jury which, in effect, tends to prejudice the victim's testimony and her credibility.

A provision that would recognize forced sexual relations between a legally separated husband and wife as rape was dropped from the bill. The term “rape” was changed to “sexual assault” and a detailed system of classification and harsher penalties were instituted.

Homosexual Child Custody Bill Killed

According to the House Judiciary Committee, there is nothing in Colorado laws that says that a judge should rule against a homosexual parent in a child custody case, so there doesn’t need to be anything that says he can't. On this reasoning, the homosexual child custody bill was killed in committee in late March. Judicial prejudice against homosexual parents was not acknowledged by the legislators. One member of the committee, Rep. Betty Ann Dittemore, R-Englewood, evidently sees homosexuality as “a problem of evolution.”

Credit Discrimination Broadened

The Colorado House Judiciary Committee unanimously approved a bill to prohibit discrimination against homosexuals in the granting of credit. “Sexual orientation” was added by the bill as a prohibited basis for discrimination under the Uniform Consumer Credit Code which already bans racial, sexual, religious, and other forms of discrimination.

Women’s Resource Center Moves

The Denver Women’s Resource Center has moved to new offices on the second floor of the Metropolitan Denver YMCA, 25 E. 16th Ave., the corner of Lincoln and 16th Ave., Room 205. The move has allowed the Center to expand its counseling services and develop a more extensive resource library. The office will also be used more extensively for women’s workshops and programs.

Office hours are 9 to 5 Monday through Friday; evenings and Saturdays by appointment.

Women’s Dream Group

The Women's Studies Program at the University of Colorado at Boulder would like to get together a group to study women’s dreams, myths, archetypes, and symbols. Group to meet this summer. If you are interested, contact the Women’s Studies Program at #7 Hillside Court, U of C, Boulder, Colorado 80302.

S.O.C.A. AWARDS. The YWCA of Metro Denver along with Gart Bros. are presenting The First Annual Sportswomen of Colorado Awards, Sun. April 20 at 5:30 p.m. 1545 Tremont.

Boulder Women’s Resource Center

The Boulder County Women's Resource Center is now a reality. Many feminists in the Boulder area have been working towards the establishment of such a Center for some time. The Center staff, Co-Directors June Wicklander and Rosalind Alleman; Volunteer and Office Coordinator, Judy Richtel; and Outreach Worker, Regina Vigil would like to extend a thanks for all the many women who have given warm support in the past and the many volunteers who continue to be the backbone of our staff.

The Center's major thrust is to provide services and programs for single parent heads of household, minority women, and low-income women. Currently, we are providing information and referral, counseling, and support groups for women and brown bag lunch programs. We are also offering self-defense classes and are developing a resource book for women in the Boulder-Denver area.

Since the Center is dependent upon volunteers to work in many capacities with us, we invite anyone who is willing to work with us to give us a call. We are located at 2750 Spruce Street in Boulder, phone: 447-9670. Our hours are 9 - 1 Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday and Thursdays 9 - 9. Give us a call. We'd like to hear from you.

Memberships are available for $10.00 a year. (tax deductible)

DGH Nurses File Suit

Eight city-employed nurses have challenged Denver's pay scales in a complaint filed by the Women’s Rights Project of the American Civil Liberties Union in March. It charges that the 300 to 400 nurses at Denver General Hospital and the Visiting Nurse Service receive substantially less pay than city-employed men with similar backgrounds and responsibilities.

The women didn't use the standard test for documenting sex discrimination — namely comparing the salaries and benefits for men and women in the same profession, but rather compared salaries for the woman-oriented nursing profession and those for male-oriented professions with similar educational requirements and job responsibilities. The nurses found they suffered “at every level” from “wage discrimination when compared to 100 percent male classes.”

The nursing profession has a tradition of being low-paid and the city of Denver perpetuates this “depressed” condition and the discrimination against women that is being practiced in this community.

The complaint was filed with the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission which has six months to review and investigate the complaint. At that time the commission can recommend that a lawsuit be filed, arbitrate with the city, or recommend against the filing of a lawsuit. The nurses are hopeful that the commission will find merit in the complaint and that salaries will be raised.

REGIONAL

Gay Pride Conference

A group of Lesbians are planning a midwest Gay Pride Conference for April 11 - 13 in Iowa City, Iowa. Contact the Women’s Center, 3 East Market St., Iowa City, Iowa 52240 for more information.  
More on Page 14