6. Female Culture

Big Mama Rag Vol. 2 No. 8

Women in the Arts

Artists Show Off Talents

Local

Anne Zeigler, Carol Lease

ROCKY MOUNTAIN WOMEN IN THE ARTS (RMWA) is a newly-formed, non-profit group for all area women interested in communication with other women artists, in showing and selling their work, and in establishing a Center where their efforts can be centralized and recognized.

Women working in any art form are welcome, as are women who wish to support the artists’ goals. Specific group goals range from consciousness-raising to sales, in an ultimate effort to encourage excellence in women’s art. RMWA’s most ambitious hope is to establish a Women’s Arts Center in Denver where women can show regularly, meet and exchange ideas and experiences, and share services and facilities.

Women interested in Rocky Mountain Women in the Arts can come to meetings held every Tuesday evening at 8:00 at 1895 Lafayette Street, or contact Jan at 388-6590.

Soup’s On Exhibit

The serenity and excellence of RMWA's first show at Soup's On, a downtown Denver restaurant, belie the frustration, betrayal, and struggle that went into setting it up, and are a tribute to the resilience and persistence of the women involved.

According to the two RMWA members with whom we spoke, the story goes something like this:

The group had been discussing putting on a show or creating alternatives to showings when their meeting was interrupted by a telephone call from a would-be Sir Lancelot named Richard Vincent. Vincent offered, as a political and artistic statement, to organize a show for RMWA at Soup's On. He extravagantly promised to provide free publicity, lots of wine, and comprehensive mailing lists. He offered to make all arrangements with Soup's On and with the Friends of the Denver Symphony, for whom the show was to be a benefit.

Although some women in the group were instinctively turned off by the man, their inexperience, disorganization, and lack of confidence made the idea seem like “an answer to our prayers.” So the group made a decision to work with Vincent.

Sir Lancelot Foiled Again

At this point, the deception began. Vincent changed the date of the showing without informing anyone, hired an auctioneer that he said had had considerable experience, but who in fact had had none at all, and had invitations printed that did not even mention the art show, thus forcing the women to redo them. Despite such obvious deviations from the truth, Vincent’s air of professionalism, in demanding deadlines, in seeming to know so much, was still convincing to the RMWA women; and it wasn’t until almost show time that the women realized how thoroughly they had been conned.

Despite all the frustration in putting the show together, and despite Vincent's “help,” despite the fact that few, if any, of the “Friends of the Denver Symphony” showed up, and despite the refusal of the owners of the show to exhibit two works by Fran Gottlieb which they called “obscene,” the show was a financial and emotional success. Rocky Mountain Women in the Arts has made and is making money from the show.

RMWA Grows

Rather than being destroyed by their betrayal by Vincent, the RMWA women have been strengthened. “We learned not to depend on others to do our work for us. We learned to talk about our mistakes. We see that our group was essentially used by a man trying to make a name for himself.”

This summer RMWA will participate in the Street Festival in Denver (the date of which has not been set). It is organizing shows and doing some consciousness-raising. The RMWA women are all concerned with being women artists, and there is great diversity among group members as to whether “women” receives the emphasis or “artists.” They welcome all women.

“Ladies of Mexico” by Carole Katchen

Judy Chicago says women’s art comes from an inner sanctum, and this makes women’s art intrinsically different from men’s. She has observed four patterns in women’s art. Maryse Holder in Off Our Backs, “...repeating forms (cylinders for instance); circular forms (deriving from the breast perhaps); organic forms (she calls these ‘biomorphic’). Examples would be plants, genitalia, gardens. ...Central aperture, the representation of an opening in the center of a painting. These openings could appear as hearts of flowers (O'Keeffe), or as tunnels or portals leading to a mysterious infinity beyond.”

Organic Imagery

However, organic imagery is not limited to women. I think the early Egyptian, Byzantine, and African art to be very biomorphic and organic in form. They possessed those same smooth curving planes as the Surrealists later developed. Arp, Dali, Ernst, Miro, Fini, Moore, Oelze, Oppenheim, Tanguy, and Toyen all expressed themselves with dynamic organic and biomorphic forms, whether in painting or in sculpture. Surrealism is these forms—not from the exterior realistic world; but from the interior, the unconscious and the imagination. “Expressing inner perceptions visually,” as Andre Breton put it.

Organic and biomorphic imagery have been around since the earliest artists, and have been created successfully by men and women. Women have also created concrete and realistic imagery and forms. Cindy Nemser and Irene Moss from The Feminist Art Journal express their viewpoints:

Other critics, such as Linda Nochlin and myself, are unable to pick out any all-prevailing traits in either painting or sculpture that will immediately proclaim it to be the art of a woman. This is hardly strange, as psychologists and biologists have been unable to discover any definitive relationship between female hormones and female artifacts. Moreover, since the two sexes have jointly built and participated in similar cultures, it seems rather unlikely that the art of each sex should be highly distinctive from that of each other. At this time, however, our total culture is in a stage of transition and evolution. A new woman is emerging, a woman who is often setting herself apart from man, or at least is in opposition to him in order to sound forth her own individual voice. Why not wait, hold back, and examine each individual sound for its own rhythm, beauty, and harmony as it appears or has appeared in the recent past? Why work in the old way to create an amorphous category and dump all females into it? All women are not alike.” —Cindy Nemser.

Women artists should be able to paint “tender” paintings if that is what they want to do or “bold” ones if they are so inclined, or “circles,” but, in any case, only because that is what they want to do and not because they have a hang-up about their wombs.” —Irene Moss

Art history has relegated women to either the “decorative arts and crafts,” or to the back pages behind men. The art world is run predominantly by men, for male collectors and buyers, and for male critics and jurors. Many women, art separatists as well as those who believe art is art (men and women have equal talent but are not equal in the art world) have found the need for an alternative system. Art collectives and women’s galleries have shot up throughout the country, Denver notwithstanding.

Review

The Rocky Mountain Women’s Art Show, May 1-25 at Soup’s On restaurant in downtown Denver, was the first attempt of area women collectively making an effort to show and sell their work. They couldn't have chosen a better place for exposure...downtown, crowds at lunch time, and an almost gallery effect from the interior design of the restaurant. For a first timer, it was good. A lot of women were represented and quite a few sold; there were also a good number of methods and media shown—plastic arts, prints, photographs, sculpture, pottery, and fibers. However, the overall quality of the work left a lot to be desired. Sloppy technique and poor realization of the subject matter predominated. Barbara Baer and Carol Katchen offered the best in my eyes.

Carol Katchen had a series of black and white prints. She uses smooth, clean, and strong lines, expressing movement vividly. “Fire,” a woman bent over backwards on her legs and hips, emanates grace and passion and lots of energy. Barbara Baer had two sculptures, “Chain Gang” and “Anthro-Lectric.” “Chain Gang” is a simple sculpture made from plexiglass and small link chains. The coloring and the simple forms produced provide a compelling design which is high in originality. Her other piece exhibited was an organic, breasty-looking light structure. The form is great; all I can say is it’s beautiful and very refreshing to see good modern sculpture small and concise.

I am glad the show was put on and hope there will be others, for each of us has to work, develop, and grow with our art.

The Twenty-Second Annual Metropolitan Show at the Denver Art Museum came in with over one-third of its works produced by women. The best, without any doubt in my mind, was “Rocking Chair” by Marilyn Martin. It’s a plexiglass rocking chair with solid smooth planes; the seat is a clear box half-filled with different colored pebbles and water. It reminds me of a mountain pool, so cool and smooth, while I rock in the chair, daydreaming of putting my hand in the slightly greenish water.

Kay Koch-Brown had a good entry. Her technique is good, her colors defined but subtle; yet her subject matter leaves a lot to be desired. I am not too partial to mid-western regionalism, though if you have nostalgia for tractors in Kansas you would hang it in your living room and dream on.

“The Go Game” by Susan Walp was recommended for a one-person show. I was greatly surprised; it was one of the worst things in the show. It was poor technically, unsanded surface with lots of air holes, poor brush stroking, and muddy coloring. The subject matter was boring, not even inspiring your imagination to wander.

Other outstanding contributions were made by Alice Abrams, “Flame Ring Hanging,” a beautifully simple sculptured ring; Becky Clune, “Myth,” an attractively designed neckpiece made from silver, brass, amber, garnets, and bone; “Bread Box—B.L.T.” Peg Goldberg evoked the pop art imagery of the sixties. A larger than life B.L.T. staring at you in the face brings back the smells of the “round the corner.”

More on Page 10