hot briefs

compiled by Vicki Piotter

Dalkon Shield Settlement

Carrie Palmer, a Denver woman who
blamed a faulty Dalkon Shield IUD
for her near death and emergency
hysterectomy, was awarded $6.8 mil-
lion in her suit against the A. H.
Robbins Company in Denver District
court July 30th. The case was one
of about 400 that have been filed
against Robbins for its manufacture
of the IUD birth control device in
the early 70's. This is the seventh
to come to trial, and only the sec-
ond in which a jury ruled in favor
of the woman.

The Dalkon Shield was taken off
the market in 1974 as the device
was suspected of causing septic abor-
tions causing the deaths of at least
15 pregnant women.

The Real Practice

Male patients receive more thorough

examinations from male doctors than
female patients receive, according to
a recent study by the University

of California
at San Diego.
The study followed

married

couples through 181 physician visits.
Five medical complaints-- headache,
back pain, dizziness, chest pain, and
fatigue-- were selected for the study
because they can be the symptoms of

serious problems requiring a more
thorough examination.

“When we measured the charts against
examples of what we thought should be
a good work up, it turned out that
the doctors seemed to do more when a
man came in with the symptoms," re-

ported the principal investigator.
This is the first systematic study
to document sexist medical practices.
Previously, evidence of sexism in the
treatment of female patients has been
documented only in isolated incidences.
-Longest Revolution

Courting the Pill

A trial opened recently in Sweden
in the first of an expected 100 cases
involving deaths and injuries of
women who took birth control pills.
Thirty-one suits against five Europ-
ean pharmaceutical companies are re-
portedly destined for the courts.
Swedish justice officials are invest-
igating 70 more episodes of birth
control pill-related deaths or injur-
ies.

-Plexus

Raper P|
ae NO
1. wag te | : |
Gainer M0 STERILIZATION
| FORCE» |
TR 2ps ABUsC

ff

oe
|

~Workview/LNS

Forcing Sterilization

A survey released in July shows
that teaching hospitals, where many
federally funded sterilizations for
poor women are performed, still fail
to obtain voluntary and informed con-
sent before performing the procedure.
Public Citizen Health Research Group
found in their survey that more than
70% of the teaching hospitals failed
to comply with one or more of the
major features of the government's
sterilization consent regulations
created to prevent the practice of
forced sterilization.

#Rocky Mountain News

concurrently and an additional 15 years

onr:
where we're at

It's seemed like a short month again- the time between production get-
ting smaller and the work more demanding and important. However, we feel
this probably has a lot to do with the theme of this issue, “women and
work,” and the personal ways each one of us connects to that issue. We
wanted to make this the most comprehensive issue we've ever done- we gave
ourselves an extra week for production; when that week had ended, we felt
we needed yet another week. But, we quit torturing ourselves - there are
no “final” words on the struggles involved with being a working woman-
those struggles are with us every day. What we have developed feels impor-
tant enough to invest the energy, and an added week of time, to produce
28 pages; these pages are a starting point, not an ending.

We hope that by being specific about upcoming themes (see back cover), we
will receive articles from women outside the collective, and that more to-
pics will be covered.

The process of dealing with our own feelings about women and work has
been another important step in collective growth, and we are really build-
ing a strong base of trust and support (the question is how we will sup-
port each other if we all leave our straight jobs after dealing with the
feelings that came up as we put out BMR this month...) We also learned that
we are soon to lose a collective member - Lisa Gould has decided to move
to Boston; we will miss her, and wish her luck there. Next month, we will
number five, but are still committed to working towards increasingly com-
plete issues, and to developing an editorial policy and a points of unity.
This month, for the first time, we as a group struggled with the question
of relevance and content in some of the copy we received, and we began to
feel a real need to clarify our own commitment to the content of what we
decide to print.

Good news this month is that our newspaper boxes are not only bringing
in money, but are being noticed. They are located at: King Soopers Grocery
at 9th and Corona, Rainbow Grocery at York and Colfax, Downtown Walgreens
at 16th and Stout, Colorado Soupers on South Washington and Buchtell, and
the Student Center on the Auraria Campus. We are starting to get responses
to our sustainer plea, and will include a mail-in sustainer form every
month --we encourage our readers to send theirs in as soon as possible. We
have just had a successful benefit, a party on Saturday, July 28, and are
planning other fund-raisers over the next few months. The highlight will
be a garage sale at Fran's on September 15 - so start gathering contri-
butions now (no clothing or unsaleable items), and watch BMR next month
for details.

We held a community meeting at Woman to Woman on July 11, and were glad
to find that the women there shared our enthusiasm about BMR's growth dur-
ing recent months. At that time, we expressed our visions of community re-
sponsibility, and stressed that we do need support - not only financially,
but in terms of developing a good working relationship with each other.
When copy is promised to us, we expect it to be on time (getting the paper
out on time is a shared responsibility), and it must be legible. As always
we can use help during production, and with typing ahead of time. We also
want to hear what our readers think of the paper - and that includes cor-
respondence from women outside our geographic area. Please write to us -
we love to get mail. And besides, you are the ones who can make our let-
ters page interesting.

More Than Enough Power

A federal district judge sentenced
20-year-old Zola Humphries to a pro-
bated five-year prison term for steal-
ing a $199 government check. Humph-
ries, unmarried and the mother of
three young children, told the judge
she took the check to pay her over-
due utility bill. Judge Owens, ap-
pointed by former President Nixon, threat-
ened to revoke her probation if she
became pregnant again. An attorney
at the sentencing quoted the judge as
telling Humphries, “If I had the
power to compel you to go to a local
doctor to have your tubes tied, I
would do so. But I don't have that
power."

-Hersay

Waiting For Our Lives

A study of woman inmates in the
Cook County Women's Correctional In-
stitution in Chicago found that the
major reason given by 132 women await-
ing trial for manslaughter or murder
was retaliation for, or defense
against, physical abuse. Of the 132,
53 had killed their husbands or male
friends. Twenty-seven used knives and
twenty-six used guns-- that, in some
cases, had been used to beat the
woman earlier.

-National NOW Times

Girl Faces 114 Years

"Ninety-nine years for second degree
murder and for burglary to be served

for strong-arm robbery." This was
Miami Circuit Judge John Gordon's rul-
ing last June as he sentenced 13-year-
old Eve Postell for charges stemming
from the robbery and fatal beating
of 85-year-old Ralph Germano.

Gordon's sentencing of Postell to
114 years reflects a national trend
of harsher punishment of youth offend-
ers. This practice has been most sev-
erely meted out to Third World youth.
Because of a new, strict Florida law,

Postell cannot be paroled for 38 years
without the judge's approval.
-LNS

A Dog’s Life

Where do dogs get better treatment
than children? In states like Texas,
where the weekly government allotment
for children in foster care is less
than that for animals in kennels.
This was among the findings of a pri-
vate, 20-member commission study of
the special problems of children sep-
arated from their parents which was
released earlier this year. "A surer

system for harming children and wasting

money could hardly be invented than
that which has grown up in the opera-
tion of foster care,” concluded the
National Commission on Children in
Need of Parents.

-Through the Looking Glass

Hunted

When two young women ran away
from the Willow Lane School, an
institution operated by the South
Carolina Department of Youth Serv-
ices, authorities routinely called
in law enforcement bloodhounds.
The girls were found a mile from
the institution and one of the
girls had to spend over a week in
the hospital for dog bites over
all of her body.

-No More Cages

Big Mama Rag Vol. 7 No. 7

Money Talks

On July 20, 1979, U.S. District
Judge Harold H. Greene ruled that
the Labor Department could order
all federal contracts be cancelled if
a company refuses to cooperate in
a sex discrimination investigation.

Uniroyal, Inc., the third largest
U.S. rubber manufacturer, had refused
to turn over company personnel
records during an investigation by
the Office of Federal Contract Com-
pliance Program of the Labor Depart-
ment.

The OFCCP was looking into Uniroy-
al's decision in 1968 to lay off
520 women at its plant in Mishawaka,
Indiana.

This ruling broadens a 1965 Execu-
tive Order that prohibits employment
discrimination by all employers

having contracts with the U.S. Govern-
ment in amounts over $10,000.

Uniroyal contracts total

$36 million.

-Kinesis

Granting No Favors

Workplace sexual harassment of wo-
men by supervisors, foremen and other
male workers is nothing new. In 1912,
for example, women striking for union
recognition at a corset factory in
Kalamazoo, Michigan listed foremen
harassing them for sexual favors as
one of their complaints. According to
a survey by the Women for Racial and
Economic Equality, 70 percent of the
women contacted had experienced sexual
harassment. They explained that noth-
ing is gained by ignoring this haras-
sment from men on the job and that the
best action is to fight it with other
women who are experiencing similar
on-the-job problems.

-LNS

Dobie Jomanda

The film, “The Double Day," pro-
duced by the International Women's
Film Project, portrays the Latin Am-
erican working-class woman. The title
tells of her struggle to fulfill her
family and work responsibility which
leads her to a double work load or
“Doble Jomanda." It explores her
oppression due to her race, sex and
class. This documentary is available
from the Film Project for a rental
fee; write to them at 333 Sixth Ave.,
New York, NY 10014 or PO Box 4430,
Berkley, CA 94704.

-New Directions for Women

Danger: Women at Work

The Women's Legal Defense Fund
which provides counseling and legal
assistance to women in areas of sex
discrimination is urging the Occupa-
tional Health and Safety Administra-
tion to undertake a comprehensive
study of the hazards faced by the
more than 14 million women currently
employed as clerical workers. The
Defense Fund points out that little
attention has been paid to the work
conditions of clerical workers, which
include such problems as trouble with
lighting and vision, exposure to dan-
gerous chemicals, ventilation, seat-
ing, noise, equipment hazards, and
psychological factors.

-Women‘s Occupational
Health Resource Center