pet

7 eee er aL AMEE UacT ata ee

Page 6

NEWS
FROM AROUND

THE COUNTRY

a column

Chocolate Waters

Two Women Kill Rapist, Edgewater, Fla. -- Two Indiana coeds
apparently strangled an assailant after he raped them and then
tried to kill them with an icepick, police said. Investigators said it
was believed the two women were hitchhiking when the
26-year-old man picked them up and drove them to a wooded area.
Deputies said the women had managed to choke the man with a
scarf and believing he was only stunned, had run to a farmhouse
and called authorities. When deputies arrived, they found him
dead. (Excerpted from the L.A. Times, 6/9/74)

Flagyl May Cause Cancer -- Three separate experiments have
revealed that Flagyl (a drug used in the treatment of Trichomonas
- see Women and Health column) has caused cancer in mice and
rats. The Health Research Group has petitioned the Food and
Drug Administration to ban the drug but the FDA has offered little
response. Your doctor may not be aware of the findings about
Flagyl so you need to tell her/him that you do not want to take the
drug.

NOW Chapter starts in Women’s Prison, New Jersey -- A chapter
of the National Organization for Women at the Clinton
Reformatory is being chartered with the assistance of Poppy
Kennedy. Funding of the chapter was announced by the
newly-constituted state board of NOW-N.J. (New Directions for
Women, Winter, 1974)

Bella Abzug Cautions Against Being Used by Men Candidates --
“Women should not give their free labor to men without getting
something in return. Just imagine the difference for some of
these male candidates if one morning they walked into their
headquarters and found there were no women at the reception
desk, no women on the phones, no women writing position
papers, no women raising funds, no women handling literature,
no women canvassing -- and someday, no women voting for
them.” (Report to the Woman Activist from Beverlie Ludy,
7/15/74)

Until ERA is Ratified - Media Report to Women, a publication
about communications which is published in Washington, D.C.
offers one-year subscriptions to women for $10 but the price for
men for the same amount of time is $15. A qualifying note after
the special rates for men says “until ERA is ratified.”

Wonder Women Conference to be Held In Same Week as Miss
America Pageant -- The Wonder Women Conference which is
sponsored by NOW will be held in Atlantic City on Sept. 6, 7 and 8
- the same weekend as the Miss America pageant. The conference
will exemplify the Feminist concept of women as persons,
contrasting sharply with the traditional portrayal of women as
objects. Workshops will explore the many facets of women and a
huge Feminist parade and many zap actions are also scheduled.
(New Directions for Women in New Jersey, Summer, 1974)

Women &
History

MARIA MITCHELL, ASTRONOMER

Maria Mitchell was born on August 1, 1818 on Nantucket
Island. By the age of 13 she was assisting her father in his work in
astronomy. As she grew older, she became the librarian for the
Nantucket Athenæum and spent her evenings watching the skies.

In October of 1847, she discovered a telescopic comet
which bears her name, and a year later, she became the first woman
elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. In 1850,
by unanimous vote, Mitchell was elected to the Association for the
Advancement of Science, again the first woman.

While Maria Mitchell had an unusually easy time
establishing herself in the field of astronomy, she did not forget
the oppression of other women. She worked both for the suffrage
movement and as president of the Association for the
Advancement of Women. While she was the first professor of
astronomy from 1865-88, at the newly founded Vassar College,
she criticized the male president and board of trustees for
employment practices such as hiring men for the highest
positions and giving women unequal salaries.

Believing that women had much to contribute to the
progress of society, Mitchell once said: “I wish we could give
every woman who has a novel theory dear to her soul for the
improvement of the world, a chance to work out her theory in real
life.” (reprinted from Uppity Women! A Legacy of Liberation.)

~——Big Mama Rag Vol. 3 No. 3

Thoughts from Diane DiPrima

Diane DiPrima, who recently read her poetry in Denver at the
Changing Scene, is a woman who has achieved much success in
recent years as a poet and writer. She has produced four plays on
Broadway as well as a number of books including Memoirs of a
Beatnik, Revolutionary Letters, etc. DiPrima has been conducting
poetry workshops around the country as part of the Poetry In
Schools program and she recently helped teach a course entitled
Spiritual Poetics at the NAROPA Institute in Boulder. Having
grown up in NYC in an Italian neighborhood in the 50s, DiPrima
has often been identified with poets from the beat period such as
Allen Ginsberg. Presently living in northern CA, where she is
editing her unpublished writing and a book of essays entitled
Blessed Are The Meek, Baby, DiPrima is married and the mother of
five children. The following thoughts are taken from an interview
conducted by Marian DeVito and Ronnie Burk and we would like to
extend our appreciation to the Boulder Gay Record for supplying
us with this information.

ON FEMINISM: Feminism for
me is kind of funny because I
grew up thinking women were
superior to men, that’s a
terrible chauvinism I hate. I
grew up where women took
care of all the business and
men were pretty, lovely...sex
objects in a lot of ways...When
it got right down to getting
food on the table, raising the
children, making sure you
didn’t get evicted -- whatever -- it
was the women who took care
of the business. So I always
grew up assuming that it was
my business, that I would
handle it -- essentially. So it’s
been very recently that I’ve
started to share, to live with
men on equal..., almost equal
footing. I never even tried until
I had my first baby. All I
wanted was a baby, my baby,
but I didn’t want a man. Later
when I was in love, it wasn't a
kind of polarity of relating
on a day-to-day level. So, like
Feminism was where I came
from.

COLLEGE DAYS: I went
straight from college to a
gay bar because it was the only
safe place I knew in the city. It
was a place called the Swing
Rendezvous - 1953 - totally
peopled by very fierce street
dykes and a few mafia people
who ran the place and hung
out in the back. Both the
dykes and the mafia people
were very fond of me and my
friend Joannie. I left college
because I was in love with a
woman. Her name was Mari-
anne, a woman in my class.
We were both 17. She was in
love with my friend Joannie...
a typical adolescent situation.
We all lived together. Various
things began to happen. Mother moved
in, the cops moved in,
Marianne was forced back to
school and I wasn’t forced to
do anything..., though my
parents were very conserva-
tive. Like, up until I went to
college, I wasn't allowed to go
to the opera in New York City
on a Saturday night. Once
they grasped they couldn’t do
anything, they didn’t stand in
the way. Their conservatism
was overrun by their basic
kindness and affection.

My father’s talk on homo-
sexuality was something like
this, “I’ve been reading up on
this subject and through my
reading I have found that the
main problem with these
people is their parents won't
accept them. Well, you’re not
going to have that problem
here. I don't want you to feel
that way.” From 18 until about
21, the atmosphere that
nurtured and protected me
was a gay one. The scenes
that I got into were very few
because I was very wary of the
amount of violence going on.
It was very full of knives and
bullets. The situation was one
with poor people; lots of
ghetto violence. I avoided
getting into many scenes with
the women that I met at bars,
but I did get very close to a lot
of them...

It was like home, a very safe
atmosphere. We were mutually
taken care of by the scene.
Our scene was relatively jail
ridden. We would get money
to bail people out and they
would protect us from the
streets in general. The mad-
ness! Like, we were sleeping

& METAL

TO:

FURNITURE STRIPPING & ANTIQUES
PAINT AND VARNISH
REMOVED FROM WOOD

ILLAGE
STRIPPER

WE MOVED

1930 SOUTH BROADWAY
DENVER, COLO. 744-9911

say Big Mama Rag for [O# of f

in hallways. The same scene
that went on in the mid 60s
except there were very few of
us. Later, I wanted a child, but
really didn’t especially want a
man. About a year after she
was born I fell in love with a
woman painter. Her name was
Evelyn McDaniels. She was
from Texas. It was a totally
stormy and very opening year.
It was the first time I took
peyote - 1959 - New York City.
She lived in a studio on Ave.
C, and I lived off Ave. B, an
incredible slum.

ON INVOLVEMENT: However, now I find myself very
scared to get back into a gay
scene. That's a funny thing to
say. It’s not very often I find
myself scared of things. But
I've found the degree of
involvement that I get with a
woman is so total, it meshes
on every particular level so
completely, that it doesn’t
leave any room to work. I can
really empathize with what a
woman is feeling. I can’t do
that with a man, which is just
as well. We can keep a little
space between us.

ABOUT CHILDREN: There are
different planes of history
going on in America right now
that don’t even communicate
at all. If one talks of official
political America, where is
that? Even when Rome began
to fall, it took 500 years to
finish it off. I can't wait that
long! The possibilities that
children have doesn’t seem to
have much to do with the
political or social structure of
America. I keep kids out of
school as much as I can. They
have their own theatre, draw,
paint, write, whatever, it’s up
to them. Instead of keeping
their fantasies locked up, the
way we used to do, they just
live them.

I can help them get the
space to do that. They’ve got to
figure out how to put it
together. I’ve found they can
pretty well figure out for
themselves. I try to run a
policy of non-interference in
my children’s work. It’s not
like allowing them to do
whatever they want to do...it’s
pretty much believing them
and backing them up. It works
out rather strange at
times...for instance, “You
don’t want to go to school
today, do you? It’s raining.”
They're the ones that assume
the responsibility, they
decide. “Well, I owe so and so
so many pages of Math, I need
to go.” It’s a great thing to
take on themselves at age
10—the responsibilities, to
develop those muscles, to
decide their lives.

ON SEXUALITY: There is
something about the homo-
sexual—in a lot of ways—is
a lot closer to being a whole
person. Bisexuality is really
groovy. The things society
makes you feel more and more
less whole. When you see the
old men, the old Indian men,
they are as feminine as
masculine. The same holds
true for the women, it’s a
different form of femininity. In
order to be a person with
power, a shaman, they have
totally amalgamated both
sexes. Basically, that’s what
the world’s been doing, that’s
what's happening, that’s our
trip. I used to always envy
snails. Know how snails
copulate? They have female
organs on one side and male
organs on the other and they
get together both ways. I think
I’ll try being a snail in my next
life.