local

Illness In Our Community -- Building Support

The BMR Collective

When we first started to talk about putting out a health issue of BMR, we hoped that it would be good for ourselves and our community. Pulling together copy on sickness and disease was an unearthing of all sorts of feelings that had not been resolved for us personally or politically. Memories of the community's struggle to both maintain ourselves and our projects, and to give active emotional and financial support to those burdened with illness at a time when Denver seemed nothing less than a city of death were off and on overwhelming for us to handle in the context of weekly meetings.

After generating interviews with three of the long string of women who were and are seriously ill (there were at least six others), we came up feeling like we were missing something. This article, written collectively, is our attempt at recollection and reflection on some aspects of our community's response to the women who were sick (as individuals and as political groups) to the women who were sick in hopes of filling that void. This also serves the personal need of an attempt to get us finished with some of the emotional burden of a crisis we were certainly not prepared for, not that we ever could have been.

Yes, as political lesbians, we were aware of the oppressive nature of the health profession, and yet for many of us the personal as the political was made more graphic than we ever thought possible. Women who were disabled by serious physical symptoms were referred to psychiatrists. We battled with the medical systems to demand our right to information about "the illness" for both "patient" and "family." Friends and lovers had to fight for the right to be recognized as family, as the people who were closest to the women who were under “doctor's orders." Death became an issue for us collectively rather than the usual individual ownership of such an issue. That health care is not in our control hit hard.

Suddenly women who had never questioned keeping their lesbianism in the closet were confronted with the possibility of being out all of a sudden—in the midst of a crisis—that would make "coming out" 1000 times harder than it is anyway. We discovered that legal protection for lesbian lovers was minimal at best. Though, we'd bet that our lesbian/feminist lawyers were flooded with requests to establish "powers of attorney," one lesbian for another, and to write up wills. We felt just as terrorized as we would have been by an invasion of Government agents into our lives. It got to where we just didn't want to answer the phone for fear of more Bad News.

And we were angry at the exploitation of our lives as lesbians and women, aware that no matter how much we would want to just deal with the personal, contact with the medical profession demanded that our response have political connections, which sometimes seemed so callous. And our anger frightened us and our fear made us angry... and then those waves of powerlessness. As lesbians, our very lives tend to express an independence long fought for by most of us, and here we were having no control. Watching the struggle of the women trapped in a failing body, having to reconcile to a certain dependence on others, on us. Responsibilities seemed immense.

MORE ON PAGE 15

Denver Bar

When she told him she would leave after finishing her dance, the doorman yelled, "Right now, bitch." He then grabbed her by the arm and pulled her all the way out to the entrance hallway.

When the doorman twisted Frances' arm and flipped her over onto the floor, her leg smashed so hard that her knee cap cracked. She could only get up on one leg, and three men dragged her along the floor and threw her outside.

Frances was further insulted and dragged on the pavement (but never arrested) by the police.

(ed. note: This article was pulled from a pamphlet put together by Y.O.U. (Your Own Understanding), an organization formed in Sept. 1980 to confront racism and sexism in Denver's gay bars. For a copy of the pamphlet, Your Right To Say It, send sae to: Your Right To Say It

PO Box 18281

Denver, CO 80218)

We will be doing an issue on the state of the women's movement, and encourage individual and collective input on this topic.

The deadline is July 15.

We have already received lots of good copy for that issue—a critical look at Lenin, from a feminist perspective; the issue of feminism and pacifism; an analysis of the anti-pornography movement, and an article about the politics of a feminist workplace... Then, we will be taking a vacation for the month of August, so there will be no September issue.

To those of you who have corresponded with us in one way or another and are waiting for responses—hang in there. Sometimes it takes us a while, but we do eventually come through. Now that it's June, sorry for our slowness. If you all can stop sending space heaters, if you have any extra bucks burning holes in your pockets, we always welcome that sort of contribution... Our finances are even bleaker than usual.

Carry on!

Big Mama, Rag, June 1981 — Page 5