Big Mama Rag Vol. 7 No. 10

We Marched On Washington

Janet Sergi

October 14, 1979 at least 100,000
lesbians and gay men marched in Wash-
ington D.C. to demand their civil
rights. It was the largest gathering
of gay people in history. NBC manag-
ed to underestimate the crowds by
half. Unlike big anti-war or anti-
nuke rallies, the national establish-
ment press and media gave no prior
coverage. In New York City, radio
announcements of the charter bus
schedule occurred the day of the march.

However, intensive grassroots or-
ganizing brought out this record and
diverse crowd. The joyous marches
were 60% men and surprisingly 40%
lesbians. Minority gays composed about
10% of the crowd. The Far-West contingents had a larger proportion of
white men, probably due to the fact
that lesbians and minorities couldn't
afford plane tickets or a week off
work for a cross-country drive.

In the July Houston planning confer-
ence after discussion of lesbian vis-
ibility and Third World participation
a rotating national leadership board
was formed, composed of 50% women,

20% Third World with youth and older
persons, physically challenged and
transperson representation. Many of
the rally speakers were women and
Third World: Arlie Scott, Betty San-
toro, Michi Ko Cornell.

To show good faith and good politics
a Third World Conference was scheduled
three days before the march. Workshop
topics included Gay American Indians,
Role of Homosexuals in the Black
Family, Lesbian Feminism and Third
World Women, Chicano Identity, Black
Gays of the South, Organizational
Approaches and Mental Health and
Prison System.

Regional planners and a diverse
group of sponsors brought out lesbians
and gay men from Alaska to small

towns like Parkerburg West, VA.

The march commemorated the 10th
anniversary of the Christopher Street
riots that sparked the modern gay
movement. The full range of gay peo-
ple were there from the leather set
to radical lesbian feminists, young,
old, all races and nationalities,
all regions of the country, all eco-
nomic classes and all religious per-
suasions - from Catholic priests to
my favorites, The Gay Atheist League
of America.

Third World Women led the march,
followed by the physically challenged.
The contingent of Parents of Gays
received a loud applause as they
marched past. Regional contingents
followed, Colorado had 70 representa-
tives organized by Billie Lindsey and
Kerr McManus of the Gay Community
Center.

100,000 bodies gave validity to
the slogan, We Are Everywhere. We
outdrew the Pope! Yet, no big named
liberal heterosexual gave the march
visible support. The mayor of Wash-
ington D.C., Marion Barry proclaimed
Oct. 10 - 17th Gay Rights Awareness
Week but did not appear in person.
Joan Baez sent a message of support.
Likewise, no big leftist person or
group appeared. N.O.W. did endorse
the march, as did some other small
progressive groups. Basically only
the queers marched. Irony prevailed,
in the collective memories of all
of us who marched so faithfully in
other marches for other causes.

Entertainment included Holly Near
and Meg Christian. A great sound sys-
tem carried the song and speeches
across the George Washington Mall,
thanks to a group of Washington, D.C.
women.

Michi Ko Cornell, an Asian-American
lesbian, powerfully reminded the
crowd of the invisibility of gay
Asians and the need for the American

gay movement to recognize the needs
of this community of women and men.
The connection of these forgotten
gays and their exploited Asian sis-
ters and brothers gave a world per-
spective to the rally.

Throughout the speeches people
seemed to be talking to old friends
and generally enjoying themselves.
Each person's gay identity was
affirmed by 100,000 others - truly
a once in a lifetime experience. This
self-affirmation hopefully will be
translated into an effective lobby
for gay rights. Monday, lobbying
efforts on the Hill were organized
for House Bill 2074-C, Congressperson
Ted Weiss and Congressperson Henry
Waxman are chief sponsors. Each per-
son was urged to write their federal
representative in support of this
bill.

The five demands of the march were:
1. Pass a comprehensive lesbian/gay
rights bill in Congress.

2. Issue a Presidential Executive
Order banning discrimination based
on sexual orientation in the Federal
Government, the military and federally
contracted private employment.

3. Repeal all anti-lesbian/gay laws.
4. Protect lesbian and gay youth from
any laws which are used to discrimi-

nate against, oppress and/or harass
them in their homes, schools, jobs
and social environment.

5. End discrimination in lesbian
mother and gay father custody cases.
The best t-shirts and signs were:

1. Klondykes (Women from Alaska)
2. I don’t molest children and don't
do windows (A Black gay man)

3. Middle-Aged Dyke (A middle-aged
dyke)

4. Hi-Mom (Many brave souls)

5. My son is gay & it's okay (A mom)
6. We are everywhere

7. I march for 2,000 (A woman from
Idaho)

8. Harvard/Vassar/Yale (Ruling class
offspring)

9. We are family.

Partial list of march endorsers:
National Gay Task Force, Gay Rights
National Lobby, National Organization
for Women, Metropolitan Community
Church, National Lawyers Guild,
Mobilization for Survival, National
Lesbian Feminist Organization, Nation-
al Women's Political Caucus, Ameri-
can Friends Service Committee, Colo-
rado Citizens Caucus, Clergy and
Laity Concerned, and many local grass
roots gay groups such as Sexual
Identity Center, Honolulu and Gays
in Parkerburg, West Virginia.