Voices From Our Lives........

Doris

Terensinka Pereira

I visited the hospital, that hor-
rible structure where the sick are
supposedly received to cure them or
to give them a place of rest (eternal
or temporary); nevertheless, its en-
trance appears to be one of a luxur-
ious hotel, during a party, with show
windows of presents and flowers, peo-
ple entering for visits or leaving,
female workers, the volunteers, yon-
der the smiling receptionist with
rose-colored uniform.

I thought to reconstruct Doris' ad-
mission, looking at everything, with-
out giving importance to anyone,
saying her name to the nurse at the
first station and directing herself
to the emergency room. The elevator
which would take her to the second
floor, she noticed the broken light
that gave little light and the door
that opened separating itself in the
middle. Next, they placed her in a
high bed, and the nurses exchanged
her clothing for a white nightgown
that opened in the back. Then they
led her through some corridors and
rooms, and to her eyes all of the
walls seemed curved and the doors
screamed, and the artificial plants
that decorated the corridor seemed
to murmur commentaries as to the pro-
ximity of her death.

In the elevator, I was repeating
her anguish and her fear, as if I was
Doris entering this gray building an-
other time, attempting to remember
the beginning of her death. But,
could it be death, something remem-
bered? Or was it perhaps a memory?
Had Doris noticed the spots on the
tiles and the scent of ether that
floated in the air as preparation for
autopsies? Had she cast her eyes
through the doors that were ajar and
seen the suffering of the other pa-
tients or the happiness of others who
had succeeded in differing with
death, postponing it - in order to
experience more pain.

There remained very little time for
Doris. And we had so much to finish
within the miserable minutes of ex-
treme struggle. We were compelled to
look into each other's eyes, to inte-
grate our dissipated illusions, to
verify the past and settle the inten-
se moments of communication we had
without understanding why at that
time. If it was true that she was
going to die we had to resolve my fu-
ture, if I should continue there or
stay here... This is what we had to
decide before we separated. Because
one thing was obvious to all: when
Doris would die, I might follow her
there immediately, we would be irre-
mediably separated, because death is
this: death is separation.

Doris didn't want to talk about
childhood, but this point was import-
ant: we had known each other since
we were small girls, our houses were
neighboring and our mothers were
friends. We were comrades of adven-
ture from a very early age, we would
flee to the farthest street of the
city, we would run through the hills
where the poor sections were, we
would enter the small tin and wooden

shacks, we played with barefoot child-
ren, almost nude, and many times we
would eat a small piece of bread, re-
gardless of how small it was it was
always shared with us. Many times we
were gone all day on our outings and
we would arrive home very late, we
would lie; we would tell my mother
that we were at Doris' home and her
mother that we were at mine.

As we grew older, the adventures
became more complicated, we put more
of our imagination into them, we
would meet with perverted people and
amuse ourselves much more. We would
penetrate the forest with a group of
companions, the same group we visited

in the hills, we embellished western
films of bandits, of struggle and of
love, we would climb trees and swim
rivers, we hunted birds and upon re-
turning home we lied out of habit, we
dreamed together and many times we
slept together.

We then ran away from home together.
We stole enough money for our bus
fare and food for the first few days.
We found work together, washed dishes
in a restaurant, worked in a bakery,
in a bar, in a theatre selling tickets
in a motel and in worse places. One
day we asked ourselves why we were
doing that, why we were living by that
habit? Why we hadn't finished school,
why did we hate our families? These
questions, made for the first time in-
itiated a series of questions, which
without a simple answer began to tor-
ment our lives. It had been because of
our inability to answer such questions
that we fled our familiar environment.
We were searching for a truth that we
hadn't been able to encounter and now
only now, did it seem clear to us. We
spent the day discussing our condition
and finally we concluded that we had
not reached a single truth, that there
was always a lie in our gestures, in
our words, in our manner of eating or
laughing. Our only consolation once
again was that we were together, the
two of us alone, but she was not com-
forted that it was sufficient for her.

Doris decided that it wasn't worth
it. While I was at work at the dyer's
shop, she overdosed on drugs. Later,
suffering alone, she walked as far as
the hospital for her death.

I ran. The doctor told me that there
was no alternative, death was now the
only assurance for Doris.

She would tell me then that I should
look for a different lifestyle, as if
I had been born another time. But her
voice was distant and though she was
there close to me her hands no longer
clung to mine and I could feel the
cold sweat that ran down her forehead.

‘MORE ON PAGE 14

Sisters,

Brothers.

Others

Saturday, March 17th
(widely known as St. Patrick's Day)

Aging,

I am sitting at the bar sharing
chimichangas when this woman finds
out I am 38. She asks me to write
about my feelings about aging----38!

A week later, in another local bar,
the woman asks to see my ID. I am
glad to be asked. When she finds I am
exactly 14 years older than she is
her comment is, "I hope I age that
well." I rub off the fossil feeling
on my arms.

That those other women feel 38 is
old is one comment on our cosmetic
society. That I also felt good about
being taken for a younger woman is
another. I, too, wanting support from
the very culture that offers a strait
jacket definition for desirable woman,
young, emaciatingly thin, smiling,
passive... you can fill in the rest.
Aging fat men like Orson Welles yes,
but women must always be the Virgin
Mary.

But I am writing this article to
show how very alive is the opposite
reality of that male definition, how
very alive are my feelings that still
lack visibility, for at age 38 I am
happy, a bit overweight, intelligent,
optimistic, passionate, politically
active and aggressive. I love being 38
(going on 39). I feel like I waited a
long time to get here, and here is a
space, not time factored. I paid my
dues, went through a lot of pain (not
all necessary) to learn how to deal
honestly with the world and myself,
to learn how to love myself, in spite
of the phallic-centered world that
overtly and subtly tries to suppress
me, so I could genuinely love others.

I feel at this point in time that I
am finally putting things together in
my life, a synthesis of my experience
happening in a powerful way---for
starters here I sit at a typewriter,
feeling my words are worth something,
putting together a novel. You might
think I am a late bloomer maybe there
was a lot of clearing out needed, but
for me it's a sum total of life hap-
pening: In fact the older I get, the

better life is. I love the grey in
my hair. I love that I have been a
dyke long enough to have long stand-
ing friends---a family who has been
around for a long time with a deep
heritage.

I confess to wanting to be a wise
old woman---to really have learned
something of life worth telling and
sharing with other women. I have done
a lot, traveled, know many wonderful
women on land and in cities. I have
had cosmic experiences, funny ones
and plain morbid ones but the vast
array of experiences is beginning to
tell. I truly feel I am getting wiser
---and you may remember that another
word for wise woman is witch. Not
the witch male historians conjure up.
Witches are strong, wise women who
defy male conventions, who offer al-
ternative ways of seeing, and being
and healing and growing and loving,
and singing and loving and dancing
and loving. Witch is a label. I have
been called others. I will settle for
wise old woman one day.

And after all, we can live longer
to bear the fruit of our lives. I
watch my diet 5/7 of the week, try
to avoid red meat, sugar, caffeine,
fats. The 2/7 is cause I ain't perfect
and can't always resist temptation.
But mostly I send positive messages
to my body, and cancel out the nega-
tivity and food that could kill me
early. I do not smoke---cigarettes. I
meditate---not for nirvana, but to
stay calm and centered, to keep the
fantasies in my head for my books and
out of my relationships.

I love the thought that at 60 and
70 and 80 I might be like Elizabeth
Gould Davis, or Golda Meir or Malvi-
na Reynolds. Mostly that I will be
most fully me---and my picture of me
at 70, say, is still wearing jeans,
actively loving and passionate, still
giggly and cuddly, still keeping my
politics relevant, an elder in the
bear tribe of women who love women of
all ages.

At 38, I am just beginning. 

Dance to the Music of

9 PM to 1 AM at the Continental Denver Hotel, second floor
Speer Blvd. at the Valley Highway $3 at the door Cash bar

A benefit for the Gay Community Center of Colorado