‘ Big Mama Rag Vol.7 No.10

culture  
The Cold War Daughter: I've made the choice not to have a child  

not to start again  

By Alison Colbert fallout in her growing bones,  
£ for Judy Austermiller but I've got to survive.  
I am a nuclear victim  
I. The Air Raid Drill II. The Nuclear Reactor Accident a seven-year-old  
In 1956, when I was seven, In 1979, I know the big words about 1956, cowering in a school hall  
my teacher said, Cold War vaporized fallout fallout in a World War II-style air raid drill  
the bad Russians might attack us. invisible fallout in '56 from H-bomb then in the lunchroom  
Our town, Washington, D.C., was testing drinking my strontium-90 milk  
an important place. eating into my growing bones. radiation in my growing bones;  
The Russians were going to drop I know about the neutron bombs a thirty-year-old woman staring  
an atomic bomb on each important in their siloes waiting at a cracked window waiting for  
place in America. to be used against Three Mile Island to explode bringing its  
After this bomb went off, there people not property. cancer-laden core through my window  
would be a miles-deep black hole I am a nuclear victim my body.  
in the ground. I am not satisfied.  
"Now," she said, I am a nuclear victim fallout in my formula  
"we're going to have an air raid drill In 1979, I know other big words I am not satisfied.  
to keep us safe no one knew in '56: I want the invisible bureaucrats in scientists'  
from this bomb." nuclear core meltdown low- masks who shortened my life and my generation's  
level radiation reactor accident. to die.  
So, when the siren shrilled, Now, I've got no hall to go to They play Russian roulette with our lives,  
we filed out into the hall, no teacher to tell me to get away from the glass five chambers are loaded.  
knelt, put our hands During the Three Mile Island Accident,  
over our heads. when I heard the announcer Now, Three Mile Island is being  
I knelt in front of the alternative radio station "cooled down,"  
of the hall door. shout: "The reactor may explode. the pregnant women  
My teacher ordered me, Stay inside insulate your windows and children  
"Don't get too close against fallout," are being allowed to  
to the glass/doors. I stared at my cracked apartment return to the area.  
They might break over your body." windows which don't keep out The men in protective coats  
the cold air. are fooling around with the reactor,  
That night I dreamed I knew another Cold War child trying to find a place to dump the heavy water.  
I was back was panicking on the radio  
in the hall, the Cold War child inside me screaming I am not satisfied. I am still living in that elementary  
the glass smashing down, seven years old then thirty expecting to die. school hall my hands over my head against the atom bomb.  
I was falling, down, down, I don't want fallout I don't want Indian Point to  
into the black hole, We all cowered in that hall explode shortening the lives of twenty million people  
dying, during the air raid drills. from cancer millions of children children  
We walk with bombs on our backs with their own nightmares a new generation  
For years, I had that dream radiation in our bones. of atoms growing in their bones.  
again and again. We are the Cold War children I am not satisfied that the bombs have not gone off in  
We kept having air raid drills the baby boom the population explosion some holocaust. I am not satisfied that Three Mile  
in the hall. drinking fallout in our mothers' milk, Island is being "cooled down" while bureaucrats  
I held my hands over my head fallout in my formula in the tap water lie. I am a nuclear victim we are all nuclear victims  
against the atom bomb. in D.C. in the spring of '49. we will not be satisfied.  

CINDY FREDRICK/ LMS.  

last friday  

By  
I guess I've seen a lot for being 24  
Constance Perenyi images burnt on my eyes+  
Nagasaki shadows...  
they're always there,  
we never escape  
strobelights and crumbling power plants,  
bleeding through the cracks  
quiet- : like they were fueled by  
silence - human guts  

feet crunching pine needles.  
(hands steadily stitching)  

— ee ee ee awe ae ae =e  

far from reality, deep into ourselves We came back to the city, we came back  
small steps (neat stitches). behind a bomb plant -  
-silence-  

journal entry, friday, june 22, 1979:  

‘we went to the mountains today! -  
how long's it been since I wrote last?  
since I left Denver last, even for the day?  

the silence between us said a lot  

I'd been thinking of it all day  
Could not seem to get it out of my mind  
Seeing it then only confirmed  

my own reality...  

pL UR two weeks later I dream I'm knee-deep  
on the way up, the trees were green, in radioactive water  
all different shades, the Pied Piper has led me up steep  
and on the way down, they were silver, hills, chin skyward, bent back,  
shimmering... to paradise, a lush green valley. a  

river - Three Mile Island...  
I can't drink, can't eat, can't rest,  
cause, christ, it's glowing...  

peaceful escape-  
but I couldn't seem to get  
out of my head...  

I finally gave up trying  

and I let my thoughts and I realize again  
race on ahead of us they're always there  
trail behind us... we never escape...