letters home to mama

Feminism Lives: The Demands of Women

Dear Women,

I was inspired to see the Women's
Demands on the cover of the June 1979
Big Mama Rag (see box on page 24).
These were put forth in the context
of widespread disillusionment with
the failure of small business/cultural
projects serving the women's community
during the past years. The Big Mama
Rag collective invited leaders of these
projects to write about their views on
the “crisis in the movement". The
writers did not note that our economic
system assures that nine out of ten
small businesses fail during the first
five years, and that economic recession
kills small businesses and forces more
and more of us into jobs as wage-earners.
Instead, many criticized themselves or
each other for "not being businesslike
enough" or else conceded that "big
business can do it better". In taking
this approach, they failed to raise
our consciousness to a higher level.

If we have to be first-rate ogres
to make a small business succeed,
that doesn't mean our only alternative
is to humbly entrust our future to
Westword, Random House, RCA, Mountain
Bell, and White Spot. Our relationship
to such companies can never be one of
trust, even though they are a reality
that we can deal with creatively.

Our overall strategy must emphasize
the struggle for an economy controlled
by workers. If that doesn't bring us
power over our lives as women, we must
fight for a women-controlled economy
because we are a huge and growing
majority of the exploited workforce,
taking into account the double shift
we do at home and on the job. The
demands put forth by the Big Mama Rag
collective, in fact, imply such
mammoth struggle. I wonder if we are
ready for it. Are we ready to move in
a general way beyond an (attempted)
groovy counterculture women's movement
and seek allies among other victimized
groups in our society? Are we ready
to organize a grassroots union in the
area where the workforce is expanding
most rapidly, where women predominate,
and where corporate power depends more
and more on our subservience (I'm
talking about clerical workers,
especially important in Colorado with
the new statewide “energy boom")?

We can demand worker-controlled
childcare, for instance, in the new
office buildings which are coming to
Denver. The suit-and-tied young
establishment/union men who come around
to organize us, flanked by women flunkies
who serve us donuts and take down our
names, do not talk about childcare.
They can never represent us, and we
have enough numbers nationwide (espe-

MORE ON PAGE 25

COLLECTIVE

Judy Barlow, Fran Day, Sue Goding, Connie Perenyi,

CONTRIBUTORS

Dear BMR,

I was disappointed and disgruntled
to read the "Feminism Lives:" list
of demands in a recent issue of Big
Mama Rag. The majority of these
demands were, I felt, very well expressed.
However, four of them made me very angry:

We demand free, adequate health
care; We demand free, 24 hour
day care; We demand the right
to guaranteed jobs or income; We
demand free and relevant education.

First of all, who is "We"? I feel
this is really the source of my anger;
it is not stated whose views they are
surely not all feminists: Who wrote
this list? Secondly, I don't think
or believe that anyone should receive
free health care or free childcare or
a free education. On the other hand,
I don't discount the fact that rising
costs have made these services
untouchable by some. Something must
be done, yes, but why should my tax
dollars go to educate, teach, and care
for someone else's children when I
choose not to have any? I don't want
to support anyone's children and, that,
too, should be my choice.

This list, I feel, should be titled,
"Socialism Lives". If, however, I
have misinterpreted this list, please
explain how. If I have interpreted it
correctly, please explain who "we" are,
and why these demands should be met
in their opinion.

Sincerely,
D. L. Slovak

Editor's Note: Please refer to the
June 1979 issue of Big Mama Rag pp.
14-15 for the answers to your questions.

Demystifying Female
Processes

Dear BMR,

My 9-year-old daughter, my 15-year-old
roommate and I had a wonderful idea
that we want to share with you all.

We were discussing (although Emily's
interest is so far only academic) how
hard it was to use a tampon the first
time (as I'm sure you know, tampons
come in 3 sizes--regular, horse and
killer). Every woman I know, at least
13, 14 or 18 or so, thought that
tampons go in straight up--remember?
Nobody told us that they go towards
the toilet tank instead of the ceiling.

MORE ON PAGE 25

Vicki Piotter

Cover: Constance Perenyi

Janelle Lemken, Crystal Arp, Bobbe Ross, Lori K. Johnston, Marilyn Gayle,
Judith Miller, Kathy Riley, Alison Colbert, Clair Kaplan, Susanna Smith,

Deb Taylor, Andrea Gabriel,

Eileen Bresnahan, Kate Sharp, Lori Bradford,

Carol Arber, Debbie Squires, Marianne L. Hricko Stewart, Janet Sergi,
Janet Fons, Kay Young, Pat Greer, Pandoura,

INSIDE BMR

Local News
Letters.

Hot Briefs

March on D.C. ...

Conferences

Abortion
eecccceces

Peereereccesecssosonseoees®

Culture.
Voices....
Calendar..
Classies..

Big Mama Rag is a feminist periodical published monthly for women by

Denver - Melbourne
ra re 44%

Similarities

Dear Sisters,

I look forward to reading your
newspaper, which can be bought at
the bookshop in the Women's Cultural
Palace, the focal point for the
Melbourne Lesbian/Feminist Community.
I always appreciate news from Denver
as I found there were real similarities
between activities and problems in
Denver and in Melbourne.

All the best in future struggles
and sisterhood.

Lyn McKenie
Victoria, Australia

‘Feminism in Spain

Dear Andrea Gabriel,

I am Anna Maria Dimaus Anaya. I
read your article in Big Mama Rag,
"Feminist Movement Grows in Spain" and
"A Feminist Manifesto". Both articles
were well written. I felt of all the
articles written about Spanish Women
you have been able to really understand
not only the feelings of women expanding
into areas which have been recently
closed to them but most important you
have been able to understand the political
part of the movement. A part which is
to us connected like breathing, in and
out. I am interested in your comment
"The Feminist Movement in the Basque".
What other information do you have on
them and the feminist movement in Spain?
Also do you know of any literature or
books written on the Basque people and
their language?

Gracias
Anna Maria Dimaus Anaya
Boulder

Versatile Touches

Dear Constance,

I want you to know how much I enjoy
your versatile touches in the August
issue of BMR. I am finally finding
time to devour the several issues I
brought back with me from a recent
trip to Denver. An added plus,
perhaps, is that I am paid for this
"time" as an employee of OURS newspaper.
I find the grazing of newspapers from
around the country as incredible fodder
for the visions I have with OURS.

In sisterhood,

Pamela Sheen
Little Rock, Arkansas

More Letters on
Pages 22-23

Big Mama Rag Vol.

Dangerous

Revolutionaries

Dear Big Mama,

Please stop breaking your stories
in the middle. Please, just let them
run on. I do not dare turn to "more
on page 18" and "more on page 20"
because I'll get mixed up and miss
something. So I have to read all
the beginnings, then all the ends.
I'd rather read each story straight
through.

That's the easy thing to tell you.
Each time I read your paper I want to
write to you and tell you how proud
of you I am--how glad I am to have
your paper--how beautiful it is, you
are. But I don't know how.

I've just read your October 1979
issue. I felt pounded, beaten as I
read that lie detectors are being used
to discredit rape victims, nine girls
were sexually molested at a county
home for youths and the man merely
lost his job, lesbian bicyclists were
hassled, propositioned, run off the
road, women sued Ma Bell and lost and
now owe one thousand dollars, and in
London, “a photo of a policeman hitting
her with a club while she was on the
ground," banks usually pay “qualified
clerical help" $125 a week. How glad
I am that Lolita Lebron is free after
all those years in jails. How glad
I am that four Boulder women are
organizing--"teaching ourselves ‘to be
articulate and strong. We fight woman-hating,
the violence upon which our society
is built". How glad I am that Jo Ann
Yellow Bird won $300,000 after a policeman
kicked her in the stomach while she
was pregnant and killed her child. I
read with sadness, “Is it true that
women, on the whole, don't seem to
mind the messages of our culture...?"
I listen to Alison Colbert telling of
her struggles to sell her self-published
book and I love her when she says,
"I'm going to get my work out to women
myself, now. Self-publishing may have
disadvantages, but, for many women
with something to say, the alternative
is silence."

Do you know that after you and
Bob published my story about how I
published my book--how I had hoped
to pay the author one thousand dollars
and couldn't--how I owed $800 more
than I had--that a woman sent me a
one thousand dollar anonymous check:
That got me back to zero which was
a great relief. Thank you, friends.

More and more clearly we see the
humiliation, degradation, mutilation,
subjugation of ourselves--the women
of the planet. Always now I am aware
of our 5000 years of slavery. How
are we going to get free? I don't
know. Nobody knows. But we are doing
it. And you, Big Mama Rag women,
are dangerous revolutionaries. You
are helping to make it happen. Did
you know that?

Thanks friends,
Kady Van Deurs

Feminist

center

Big Mama Rag, Inc., a non-profit corporation. Manuscripts and artwork
may be submitted to 1724 Gaylord St., Denver, CO 80206. Deadline for
material will be announced each month in Where We're At. Please enclose
a stamped, self-addressed envelope with all manuscripts. No responsibility
is accepted for unsolicited material. We reserve the right to edit all
material for length. Subscription rates are $6 per year for
individual subscriptions in the U.S., $10 in Canada; and $12 to institutions.
BMR is free to women in prison and in mental institutions.
This publication is on film at the New Alexandria Library for Lesbian
Women in Chicago and will soon be available on microfilm through Bell
and Howell. We are indexed by the Alternative Press Center, P.O. Box
7229, Baltimore, Maryland 21218.

Feminist books, records, posters, newspapers, magazines,
nonsexist children's books, lending library, meeting
space, housing/jobs/events bulletin board, information.

2023 E. COLFAX
Denver, CO 80206

320-5972

Mon-Th 10am - 8pm

Fri-Sun 10am-7pm

Advertising information is available from Sue at 333-7656