bmr:

where we're at

Well another year at BMR. Wow, volume 12! Twelve years
and we are still struggling month to month to keep getting
the paper out. Sometimes the most struggle and tension is
internal--among the collective members. Other times--we
guess in fact--all the times, BMR's money is barely/non-
existent. As we do the work this weekend to put the paper
out we have no money to take it to the printer. And yet we
never don't do the work because we always work on the pre-
mise that "somehow" the paper will get printed and mailed.
Donations are needed. Energy-wise--in terms of getting the
paper out--we so recently moved from a collective of 4 to
5 and now Sue Doell has started coming to collective meet-
ings and there are six of us. Sue is an ex-psychiatric in-
mate (see her article on page 3), as Lori is, and Lori will
no longer be "isolated" on the collective in that respect.
In other ways the entire BMR collective is "isolated" with-
in the "feminist and left" press because of the paper's po-
sition in support of the Mental Patients Liberation Move-
ment and criticism of feminist/alternative therapies, and
support for armed struggle and National Liberation Move-
ments.

We work on BMR collectively. For us this basically means
that we share tasks and responsibilities--there is no “ed-
itor", and we use consensus to make decisions. Consensus
means that we all have to agree to print something in the
paper or not. If we don't agree we continue to talk about
it until we come to a unanimous decision. This struggle for
consensus is also connected to our struggle to use some
form of criticism/self-criticism in our meetings and in the
paper...To work for the best politics we can. Meaning ones
that will do the most to overthrow the white-imperialist
patriarchy. Politics that will keep us moving to this goal
of change, of revolution. To say we try for "good" politics
doesn't mean that that is always what comes out in print.
We make serious political errors because of our own racism,
classism, anti-semitism, ageism, mentalism. Political errors
can define the need for political change in strategies
and tactics--if we could work it right.

Years ago several of us read the book "Constructive Crit-
icism" by Gracie Lyons. BMR collectives have taken on a
form of criticism/self-criticism based on Gracie's book,
to end each collective meeting. A recent first read by some
and re-reading by others of "Constructive Criticism" took
us by surprise. Criticisms were that the book was couched
in "therapy" talk---too much like a script, and classist.
Also we found that our process of criticism/self-criticism
was failing us badly. All of our feelings were hurt and we
were all so frightened--and all these "personal" feelings
have everything to do with the hard political issues we
were dealing with: rape; cancer; images of friends being
caught by the psychiatric system; alcoholism/drug use, wo-
men in recovery; this is a war...when do we take up arms?
ageism; anti-Semitism; death, the right to die; mentalism.
Too much. So we stopped being honest and keeping up with
all this shit and we were all ready to quit the paper...
But instead we decided we might try to figure out the po-
litics and change how we were doing criticism/self-criti-
cism. We are still kind of floundering with this change in
process. What we are changing to is not clear to us. If any
collectives out there have a few moments to write to us a-
bout how you keep up with "stuff"--all the personal/politi-
cal.

cover: The cover artist this month is Sudie Rakusin.
“Samantha” is one of 6 paintings that comprise the group
called "The All-Bisexual Mime Troupe On Tour". Photo of the
original work is by Beth Karbe.

collective: Bobbe Ross, Lori Bradford; Susanna
Smith, Deb Lugar, Joan Pettijohn, Sue Doell
Supporters: Sue Goding, Linda Lane, Kay Young,
Cynthia Claire Ellington, Liz Lewis, Candy McCullough,
Rozamund Leight, Dee Berman, Kathy Riley

contributors: Vickie Barriga, Patricia Silva,
Louise Knapp, Rose

BIG MAMA RAG is a feminist periodical published monthly
by BIG MAMA RAG, Inc., a non-profit corporation. Man-
uscripts and artwork (please!) may be submitted to 1724
Gaylord St., Denver, CO 80206. Deadline for material sub-
mission will generally fall between the 15th and 18th of
the preceding month. Please enclose a stamped, self-add-
ressed envelope with all manuscripts. No responsibility is
accepted for unsolicited material. We reserve the right to
edit all material for length with the input of the author.
Subscription rates are $15/year (11 issues) for individuals
in the US, $15 for Canada, Mexico and plain brown wrapper,
$18 overseas, $22-US institutions, $24-Mexico, Canada and
$26 overseas. Free to all US women incarcerated in prisons
or psychiatric institutions. BMR is on file at the New
Alexandria Library for Lesbian Women in Florence, MA and is
available on microfilm (Vol.1/#1 Oct.
'72 through July '79)
directly from BMR for $75. BMR is indexed by the Alternat-
ive Press Center, P.O. Box 7229, Baltimore, MD 21218. Our
phone # is 303-322-2010.

BMR wants to have a community meeting with our Denver
community soon. We talked of having a single focus/issue
for the meeting. Two possibilities are:
Anti-Semitism,
Zionism, Palestine,
and the Mid-East or Re-evaluation Co-counsel-
ing and "feminist therapy." Let us know what you want to
discuss/have more information about. Locally BMR is avail-
able at: Radical Information Project; Tattered Cover; Cata-
gory Six; in Boulder; and Left Hand Books and Eade's News and Smoke Shop and Women's Health Services and Poor Richard's
Bookstore in Colorado Springs. Newsboxes are located at: The
King Soopers at 9th and Downing and 14th and Krameria and at
the Safeways at 6th and Downing and at Cherry Creek.

The Women's Eye Liberation Film Festival Committee ended
their showings with 4 great films this December. It was ex-
citing to have political films being shown in Denver--and
discouraging to see how few people came to see them. Fin-
ancially it's a real disaster. Women on the committee front-
ed money to bring the films and for space to show them and
have never been paid back. Nothing like a fundraiser that
leaves you in the hole. Anyone who could make a donation
MORE ON PAGE 16

Dear Big Mama Rag,

I really appreciate all
the coverage you've given
the campaign to ban elec-
troshock in Berkeley. How-
ever, in the future I would
appreciate it if you would
print my articles separate-
ly, not mushed into the
middle of someone else's,
as was done in the Decem-
ber issue. (see Lori's ar-
ticle on Mental Patients
Liberation Movement, center-
fold) To make matters worse
the information "edited"
from my articles was not
reported correctly. Manuela
Scott, the Deputy City
Attorney who has been de-
fending the shock ban, did
not bring the motion for
intervention. The motion
for intervention was brought
by the Coalition to Stop
Electroshock in order to
give us legal standing in
the case, so that our att-
orney would be able to par-
ticipate in the defense of
the shock ban. While we
think Deputy Attorney Scott
has been doing a good job
in defending the ban, the
Coalition feels that it is
essential to have our view-
point represented as well,
since we were the organi-
zation which put the ban
on the ballot and many of
us are either former in-
mates of psychiatric in-
stitutions or former re-
cipients of electroshock.
We have been very fortun-
ate in having the assis-
tance of David Ferleger,
one of the leading attor-
neys in the patients rights
field, who has argued such
cases five times before
the U.S. Supreme Court. I
hope the enclosed article
will clarify things some-
what. Jenny Miller

Dear Jenny,

I am sorry to have buried
your writing in the midst of
my article, it was both a
political/tactical error and
a serious error in editing.
I am so sorry and angry
with myself for mis-representing the work of
ex-psychiatric inmates and
survivors of electroshock
in getting the issue placed
on the Berkeley ballot, and
their work on the long and
complicated political issues
that have been going on since
Misinformation is the last
thing needed around this le-
gal battle. Lori/BMR

Nicaragua Step by Step Update
National

Common Differences: Third
World Women And Feminist Per-
spectives Conference 12, 13 & 14
Political Kidnapping/Tina
Fistman Update 15
America Held Hostage 15
Calendar 16
About The Cover Artist 16
Classifieds/Ads 18 & 19

Subscription rates are $15/year (11 issues) for individuals
in the US, $15 for Canada, Mexico and plain brown wrapper,
$18 overseas, $22-US institutions, $24-Mexico, Canada and
$26 overseas. Free to all US women incarcerated in prisons
or psychiatric institutions. BMR is on file at the New
Alexandria Library for Lesbian Women in Florence, MA and is
available on microfilm (Vol.1/#1 Oct.
'72 through July '79)
directly from BMR for $75. BMR is indexed by the Alternat-
ive Press Center, P.O. Box 7229, Baltimore, MD 21218. Our
phone # is 303-322-2010.