racism

Mixed Relationships -- No Alibi Against Racism

Reprinted from the “Black Forum" of Bitches, Witches and Dykes, a new newspaper from New Zealand.

Ripeka

Mention Black-White relationships to any racist white or any conservative black and it incites defensiveness. While thinking about this article I thought back over all those years when my parents had encouraged all our closest and intimate relationships to be with other Maori people. Coming from the heart of Ngapuhi, the area of Aotearoa that has borne the brunt of white racist and sexist capitalism and colonialism, it was hard for Maori parents to bring children up with such a positive Maori identity mainly because so much of our cultural heritage had been bastardised by white society. Intermarriage and integration were very much part of the “whitewash" philosophy with which parents of my generation were brought up. Although the "White New Zealander" myth had been created by the first whites that came to New Zealand, its version in my parents' days was "the brown-skinned Pakeha". The terms are important because they are synonymous. Like South Africa there is for white people in New Zealand only one people, white people.

What we have witnessed in the last ten years in New Zealand is not in fact so much a resurgence of Maori pride but more an explosion of the great myths. When organisations such as Nga Tamatoa and Polynesian Panthers hit the streets and the world what they said to whites was "this is what we are, we don't want to change, you change, if you don't we will change the gag you have over our mouths and the white glove you have over our identity." White New Zealanders still haven't been able to come to terms with this twelve years later. I don't intend to go to great lengths to explain or justify my pro-black stance. I'm not answerable to any whites for my identity, but I certainly think it's high time whites started answering for theirs. What I think is necessary is to explode a few more myths. In justification of black-white relationships we find the following most common reasons which are posed as rebuttals to racism; "it's a matter of personal and private choice which has nothing to do with politics." "you're being racist by saying black-white relationships are racist"; "but we love each other," "we're lesbian, and lesbian oppression undercuts racial oppression," "heterosexual relationships and the institutions of heterosexism are more oppressive than racist relationships," etc., etc., ad infinitum...

Those are just some of the anti-black-woman justifications I've heard. What invalidates these stances is not so much the fact that they are not completely pro-black-woman stances, but also they are phrases in the belief that we live in a racially harmonious society--Maranga Mai! Wake up!--we are not there yet by any stretch of the imagination.

Because of the relatively new feminist and class consciousness amongst black women, whites and black men have exploited this position of powerlessness. As long as black women remain powerless we will always have those who have power or access to power, validating and defining our relationships for us. This power position I see as a determinant factor, that is whoever has power determines what relationships and activities are legal, valid or o.k. For example, the new wave of the feminist movement in the late sixties also saw the upshot of black groups here as well as overseas. In the black civil rights movement in the United States and in anti-racist movements in other countries there was also an upsurge in black-white relationships. This trend has occurred in many liberation movements where black men, as recognised leaders of those movements, have interrelated with white women in phenomenal amounts. Black men here and in the United States fell for the same old traps.

What alarmed me and many black women in Nga Tamatoa, five years ago, was the fact that many of the white women who these racist and sexist black men went off with, were feminists. When the "take" or issue was brought up as a political discussion at the Nga Tamatoa National Hui in 1976, many of the black men resigned and went to work in white organisations!--The revolution had come too close to home! For many of the black women involved in this battle it was the ultimate threat--"the personal had become the political--black women had demanded rights, recognition and status as black women--and if we were to keep demanding our rights (and keep forgetting our place) we were gonna bloody pay for it.

What was despairing about this confrontation was that black men used racism and sexism against black women, that is, as power holders within the movement, they had sanctified their own personal relationships, they had said, "It's o.k.," end of discussion.

I'm not anti-white per se, but if white women are going to participate in relationships that are racist and sexist, and shit on black women then they deserve to be roasted by black women. Having a relationship with a person of an oppressed race does not make you any closer to us or absolve you from white racism.

Although I've mentioned heterosexual relationships between black men and white women, relationships between black women and white men also occurred but never to the same degree as the former. In both sets of relationships there were "trade-offs", racist benefits for sexual privileges, or what appeared to be so.

In the midst of this anti-black woman lash, came a further beating, the black-white lesbian relationship. All sets of relationships have continued to exist and the plight of black women has not got any better. The most commonly offered defence is one where lesbianism is used as an alibi against racist oppressiveness, that is white lesbians can't be oppressors! You try that one on black women and see how far you get! The most effective and political anti-racist relationships are whites with whites and blacks with blacks. In a racist society we can't afford the privilege of another powerless relationship.

In all movements of socio-political consciousness (and I use that term in the broadest possible sense), we are expected to practice what we preach. If white lesbians and white feminists allow the same hegemonic subtleties to filter throughout their feminist consciousness so that they give credence to black-white relationships then they stand to alienate black women who see their misuse of power as an anti-black-women stance.

The degree to which we can unite around common issues is of foremost importance but if we cannot give priority and focus to the pivot of our existence then the social conscience and political order that we strive for will not be taken seriously. Black women are getting together--don't hold back our revolution by sapping our energy and time for issues of white reform. "Black Women Unite”.

Big Mama Rag, December, 1981.- Page 9.