Eliminating Sex Segregation

Strategies for Changing Our Future Employment

Donna Lenhoff

Throughout the world—indeed,  
throughout history—human work has  
been characterized by a greater or  
lesser (sometimes a near total) divi-  
sion of labor by sex. In the present  
United States labor more than  
60% of women workers are in  
predominantly female occupations. In  
the Soviet Union, 55% of women workers  
work in predominantly female occupa-  
tions. Women are highly concentrated  
in the service industries and in cer-  
tain manufacturing industries, such  
as textiles and electrical equipment;  
in 1974 in the United States, women  
accounted for 70% of less than  
all clerical workers, almost 82% of  
all librarians, 93% of nurses,  
dieticians, and therapists, and 77%  
of all ironers and pressers. The  

five percent of all employed women  

Measuring Women’s  
Worth In the Workplace  

Co-existent with  
universal occupational  
consistent inferior compensation for  
women. The average working woman in  
the US earns less than 60% of the  
average man. The female-to-male earn-  
ings ratio ranges from 72% in profes-  
sional and technical occupations to  
47.8% in sales. The result: regardless  
of actual job content, women's jobs  
are worth less than men’s.  

The fight has been  
for equal employment opportunity,  
with the emphasis on eliminating bar-  
riers to women's employment in non-  
traditional women's jobs.  

Non-traditional Jobs  
Not the Answer  

Since passage of the Civil Rights  
Act in 1964, this strategy has met  
with success that is limited, at best.  
A few token women have moved into non-  
traditional blue-collar jobs; the  
numbers and percentages of women in  
some professions (e.g., engineering)  
increased beyond tokenism; yet the  
average income of college-educated  
women in 1975 still was $10,681, com-  
pared with $17,891 for male college  
graduates, and our labor force remains  
characterized by a very high degree of  
occupational segregation. Of course, anti-discrimination  
laws have not been  
enough to ensure that women will move out of  
traditional “men's jobs.” Women often don’t want “men's  
jobs,” even if available, for any num-  
ber of reasons. Perhaps they do  
not feel they can handle what they  
perceive to be the increased workload  
or responsibility because of childcare  
obligations; or they lack the back-  
ground, training, and confidence for  
non-traditional work; or years of social-  
ization have made them reluctant to  
do “unfeminine" work; or they are sat-  
isfied as teachers and secretaries.  
Moreover, satisfying, higher-paying  

It is no coincidence that women are  
segregated into a limited number of  
occupations and at the same time are  
paid significantly less for full-time  
work in those occupations. Once women  
are restricted to employment in only  
certain occupations, they are over-  
crowded into those occupations: the  
demand for women's labor is low; the  
labor supply is great; and women  
therefore are forced to accept lower  
wages. It is a classic case of labor-  
market segregation, in which division  
within the labor force reduces its  
overall bargaining power.  

The limitation of women to certain  
occupations is a key mechanism in the  
complex interaction of social institu-  
tions that together maintain and mutu-  
ally reinforce the patriarchal organi-  
zation of our society. Marriage, for  
example, is a primary part of this  
web. A domestic division of labor ex-  
ists in marriage in which women are  
responsible for childcare and house-  
hold maintenance, even when they work  
full-time outside the home. Domestic  
relations laws are founded on the  
theory of the exchange between the  
wife's services and the husband's  
support. It is a vicious cycle: low  
wages pressure women into marriage,  
and marriage and childcare are relied  
on by employers to justify women's  
marginal, inferior participation in  
the workforce. Other major social in-  
stitutions, the political and legal  
systems, also exclude women from sig-  
nificant participation, thus reinforc-  
ing sex-role behavior patterns and  
sex segregation.  

The initial response of the women's  
movement, following the civil rights  
model, has been to gain access for  

men's jobs that are slow to become avail-  
able in a shrinking economy.  

Thus the campaign for equal pay for  
work of equal worth has arisen. By  
prevailing wage scales, women employed  
in “women’s jobs” (e.g., a secretary),  
invariably earn less than men in  
“men's jobs” (e.g., a maintenance  
worker), which are in no sense more  
demanding. Women's labor is simply  
valued less than men’s.  

Practical Advantages  
Of “Comparable Worth”  

Fundamentally, equity in compensa-  
tion for segregated women's and men's  
jobs is a symptomatic approach to  
eradicating women's economic oppres-  
sion which does not reach its under-  
lying causes. While achievement of  
equal pay for work of comparable value  
may not lead to an integrated work-  
force, it is one step in a strategy  
for radical social change.  

The “comparable worth" strategy has  
certain undeniable practical advant-  
ages. When implemented, however limited  
the form, it can provide immediate  
measurable monetary relief to individ-  
ual women: when in 1977 the Washing-  
ton State Public Employees Associa-  
tion adopted a wage scale based on  
comparable worth, a $656/month clerk-  
typist received a salary increase of  
$73 and a $691/month bookkeeper a $90  
increase. Moreover, equitable pay is  
particularly susceptible of being ad-  
dressed through collective bargaining,  
and thus is not necessarily dependent  
on “the vagaries of government enforce-  
ment and the cumbersomeness of litiga-  
tion to work—although its incorpor-  
ation into the equal employment oppor-  
tunity arsenal would be very valuable.  

Creating a Consciousness  
Among Women Workers  

This approach has  
to women presently in  
traditional men’s occupations; many do not  
want “men's jobs” (and indeed, fear  
that the women's movement threatens  
their freedom to choose a “woman's  
job”). “Women's occupations” offer  
women the potential for achievement  
while minimizing the possible conflict  
that many women experience; without basic attitudinal  
changes, women in non-traditional jobs  
would feel these conflicts even more  
acutely. Such jobs might also offer  
women participation in female subcul-  
ture that is emotionally rewarding and  
supportive. Furthermore, pecuniary rec-  
ognition of the value of their work  
can be psychologically satisfying to  
women workers.  

Emphasis on women's sense of worth  
can be an important first step in cre-  
ating a consciousness among women work-  
ers that they share common problems  
and must organize to achieve their  
demands. Raising the issue of compar-  
able worth can point out women's com-  
mon oppression by drawing attention to  
wage structures that pay assembly work-  
ers, nurses, and clerk-typists less  
than warehouse workers, common laborers,  
and salesmen.  

Radical Restructuring  
Of the Labor Market  

Moreover, implementation of compar-  
able worth policy could act as a cata-  
lyst to break down the sex-segregated  
structure of the labor market. If wo-  
men are paid as much as men for compar-  
able jobs, men are likely to be at-  
tracted to jobs that were formerly rel-  
egated to women, contributing to the  
demise of rigid sex-work roles. If  
women are paid as much as men, their  
attachment to the workforce may no  
longer be seen as marginal, and par-  
ents' needs for flexible work sched-  
ules can be taken seriously.  

Finally, the  
entire economy  
the present labor  
is not set according to the complexity or  
difficulty of jobs involved, but  
rather according to such labor market  
factors as availability of qualified  
workers and bargaining power of unions.  
Comparable worth policy would replace  
the labor market dynamic of supply-and-  
demand with compensation according to  
the relative value of jobs, as measured  
by job content. It would logically lead  
to a radical restructuring of the labor  
market, in which virtually all jobs  
were seen as equally valuable to soc-  
iety and worth equal compensation.  

Employers can be expected to resist  
such a policy; their interest is to  
maintain the present wage system and  
to avoid having to increase salaries  
for women and other low-paid workers.  
Indeed, their resistance may result  
in a general refusal to raise wages  
or lower unemployment rates. Further-  
more, there is a danger that men will  
react by pushing women out of the now  
equitably-compensated “women's jobs,”  
without women also moving into tradi-  
tional “men's jobs.”  

The likelihood of such reactionary  
consequences may be reduced, however,  
if wage equity is introduced as a rem-  
edy for Title VII violations, thus  
permitting it to secure a political  
foot in the door. The short-term ad-  
vantages recommend it as a first stra-  
tegy. Nevertheless, it is clearly a  
political issue, and one that will re-  
quire a great deal of popular educa-  
tion to engender political support.  
As columnist Ellen Goodman has said  
of the comparable worth issue, it is  
at bottom a matter of “equal pay for  
equal power.”  

[This article is reprinted from the  
"National Lawyers Guild Women's News-  
letter” with permission.]