Lee A. McDavid

Another abortion march. Actually not a march. Actually just a stand.  
We decided not to tag along beside the Lifers this time as they piously  
advance down the dark street in candlelight solemnity. Moving really, if  
you're into that type of fascism that is.

Just like old times. Been a while since I've carried my trusty “ABOR-  
TION IS YOUR RIGHT.” Well worn. In fact, the “ION” in “ABORTION”,  
as well as “IS” are sort of fading into the distance. Unfortunately, when  

you see it in the wrong light it appears to say “ABORT YOUR RIGHT”  
sometimes. I'm sure it makes them think, but I definitely should paint  
that part over.

Too bad this sign has never really quite been the same since that  
fateful march a while back when the Supreme Court was deliberating  

on the abortion issue. Had to whack a minister with it I'm afraid. He  
asked for it though. It was totally in self-defense. I mean he was nearly  
catatonic with righteous indignation. It was inspiring if you're  
into that kind of stuff I mean.

Well anyway, he became overtaken with holy homicidal hatred and  
tried to grab my hand. Well to begin with nobody grabs me. Not anyone,  
not anywhere, including a minister, including my hand.

As much as I hated to, (unfortunately I still do carry around stereo-  
typic remnants so that I feel worse about hitting a minister than a  
construction worker) I gave him the best of my picket sign. He was bald  
too, so he got the full force of “ION IS.” Not even any hair to soften the  
blow.

He left me alone after that. I can’t imagine why. He only had a six inch  
gash across his cranium, as well as a black eye, three lumps in strategic  
positions, and a sore ego.

I don’t think he expected physical violence. Men never do expect  
women to actually have the gall to defend themselves. He'll probably go  
back to his congregation with his battle scars and refer to me as the  
“balleating bitch” that attacked him for no reason.

Actually he probably won't call me a balleating bitch. Ministers like  
him don’t use that kind of language unless they're alone late at night.  
I have this fantasy. I fantasize that some ministers go home at night,  
lock all the doors, pull down all the shades, go into their bedroom, close the  
door, crawl into bed alone, pull the sheets up over their heads, take a  
deep breath, and say things like “balleating bitch.”

Actually he didn't seem to be creative enough to think of balleating  
bitch. He probably called me a threat to society. I hope not. Not that  
I mind being called that, but somehow I'd much prefer balleating bitch.  
What kind of identity can you get from ‘threat to society?’ How  
academic. How esoteric. How boring.

On the other hand, balleating bitch is something you can really relate  
to, something you can grab ahold of, something you can really sink your  
teeth into, if you know what I mean. I would have much preferred it.  
Well, it looks like a good crowd tonight on both sides. Sometimes I think  
we should all wear numbered T-shirts in different colors. It would help  
the press out so much. They could just report that No. 12 - Red called No.  
32 - White a so-and-so, and No. 3 - White demanded that No. 15 - Red  
give back the bottled fetus he had brought all the way from Toledo, Ohio  
on two trains and a bus.

We could identify who's on whose team so easily too. Except everyone  
thinks it’s pretty obvious as it is. I mean of course that we wear  
brass knuckles, army boots, metal chains, knives and guns, have short  
cropped hair, certainly no one wears a bra, and we of course chew a  
voluminous amount of tobacco which we hold in reserve and spit  
whenever a Lifer comes near (or so they say).

Personally, I can only relate to a small portion of that. I've never seen  
brass knuckles, except on ‘Police Woman" (remember, the woman  
who's supposed to be tough yet “feminine” - right). True, I have army  
boots, but I reserve them for walking down dark alleys. The only chains  
I ever wore were bubble gum chains I made in grade school. But come to  
think of it I did lasso a kid or two with it. Knives are aversive to me except  
at dinner. Guns are eternally on my bad list. True, true I do have short  
hair and wouldn't touch a bra with a ten-foot pole, but I guess all myths  
have some basis in fact. As far as tobacco goes, I have few words at my  
disposal which truly explain my feelings towards it. Like eating a great  
dinner and seeing your dog throw up next to the table. It's somewhere  
in that vicinity.

And of course they without exception are the polyester pantsuit or  
leisure suit gang, with diamond rings, spike-heeled or white patent  
leather shoes, and cosmetology hair, carrying at least two Bibles (one  
the King James version just in case), and chanting the Lord‘s Prayer to  
ward us off (or so we say).

Truth be you known for you hide somewhere betwixt and between.

What is this? Is that woman walking right towards me? That woman is  
walking right towards me. Hell, if I have to defend myself against  
another woman the press will really eat it up. “Women Fighting  
Women.” I can just see it. Oh well, brace yourself.

“What is your name?” Did she just ask me my name? What does that  
have to do with shit in the White House?

“What is yours?”

“Ruth McFarline.”

“Mary Magdeline.”

“What are you here for?”

“I'm selling Girl Scout cookies. Would you like to buy some? I only  
need ten more boxes to go to the Masters and Johnson clinic.”

“Do you know what abortion is?”

“No, I just came along for the ride. They promised me milk and  
cookies.”

“It's killing.”

“Killing, killing ... now let me see, isn't that what John Wayne does to  
Tonto or someone like that?

“It’s killing of innocent lives.”

“Like My Lai.”

“Killing of unborn children.”

“Like DES.”

“It's disrespect for human life.”

“Like discrimination.”

“It's immoral.”

“Like poverty.”

“I hope you have listened to what I’ve told you.”

“More than you've listened to me.”

“... and I hope that you will rethink your position.”

“I already have,” Next time I won't hesitate, I'll just whomp her over  
the head.

Low Income Families Targeted

Feds Seek Child Deviants

The city of Ann Arbor,  
Michigan recently joined the  
ranks of many other U.S. cities  
and states in applying for parti-  
cipation in a federal program for  
day care training and develop-  
ment. Within this program, how-  
ever, is a psychological screen  

ing system for alleged  
“deviance” or “potential”  
criminality in the children of  

low-income families which Ann  
Arbor must implement.

The city council approved this  
federally-designed Early and  
Periodic Screening Diagnosis  
and Treatment (EPSDT) program  
as part of the overall Day Care  
Coordinated On-site Service and  
Training (DC:COST) in early  
December.

If approved for funding by the  
government, the program would  
psychologically screen an initial  
250 Ann Arbor children from  
low-income families, and would  
be expanded over the next three  
years to cover children in one-  
third of day care homes and all  
day care centers in the city. The  
results of the screening then  
would be committed to federal  
computer data banks as part of  
each child's permanent record.

All told, more than three  
million low-income children in  
virtually every state in the nation  
have already been screened, the  
Michigan Free Press reported in  
early December.

Dr. Edward Opton, chairman  
of the American Psychological  
Association, has termed the  
EPSDT program “a blueprint for  
the wholesale invasion of  
privacy and sociopolitical control  
of welfare families.”

Congress gave its initial ap-  
proval for EPSDT in 1967, lured  
in part, say opponents of the  

Anything to Oblige  
“A current trend in obstetrics  
which may not be generally  
known is the practice of ‘day-  
light obstetrics.’ This involves  
scheduling labor inductions and  
planning for deliveries from 9 to  
5. It is an attempt to eliminate  
not only last minute, middle-of-  
the-night rushes by expectant  
parents but also the need for  
staffing full nursing shifts in the  
delivery room.”  
— Ethicon/Point of View

Starving Artist Award

The Eggplant Group is “an ill-  
defined, non-structured bunch  
of people who share an interest  
in the arts and the people who  
create them.” The group is of-  
fering a Starving Artist of the  
Month Award, $25 worth of food  
from a natural food store, to ar-  
tists working in the field of  
graphic arts. For information  
write Eggplant Group, c/o P.  
Wagner, 1995 S. Franklin St.,  
Denver, Co. 80210.

Tutors Needed

Denver LEARN (Let Every  
Adult Read Now) is the local  
chapter of an international lit-  
eracy project. The group pro-  
vides twelve hours of training for  
volunteer tutors in the use of  
structured learning materials.  
The next training workshops will  
be held at 7 pm on February 9,  
11, 16 and 18 at Park Hill Metho-  
dist Church. For more informa-  
tion phone Anne Walz at 333-  
7216.

Abortion Rumors

Rumor has it that 6 grams of  
vitamin C taken for 5 days be-  
fore a missed period will pro-  

duce spontaneous abortion ...  
also that inserting parsley in the  
vagina or eating parsley seeds or  
doth will produce a similar ef-  

fect ... what can you lose?  

— The Monthly Extract,  
Stamford, Conn.

program, by free health check-  
ups which are offered to the low-  
income children participating in  
the program. This provision for  
badly needed health care is no  
doubt also instrumental in at-  
tracting cities like Ann Arbor to  
the program.

But Congress approved the  
“mental health” component of  
the EPSDT without guidelines  
and in 1971, the National  
Welfare Rights Organization —  
filed a suit through the  
Children’s Defense Fund to force  
the government to apply federal  
guidelines.

The Department of Health,  
Education, and Welfare even-  
tually offered the American  
Orthopsychiatric Association  
(Ortho), a group of psychiatrists,  
psychologists and social  
workers, a $75,000 contract to  
develop federal guidelines. But  
after touring EPSDT programs  
across the country, Ortho con-  
sultant Dr. Florence Halpern  
advised the association “not to  
mess with it.”

“It can't be done in this  
country at this time,” said Dr.  
Halpern.

But despite the “experi-  

mental” character of the screen-  
ing and the lack of guidelines,  
the program is now being imple-  
mented in almost every state  
and Congress has already  
ordered that federal welfare  
funds be withheld from nine  
states that have failed to imple-  
ment the program.  
Screening Questions

Questions proposed for  
mothers of infant children being  
screened include:

“How did you feel when you  
were pregnant?”

“How did your husband feel?”

“Do you want more children?”

Warning Ignored  
A 1972 study by police in Kan-  
sas City revealed that more than  
half the women murdered that  
year had been visited by police at  
least 4 times during the pre-  
vious two years in response to  
family disturbance calls; and  
80% of the murdered women  
had called the police at least  
once.  
— Plexus, Berkeley

Anything for a Buck

There are rumors that some  
tampon manufacturers are ad-  
ding vitamin A to their product,  
which has the effect of slowing  
down blood clotting, causing a  
heavier flow, causing an in-  

crease in tampon sales.  
— The Monthly Extract

No Money for Abortions

The New Jersey legislature  
has passed a law prohibiting  
most Medicaid payments for  
abortions. The American Civil  
Liberties Union plans to go to  
court to challenge the law.

Inexpensive Entertainment

The People’s Vaudeville Thea-  
ter performs at the 17th St.  
Theater, 1035 E. 17th Avenue,  
at 8:15 pm the first and third  
Tuesday of every month. Ad-  
mission is 99¢. For more in-  
formation, call Ellen O'Neil at  
355-6902.

Celebrating Our Second Year  
The New Denver Community School

1538 Adams

An alternative elementary school  
NOW TAKING APPLICATIONS  
School starts September 8th

Big Mama Rag Vol. 4 No. 2

If not, why not?”

“Is this child smarter than  
your other children? Not as  
smart?”

Questions for mothers of 11-  
year olds and up, as suggested in  
the doctor's manual prepared by  
the American Academy of Pedi-  
atrics, include:

“Do you think this person is  
generally pleasant and easy to  
live with?”

“Does this person regularly  
use tobacco, alcohol or drugs?”

“Has this person had sexual  
intercourse?”

In preparation for the opening  
of a screening center, parents  
with eligible children would be  
informed in detail of the program  
for free medical exams, mental  
screening, and the training  
program for day care center  
staff. Parental permission would  
have to be obtained for a child's  
participation.

Children would also be sought  
out through the schools or in  
their homes by later outreach  
programs organized by the coun-  
ty.  
But unlike the physical health  
aspect of the program, the mass  
screening for ‘mental health”  
has no provision for treatment of  
diagnosed “problems.” The  
information just goes into the  
federal data bank.

The National Institute of Men-  

tal Health (NIMH) and the  
American Orthopsychiatric  
Association have recom-  

mended that the screening be  
stopped because there is not  
enough basic knowledge for  
testing, no valid instruments for  
screening, no culturally un-  
biased tests, and not enough  
professionals to do the screen-  

More on Page 14

Local Service Directory  
Boulder County Women's Re-  
source Center offers a new di-  
rectory of services available to  
women. Fifty agencies listed in-  
clude civil rights, education, em-  
ployment, health, housing,  
single parents, etc. Cost: 10¢.  
Available at 2750 Spruce.  
— NOW Boulder Newsletter

Home Deliveries Safer  
A California study shows that  
mothers whose babies are de-  
livered at home by midwives  
have healthier babies and fewer  
complications than those who  
go into the hospital.

POTTERY  
MACRAME  

322-0113