Class Mobility

Eileen Bresnahan

America—that golden land of op-
portunity—where even plain little
Jane from Peoria can strike it rich
and become Chairperson of the Board
of Mobil Oil... Well, maybe not quite
that, but almost any little girl who
works hard enough and wants it bad
enough can go to college and become a
school teacher or manage a McDonald's.

Right?

Of course, right!

Or so our teachers, politicians,
parents, priests, television, maga-
zines, and musical comedies tell us.
This is the American dream, the prom-
ise that anyone, regardless of race,
color, or creed (or sex, in some of
the updated versions) has an equal
shot at making a buck and exploiting
others in this great land of ours.
And if that doesn't work she can al-
ways marry the boss or win the state
lottery. This stuff of American
popular propaganda is the myth and
reality of class mobility.

This doctrine tells us that a few of
the "best" of the working class will
make it to the "good life." To do
this we must be very smart, work very
hard, have a good attitude, listen
for opportunity to knock—in short,
step over everybody else in our
scramble for a better life. Individ-
ualism is the name of the game—
encouraging us to identify with the PBs
rather than the working class—to
seek to advance ourselves rather than
to work for the good of our entire
class. Upward mobility keeps us
(working women) divided, it's as
simple as that.

But, you may be saying, that's only
fair. Why shouldn't those who work
hard, who are "smarter," get ahead?
For several reasons, the main one be-
ing just plain numerical. Currently,
only about 5-10% of the population is
PB. These people—professionals and
small business owners, mostly—are

ENGLISH FOLK SONG,
18TH CENT.

It works thusly: This country (the
good old US of A) is what is known as
a class society. (They probably told
you something different in school:
something about a "classless society”
or the "great American Middle Class."
Well, forget all that, because it's
not true.) What this means is that
some people own the means of produc-
tion (factories, for example) and
thereby are very rich; some people
own small businesses or are profess-
ionals and are in the middle (they
make more money than they need for
necessities); and some of us work
for wages, with only our labor to
sell, with little control over our
situation, and make little if any
more than we need just to survive (or
we are unemployed).

For the purposes of this discussion
we will call the first group the
bosses, the last group (which inclu-
des about 90% of us, by many esti-
mates) the workers, and the middle
group (take a deep breath) the petty
bourgeoisie (or PBs). Which of these
groups one belongs to (theoretically)
depends less on one's birth than on
one’s current ability to make money.
Of course, a person who started the
game with significant advantages
(privilege) such as a superior educa-
tion, better social contacts, or just
plain more money has a far greater ab-
ility to make money and, therefore,
to maintain or better class position
relative to those who began with the
pack (or behind it).

Despite this inequality of opportun-
ity, significant numbers of working
class people do leave the working
class and join the ranks of the PBs.
A few (very, very few) even make it
all the way to boss. The knowledge that
this happens (and it does) is the
carrot in front of all our greedy
eyes, keeping us plodding in our cir-
cle, in line, like asses—allowing
ourselves to be exploited in hope
that we will be among the few to
reach a better life.

Upward mobility is the safety valve
that keeps American society from
blowing up—the doctrine that encour-
ages us to identify not with our
class, but with those who exploit us,
who we're all supposed to aspire to
be. That's why practically everybody
in a sympathetic role (the "good
guys") on TV is a member of this
group. The message is: “be a win-
ner, become PB." All the values we
learn in school and elsewhere in some
way contain this message. But if we
(working women) all become PBs, who's
gonna do the work? Society (capital-
ist type) could not, would not, sur-
vive. So only a few can ever make
it. For every kid who leaves the
ghetto, 1000 stay. For every woman
lawyer, there are 1000 woman clerical
workers.

But it still might be fair, you
could say: open competition, free
enterprise, and all that. But it can
never be fair in a society where some
people have a better preparation for
the game than others. Do you "know
the right people?" Did you go to the
best schools? Did you finish high
school? Are you traditionally at-
tractive (i.e. do you conform to PB
expectations)? Are you “well groomed?" Have you ever gotten a job
through “connections?” Did your
parents help to pay for your educa-
tion? Are you white? If the answer
to any of these questions is "yes," 
you have privilege, my dear. Privi-
lege that puts you way ahead of those
who answered "no." Way ahead of
those who were disqualified from the
game generations ago—the poor and
blacks, to name a few (million).

As women, we earn 59 cents for every
dollar earned by a man. No matter
how hard any one of us works, we will
not change that statistic. Because
it cannot change, the capitalist
system couldn't stand it. And if
it's not women earning the 59 cents,
it will be someone else.

(or Why Do You Think They Call

It A “Rat Race,”)

Capitalism is based on the exis-
tence of a class whose labor is ex-
ploited (i.e., some of the true value
of that labor goes to someone other
than the laborer)—right now this
class includes 99% of all Americans.
One or two here and there might make
it out, but always, for all time,
under capitalism, 90% of all people
will be exploited. If we're going
to change things to benefit the most
people, does it make more sense to
work our butts off, and step on
others in the same boat as we are, so
one or two can “get ahead?" (Keeping
in mind that, as women, we're start-
ing way, way behind.) Or does it
make more sense to work together for
a system where things will be divid-
ed more equally—where people will
"get ahead" (advance to positions of
authority) based not on their sex,
looks, or the kind of education that
their corrupt parents were able to
buy them—but only on themselves,
their work, their abilities?

That's really what it's all about—
do we join in a system that's design-
ed to keep most of us down, or do we
fight to replace it with something
better? Do we seek what's best for
everyone, or think only of ourselves?
Do we gamble, or do we work for a
sure thing?

Have you ever wondered why there
is such a mystique connected, in
America, to gamblers? It's because
this is in the best interests of
those who rule. Along with Daniel
Boone and Davy Crockett, the society
encourages us to admire individuals
who have "made it alone." That's
why we know about Neil Armstrong (the
first man to walk on the moon), but
most of us can't remember the name of
the other guy who took all the same
risks, but walked on the moon 45 min-
utes later (it was either Aldrin or
Collins, I think, but I can't remem-
ber, either). And, of course, we
don't know the names of all the
thousands of technicians, without
whom none of it would have been pos-
sible. Let alone, all of us workers
who paid the bills. No one ever does
anything alone—we are made able to
do what we do through the labor of
others. But we are encouraged not
to see this; to look on everything
we do as an individual achievement,
because if we start making some of
these connections, the ruling class
is lost. We labor as the last 90%, remember. If, say tomorrow, we
started thinking not just of our-
selves, but of each other, of our
class—who could stand against us?
We do everything, shouldn't we con-
trol everything? How can we justify
buying into a system where some must
always starve, to support the excess
of others? How do we help the starv-

among. They sneer at the struggling
of others, never having suffered the
pains that cause working class people
to work hard to hold a job, because
that job is everything between them
and poverty.

The downwardly mobile are scum—
“slumming" where others have no
choice but to live. Until their
heads, their values, and their econ-
omic priorities become the same as
other working people—until they ac-
tually become members of the working
class—they are just the boss's
children, come to play with us poor
kids, but still going home at night.

-Whalen/LNS