17

Women Against Violence Against Women

Fran Day

Women Against Violence Against Women (WAVAW) is an activist organization working to stop physical and sexual violence against females of all ages. WAVAW was born out of the collective outrage of feminists at the sex-violent, racist film, "Snuff," which appeared in March, 1976. WAVAW protested both the film itself and the advertisements for it, which claimed that the mutilation and murder of a woman was entertaining. WAVAW actions in Southern California resulted in the film being withdrawn one week after it opened.

Independent WAVAW groups sprang up around the country during the next two years; a Denver group was organized in May, 1978. These groups have been working in a variety of ways against violence against women, which is often exploitative, glorified, and romanticized. WAVAW is taking action against a system which trivializes, condones, and encourages acts of violence such as rape and battering against women.

The current focus of many WAVAW groups is media violence. Through mass consumer action, education, and consciousness-raising, they intend to raise community awareness to the point where the people will demand social responsibility and will take and support action to eliminate violence against women. WAVAW actions against the recording industry have resulted in the removal of the Rolling Stones’ "Black and Blue" billboard from Sunset Strip and the curtailment of that ad campaign. They have initiated a consumer boycott of Warner/Elektra/Atlantic Records, industry leaders in the use of violence against women. WAVAW and other activist groups organized Marches to Reclaim the Night in cities around the world, in which women demanded an end to violence against women. Denver WAVAW organized the Denver March in July, 1978.

Denver WAVAW initiated actions against a local disco and a local radio station, staged guerrilla theater at the 1978 Women's Festival, made and sold buttons, met and discussed possible retaliatory tactics with several victims of attack, leafleted, and expressed rage in a number of ways against expressions of misogyny.

Denver WAVAW disbanded in March, 1978 due to lack of support, energy, direction, and cohesiveness (see Kathy Riley's article which follows).

However, the need to combat violence against women in all its destructive forms still exists in Denver and around the country.

Denver WAVAW

Kathy Riley

As a former member of Women Against Violence Against Women (WAVAW), a Denver feminist group which folded in March—less than a year after it began, I would like to examine some of the reasons why we were unable to continue working together as a group.

I think that the reasons why we stopped meeting might offer some insights into that by-now-too-familiar pattern: a group begins with great energy and enthusiasm, accomplishes something, and a year or so later, folds due to "lack of energy and support."

Like other now-defunct feminist groups, WAVAW began with great energy and enthusiasm. In May of 1978, about 12 or so of us began meeting weekly in the basement of Woman to Woman Book Center. Our needs and priorities differed, but basically we were hoping to form some kind of feminist resistance to the many forms of violence against women that we saw around us, and in the process, develop our politics around those issues.

Most of us were white lesbians without children and without professional jobs, but our backgrounds were quite diverse. Some of us had been involved in the defense of the Bluebird Five—five women busted for plastering anti-porn leaflets on the Bluebird Theater. Others had been involved in getting the film "Snuff" run out of town. Some members had a great deal of political experience; others found themselves in a feminist group for the first time.

After a few organizational meetings, we chose our first project, a Saturday night march to "Reclaim the Streets" coupled with a rally and a speakout. Within six weeks we had organized the event for late July and had put together a statement of demands leveled at the government and other institutions. It covered a number of inter-connected issues: sexual assault, battering, sexual harassment on the job, and decriminalization of prostitution.

By the week of the march, our numbers had doubled. We worked well together, liking the process and each other. Although we had political differences, we found enough agreement to issue a good leaflet. (See BNR Vol. 6 No. 8 Sept. 1978). As a result, the march was one of the most successful feminist demonstrations in Denver history, drawing more than 590 women; and the quality of what women had to say at the speakout was necessary and important.

A little more than two months later, much of our good feelings and sense of purpose had worn off. Our numbers gradually dwindled. While many of us had been confident before the march that a new focus or project would emerge out of the group's needs, it didn't work out that way. Creating a purpose and direction turned out to be immensely more difficult than writing a leaflet.

A turning point in the group's history came in October, a month before several of us were to attend the first national feminist conference on pornography in San Francisco. At the time, some of us hoped the conference would provide the shot-in-the-arm the group needed. However, we went through a bitter dispute over the ethics of fundraising to send women to the conference. Anger and bad feelings caused more women to drop out.

Meanwhile, lacking a direction, we found that women both within and outside the group had different expectations and needs from us. As many of us had hoped, several women who heard about us through the march came to our weekly meetings saying they wanted to “do something.” None of them stuck with us, however—possibly because we had no clear-cut program/perspective to offer. Possibly we seemed too "radical," since we were asking for more than volunteers; we expected a political commitment as well.

During the early fall, a few women came to us because they didn't know where else to go with their questions: The mother of a 9-year-old who had been raped wanted to know what to do now that the rapist was getting paroled; another woman was receiving threats from the ex-boyfriend who had raped her. In both cases, we listened and offered our suggestions.

Within the group, members simply had different needs. I think that in trying to meet them all, we kept postponing the question of what exactly we were doing together as a group. One woman needed to talk out long-standing personal issues that her work in the group forced her to confront; others needed more substantive political discussion than we were doing. Others felt anxious or angry that as a self-defined "action" group, we weren't doing much action. As a result, several quickie actions were planned and done—one being a protest against sexist advertising at the Yellow Pages disco—which generally speaking, left most of us pretty dissatisfied. For me, it was a treading water feeling. As a group, we agreed that actions couldn't be done effectively without solid political discussions beforehand, but we seemed to go around in circles about how much of each we should be doing. By late winter, in desperation, the five of us who were left agreed to function as a study group to see if the group could be salvaged. By that time, however, our energy and spirit were gone, and we folded a few weeks later.

In talking about the internal pressures this group faced, I think it's important not to forget the external ones when we try to figure out why we "failed": the fact that our community is small, that we have a hostile political climate for radical feminist actions, that the possibilities of arrest are real and frightening, that we all had to juggle full-time work or school commitments or the equivalent.

Yet, in understanding all of the pressures we had to deal with, I still can't quite put my finger on why none of the good ideas we frequently tossed out among ourselves ever took hold. One of the most frequently mentioned ones was the idea of confronting rapists (such as, picketing a home or workplace) when a woman couldn't or wouldn't use the court system. Possibly one of the reasons why we didn't start doing that had to do with our isolation. Aside from professional service agencies such as safe houses, we were the only group in town trying to deal with the issues of violence against women from a feminist perspective. From the beginning, we had rejected organizing ourselves as a service group—a rape hotline, for example. For a couple of reasons: First, there was a strong feeling against becoming another volunteer service agency with the usual burnout and time commitment problems. Furthermore, as mentioned earlier, we wanted to be an action group: the possibilities of guerrilla theater, boycotts, picketing were often talked about. Yet, the isolation remained. Because we had almost no contact with social service groups, and had no ongoing project of our own, we had no regular contact with women who were victims of violence. The idea of a confrontation project and the others remained abstract.

The whole question of time commitments—the whole circular chicken and egg puzzle—deserves more discussion. Lack of time was another reason we used in deciding against projects such as a rape hotline. Basically, most of us were unwilling to commit more than one evening a week to the group. But why was this so? Could it have been that we didn't feel strongly enough about the group to want to make more of it? So that we fell back on the old time-honored excuses for our minimal involvement: jobs, school, personal issues. While those "excuses" are grounded in real pressures, they always seem to get more powerful when a group is dying.

That still leaves the question of what did we—what do we—feel strongly enough about as a group? As a community? Could the problem have been that we simply weren't angry enough, often enough? It's an uncomfortable thought for me. Could it be that as a college-degreed, white lesbian-feminist, I have successfully insulated myself from the assaults faced daily by women with less privilege: assaults faced by prostitutes, by women economically dependent on brutal husbands, by women harassed sexually on a job they can't leave, by women who will be raped tonight in Capitol Hill because they don't have money for a car or a (relatively) "safe" apartment?

MORE ON PAGE 26