IWY Results Are Still In Question

Mary Wadding

(Editor's Note: The following article
is a brief rundown on the Women's
Conference from a general perspective.
Next issue, BMR will feature inter-
views and analysis with Carol Lease,
delegate from Colorado, and Madeline
Hokdorf, delegate-at-Large. More in-
depth analysis of the problems, deci-
sions, and events will be included.)

During November 18-21, women from
throughout the United States and its
territories converged upon Houston,
Texas. Estimates have ranged from
17,000 to 22,000. Two thousand of
the women were delegates selected by
their state conferences, alternates,
or delegates-at-large selected by the
National Conference Commission. The
remainder included official observers
selected by the Commission, news
media persons, and those women who
were simply interested in what was to
occur.

The conference was split into two
parts, the official voting taking
place in the coliseum and the exhibits
and workshops provided at the conven-
tion center, under the concept of
Seneca Falls, an alternative to the
official conference.

On the agenda were 26 proposals
that were derived from the individual
states' conferences. Among them were
three that were thought to be the most
controversial; the ERA, reproductive
freedom (abortion), and sexual pre-
ference (lesbian rights). Others
dealt with “safer" topics, including
daycare, child abuse, battered women,
social and health services for elderly
women, rape prevention, and establish-
ment of a Women's Department (a
Cabinet level department).

The most widespread caucusing re-
sulted in what was called the “pro-
plan" vote. Pro-Plan was, simply,
an agreement to vote for all the
proposals, not to amend them, and to
limit the debate in order to get the
issues completed within the allotted
time. Once committed to the Pro-Plan
the delegations were, in essence,
rubberstamping the same issues that
had already been voted for at the
state conferences.

Most of the time-consuming debate
came from the anti-ERA, anti-abortion
("pro-family") coalition opposing the
three major issues listed above. The
major complaint from this group was
that they were not being allowed equal
time to express their views at the
microphones located on the voting
floor. Strategies used by the anti-
ERA, anti-abortion people were mostly
involving tying up the proceedings by
calling for points of order, privilege,
and inquiry.

Governed by rules sent out in ad-
vance by the Commission and using Ro-
berts Rules of Order to cover areas
not provided for by the Commission's
rules, the plenary sessions were a
mixture of order and chaos. Confusion
regarding the procedures was com-
pounded by not only the delegates, but
also the lack of a strong chair. One
notable exception was the presence of
Anne Sarnier of Ohio who chaired the
longest of the sessions and exhibited
confidence in her abilities to govern
a meeting which was matched by the
confidence and respect she gained
from the delegates for her fairness
and decisiveness in making her deci-
sions. Under her direction, the
delegates were able to get through
most of the business of the agenda
and to curb most of the delaying tac-
tics of the anti-ERA, anti-abortion
faction.

With the exception of the proposal
dealing with the creation of a Cabinet
level Women's Department, the plan of
action was adopted. Three proposals
dealing with disabled women, minority
women, and welfare were substituted
by proposals which retained their
original intent but were strengthened
by more definite language.

Speeches opened the plenary
sessions. Among those who spoke
were Bella Abzug (presiding officer
of the conference), Roslyn Carter,
Betty Ford, and Coretta King. Lady
Bird Johnson introduced Barbara Jor-
dan, the congresswoman whose district
includes Houston. Ms. Jordan's
speech dealt with the necessities
of the conference, cautioning the
women to be aware of each other and
the needs of all women.

Perhaps having the conference in
Houston set the tone for what would
follow. Texas has its own ERA. The
mayor of Houston has a reputation as
a champion of the Equal Rights Amend-
ment and has worked toward the elim-
ination of inequality within his own
administration.

The conference ended without the
delegates getting through the entire
agenda. New business was never
brought to the floor. But, the major
portion of the agenda was the plan
of action and despite the many dis-
tractions, the important business
continued.

Childcare Continued...from page 6

collective commitment. Mary does
recognize that June is Morgan's moth-
er and that she, Mary, is Morgan's
"special friend."

June, as Morgan's biological
mother, noted that when she first
had Morgan, she was really "in love"
with her in a way that can become
possessive. She feels that the
childcare collective has helped her
have a more balanced attitude toward
Morgan. At one point, when Morgan
was about 3-1/2, she began demanding
more of June's time, as the biologi-
cal mother in the collective. June
was disappointed because she felt
that if Morgan had been more secure
it wouldn't have happened. "For
about six months, things were pretty
scattered. All of the parents were
having major changes in their lives
and everyone was changing households.
That's when Morgan was making more
demands on my time."

June also felt that outside pres-
sures were a factor. "In some
ways, I don't like Morgan's attitudes
toward me because it doesn't have
anything to do with me personally:
but with what she's taught away from
me about the “eternal mother" figure.

Both June and Mary would like to
see a society without biological
distinctions of motherhood, but they
recognize that attempts to create
such a living pattern in the current
society would pose too many contra-
dictions for Morgan and would be
harmful.

Ideally, Mary would like to live
in a stable collective, raising a
child under one roof. She noted,
however, the added freedom and flex-
ibility that several households gave
parents. "I can't say that I would
live with the same group of women for
15 years and I would resist if anyone
made me."

The logistics of rearing a child
in several houses takes some work--
tensions arise between parents over
scheduling (who has Morgan when?).
The simple logistics of communication
between households also have to be
considered--did someone make a doc-
tor's appointment, has Morgan had her
bowel movement regularly, which house
has her shoes?, etc.

"Also, it's the mushy things that
you really miss," said Mary. “Like
which of the four parents will see
the first tooth loss? I bought Morgan
this wonderful flannel shirt that I'll
never see her in because it went to
another house."

Childcare collectives have many
of the same problems as traditional
families, Mary noted, only the broad-
er collective structure provides
more opportunity to balance these
things out. June added that when there
is disagreement over childrearing
methods, having several parents in-
volved at different levels instead
of two parents makes these disagree-
ments easier. They are less polar-
ized.

"Ultimately," Mary said, "we have
to give up some of the 'pleasures' of
traditional childrearing to get rid
of the bad things. More individual
needs of the parents can be met
through this type of collective child-
rearing. It's unnatural to expect
parents to spend all their time with
a child and not turn into child abusers.

"The kids from childcare collec-
tives are more independent. They
have more than one person to depend
on. They also get a lot of intellec-
tual and social stimulation from
having several parents with different
skills and attitudes. Morgan is more
adaptable and flexible to new situa-
tions. No one mother with three kids
and a TV could provide that. We
work with these kids.”

OTHER COLLECTIVES

The Morgan collective provides the
basic pattern that most childcare
collectives follow. One major dif-
ference between the Morgan collective
and other collectives, however, is
that Morgan is the only child so far
who has been raised collectively from
birth. In both the Seline Collective
and the Alan Collective, both children
were raised individually by their
parents before their childcare collec-
tives developed.

At the same time as the voting
was taking place, women were gather-
ing at the Thomas Albert Center.
Within the building were exhibits
including crafts, books, information,
t-shirts, buttons, etc., which women
sorted through and collected. Semin-
ars, workshops, entertainment and
discussions were held on the upper
level of the center. At regular in-
tervals throughout the weekend, films
such as “In the Best Interest of the
Children" were shown. Speakers in-
cluding Colorado Congresswoman Pat
Schroeder and Patsy Mink of the State
Department were present to talk about
their areas of expertise. An open
forum was available for poetry read-
ings and discussion was also provided.

In spite of the atmosphere of work,
entertainment was part of the agenda.
Tickets could be obtained for per-
formances by Holly Near, Meg Christian,
Margie Adam and Sweet Honey in the
Rock. Also available were tickets
to the production of For Colored Girls
Who Have Considered Suicide When the
Rainbow Should Be Enuf.

Mandated by Presidents Ford and
Carter, the Conference was federally
funded. The Plan of Action, as adop-
ted by the conference, now goes to
Carter who has 120 days to prepare
his recommendations to Congress which
has another 120 days to respond.

How far the plan will go is unsure.
Studies need to be made as to the
costs involved, the feasibility of
carrying out the mandates of the women
who voted for the plan.

The women made it clear how far
the plan should go. How far Carter
and Congress take it is anybody's
guess.

THE SELINE COLLECTIVE

Penny had Seline when she was 19
years old and for the first two years
raised her as a single parent. Even-
tually other women in the community
started to give Penny some support
and a childcare collective developed.
When other women started to relate to
Seline as parents, Seline was already
over two years old and had a definite
personality. “The other parents in
the collective chose Seline," said
Penny, “and this still makes a dif-
ference in their level of commitment.
I had to take whatever came up and
do the job.”

About one year ago, Penny needed
to let go of Seline, but the other
parents, while involved with Seline,
had not made a real commitment.

Penny, as she puts it, “freaked out."
In the year since the crisis, Seline's
childcare collective assumes about
as much time and financial responsibi-
lity as the Morgan collective. Be-
cause of previous patterns, however,
the identification of Penny as mother
is much stronger and the distinction
between her role and that of the other
primary parents is much more distinct.

Penny sees herself as less "ideal-
istic" toward Seline than other par-
ents in the collective. She sees her
more on page 10.