Setbacks Plague Installers’ Case

Vicki Piotter

March 8, 1976, seven women instal-
lers filed a $50 million suit against
Mountain Bell for unlawful sex dis-
crimination in employment practices
and policies on behalf of all women
who are employed, were employed,
might have been employed, or might
become employed by Mountain Bell in
craft job positions.

This suit against Mountain Bell is
the first of its kind in the US and is
expected to set a precedent on the
issues of whether traditional union
seniority systems are more important
than ending discrimination and whether
it will be the company or the workers
who pay for the company's past and
future discrimination.

Judge Sherman Finesilver, who's pre-
sided over the case since the former
installers filed the class action suit
in Denver US District Court, recently
handed down three rulings after sit-
ting on the case for 7 months. Two of
these decisions pose a setback for
the women's case against the phone
company.

The most serious setback occurred
January 27th when Judge Finesilver
denied the motion for discovery filed
by the attorneys for the plaintiffs.
The discovery motion would have ordered
Mountain Bell to disclose and make
available to the installers facts and
documents pertaining to the company's
employment and hiring practices.

In his denial, the judge said that
granting the motion for discovery
would place unnecessary and bothersome
paperwork on the defense for Mountain
Bell. He said, however, that the phone
company must be “cooperative” with the
plaintiffs in their efforts to obtain
the requested information.

Since it is imperative that the
installers' legal team have actual
facts and statistics regarding the
company's employment practices, they
face the heavy burden of searching
through thousands of pages of docu-
ments headquartered at Mountain Bell
offices. This is expected to cost
thousands of hours in time and thou-
sands of dollars in copying and com-
puter expenses.

Judge Finesilver also ruled in favor
of the company when he denied a motion
to allow the installers' union, the

Feminists Protest

Communication Workers of America (CWA)
to become plaintiffs in the suit
against Mountain Bell. Instead, in a
clearly prejudicial move, he ruled
that the CWA could only be allowed to
participate in the case on the side of
the company. This decision denies the
installers access to union finances,
legal work, and other benefits had
they been allowed to become joint
plaintiffs.

In February, Finesilver ruled on a
motion favorable to the installers
which allowed three Mountain Bell em-
ployees to join the suit as additional
plaintiffs, instead of forcing them
to go through the procedures of an-
other sex discrimination complaint
against the company.

The three women, long-time employees
as telephone operators, were among 73
women transferred to craft jobs as
“framemen." Many of the women, having
years of company seniority, were in
line for promotion, choice of shifts,
etc., ahead of many of the men in the
framemen position. As a result, the
seniority system was changed from
years of employment with Mountain Bell
to seniority based on years in a spe-
cific job title. The women were forced
to take a cut in pay to less than what
they had received as operators.

On March 10th, lawyers for Mountain
Bell filed a motion before the judge
asking that the suit against them be
dropped. To justify this request, the
lawyers stated that the installers'
complaint against them did not offer
enough specific information as to how
Mountain Bell has discriminated
against women. Finesilver has not
ruled on the motion.

Ruth Buechler, an attorney for the
installers, said she would not be
surprised if Finesilver took another
seven months to act on the suit. His
record shows inactivity: the original
complaint was filed March 1976; in
April the judge asked the installers
to file an amended complaint as
Mountain Bell said the charges against
them were too vague; the installers
filed the amended complaint in May,
along with the three motions that
Finesilver just ruled on.

The installers' case against Mount-
ain Bell dates back to the summer of
1974 when a group of women were hired
as phone installers and cable

splicers to fulfill the company's
EEOC-enforced affirmative action re-
quirements. (When the EEOC forced
AT&T in 1973 to sign an agreement to
hire more women into non-traditional
jobs, they labeled the Bell system
the most oppressive employer of women
workers in the US.)

The second week in January, one
week after Mountain Bell had submitted
their 1974 affirmative action statis-
tics to the government, fifteen of
the women installers were declared
“surplus labor" and put to work as
clerks and operators at a $25 a week
cut in pay. Another twelve women were
replaced by men with more seniority
and bumped into lower positions. Six
men installers were moved to different
installer jobs with no pay cut.

In March 1975, all the women were
laid off, along with women in other
craft jobs, despite the fact Mountain

Bell had just requested a $40 million
rate hike under the guise of "emergency
relief" to prevent layoffs.

At that time, the CWA union refused
to be of help to the women citing the
seniority system as justification.
Although the layoffs were done accord-
ing to seniority, the layoffs perpetu-
ated past discrimination as women
were not in craft positions
before 1974. Installers insist
that men with more seniority should
not be laid off in order to keep
women working, but that Mountain Bell
should bear the financial burden for
their past sex discrimination.

In January 1975, the installers
filed charges of sex discrimination
with the EEOC. One year later, in
February 1976, the EEOC stated they
had found substantial cause for com-
plaint and gave the installers the
right to sue Mountain Bell in US
District Court.

The attorneys for the installers are
currently waiting for Judge Finesilver
to make a decision on the motion filed
by the phone company in March. In the
meantime, the Women Installers' Legal
Defense Fund is in desperate need of
money in order to copy documents and

statistics at Mountain Bell. They
also need people to volunteer their
time for the extensive research that
lies ahead. If you can contribute in
any way, write to the Women Instal-
lers' Legal Defense Fund c/o Better
Jobs for Women, 1545 Tremont Place,
Denver, CO 80202.

Affirmative Action Cuts Forestalled

Kathy Riley

Pressure by feminist and minority
groups against the government's pro-
posed watering down of the affirmative
action program has brought results--
at least for the time being.

In rules adopted by the Federal
Office of Contract Compliance February
17, none of the repressive proposals
made last September were included.
Officially, however, most of them are
still "under consideration" and could
be revived in the future.

Basically, the new rules codify ex-
isting practice. Any employer with

Women demonstrating against affirmative action cuts,

federal contracts totaling more than
$10,000 in any 12-month period is re-
quired to take affirmative action to
provide equal job opportunities.

A written plan showing how that is
to happen is required of all contrac-
tors with 50 or more employees and
contracts of $50,000 per 12-month per-
iod. Written plans are also required
of all depositories of federal funds.

The new rules allow complaints to
be filed by third parties, such as
feminist groups. However, individual
complaints may be referred to the
Equal Employment Opportunity Commis-
sion (EEOC)-- as has been common prac-

Photo by Debbie Taylor
last February in Denver.

tice since 1969. The latter rule has
been criticized because of the poor
enforcement record of the EEOC.

The rejected proposals, had they been
adopted, would have severely weakened
the affirmative action program-- which
has yet to be adequately enforced.

One rejected measure would have re-
quired written plans from employers
of 100 or more (instead of the current
50 or more). Another would have limit-
ed pre-contract clearance to contracts
of $10 million or more (instead of the
current $1 million base). In effect,
only a few large universities would
have been subject to "pre-contract
clearance" (legally meaning that
employers must show that they are im-
plementing affirmative action before
receiving a contract).

Feminist groups were instrumental in
forcing the government to hold hear-
ings on its plans for new rules. When
all was said and done, the Dept of
Labor ended up with 1100 written com-
ments and 2500 pages of testimony.

In addition to putting pressure on
government, another aspect of the
fight for affirmative action has been
a focus on how the economic structure
affects attempts to get women and
minorities into better jobs.

In New York City, for example, most
of the gains won through affirmative
action in schools and city funded
services were wiped out during the
recent budget cutbacks. (Last hired
are first fired under the widely used
seniority system).

Another concern among people working
for affirmative action is that the
program not be used to pit women and
minority persons against each other
in the competition for scarce jobs.
That is the issue in Minneapolis where
a November affirmative action report
by the Employment Task Force of the
Twin Cities NOW has received strong
criticism from national NOW and local
Black groups.

The report, which covers state gov-
ernment employment, charges that dis-
advantages due to sex are greater than
those due to race; that Blacks fare
far better than American Indians and
Spanish-surnamed people, and that
current affirmative action efforts
ignore women in favor of racial min-
orities.

Ramona Austin, Black coordinator of
the NOW minority task force in Minne-
apolis, called the report a racist
one which works against the joint
efforts of Black feminists.