18

Know Your Rights.

MOVING IN

Keeping documentation from the day you rent your apartment will greatly
reduce any trouble a landlord will be able to give you when you move out.
Keep receipts for all deposits paid. If a landlord says he will pay for

paint

or other supplies for your place, keep copies of all receipts; do not

send him anything you do not have a copy of.

On

the day you move in, any existing damages and necessary cleaning should

be listed, preferably with the landlord or apartment manager present, noting
all flaws, big and little. One copy of the damage sheet (Move In Sheet)
should be given or sent by certified mail to the landlord. It is best if
both you and the landlord sign both your copy and his.

Photographs should be taken of anything that is seriously damaged and the
photos saved for when you move out.

LEASES AND RENTAL AGREEMENTS

Some leases and rental agreements include a provision that states that
the landlord is not responsible for injury to the tenant or damage to the
tenant's property from any cause, even if the cause was a defect in the
building or some negligence by the landlord.

However, you may still be able to recover damages in a court suit, re-
gardless of what the lease says. For instance, if a leaking pipe causes water
damage to your books, records, or furniture, you may sue for the cost of the
damage done and win.

No matter what a lease or rental agreement includes, if it is unreason-
able you may sue to break the contract or recover your losses.

CONSTRUCTIVE EVICTION

A constructive eviction is when the landlord does something that substan-
tially interferes with your possession, use, and enjoyment of the rented
premises. A landlord cannot lock you out of your home or turn off the util-
ities. If he does so, you can break in or have the utilities turned back on

at your own expense and sue to recover the expenses.

yp
Millet... from page 14

to help them get it published...

——— 4

[NS WOMENS GISF:

they said if I'd write a preface they'd
publish it... the writer side of her was just beginning,

SANDIA: A lot of us still carry so many self-destructive patterns, the whole

KATE:

world seems to be courting a kind of destructive impulse.
I courted it a lot in Sita...

SANDIA: I know after translating Renee Vivien I would never court it again in

KATE:

my life.

I think too that some of that is an inability to deal with being a les-
bian... I mean think of the times, that they would do it all is incred-
ible.

And then finally, she talked about The Basement, and brought together,
quite accidentally, the strands of much of what we'd been talking about,
the seemingly senseless violence in the world, from Iran to Mexico and
now to a basement in Indianapolis.

14 years ago they found the body of Sylvia Lichens, who was 16 in a
house. She had been put to death by a whole group of people led by a
woman Gertrude Manishevsky, with whom she had been left to board by her
parents who worked for the carnival. And Gertrude and three of her own
children and two neighborhood boys had turned Sylvia into a scapegoat
and had beaten her an endless number of times, burned her with cigarettes
150 times, engraved on her stomach "I am a prostitute, and proud of it."
So that's the mystery that confronts one at the beginning: why did they
do it? How did she come to not let them do it?

Why didn’t she escape when she could have? What did they do to her
sense of herself?

I read about it in Time magazine 14 years ago, I sculpted it for years
and years and years, and finally I spent 3 years writing a book about
it, which I'm done with I guess. It was a long obsession for me, 14
years of my life. It was the first book I ever wanted to write; and it
was the sort of thing that would be the major book I write. And, uh, it
took me into all sorts of terrible places.

SANDIA: Why did they do what they did?

KATE:

Well, as far as I can see, to punish her for being sexual, by the old
"she’s cheap, she's a whore,” and all that nonsense. The whole sexual
shame business, I think we haven't taken enough account of it, because it
seems to me that's the moment young females are broken, I have a feel-
ing we’re all broken in our adolescence, and then being broken, it's

on us to live as women in this world, and the way that’s done
is through sexual shame. Sylvia wasn't a prostitute, it wouldn't matter
a lot if she were; anyway they must have convinced her of her shame and
guilt so they could practice all these things upon her.

But in a way it's just a larger, more grotesque and therefore clearer ver-
sion of what we all go through. It seemed to me in the story I had hold
of something that I had always sort of subconsciously known about this
culture, and this made it all clearer, this explained it for me.

We could all collect these stories, I wish people would, all these at-

Yvonne Wanrow

FROM PAGE 5

assault; in addition, her trial was
held the same year the government
launched its attack on Wounded Knee,
increasing the racial tension in the
courtroom.

Experience showed that Yvonne could
not have been tried by a jury of her
peers, with the situation in the
courtroom being very much the same in
1979 as it was in 1973.

Yvonne no longer has to fear the
separation from her children and com-
munity, unless she again is faced
with a situation where she refuses to
become a passive victim of violent
attack. It is indeed a crime that
she was made the criminal and the
object of a legal assault which took
too many years of her life.

(We were not able to get all the
details of Yvonne's victory by press
time; we will have them for the next
issue. For a detailed account of all
that happened previous to this time,
see the March issue of BMR.)

Money is still needed as legal and
defense costs have been overwhelming.
Tax-deductible donations can be sent
to: Yvonne Wanrow Defense Committee,
Center for Constitutional Rights,
853 Broadway, 14th Floor, New York,
NY 10003.

01.7 No.4

and Rag ¥
Daughters of ROSIE ‘20
or complaint can be slow, and the re-
sults not guaranteed, it was agreed
that we should quit letting them “get
away with it” without facing a fight.
The conference was extremely benefic
ial and informative for the “Daughters
of Rosie" who attended. Many important
issues were raised and will be further
discussed in the “Work” issue of Big
Mama Rag this August. In the meantime,
if you are feeling isolated in your
non-traditional job and want to talk
shop with other women, seek out the
"Daughters of Rosie" support group.

Therapy from page 2

Since I started therapy, I have be
come happier, clearer, more in touch
with myself and others, more honest,
and even more dedicated to what I be-
lieve in. Just as therapists can be
incredibly destructive, they can be
incredibly healing. It is very import-
ant for a woman who doesn't enjoy be-
ing alive or use her full potential to
find a sensitive, unbigoted, and non-
manipulative therapist. An unhealthy
revolutionary is less than effective,
and unhappy, unliberated (from parents,
from male domination, from the past)
women deserve to be helped to change
by whomever is willing to and capable
of helping them. We must change deeply
engrained patterns and self-images in
our psyches, as well as change the
world we live in. Otherwise, we won't
have the strength we need, and more of
us will commit suicide.

In Struggle,
Michele Feingold

e.

atrocities against women, and if we would ever collect them all, then we'd
know. We'd be able to have enough evidence to understand there's a pat-
tern and meaning in this and it's not just random, "they were crazy,”
kind of stuff, which is how we cheer ourselves up.

SANDIA: You carried that around with you all those years?

KATE: You know we didn't even speak about physical brutality in those days. We didn't even talk about rape yet, or what

people do to kids either, which is one of my... I neatly think a lot of
the evils we have to deal with in the world are the result of the abuse
of children, of little people, of your earliest years being filled with
physical terror and things like that, and as long as people think they

can beat little children, we'll have people beating children because it's
cyclical and it goes on and on and perpetuates itself, and it also instills the first kind of fears. It makes a very traumatic effect on the
mind that is never recovered from, and I think it has given reign to
those impulses, -- I don't mean to imply they're always there--but it's
like torture. It is torture.

SANDIA: I didn't think you were going to go this way with it at all. I thought

you were getting to the degree of hatred toward women was indicated,

but you took it to say also that our lives
and how that is a cyclical pattern of

KATE: I think this is a little bit of a violent society; not just against women. I know great battering is often a whole history
of child abuse. So you are saying there is that tendency in us?
KATE: No, I think we're sort of plastic. We can be almost anything.

People who might be a lot of just to drink within an

make good hard torturers, you could be either one, a lot of
things are set up. It's the kinds of permissions that come from the
culture as a whole. It's the case of where we become tortured.

It comes from the legal system
body: Somebody who might be sent to fill in a Poughkeepsie box
might have burned down Mad Virgin; I can't say that these people
are inherently evil, I don't think so. The permissions come out of

their whole society... permissions that come down the family systems.
Attitudes about how women are treated and children are broken,

and so forth. In patriarchy -- because I'm really down on physical bru-
tality for kids, I began to examine them too... I even have a crazy
theory that it perpetuates itself. Despite the atrocities of adult life, on
one hand, of course in domestic violence, but also in those emotions of
victim, torturer, scapegoat. The terror of being attacked and defenseless
comes out again in cultural morals like war or like political prisoners.
The terror that I felt at arrest was perfectly comparable to being ex-
trailed. If they had put me in a cell it would be my basement.