Littleton Sex Discrimination Suit

School Bus Driver Fights Back

By Janet Yench

A Littleton school bus driver, Gaye Lynn Thompson, is suing her employer, Arapahoe County School District 6, its administrators and school board members, after the board upheld a suspension imposed on her in September, 1976.

Thompson went through grievance procedures to protest the suspension (one week without pay), for what the school district called “offensive conduct," before deciding to take the matter into civil court.

Specific charges and amount of damages sought were not available at BMR press time; however, the suit will generally charge that Thompson did not receive due process, and that the suspension was issued in retaliation for her plans to file a sex discrimination suit against the school district.

She walked away from the buses into a ditch and some weeds, and urinated.

The cold rain and warm bodies in the bus had fogged the windows; uniforms and band instruments were heaped against the windows, and visibility in general was quite poor. She reasoned that no one would be “offended."

The following Wednesday, Sept. 29, Chaffin handed her a one-week suspension notice, which also threatened further action against her. The suspension cost her $125 in lost pay.

When she returned to work she learned that, as further punishment, she had been removed from the field trip list.

Apparently, Chaffin believed that she was inoffensive enough to drive children on a day-to-day basis, but not inoffensive enough to drive field trips, which accounted for one-third of her salary and could result in overtime. Thompson, who is supporting a daughter alone, saw the maneuver as an effort to force her to quit for better pay elsewhere.

Thompson was one of three women employees to file sex discrimination charges against the district in November, 1976. She was also active in attempts to unionize the district bus drivers in 1975 and 1976.

The charges, filed with the Equal Opportunity Employment Commission, say that she was discriminated against “on the basis of sex as to hours of work, compensation, and conditions and type of work assignments."

The charges also say that male drivers are assigned to more long-distance field trips and trips involving mountain driving or overnight stays, despite the fact that several women drivers, including Thompson, have greater experience and more seniority.

In addition, Thompson charges that "Mr. Chaffin has expressly stated that no women would be on the moving crew or the food service crew."

All of the above practices translate to bigger paychecks for male bus drivers in School District 6.

Thompson explained that the charges were filed after 18 months of “dialogue" with Chaffin, who refused to change his attitude toward women asking for male-dominated work assignments.

Shortly after her suspension, Thompson enlisted the help of feminist attorney Ruth Buechler and began to go through the school district's 5-step grievance procedure. She asked to be compensated for the five-day suspension and to have her record cleared of the "offensive conduct" charge. She also filed a second grievance protesting her removal from the field trip list.

Chaffin based the original suspension on two letters of complaint, one from the principal of the high school out of which the field trip had originated (who was not present on the trip), and the second from Jo Sheridan, the driver whom Thompson had stopped to help.

According to Thompson, Sheridan's letter would lead anyone to believe that she had dropped her drawers right next to the bus in full view of students and sponsors.

Thompson maintained throughout the grievance meetings that she had not received due process, that Sheridan's letter was somewhat different from Sheridan's comments to Thompson after arriving in Ft. Collins, and that school officials were being totally insensitive to the basic human right to perform bodily functions, particularly in emergency situations.

At step three of the grievance procedure, officials reinstated Thompson on the field trip list with the promise that she would receive preference for any overtime assignments until some 70 (field trip) hours she had lost were recovered.

Two weeks later, she received to a weekend overnight trip, even though Chaffin had previously told her and others that he would "never" send a woman on an overnighter because they were too much "trouble."

The following work week, Chaffin posted a notice that the district was having financial problems, and that absolutely no overtime assignments would be made, thereby eliminating any chance for Thompson to make up the hours and money she had lost.

In a conversation with Doug Vaughan who conducted the Redfearn interview, BMR obtained corroboration of the confession. Vaughan said that Redfearn was able to describe the placement of the office furniture and the sorts of damage that had been done. (Damage to the typewriters had been very deliberate; for example, the backs had been unscrewed, glue poured in, and the backs replaced. Two items not verified were the stolen files and the obscene calls.

Vaughan said he did not believe that the break-in was done as part of Redfearn's FBI activities—which took place over several years.

The interviews revealed that Redfearn also had connections with local Nazis, had decorated his apartment with Nazi symbols, and hated "radical women" and homosexual men.

Vaughan said he believed that the break-in had been one of a series of Nazi trashings of radical homes and offices.

Vaughan also said that the BMR trashing had been part of a "personal vendetta" of Redfearn's—something to do with the ways he was relating to women in his life. However, claiming confidentiality, Vaughan would say no more on the subject.

Despite the Redfearn admission, the Denver police are taking no action to re-open the BMR case. In a conversation with feminist attorney Ruth Buechler this month, the City Attorney said that an investigation report shows that no suspects or witnesses are listed in the case.

Thompson is asking feminists for financial support to take her case to court, a thousand dollars.

"If people could afford anything, even a dollar," she said, “anything would help. I drive for a living and I need my record cleared.

"Besides, it's become a matter of principle and of my mental health that these people in power not be permitted to abuse that power in this manner. If I don't fight that abuse, where will it end?"

She also said that any funds not depleted by court costs would be returned to the feminist community.

Contributions may be sent to the Thompson “Offensive” Fund, c/o MRF, 8501 E. Florida Avenue, Denver, CO 80231.

The first grievance, dealing with the “offensive conduct” charge, was continuously denied at every step. Finally, the matter was heard April 28 before the entire school board and school officials.

One of Thompson's five witnesses told the board that at a December drivers' meeting, Jo Sheridan had admitted that she felt “pressured” to write the letter of complaint against Thompson. The witness added that Sheridan was told that the letter was necessary if Thompson was going to be terminated. That testimony was substantiated by another witness. However, Sheridan testified that she wrote the letter of her own free will because she had been "mortified" by Thompson's conduct.

Nevertheless, another of Thompson's witnesses testified that Sheridan had been heard to say in Ft. Collins that she didn't know why sponsors of the field trip were upset: "All you could see was the top of her head."

One surprise at the hearing came when the school attorney produced two new letters of complaint, in addition to the letters written by Sheridan and the principal. Neither Thompson nor Buechler had been informed of the “new" letters. Also, the school district refused to provide Buechler with copies of the two original letters, although they had been repeatedly requested.

As a result of hearing testimony, the school board decided to pay Thompson for the hours she lost while suspended for six weeks from the field trip list. They asked Chaffin to compute the number of hours.

Second, they sustained the suspension and refused to clear Thompson's record of the “offensive conduct" charges.

Graphic by Alligator/Lys

More on Page 14

Court costs could surpass the thousand dollars.