Reonpthe y,  
of Vivien's life and its relation to her work. Here I only attempt to give an impression of her poetry, hoping to stimulate those who read a little French, and perhaps to interest others in pushing for an English edition of these sisters who were saying seventy years ago what we are shouting now. And in some ways they said it better—speaking of beauty in beautiful words, they praised women without fear, without hangups, in verse of such sensual beauty as has not been equaled since Sappho laid down her pen. (I mean the French originals, of course, not my pitifully inadequate transliterations. After all, most of us know Sappho only through competent translations. Competent translations of at least Renée Vivien we must have!  

Her English name was Pauline Tarn. All evidence points to an experience when Vivien was about seventeen. Her family had withdrawn her from happy school-life in Paris with her bosom-friend Violet to prepare her for the marriage market. Revolted by the prospect before her, Vivien poured out her emotions in letters to Violet. By all evidence her relationship with Violet—a very religious and mystical young girl—was completely innocent, but when Vivien's family intercepted these passionate letters they thought otherwise. A horrendous uproar of accusations, hate, and disgust seems to have followed, from which Vivien escaped only on becoming twenty-one, coming into her inheritance, and returning to Paris, free and wealthy in her own right.  

Free at last, independently wealthy, Pauline Tarn returned to her beloved Paris, and soon acquired residences in Paris, Nice, and Mitylene, the first of which became legendary for its treasures of antique and oriental art, and to the end of her days she was an inveterate traveler, drunk with her new freedom...she found Violet too serious. Through her, however, she met Natalie Clifford Barney, who introduced her to Sappho. This double revelation: an intelligent woman whose talents, wealth, and sexual tastes matched her own, and a great classical poet who glorified these tastes—here was her “raison d'être,” her life purpose.  

Pouring over the new Skea better, she set herself to learn Greek, and in her studies mastered it ‘avec une facilité qui stupéfiait ses professeurs’ [with an ease that astonished her teachers]. She and Barney lived together during these years between 1898 and 1900 that she acquired the villa above Mitylene where she attempted to recapture the golden age of Pindar.  

Soon after the beginning of her “new life,” perhaps as a symbol of her “pagan” (i.e., Ancient Greek) rebirth, she took the name under which she lived and wrote for the rest of her life: Renée Vivien. A common enough French name, surely, but it is interesting to note that Renée means “re-born,” and that Vivien has at least some etymological tie to vie (life) and vif, vive (alive, lively).  

That at this time Vivien felt a sense of renewal and self-confidence in her newfound faith and pride in her socially despised lifestyle is flaunted in two poems published in the same book as the one already quoted! (Poésies Complètes.)  

The first, "Ainsi Je Parlerai" [what I would say], is a religious-philosophic fantasy concerning what one would say if the Last Judgment actually arrived, complete with a sympathetic and all-forgiving Jesus. What a temptation! (In that almost excessively moral era, almost everyone believed, really believed, and the worst sinners treasured the hope of a deathbed repentance and heaven's glory, for weren't they Christians, the chosen people? hadn't Christ washed away all their sins if only they repented?)  

Vivien has obviously no desire to repent. In "Ainsi Je Parlerai," she seems unaware of any sin at all. Although this complacent confidence does not survive unabated throughout her work, naturally enough, her sincerity and “liberation” at this time is conveyed in the innocent exaltation of her poems:  

Ainsi Je Parlerai [what I would say]  
Le Seigneur penchait son front sur mon trépas (if the Blessed Saviour came to me, I would say: O Christ, I do not know you.)  
Seigneur, ta stricte loi ne fut jamais la mienne, (Lord, your strict law has never been mine)  
Et je vécus ainsi qu'une simple païenne... (and I lived thus as a simple pagan...)  
Le monde était autour de moi, tel un jardin. (the world was all around me just like a garden.)  
Je bus l’aube claire et le sol cristallin. (I drank the clear dawn and the crystalline twilight.)  
Le soleil me ceignait de ses plus vives flammes, (the sun girdled me round with his most eager fires,)  
Et l'amour m'incline vers la beauté des femmes, (and toward the beauty of women Love turned my desires.)  
Pardonne-moi, qui fus une simple païenne (so pardon me, who was a simple pagan!)  
Laisse-moi retourner vers Ta splendeur ancienne (Let me return to my ancient glory.)  
Et, puisque enfin l'instant éternel est venu (and since at last the eternal moment has come,)  
Rejoindre celles-là qui n'ont point connu. (rejoin those who never could have known you.)  

Vivien neither asks for forgiveness nor the hope of heaven; she would prefer instead to go to the pleasant, earthlike purgatory where the theology of the time placed those “good" pagans who had lived before the coming of Christ, and so had no chance to accept him. The particular pagans Vivien has in mind are clearly indicated by the use of the French pronoun celles-là in the last line. Sappho was perhaps not ‘on the list,’ so to speak, of good pagans at this particular time in history, but this specific feminine pronoun (non-existent in English) leaves no doubt as to which particular ancient pagans Vivien wants to join, preferring the splendor of the ancients to the joy of heaven.  

FOLKLORE CENTER  

The purpose of the Denver Sustaining Fund is to recycle monies to ourselves and alternative institutions. The fund hopes to establish a network of working people, women, and minorities.  

At present the Sustaining Fund is composed of representatives from four groups: a bookstore, the common market, Big Mama Rag, and the Capitol Hill Tenants Union.  

“PASPR REVIT” as at OM a oe ‘les femmes méprisées par les hommes. (the women we love have never trusted men; men they scorn, and shun...)  
Et nous pouvons... (for we can...)  
(être à la fois à la fois nos amantes et nos sœurs.) (at the same time both our lovers and our sisters.)  
Le désir est en nous moins fort que la tendresse... (with us lust is less violent than tenderness, less powerful than touch)  
Et nos maîtresses ne sauraient nous décevoir, (and our lovers could never disappoint us, really.)  
Puisque c'est l'infini que nous aimons en elles... (because we seek perfection with them, and don't demand it from them...)  
Nos jours sans impudeur, sans crainte ni remords (our days, without shame, without fear or remorse)  
Se déroulent, ainsi que de larges accords, (unroll like mid-ocean waves; broad, calm, and deep,)  
(et nous nous aimons, comme elles aimaient à Mitylene.) (and we love each other, like they loved at Mitylene.)  

Dr. Foster says about this poem:  
"Far from being the mere defiant sacrilege this seemed to some readers, it was the confession of a new faith to replace the one in whose name England had damned her."  

In an age of Faith—hypocritical or not—this is a remarkable poem. There is no guilt, no scent of sin, and Vivien's witty twist of conventional theology at the end is not only clever but daring.  

Vivien established a villa at Mitylene, and became for a time the dedicated priestess of the new “Golden Age.” The following lines from "Les Annales" show her self-confidence and liberated spirit at this time. This was in fact the most "right-on" period of her life, before health, unwise love affairs, and false friends had time to tarnish the Golden Ideal. Commonly enough, her best poetry was yet to come. But the poetry of pain, of disillusion, in other words the work of maturity (yet she died at thirty-two!) is, while it may be better poetry than these "Youthful Pieces," beyond the scope of this article.  

I do intend, however, to follow Renée Vivien on my own as far as the Denver area's limited facilities permit. Anyone who has ever heard of these women—even a name in an index or a line in a book—should write Barbara Kline, c/o The Lesbian Center, Women in Transition House, 1895 Lafayette St., Denver.  

Surely the time is now for an edition of her works in English (preferably Bi-Lingual) for a poet of whom Reinach wrote the following...  

"I could quote from these volumes at least two hundred verses which rank among the finest specimens of French poetry... I am aware that there are some objectionable elements...but her genius—for genius she had—is the more extraordinary as she wrote in a language not her own. I feel sure she will be famous someday, and think it desirable that we should try to know more about her before it gets too late."  

Dr. Foster goes on to say:  
"All the critics who grant her this superlative poetic quality agree that she has received nothing approaching her due recognition, and that because of the lesbian element in her work. In view of the small number of persons in any generation who are tolerant of such love, it may be that she will never receive it."  

All I can hope is that women and lesbians remain fashionable and “in” enough to become, at least momentarily, a popular subject for academia. The universities have the money and facilities to dig up the primary texts and get them into print. Once our lost literature is available in print, it's up to us. If "If Sappho Was a Right-Wing Woman" (no insult intended—it's a fine book, but strictly contemporary movement literature, not Belle Lettres) satisfies your needs, that’s fine. But this is our culture; it's been hidden from us; it's been simply neglected; it will soon be lost forever to us, our successors, our children.  

You don't ever have to actually...  
There will always be crazy women who will remember High School literature and feed it to you in High School pablum. Remember High School Lit... Remember the young woman come stomping out of the classroom shouting: "This is just too dull! I can't read it, I think it's nonsense! Bullshit, that's all."  

Denver Sustaining Fund  

The money for this fund will come from two sources: a voluntary tax on items people purchase from various businesses which are participating in the fund. A procedure to financially sustain organizations which are serving the needs of poor and working people has been established.  

From individuals pledging a certain amount of their weekly paychecks (the community cache).  

A board of directors has been established who will determine who receives money based on...  

continued on page 12  

I've NEVER SEEN YOU HERE BEFORE. OH  
NICE BAR, YEH  
HUH?  

WANNA DANCE?