The Sexual Harassment Of Postal Women

Kathleen Loerich, Jeanette Horrell, Kathleen Raddatz, Vicki Piotter

Following is a report on on-the-job sexual harassment, written by four women postal workers who are employed at the US Postal Service's Terminal Annex facility in Denver. The authors are all members of the Sexual Harassment Committee of the Denver Local of the American Postal Workers Union.

What does a TV station that offers a woman employee as top prize in an ongoing television quiz show have in common with a group of Los Angeles firemen, including a captain, who threatened a woman paramedic with shaving off her pubic hair if she failed to comply with their demands for sexual favors?

What does this have to do with two male clerks at the Terminal Annex who continually shout “bitch” at a woman co-worker who quit talking to them after they refused to go along with her request that they quit making degrading remarks about her body and her breasts, in particular?

Any woman who works as a postal employee knows the answer only too well, whether she is just starting out as a 348 sub, has been a letter carrier for five years, or has been clerking for 15. Whether she is black, white, Chicana, middle-aged, young, about to retire, married, single, a single parent, lesbian, heterosexual, considered beautiful or unattractive, the woman working with the Postal Service knows that the three examples above are not isolated incidents; she could probably cite a hundred more examples of the sexual harassment of women on the job. Sexual harassment is an everyday occurrence in the line of work, a condition of work so common that it's thought of as "natural" or “biological” behavior that we must come to expect. When we complain it's dismissed as trivial, humorous, or our own personal problem.

What exactly is sexual harassment? At the first women's caucus meeting of the Denver Local APWU held last March, a number of women spoke out about how supervisors and men co-workers think and behave toward us as nothing but "tits and ass," not as workers in our own right who are trying to survive like everyone else, where our jobs are critical to our survival and independence. This behavior (sexual harassment) shows itself in a number of ways and can best be explained as any form of unsolicited, nonreciprocal behavior that places a woman's sex role over her role as a worker. This may include staring at, commenting on, or touching a woman's body, constant leering, ogling, whistling (or moaning), brushing against your body "accidentally," a friendly pat, squeeze or pinch of an arm against you, catching you alone for...whatever they have in mind, requests for participation in sexual acts; demands for intercourse; and even rape.

Sexual harassment includes penalties for those of us who fail to comply with demands or who refuse to be "nice" to men putting forth this kind of unwanted sexual aggression, whether it's verbal or physical. Take for instance the woman who tried to make those guys shut up with their constant degrading comments about her body, or the clerk who finally quit because her supervisor made her work unbearable after she complained about his advances. Sexual harassment is perpetuated by supervisors who are in positions of power to back up their threats of retaliation if the woman says "no," but it also occurs between co-workers when tolerated and accepted by those in positions of power.

Workplace sexual harassment of women by supervisors, foremen, and co-workers is nothing new. In 1912, for example, women striking for union recognition at a corset factory in Kalamazoo, Michigan, listed foremen harassing them for sexual favors as one of their major complaints around bad working conditions. The history of sexual harassment on the job is the history of the women's labor movement. The earliest women workers found themselves employed at starvation wages in jobs where they were forced to bow to men's demands or starve. In 1846, a factory overseer was tried for sexually slandering an employee to keep her from finding other work after she was fired for refusing his sexual overtures. In three different trials he was found guilty and fined, but was later found innocent. However, such trials were unusual.

Women's labor organizations fought a losing battle to stop this practice, finally giving way to the concerns of male union members who felt the issue of sexual harassment was "unimportant." The problem of the black working woman was even worse; nowhere was her word accepted over that of a white man, something that still goes on today. In this early period of working women's history is the voice of Emma Goldman who braved jailings and rejections to preach her doctrine of sexual emancipation. Her words in “The Traffic in Women:" "Nowhere is woman treated according to the merit of her work, but rather as a sex. It is therefore almost inevitable that she should pay for her right to exist, to keep a position in whatever line with sex favors." This statement rings as true today as it did then.

In addition to having long been victims of sexual harassment, working women have been subject to the social failure to recognize sexual harassment as an abuse at all. In reality, harassment has been both acceptable and taboo: acceptable for men to do, taboo for women to confront, even to themselves. Yet, sexual harassment is a product of social factors. It lies in the age-old belief, custom, and laws that women are the passive and inferior servants of society and men; it sets women apart from everyone else. It means that even when we do the same work as men, we are not considered workers in the same sense, with the need and the right to work, to provide for our families, or to support ourselves independently. Men are still considered the “real” workers, which means in effect, that although we do work, we are not supposed to organize and fight for better conditions (like child care, maternity benefits, against sexual harassment) because they aren't "real" workers’ concerns. Sexual harassment tells us that we are not supposed to be independent workers and a lot of times we have given into this extortion by escaping sexual aggression at the expense of our jobs, or by keeping our jobs at the expense of self-respect.

It’s Everywhere, It’s Everywhere

Last summer the Post Office and Civil Service Committee launched an investigation of sexual harassment of federally employed women, following reports of widespread harassment. This led to a hearing before Congress in which witnesses testified that at least 40% of working women, and up to 70%, are sexually harassed on the job. Donna Lanhoff, an attorney who testified, said, "I think the problem had always been there, but something must be done about the situation because the increasing number of working women has created great potential for abuse." She blamed it on “men's perception of the role of women.

At these hearings it came out that not only is the country's largest single employer, the federal government, guilty of allowing this widespread abuse, but that sexual harassment is practiced by the very agencies which are supposed to monitor sex discrimination. The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), the main enforcement agency against sex discrimination in employment, had been the subject of two criminal investigations as a result of widespread harassment.

As bad as conditions are for federally employed women, conditions for other working women aren't any better. Working women responded to a questionnaire devoted solely to the topic of sexual harassment, in which the behavior was defined as: “Any repeated and unwanted sexual comments, looks, suggestions or physical contact that you find objectionable or offensive and caused you discomfort on the job." 92% listed sexual harassment as a serious problem, 70% personally experienced some form of harassment and 56% of these reported physical harassment. In a study by Redbook, they concluded that victimization by the practice of sexual harassment occurs across lines of age, marital status, race, physical appearance, pay range, and other factors that distinguish women from each other. All we have to do is look around the Post Office to know this to be true.

A lot of things that women said they find objectionable are using the word "girl" when addressing us at the post office; the safety films that show women as dumb and sexy and incompetent--the films do nothing to encourage a woman's self-esteem and encourage the men to view us as we are shown in the films; the constant whistling at any new sub in 030--she can't walk down the aisle without getting some kind of insulting comments or come-ons; the fact that we are told to take down postcards that depict nice scenery while the supervisors ignore postcards men have displayed in their cases of nude women baring their breasts; the fact that women who are not into playing the traditional role of women as submissive to men are equally harassed, sometimes subtly by always detailing them to nasty or undesirable jobs, getting on them about late breaks, even when they walk in with a whole group of “late-breakers," denials of requests for annual leave, or outright hatred with chants of “prude,” "dyke," or "whore." Women at work who are lesbians, and who let men know they are not interested, face constant pressure to "give in" and also to "get out.” One such woman had her tires slashed. Pregnant women face ridicule and are also made to feel they have no right to work--one woman said, "Try being pregnant and without a husband and see what you get."

Race also enters into sexual harassment in a number of ways. Black women's reports of sexual harassment by white men make one think we were back in the days of slavery. One woman, the second day on the job, was asked by a white supervisor if she would "make love to a white man and if she would slap his face if he made a pass at her." He told her he could make it easy for her at the P.O. "if she had intercourse with him seven days a week." Sexual harassment can be a sexist way to promote racism and a racist way to promote sexism.

I SEE IT AS FREEDOM OF CHOICE, EACH WOMAN DECIDES FOR HERSELF HOW SHE WANTS TO BE EXPLOITED.

We know that the problem of sexual harassment is a condition at work that affects just about everybody; sex is hardly the real meaning of this kind of male behavior at work. Women have said that they are somewhat disgusted, unaroused, unexcited, turned-off, insulted, not attracted by, and generally dislike the experience of men at work touching them uninvited. A close look at male sexual harassment leaves no doubt that the name of the game is dominance.

The problems created by sexual harassment do not end with the incidence itself. The effect on the mental and physical health of the victim are much more long-lasting. Feelings of fear, anger, embarrassment, and intimidation are commonly talked about by women who have been harassed. Because of the sensitive nature of the subject, many attacks and incidents go unreported which creates an atmosphere of isolation and only serves to increase the victim's problems. The trivialization and neglect of sexual harassment when reported do nothing to help the woman. An unwarranted feeling that she is somehow responsible leads to feelings of guilt and self-doubt. (At the Congressional hearings another attorney testified that sexual harassment of women is like rape in that "She may be disbelieved, ignored, her credibility challenged, and her complaint trivialized.") Repeated similar problems cause stress and anxiety that can lead to actual physical ailments.

In a work environment that either ignores or actually promotes sexual harassment, the options of the abused employee are all unsatisfactory. At the very least, this creates a situation in which neither the employer, her co-workers, nor the managers view her as a worker, but as a "piece of ass." Complaints or requests for job transfers can worsen the situation. The number of recent lawsuits in this area point to the desperation of women caught in these situations. Many find themselves forced to leave their job and unable to collect unemployment benefits because of the difficult nature of documenting sexual harassment, nor is the state sympathetic. Ignoring harassment doesn't make it go away; in fact, it can increase the problem. The only satisfactory solution to sexual harassment on the job is the forced end to the acceptance of this practice.

Fighting It Out In the Courts

Although judges, employers, and the like treat sexual harassment as a joke, sexual harassment is sex discrimination, which is not a joke at all--it's against the law. Sexual harassment is the shared experience of women as a group. Although work is not the only place we are sexually harassed and sexual harassment is not our only problem on the job, sexual harassment is a question of economics when it promotes employment practices which disadvantage us in work, and sexual practices that intimately degrade and objectify us.

At the March meeting (of the women's caucus), the "testimony" made clear a dimension of the social reality of woman as a sex. This doesn't mean that with sexual harassment the exact same things happen to each and every woman at the post office. It does mean that the things that explain and make up the experience of sexual harassment characterize the situation of all women at

MORE ON PAGE 13