Feminism ‘Abridged’ at Random House;  
Libel Threats Censor Redstockings  

By Kathy Riley and Vicki Piotter  

Like many feminist authors who  
sell their work to large corporate  
publishers, the Redstockings—authors  
and editors of Feminist Revolution—  
hoped that a contract with Random  
House would give widespread exposure  
to their ideas.  

Possibly it has. This spring Random  
House printed 12,000 copies of  
Feminist Revolution: an abridged ed-  
ition with additional writings. The  
book, like the original published by  
Redstockings in 1975, is a collection  
of writings by early women's libera-  
tion activists.  

The problem is that not all of the  
original Feminist Revolution is get-  
ting exposure. "Abridged," it turned  
out, became another word for censored.  
As the Random House edition came off  
the presses in March, Redstockings  
held a press conference charging that  
the publishers had censored it follow-  
ing "threats of libel suits and objec-  
tions by an array of powerful individ-  
uals and groups."  

The major deletion from the Random  
House edition was a chapter detailing  
the association of Gloria Steinem with  
a CIA-front organization in the late  
50's and early 60's. The chapter also  
talked about establishment backing  
of Steinem's power as editor of Ms.  
magazine. It was not a new story.  
Redstockings had made the CIA charge  
four years ago, and Steinem herself  
had talked about it in a New York  
Times interview in 1967. Possibly,  
the fact that the story had been  
around for a while accounted for the  
fact that it passed intact through a  
libel reading by Random House lawyers  
when the publishing house bought the  
book in 1976.  

With the libel issue safely settled,  
Redstockings proceeded to sign a con-  
tract for the book, one they had  
finely scrutinized. Corporate pub-  
lishing may not have been beaten at  
its own game—after all, Random House  
and distributors would be getting most  
of the profits; but, at least, Red-  
stockings thought they had made a  
secure bargain.  

What the group didn't count on was  
a visit by Steinem to Random House  
president Robert Bernstein the same  
day the contract was signed. It wasn't  
long, Redstockings say, before Random  
House started getting complaints from  
other people whose histories were dis-  
cussed in the material on Steinem.  
Among them were Esquire editor Clay  
Felker, the Women's Action Alliance,  
Ford Foundation executive Franklin  
Thomas, the League of Women Voters  
Overseas Education Fund, Warner Com-  
munications, and Washington Post Pub-  
lisher Katharine Graham.  

Over the next few months, attorneys  
met, objections were made, proofs ex-  
amined. The result was that Random  
House vetoed an entire five-article  
section of the book entitled "Agents,  
Opportunists and Fools." In its  
present form, they said, it would pre-  
sent “unacceptable legal risks."  
However, according to Redstockings,  
no wording changes were suggested by  
Random House: their purpose was not  
to protect the information, but to  
stop it. In the end, only one brief  
mention of Steinem's CIA association  
was allowed in the book—in Ellen  
Willis' "The Conservatism of Ms."  

It seems there is a certain ripple  
effect to censorship. It's not simply  
a bottle of white-out in a corporate  
publisher's hand. There were other de-  
letions and changes in the Random  
House edition made by the authors  
themselves. For example, “The House-  
work Poster Rip-Off" is the story of  
Shirley Boccaccio and her now-famous  
“Fuck Housework" poster which she  
created. Despite its copyright, it  
was stolen by a big-time poster sales  
outfit. Boccaccio's attempt to get  
justice, and damages, is detailed  
in the article included in the Random  
House edition. The only problem is  
that after reading it, we still don't  
know who stole her work. The names  
were changed because the “necessary  
documentation" could not be gathered  
by press time.  

Similarly, "Exposing the Popula-  
tion Controllers" was withdrawn by  
the author, the Los Angeles Women's  
Health Center. According to Redstock-  

Redstockings is a group of women whose beginnings are with the early period  
of the Women's Liberation Movement in the 1960's; they were among the first  
to develop a political analysis of women's oppression. In the beginning of  
the 1970's the group Redstockings dissolved, to be formally reorganized in  

1973 by a few of its original members in order to “begin work on a more far-  

ranging analysis of the Women's Liberation Movement."  

What has emerged  

from close to a decade of work is a collection of observation, theory, re-  
search and strategies around an important part of movement history in the  
form of the book, “Feminist Revolution." With the book now behind them, Red-  
stockings see their future work as researchers around radical strategies  
for different issues, such as the ERA and abortion.  

The following are some excerpts from different articles in "Feminist Revo-  

lution":  

Some people said that women were invisible in history because they actu-  
ally weren't there, in any ways worth mentioning, because they were so oppressed.  
Others said that though women were invisible in history, they were actu-  
ally there and working very hard and, in fact, very well, in any number of  
ways—both traditional and untraditional—that never got acknowledged. The  
invisibility was an illusion, an optical illusion artificially generated by  
political forces in their own controlling interests. The illusion, as well  
as the long established power behind it, was preventing women from ever be-  
ing seen for what they really are and from ever being free.  

It has been only 44 years since the Women's Liberation movement mushroomed,  
and already the radical women who initiated the movement's theory, or-  
ganizing ideas, and slogans, have been buried from public consciousness and  
the liberals have taken over, claiming credit for the radical achievements.  
If this goes on much longer feminism will go under once again and we will  
lose almost all of what we have gained in the last years—both the radical  
consciousness and many of the practical reforms. It won't be long now until  
the liberals will be gone, too. —from "The Power of History"  

There is a tactic that has been wrecking havoc within the Women's Libera-  
tion Movement, a tactic we call psychological terrorism. It is the use of  
personal attack to prevent political issues from being clarified and acted  
on. We call it psychological, even though it is really political, because  
its character is to deny the political by expressing it perpetually in  
personal terms, often in monastic or psychological jargon, and because it  
generates the psychological effects of confusion, guilt, fear, and despair  
among women. It takes advantage of these feelings to achieve a certain aim:  
to curb the action and power of the radicals of the Women's Liberation Move-  

ment.  
—from "Psychological Terrorism"  

It is terrorism because it rests on intimidation rather than reason.  

The original formulation for separatist organizing was a political base  
for militant confrontation with male supremacy, not as a means of avoiding  
confrontation with men. But since to the lesbians and the socialists both,  
the purpose and need for feminism is primarily psychological and to bring  
women "a new strength," the purpose of separatism becomes to "identify our  
needs and strength" so that "women can come together on the basis of self-  
respect.” They use "sisterhood to challenge our own weakness" whereas radi-  
cal feminists said sisterhood was powerful. They go under the assumption  
that women until now have been weak psychologically—"losers," what radical  

feminists analyzed in political terms as being oppressed. —from "The Pseudo  
Left/Lesbian Alliance Against Feminism"  

Redstockings, the center substantiated every  
point in the article, but they could  
not agree with Random House over con-  
trol of any potential suit settlements.  
There are other examples which, with  
some exceptions, are related to Random  
House and the libel issue. One of the  
exceptions was Judy Grahn's decision  
to withdraw The Common Woman Poems.  
She objected to criticism of lesbian  
feminists in another article as inap-  
propriate in a mass-distributed book.  

"No, No!" said the Queen.  
"The contract first, then we'll  
decide what to print—if no one  
objects."  

“Stuff and nonsense!" said  
Alice loudly. "The idea of having  
the contract first!"  

Our first reaction to this story  
was that Redstockings, certainly,  
should have known better. They are  
not naive about the real interests of  
American corporations. But then  
neither are other feminist authors  
whose work has been accepted by cor-  
porate publishers: Adrienne Rich,  
Susan Griffin, Kate Millett and  
others have published without harm  
and apparently with the benefit of  
the mainstream's distribution system.  
Maybe the question is what kind of  
material is possible with corporations  
like Random House.  

While Rich's views on motherhood,  
for example, may be no less radical  
than Feminist Revolution, no one has  
stepped forward to sue Rich's pub-  
lisher.  

"And we were afraid we would be  
owing rather than have money." Long  
gone was the $12,000 cash advance  
Redstockings received when the contrac-  
t was signed. $2,000 of that went for  
legal fees. Then there were agent fees  
and the authors got a little. And  
Redstockings got a little. And then  
there were phone bills. . .Price said  
Random House offered the usual royalty  
agreement—7-1/2 percent; which means  
that nearly 93% will go to the usual  
sources—publisher, book wholesalers,  
distributors and retail outlets.  

Although breaking with Random House  
would have brought a financial loss,  
Price said that Redstockings prefers  
to stress the positive reason for  
sticking with the abridged edition:  

It was still important to get things  
out.  

In fact, there's a lot in the new  
edition that deserves to be read.  

The 200-page anthology contains  

dozens of articles dealing with women  
and work, working with the left, or-  
ganizing, the pro-woman approach to  
sex, resistances to women's conscious-  
ness, as well as the material dealing  
with "the liberal takeover of women's  
liberation."  

According to Price, Random House  
asserts that 10,000 of the 12,000  
paperback press run are now on the  
market, in outlets that normally don't  
carry a lot of feminist material. As  
an attractively packaged oversized  
“trade” publication, Random House will  
market it with full-line and college  
bookstores, as opposed to "mass line"  
markets (airports, drugstores, etc.).  
The new edition retails for $5.95.  

In contrast, the first edition,  
published by Redstockings in '75, sold  
for $3.00 and was nearly sold out  
within four or five months through  

the usual movement channels.  

Since Redstockings has yet to see  
any sales figures for the abridged  
edition, it's hard to say just who is  
getting to see it. Possibly the  
mail Redstockings now gets offers a  
clue, since response to the two edi-  
tions has been very different. In  
1975, Price said, Redstockings got  
very impassioned letters from women  
who talked about the difference the  
book made in their lives. “We could  
have made an anthology of those let-  
ters. Now we get letters from women  
asking us if we could help them with  
their college theses."  

Perhaps the Redstockings' experience  
should make us reexamine who buys  
books from independent presses and move-  
ment bookstores. Surely those who pub-  
lish independently are reaching more  
than the "already committed"—one of  
the most often cited drawbacks of  
sticking with our own presses. Surely  
those impassioned letters must have  

WHAT WOMEN MUST DO  
Two Versions  

LIBERALS  

get qualifications  

throw off sex roles  

go to work for self-fulfillment  
strive to advance yourself  

recognize you're your own worst enemy  

try to do better  

RADICALS  

fight to have qualifications recognized  

end quotas and barriers that enforce segregation  
go to work for independence and freedom  
organize to advance collectively  

recognize male supremacy and capitalism are  
your worst enemies  

try to have a revolution  

"The number one lesson we learned—  
from Feminist Revolution  

and this seems obvious—is that cen-  

sorship does exist," Redstockings mem-  

ber Colette Price told BMR in a recent  
phone interview. “We were very cautious  
before we signed the contract, but  
afterwards we figured we were safe."  

For the Redstockings, the experience  
has underscored the importance of the  
underground and feminist press. "Un-  
less we have a movement press, the  
establishment will not publish it  
(movement literature). Our number one  
need is an underground press as a  
power base. We feel more committed to  
one than ever before," Price said.  

One might question that commitment  
in view of the fact that Redstockings  
chose to go with Random House—even  
after it was clear that the edition  
would be “abridged.”  

Price said that finding another  
publisher or doing it themselves once  
again was never a serious possibility.  
“It would have been possible,” she  
said, “but with all the legal hassles  
and effort (over three years), we  
were anxious to go on to other things.  

In signing the contract with Random  
House, Redstockings won at least one  
provision giving them some protection  
against the effects of the censorship.  
Although the old edition can no longer  
be sold, Redstockings did retain the  
rights to reprint any and all of the  
articles separately in pamphlet form.  
"That's unusual," Price said, “but  
it's still not so great, since they  
(the articles) were designed to go  
together."  

In any case, women who wish to see  
the censored articles and receive a  
full press packet on the issue may  
contact the Redstockings. Copies of  
the original articles cost $1. Ar-  
ticles plus press packet are $2. Con-  
tact them at P. O. Box 413, New Paltz,  
NY 12561. You can also get a full  
response by Gloria Steinem to the  
CIA charges through Off Our Backs,  
1724 20th St., NW, Washington D.C.  
20009.