Big Mama Rag Vol. 3-A. No. 6

From All of Us to Both of You

Photos by Kate Sharp

For about a year now two incredibly dynamic and beautiful women
have blessed the life of Big Mama Rag and the lives of those closely
involved with her. Their names are Linda Fowler and Carol Lease and
for a year they have acted as the paper's coordinators. For the next few
months they will be physically separated from the rest of us working
here and we would like to take this opportunity to thank them for their
unceasing and dauntless energies and to wish them well. Never before
have we been able to do this in print because never before could we
have pulled it off without their prior knowledge.

Big Mama Rag has dedicated many lines of print to women highly
active in the movement. But usually those words describe the actions of
women in the spotlight and in the news. There are thousands of
women who constantly dedicate incredible energy and work hours to
feminism (as much as do the more well-known women) who never
seem to get properly thanked. So as we at Big Mama mourn our
temporary loss, we would like to make just such a declaration of thanks.

Carol and Linda have been an important part of our evolution, have

Snake and Squirrelly Hit the Road

been instrumental factors in what we have become and are still
becoming. In their coordinator positions they have taken on amounts of
responsibility and work that are overwhelming. They have consistently
and competently lent us inspiration, skills, direction, insight and
energy. And for that and much more, we love them.

These two women are presently on the road as wandering
correspondents and plan to remain so for about four months. They will
be covering the alternative conference to the International Women’s
Year Conference in Mexico where they plan to find out more about the
needs and concerns of women around the world. They also plan to
report on the goings-on at Sagaris, the Radical Feminist Conference in
Pennsylvania and the Joanne Little trial, not to mention any number of
other feminist conferences and projects throughout the North
American continent.

Big Mama Rag would like to thank these two well-beloved sisters for
their leonine energies and wishes them a fruitful trip and all the best
the Goddess might wish to lay on them. Hurry home to Big Mama as
soon as you can!