TRUGGLE

Tare Strawn

Lane Stram is a white, working-class Lesbian who used to work in the feminist community in Denver (BMR) and has since moved to San Francisco. She is in the Solidarity Committee for the African National Prison Organization. The African Peoples Socialist Party and the African Peoples Solidarity Committee have been recent political influences. 

MOVING FORWARD

During my feminist political involvement, I became frustrated by a sense of vagueness and disconnectedness from an overall struggle that would attain our ultimate goals. There was no real understanding of what those goals are nor who we are fighting. As feminists, we do not have a clear picture of the strategy for getting from here to there. Our work in running bookstores, women's centers, rape crisis lines, and health clinics is explained strategically as creating "women's space," taking control of institutions that affect us by creating new "alternative" services, building and gathering women's strength and unity. Certainly, these pursuits are necessary for our survival, and the building of strength and unity as women is a prerequisite to radical action.

In the absence of long-term strategical analysis, however, many feminist projects have stagnated, all energies directed to the work of maintaining petty-bourgeois businesses, endless discussion of the hows and whys of personal trashing and what is politically correct sexual expression, etc., etc. All in all, we have failed to keep in sight the objectives of overturning the present social order. Feminist communities have become places for a very few women, mostly white lesbians, to lead a safe and comfortable social life.

POLITICAL DEVELOPMENT

Many young women and women new to the community did not experience the political development of the 60s and early 70s or the subsequent move for women's autonomy and the rush of new political ideas that flowered within that.

Some women who call themselves feminists now may have been in CR groups and developed politics from the subjective "personal is political" perspective that feminism has developed. Many women's political development has brought them only as far as the feminist community in the first place. Some may have read the standard anthologies of Radical Feminism or read Emma Goldman's autobiographies and become "anarcha-feminists." That is what I did. It is a start, but not enough. There is little encouragement or sense of necessity in the community to explore the vast reservoir of revolutionary thought of other peoples or to understand the historical context of political development.

HOW TO GET THERE

Out of context from the rest of the world, the strategical analysis coming from the radical feminist communities in the past few years has been more creative than pragmatic, if not naive. Some proposals have been to amass large amounts of monetary resources from the masses of women. This would enable those taking responsibility for the money to compete with and theoretically buy out the male capitalist class, replacing it with a matriarchal state. This idea assumes that women have masses of extra capital that they do not need for day-to-day survival. The criticisms of this idea from the feminist community are to the questions of accountability and process rather than to the fundamental issue that it does not challenge the economic order of capitalism and that it assumes either that women would be more humane capitalists or that matriarchy presupposes capitalism. It also points to a glaring lack of understanding of the gigantic scope of monopoly capitalism and worldwide imperialism.

Other ideas range from building alternative systems until they serve all women, who it is assumed will all become lesbians, to form a virtual boycott of 

BMR: WHERE WE'RE AT

These last few months the BMR collective has undergone several changes. Lynn and Corrinne regretfully had to leave the collective. They both work and live in Boulder, and the commute became too much of an energy drain, especially with winter coming on. We all miss them very much.

But starting this month, a wonderful new woman has joined, Lisa Miehle. She has no idea how happy we are she joined! Also, another woman is thinking about joining the collective, Maggie. (Yea, Maggie. See you Thursday.) This leaves the collective with 5 members: Lisa, Connie, Judy, Sue, and Susanna. (Hang in there, Susanna!) All compulsive women are welcome to try working on Big Mama Rag for a month to see how you like it. Call the office, Thursdays after 7 PM.

If you want to meet us, BMR is having a benefit at the Denver Folklore Center, December 17th, Sunday at 8 PM. There will also be a movie, "Love It Like A Fool" about Malvina Reynolds. Come! The movie is excellent and admission is only $2. The Denver Folklore Center is located at 608 E. 17th Ave.

We have a new policy for poetry submissions. This is definitely our final current policy. Poetry will only be accepted for theme issues. The poems must deal with that theme. Right now we would like poems about Aging, Work, Health, and Feremothers. Everyone who sent us poems, we will be corresponding with you soon. The deadline for the Aging Issue is January 18th.

As you probably noticed, we did not have an issue for the month of November. We simply didn't have any money. This month things are looking better, and we don't anticipate any financial problems for at least a couple of months. We are still accepting donations, however. Also, the November issue's theme was to be aging; we have instead decided to have the February issue's theme be aging.

The deadlines for the next issues are: December 11th and January 18th.

One of the greatest problems BMR has been having is that women promise articles for the paper and then never come through. An extreme example was the Women and Violence issue. Five major articles for that issue were promised, and after the copy deadline was put back a week, still only one article was submitted. Another example is when women, who are going to cultural events, promise to cover them and do not. We have been trying to think up ways to encourage women to feel accountable to the paper for these commitments. One idea has been to leave blank spaces in the paper with the name of the article at the top that did not come in. We desperately need for women outside the collective to write for BMR and for the articles to be in by the copy deadline.

Connie Perenyi is organizing a Women in the Arts Benefit to be held in February. Any women interested should call her here at the office or drop her a postcard c/o BMR, 1724 Gaylord St.

Big Mama Rag Vol. 6, No. 10

The patriarchal and capitalist society. The back to the land and spiritually based move has attracted many women, presumably to form a pre-industrial agricultural society. Organizations such as the National Organization for Women hope that the placement of women into positions traditionally held by men will change society through the moral influence of women in power and attitudinal shifts. Some leading feminist theorists are holding out for a theory that would incorporate all of the material and spiritual aspects of the American women's movement and resolve the class and race contradictions through women. Most women in the world fight male supremacy along with men in the context of their struggle for national liberation and socialism. Since these feminists are out of touch with women's struggles in the rest of the world, it is hard to imagine how such an all-encompassing theory could be integrated in practice even if it was possible in theory.

All of these offer solutions for apparent problems of modern society. But, they fail to delve into the integration of these problems as a whole, and the purposes they serve to uphold the existing order. To the question of whose benefit they serve, it is said that since men have developed this stage of history, it is obviously to their benefit. The obvious lack of this analysis is pointed up by the fact that it appeals to young, middle-class, white women whose only experience of oppression has a male face.

PROBLEMS A

The feminist movement has recognized the absence of working-class women and women of color in our ranks. We have realized that this indicates that something is wrong and have approached the problem with further discussion of "class and race." Feminists have based their politics on "our" experience, a new and important concept rising in contrast to abstract, ideological, book-oriented, "line struggle" that many women experienced in the left. Relating political understanding to a base in our own experience anchors it to a "material" level of reality rather than to "metaphysical" and "esoteric" ideology. The mistake made, however, is to make generalizations of all women based on "our" subjective experience, especially when "our" is young, white, and middle-class. Another critical error made by the left and women's movement alike has been to assume that what we have to say is most important and that third-world people should hear us and join our perspective of the fight. When women felt that the left was co-opting their struggle into one based solely on class contradictions, we moved away from the left to form the autonomous women's movement. Since that time, feminists in this country have moved further from socialism. Some reasons have been the opportunistic and unprincipled practice of some leftist segments. Men are also criticized for not applying what they said to their relative position and for not putting their theories into practice in how they relate to women. It is also obvious that the vast overwhelming needs of women are not being addressed in the context of socialist ideology. These important criticisms led to a rejection of socialist theory itself based on the fact that it was developed and led by men.

MOVING FORWARD

Many women like myself have begun learning about the ideas that socialism is based on and have found them an important factor in our understanding of the position of women. Since the International Tribunal in Mexico City a few years ago, we in the U.S. have begun to recognize the leadership that women have in many of the struggles for national independence and socialism for their countries. I think we have something to learn from the women fighting in the third world. I think it is very important for feminists to take on the responsibility of understanding the fights that other people in the world are waging. Maybe they will help us to develop our understanding of who the enemy is, how we overthrow him, and what we want in the end. Yes, the left in the U.S. has historically, and continues to, liquidate the vital issues of women's oppression and lacks a conclusive understanding of how women fit into the picture. But with an understanding of what is going on outside of our safe feminist communities, we will be better equipped to develop an analysis of the oppression of women so that our role will not be liquidated in the future. We must also learn to recognize our mistakes as white feminists. We have failed in our understanding and support of other peoples fighting our common enemy. As long as women are oppressed in any form of society, Socialist or Imperialist, there will be the necessity of an autonomous women's movement. But we can no longer afford to see the world from a subjective stance outside and unaffected by the fights for national liberation and socialism. If we do, we will be left behind; we will be dragging progress back rather than pushing it forward.

The issues affecting us can be taken up in the context of the worldwide fight against imperialism, both within the autonomous women's movement and by the many women (lesbians included) now working in the anti-imperialist left.

RECOMMENDED READING:
Women's Liberation and Imperialism
Prairie Fire Organizing Committee
P.O. Box 40614, Station C
San Francisco, CA 94110

Marx for Beginners

50¢ plus postage

by Ruis $2.95
Dialectical and Historical Materialism
Stalin 40¢