Rock -on Gray Panthers ?

We challenge all forms of ageism + discrimination based on age.

We challenge compulsory retirement based on chronological age.

We seek the right to participate in determining policy and program decisions in the institutions that serve us.

We are a coalition of all ages, but especially the old and the young, who live outside the mainstream of society deprived of power and influence.

We seek improved public (Social Security) and private pension programs as well as better public and private health care, housing, and transportation, especially as these affect older people.

We are critical of the injustices, misplaced priorities, and discrimination based on race, sex, and age which exist in our society. We call for a reordering of national priorities which now favor military expenditures instead of supporting domestic needs, especially affecting older people.

We believe in direct action on behalf of these principles including researching, lobbying, and publicizing these issues, testifying at public hearings, and participating in public demonstrations.

These are the principles of the Denver Gray Panthers, part of a nationwide network of individuals and groups drawn together by deeply felt common concerns for human liberation and social change.

The Gray Panthers were born about four years ago in Philadelphia by a coalition of retired persons and students. Among the first issues dealt with were the war in Vietnam and increases in social security. Retired people had the time and the freedom to act without fear of losing their jobs. Such issues as a national health plan, public transportation for reduced fares, housing, job discrimination, court reform, corporate responsibility, and the passage of the Equal Rights Amendment have been part of the focus of the Gray Panthers in recent years.

The Denver chapter of the Gray Panthers was organized in April of this year and has been successful in having walklight signals on Colfax and other streets lengthened so that all people are able to cross the busy streets safely. The Traffic Engineering department has been “very responsive” to this problem according to Dortha Howe, a member of the Panthers.

Other activities of the Denver group are issue forums for state legislative candidates which were held in August in conjunction with Common Cause. More are scheduled for October and specific information can be obtained by calling Common Cause at 534-8259.

Consciousness raising groups are being started that will be open to all - young and old, men and women. Anyone interested can call Ms. Howe at 831-7707, afternoons.

A shared living house for older people has been established in Lakewood at a cost of about $150 a month. Contact Fran Yehle at 237-0839 or Ann Voiland at 237-2495 for more information.

Action around the issue of nursing homes will be discussed at the next meeting of the Gray Panthers which will be held at Sunset Park at 1865 Larimer, on September 9 at 1:30 pm.