EDITORIALS —

__Denver Doing Enough? |

From Page 10

A policeman at one of the department's storefronts said that the two
most disgusting crimes to an officer are child molestation and
rape. In both “helpless” people are concerned. It is easy for them
to see the effect of assault on a child, but for a woman to be raped
is something a woman is expected to bear.

If the Denver Police Department would like to improve its image
with the women’s community in Denver they will have to become
aware of their own sexist attitudes towards women. There is a hell
of a difference between what the police say it believes and what it
actually does. There have been reports from rape victims that a
married detective on the Sex Detail has visited them at their
homes on unofficial business - showing up at their front doors
complete with a bottle of wine to discuss some of the heavier
aspects of rape.

If the detail needs some consciousness-raising I suggest that
they attend some groups being organized by this paper, and not
invite themselves to the homes of rape victims.

Women do not need the “protection” of men whether through
law enforcement agencies (defenders of the morals of “good”
women) or through scare tactics for women to stay off the streets
at night or to avoid wearing attractive clothes.

We are not second-class citizens. We will not be clinging,
cringing, terrified females. We will not be degraded because we
are women. We will be free. We are not the property of men that
needs to be protected and revenged. As long as women are treated
as property in this society its institutions will perpetuate this
attitude.

The Coalition
The Coalition on Sexual Assault is rapidly dissipating into a
do-nothing, say-nothing group due to an exodus (purge?) of
women who want to take more radical steps towards dealing with
rape.

It seems that many in the coalition are worried about its
credibility (read: image) in the Denver professional community of
law enforcement and treatment, etc. There are endless ways to
help people change their attitudes towards rape, but the coalition
is working on just a very few.

The reason for a Coalition, it seems, is to provide a point for
different energies, perspectives, ideas to work together for a
common purpose. It is unfair and typically “male” to create a
structure that allows a few at the top to make decisions affecting
the whole “for the good of the company.”

The coalition does not need to support men to get things done.
More could be accomplished if the Coalition would forget about
working in the system exclusively, and think about women, their
positions in this society, and the part rape plays in that
subjugation.

The D.A.

The District Attorney's booklet on rape is slick and reminds all
of its readers that “the best way to protect your body is by using
your head.” What it really says is the best way to remain “unde-
filed” is to stay home behind locked doors, and keep your mind
behind locked doors. Yet statistics indicate there is a 50-50
chance that if you are attacked it will be in your home behind your
locked doors.

Rape isn’t a crime of passion. It is a crime of hate and political
terrorism against women. It is the ultimate manifestation of the
colonization of men over women. Rape is not the isolated behavior
of a few sick men. Psychological profiles indicate that the typical
rapist is the boy next door. Rape will exist until our bodies are
truly our own, until men cannot claim to own women.

Lesbian Baiting!

From Page 10

exceeded 10% coverage of the subject. (The actual percentage of
that issue touching on the topic of Lesbianism was only 28%!)
Frankly, this reminds us of labor union history during which any
“communist” content in a paper immediately labelled the paper an
organ of the “international communist conspiracy,” and subjected
it to emotional red-baiting. Radicals, especially, should know
better than to attempt “Lesbian-baiting” in this community.

Does BMR relate to working class women and their concerns?
We have considered this question ourselves. The last issue of
BMR contained two lead stories: “Chicanas Fight Welfare
Injustices,” “Minority Task Force on Prisons,” as well as a
reporting of the conference of Coalition of Labor Union Women,
and an editorial on the Talmadge Amendment (regarding welfare).
The July issue also contained poetry, TV reviews, theory, etc.,
which are of interest to any women. We think it is patronizing to
assume that working class women aren’t interested in anything
but “bread and butter” issues.

Does the Lesbian content of BMR alienate working class
women? It may alienate some. It may attract others. The point is
that sexism is as rampant in the working class as it is in the ruling
class, and that no Feminist paper will ignore or cater to people’s
prejudice against Lesbians, in order to attract more readership.
We have said goodbye to the dishonesty of hiding our personal
and political lives to “organize the people.” We want a newspaper
which will attract a large number of women because it has
something to offer them.

People read the daily papers because those papers offer
information and services, even though readers may not agree with
the paper's editorial policy. It is the nature of editorials to be
controversial, but we do not insist that our readers’ politics align
with ours. We will continue to express our opinions and analysis in
the paper without compromise.

We assume that our readership has the intelligence and
open-mindedness to distinguish opinions from reporting, and we
are working towards making that distinction clearer. We will
continue to report and comment on topics concerning women —
health, education, sexuality, children, self-defense, Lesbianism,
and any other subject that women in this community care about.

Enough said. We take our work seriously. Let's get on with it.

The BMR Collective
1 Common Woman, poems by Judy Grahn.
2 Lesbian Woman, Del Martin and Phyllis Lyon, Bantam Books, New York, 1972, p.1.

:
op tae

~ pane? ore a

Le

LAVENDER WOMAN

OUR LESBIAN-FEMINIST NEWSPAPER.

* 1 year $4.00

© institutions $8.00

Single issue 65¢

° Free to sisters in prison

or mental hospitals.
send to: LAVENDER WOMAN

P.O. BOX 60206
Chicago, IL 60660

RIP BOOKSTORE
737 E. 17th Ave.
LARGE WE ASOREC NS SECTION
SOM GAY LIBERATION,

Cua re SIETHAM, MARISA,
ane AMARCHISO1, O.S. UOPERIALIS P4,

ALL BOOKS 20% OFF AT
ALL TUES

jaatey 42-6
- Saturday (2°9

lee ae

19

B.S. Sugar

From Page 5

change... that's what we try to
do and that's the thing we
think about... but right now,
most of the things we do are,
as you put it, designed not to
offend because when you
offend somebody, you've lost
them right there, we feel, and
if you don’t offend them, then
you have a chance to get in
there and tell them your side
of the story.

BMR: What is your ultimate
goal for yourselves or your
music? What would you like to
see happen?

SYLVIA: I personally would
like to see the stuff that we
write be out front.

SHARON: That is our ulti-
mate thing... to get our own
music across to people with a
message... you were talking
about the Feminist thing and I
want to make one thing
perfectly clear. What I want to
do is to make it as a woman
and to be an example for other
women to be able to do the
same thing I did - without
having to sell themselves as a
woman... because like they
(Sylvia and Bev) said, it was
an advantage at one time...
you know, I was there up front
playing the tambourine, smil-
ing at people and singing one
Se I wasn't conscious of
i a on. Anyway...
I would like to be an example for
women to be proud of, to feel
good about... to raise up their
heads and see that it can be
done, but in a way that you
don't have to sell yourself as a
woman.

Because the majority of the
music B.S. Sugar & Co. has
written is not yet legally
protected, it is not being
performed as part of their act.
One song, Leave My Children
Alone, makes a strong state-
ment, calling for individual
freedom from cultural stereo-
types:

“Leave my children alone.
Let 'em grow now.

Leave my children alone.
Don't try to change them into
your own ways,

Leave my children alone.

The content of this interview
has been necessarily abridged
because of space limitations.
Nothing, however, has been
taken out of context.

B.S. Sugar & Co. is appearing
through Aug. 31st at Christo-
pher’s in the Capital Plaza Inn,
Denver.

Alicia’s

Mexican Restaurant

278 Downing 777-9904
“Good Home Made Food”