‘Using The Chosen Weapons

Big Mama Rag Vol.7 No.10.

Lucia Valeska On Building Gay Power

(Lucia Valeska is the recently appointed Co-Executive Director of the National
Gay Task Force, filling the position vacated by Jean O'Leary. She is a
founding member of the National Lesbian Feminist Organization in New Mexico
and founded the Women's Studies department at the University of New Mexico.

She has been a Lesbian activist for nearly a decade.)

The following address was delivered by Lucia Valeska before 500 lesbians
as the keynote speech to kick-off the Lesbians Colorado Conference.

Transcribed and edited by Vicki Piotter

Introductions and backgrounds; I always get very nervous when people ask me
my background. Charlie Brydon, the male co-executive director of the National
Gay Task Force, and I met with Sarah Weddington in the White House last week.
I never expected one year ago that I would be sitting and chatting with Sarah
Weddington in the White House. She's a very gracious, Southern lady. She calls
herself a lady, so I guess I can too. But, speaking of background, her first
question to me was, “And what is your background, dear?" You know how you hate
that question-- a queer's tried and convicted before you open your queer mouth.
I had an overwhelming sensation to say to her, "Oh, I've just been hanging out
with a bunch of dykes on Old Lady's farm in New Mexico." I think that
she wanted to hear I had just graduated from Harvard Business School. But any-
way, the truth of the matter is the reason I've been foisted into the position
of co-executive director of the National Gay Task Force is because of those
bunches of lesbians in various urban enclaves and rural enclaves across this
country which have been welling up in the last ten years. I hold this job be-
cause of that movement.

The reason I'm short is that Jean O'Leary wouldn't let anyone taller than
her get in there (the vacated position); they couldn't fill the position till
they found someone short enough. Jean O'Leary is a wonderful person, and on
that note--

Good morning, lesbians; such a nice word, though-- lesbians. It kind of
rolls around in your mouth and takes its time coming out-- leesssbbiannns.

Now I could say, "Good morning, feminists"-- it's more military. It's a
little chilly to get called a feminist first thing in the morning, but it's
safe in 1979. At least I think it's safe. There may be one of us out there
who's a little worried. But the truth of the matter is that in 1979 when-
ever you get a group of lesbians together, you have a group of feminists to-
gether. There isn't a woman here who believes that men should be paid more for
their work than women-- that's a feminist cause. There's not a woman here who
thinks that women aren't fit to hold political office-- that's a feminist
cause. There's not a woman here who thinks it's healthy for our children to
have traditional sex roles shoved down their throats by the educational sys-
tem, the media, the arts, religion-- that, too, is feminism. Surely, there isn't

the Colorado Lesbian Conference

Susan Goding

675 lesbians attended the first Col-
orado conference for lesbians. Lesbi-
ans Colorado- Our First Gathering was
held at the Landmark Inn in Glendale
September 28th thru the 30th.

The planning committee of Ann Dan-
jel, Linda Fowler, Jane Hoback, Carol
Lease, Deirdre Reilly and Wood spent
almost a year making preparations for
the conference. They were assisted by
over 30 other women in organizing
workshops, entertainment, childcare,
publicity and the many other tasks of
the conference.

The goals of the conference were to
identify who we are, where we live,
what we do, what interests, concerns
and needs we have as Colorado lesbians
and to create long lasting communica-
tion links, or networks around similar
interests and needs. Another goal of
the conference was to affirm our les-
bian identities through our culture
and associations with each other and
to increase our visibility as a group
in society.

Lucia Valeska, the Co-Executive Dir-
ector of the National Gay Task Force,
delivered the keynote speech Saturday
morning to resounding applause before
the group broke up to attend workshops
(See this page for Valeska's address.)

There were almost 60 workshops cover-
ing a wide range of topics from body
awareness, how to get pregnant by al-
ternative methods, to battering within
lesbian relationships. The workshops
were to provide forums for lesbians of
similar interests to meet and form
long lasting networks.

Fine entertainment was provided all
three days of the conference. Friday
night Chocolate Waters, Blaze O'Brien
and Karen Rice King gave an evening of
poetry, comedy and song. Saturday
night Gwen Avery sang following Pan-
doura, Cassandra, Maree, Tina and
Evelyn who read "Movement in Black,"
a poem by Pat Parker. Pandoura also
read some of her own poetry from her
book, “Deal With It.“ The evening end-
ed with dancing with Robby as disc
jockey. Sunday, as a finale to the
weekend, the women from the Colorado
Springs Women's Health Service Clinic
performed “War Dance."

The conference was enjoyed by almost
every woman who attended. However, the
enjoyment of the conference was cloud-
ed for many. The small workshop format
of the conference, while perhaps pro-
viding an effective means for women
of similar interests to meet, also
facilitated women avoiding broader
issues in the workshops.

A workshop was given on racism with-
in the lesbian community; about 27
women attended. From the estimated
650 white women at the conference, 18
attended the racism workshop.

During the conference wrap-up where
women from the workshop groups gave
reports about what happened in their
group, the women from the racism work-
shop were met with hostility and de-
fensiveness from many white women in
the audience. Their objections were
that while someone was provided to
sign for the deaf, no translator was
provided for Spanish speaking women,
the publicity leaflets were not print-
ed in Spanish, the location of the
conference was oppressive, the hotel
setting was alienating to many Third
World women, the absence of a caucus
room for women of color, and that
white women facilitated the workshop
on racism.

At the Saturday entertainment, an
evening of black entertainment per-
formed for an almost all-white audi-
ence, Pandoura confronted the audience
on its absence from the racism work-
shop.

Racism within the lesbian community
is just one issue that all lesbians
must deal with and change. The work-
shop format hindered any growth that
might have happened at the conference.
What is not needed is a "network" of
women to come out of the racism work-
shop to deal with racism in the les-
bian community. The problem was not
that women didn't attend the racism
workshop, but that ending racism in
the lesbian community was not a goal
of the conference; that recognizing
class differences and dealing with
those differences was not a goal; that
ending looksism, ageism, and role-play-
ing were not goals.

There was a feeling, spoken and un-
spoken, that the issue of politics
would be divisive. It was this failure
to deal with political issues (racism,
classism, ageism) that left the lesbi-
ans affected directly by those issues
feeling alienated.

As long as the discussion of any
oppression lesbians suffer is invali-
dated (in the name of lesbian unity
or any other) there will never be a
lesbian conference or gathering that
will bring us all together; will the
conference goals to identify all our
needs and to affirm each of our les-
bian identities ever be reached?

a woman here today who feels her life begins and ends with her personal, int-
imate obligation to a man-- and even that is merely a feminist issue.

So the next question is, "So what?" What more is there to being a lesbian
than feminism? What additional reason for gathering ourselves in a circle to
contemplate our destinies? What woman-loving thing about us is not so safe in
1979? Now I would never belittle the issues of feminism-- they are near and
dear to us. They will reach us and mark our collective fate in places no oth-
ers can reach.

Lesbians have made an immense contribution to the feminist movement. The
leaders of every feminist organization and the membership of every feminist
organization has seen the participation of lesbians from the onset. If you are
a stranger traveling across the country and you want to find the lesbians,
where do you go? You go to the women's center, the women's bookstore, the
women's health care center. Probably no other discriminated against minority
has to make contact with their own in the midst of rape crisis-- we are staf-
fing the rape crisis centers, too. Recently in an interview, a straight man
asked me why there weren't lesbians hanging out in Central Park in New York
like the guys do. And I told him, “Brother, it's because they're all down at
the rape crisis center." Hanging out in Central Park, you'll end up at the
rape crisis center anyway.

So, where there is feminism, there are also always lesbians. Even though
Charlotte Bunch, and others, said years and years ago that lesbianism is
a feminist issue. And though she said it again at IWY (International Women's
Year Conference in Houston) when speaking on behalf of the sexual preference
resolution, which was passed, I don't think many heard her. What they bought
basically was Betty Friedan's analysis of why the IWY Conference should pass
the sexual preference resolution-- it boils down to “lesbianism has been the
most divisive issue in the feminist movement; we should pass the resolution
because they won't go away. And they're not like the majority of women; they
might be entitled to jobs, housing, their children, and besides that, they
just won't go away." She was not about to afford us the truth-- she was not
about to count up the number of woman-hours alone, provided the feminist move-
ment, free of charge, by the lesbian community. But it's no wonder, because
in those days we had barely even begun to count ourselves. There is a change
in this room-- we are starting to count ourselves. Back in those days we had
barely begun, except for a handful of wild-eyed, braless, hairy-legged, man-
hating revolutionary dykes, whose imaginations were a bit bigger than some of
ours because they actually believed that male supremacy was about to breathe
its last gasp. And why not, it had in their lives-- others were bound to catch
on. It was only a matter of time. Maybe it is. What do you think?

This conference, statewide, is the product of that insurgence; it provided
the basis for the formation of a new coalition of women. The question now is
what to do now that we are here. Networking is a beginning. Until we are able
to form functioning organizations, with funded programs that will outlive the
individuals who come and go, we will be subject to the instant rise and in-
stant fall of rapid organizational turnover which has besieged the lesbian fem-
inist movement from the beginning. That's too much a waste of time and energy.
We can't afford it anymore. If we continue as we have, and I'm not saying the
last ten years were a mistake-- they were absolutely necessary-- and I'm not
saying that lesbians should forget about the lesbian feminist movement, and
I'm not saying we should go running back totally into the feminist movement
or totally into the gay movement-- we need, we have, a separate role to play,
but we have to start playing it differently, because if we don't defect the
powers that be, we won't be safe.

The politicization of homosexuality has resulted in a much greater visibil-
ity for us across the country-- the closet doors have been opened. We are vis-
ible to the naked eye of the non-gay world, but gay people pay a price for
their visibility. (Editor's note: here Valeska went into detail about the mur-
der of gay supervisor Harvey Milk in San Francisco and the harassment and in-
terrogation of Canadian lesbians, by US border guards, on their way to the Mich-
igan Women's Music Festival.) Before you exterminate a people, you must degrade
them, break their wills, and create hopeless resignation. As we gather in a
circle to create space, to be ourselves, the majority is likely to sense the
retaliation in that response; and that threat that we present for them will
be real because every civil rights movement that works diminishes the majority,
if only by making its values seem relative. Gayness, when freely expressed,
makes heterosexuality seem optional. It relegates sexual preference to the
arena of choice.

Part of the fight is to understand the peculiar nature of gay oppression. We
must have a sense of our history to make sense of our destiny. There was no
such thing as a gay organization in this country until the early fifties. Un-
til the Kinsey reports, lesbians and gay men had no idea as to their numbers,
of how many people we are. Now we know-- we're ten percent of the population;
we're 20 million people strong. We have incredible potential clout. We are not
wielding that power yet. But visibility for us has been absolutely essential.

Last weekend I attended the huge, annual, gala extravaganza put on by the
Black Congressional Caucus in Washington. There are only 17 black members of
Congress in this country, which is outrageous, but they have a tremendous sup-
port from the black business community and black civil rights leaders, so it
is an immense event. The co-chairs of the National Gay Task Force were there.
I must say I would have wished I was black because this annual convention is
put on by black people, there are mostly black people there-- I think I could
count the number of white people on one hand, and besides that, when you are
passing out gay literature, it makes you really uncomfortable. But, anyway, I
was told I had to wear a dress to the Black Congressional Caucus. I said, ‘I
don't have a dress,' so Carolyn Handy, a black woman on the Task Force Board
said, 'I'll get you a dress.' Carolyn gave me a black dress and I wore black
stockings and black shoes and I still didn't pass very well. (If you have not
put on a dress in years, I can't tell you what a culture shock it is.) Then
Carolyn and I went out to find another lesbian in the midst of 6,000 people,
because as far as we knew, there were just two of us. Suddenly you realize the
tenacity of roles within our own community. As long as invisibility is requis-
ite to our survival, the butch dyke thrives, or some modern, looser rendition,
because that’s how we find ourselves. That's how we find ourselves-- because
of those women who dare to say to the world, 'I am different.’ We did find
one woman who from the waist up looked like a dyke, so we sat and argued about
it, but I said, 'No, her fingernails are too long.'

It is utter madness when Charlie and I go to Washington where meetings are
set up, but we did manage to hit four or five places between the two of us
connected to the White House and then we ended up at the Black Congressional
Caucus, and who should Carolyn and I run into but Sarah Weddington. She was
one of the other white people there. I think she was glad to see me; she was
much friendlier that night. So I said to her, ‘We're everywhere.

With straight women we fight for the tools for survival as females. With gay
men we fight for the tools for survival as women who love women. If we fail on
either front, we fail on both. Fate destines a unique role for the lesbian
movement-- if we do not become the bridge between these movements we will fail
altogether. The strength of this particular coalition between the feminist
movement and the gay movement is incredible. Women make up 50%; gay people
make up 10%. Together our constituents add up to 60% of the population. We
have a great deal of power we have yet to wield.

MORE ON PAGE 25