IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Otherwise Called Psychological Terrorism

Behavior Modification in Prison

July 1979 witnessed the end of long litigation proceedings demanding reparations for damages for cruel and unusual punishment to ten women illegally transferred to Matteawan State Hospital for the Criminally Insane from Bedford Hills Correctional Facility, in July 1976.

For three years, the men battled in court and suffered recrimination by prison officials, but remained strong throughout, in an effort, not merely to get some financial retribution -- after all no amount of money can make up for one single day in prison -- but also to establish firm legal precedent which would prohibit the New York Correctional Department from putting women prisoners in a state psychiatric institution and subjecting them to behavior modification solely because they refuse to submit to the prison system and stand firm and outspoken in demanding their rights and those of their other incarcerated sisters.

Although only seven women were involved in the class action suit, originally there were ten women who ended up at Matteawan. They were forcibly taken there after a series of episodes culminating in a suicide attempt and a fire which was purposely left unattended, almost causing the death of one woman.

Matteawan is located in Fishkill, a long costly 3 hour drive from New York City where all the women's families, friends and supporters were located. Bedford itself is isolated in the midst of Westchester County, but it is at least reachable in a reasonable amount of time and money.

Compared to Bedford, Matteawan is a medieval dungeon, the cells bare, small and filthy.

Furthermore, it is an all-male facility, run by male guards, for men considered "criminally insane". The women's cells were at all times visible to the men who could watch the women's every move, including using the toilet.

Immediately upon their arrival, the women were subjected to forced consultation with a psychologist, and to forced "medication", although there had been no hearings determining that they were "mentally disturbed". Their mail was interrupted and withheld. They were refused the right to the legal library. No programs were available to them.

It all took place in the Special Housing Unit of Bedford Hills, the euphemistic word for segregation. The women had been there from two months to a year. Sheila Liles was in the process of establishing a “record” for Bedford of 13 months in isolation.

The reason? The administration called them "dangerous", "violent", "troublemakers", and "unrehabilitable". In truth, they were women with strong spirits whom the prison could not break and mold as they pleased. They had a political awareness which led them to constantly protest conditions at Bedford and encourage other women to do the same.

When Bedford had exhausted all their means of getting these women to "adjust", they sought the help of the Corrections Dept. in Albany, who authorized them to label them "mentally disturbed" and transfer them to Matteawan, there to be subjected to a behavior modification program.

In the early sixties, at a seminar of prison wardens and psychologists, Dr. Edgar H. Schein, associate professor of psychology at MIT, described the process as follows: "In order to produce marked change of behavior and/or attitude, it is necessary to weaken, undermine, or remove the supports to the old attitudes...by removing the individual physically and preventing any communication with those whom he cares about...If you want to produce behavior inconsistent with the person's standards of conduct, first disorganize the group which supports these standards of conduct, then undermine his other emotional supports, then put him into a new and ambiguous situation for which the standards are unclear, and then put pressure on him..." (J. Mitford, Kind and Usual Punishment).

Next came the pressure, in the form of STEADY -- Steps Towards a eventual Acceptance of a Disciplined You.

The whole idea of behavior modification is based on reward and punishment. Prisoners earn privileges for good behavior, but they earn them the hard way, through beatings, sensory deprivation (isolation), the use of drugs -- often with irrevocable side effects -- and individualized psychiatric treatment aimed at breaking one's will.

James McConnell, professor of psychology at Michigan University, in an article in Psychology Today titled "Criminals Can Be Brainwashed -- Now", said, "I believe the day has come when we can combine sensory deprivation with drugs, hypnosis, and astute manipulation of reward and punishment to gain almost absolute control over an individual's behavior...After all you have no say over what kind of personality you acquired and there is no reason to believe that you should have the right to refuse to acquire a new one if the old one is anti-social".

This is how STEADY was supposed to work: The stated objective was to "develop a ‘step program’ of two months time which will assist these women in modifying their observable behavior to acceptable standards for general population".

Phase I: to be spent in strict segregation, with individual counseling as needed.

Phase II: two weeks duration. During this time, a woman may earn daily one extra hour out of her cell depending on security's rating of her behavior. Attendance at daily community meetings with all involved staff and inmates begins as soon as she has earned an extra free hour. (The daily community meetings were more or less group therapy sessions). Phase III: 3 weeks duration. Once the woman has earned her 14 hours daily out of her cell, she will begin to earn privileges and work out a fuller program in terms of education, etc. Phase IV: 2 weeks, gradual return to population. However, special permission is necessary from Albany. Phase V: Return to population.

The staff for this program was to include a psychologist, whose responsibilities, however, should not use more than 1/5 of his/her time, and security personnel, "the most important member of the team".

However, the women had been given no judicial commitment hearings. They had been given no advance notice of the transfer, and they were not permitted to notify their families or attorneys of the transfer.

As administered on Ward 19 of Matteawan, STEADY was solely a means of effecting custody and control. Whether the woman earned good time was determined by the custodial staff, not a psychologist. No woman ever made it even to Phase III.

The women were searched daily. They were subjected to searches of their bodies including internal ones, sometimes conducted by male guards. Male guards often entered the women's housing area at night unannounced, and shined lights into the women's cells to take the count.

Male “patients” routinely entered or passed through the female housing area unannounced and unescorted, often when women were undressing.

Mail and visits were often denied as punishment.

Muslim women were not permitted to attend their religious services.

No woman was allowed to leave Ward 19 for any reason, not even for educational programs as required by state law.

As punishment, the women were often confined in cells other than their regular cells. These had even less amenities than the regular cells, and these varied at the whim and caprice of the custodial staff. Women were not allowed their own clothes, and frequently denied any reading material.

One woman, Carolyn Smithers, was once removed from her cell, taken to the strip room and beaten severely.

Another woman, Sheila Liles, refused her medication and was thrown into the strip cell, and was forcibly injected with Prolixin. A sign was hung outside her door reading, "This nigger is crazy again".

The women were often denied medical attention. Carolyn Smithers, an epileptic, had her Dilantin (an anti-convulsant) reduced so drastically that she suffered repeated attacks.

In November 1976, due to a class action suit and public pressure, the women were returned to Bedford. The judge forbade the Corrections Dept. to ever transfer any woman to Matteawan again. The women were awarded $45,009 in damages, the first settlement of its kind.

When Matteawan became off limits to women from Bedford Hills, Bedford Hills initiated a new program at its facility, the Satellite Program. Behind locked steel doors, out of reach, hearing and sight from the general population, the administration placed women they label "mentally disturbed", "dangerous", etc. Very little is known about this program at the moment.

Other facilities have similar situations. At Framingham, MA, the proposed unit for “violent women" was stopped late last year, after strong protest. So now the authorities are switching tactics and concentrating on the Consultation and Treatment Team, which purports to be working with individual women or the staffs responsible for the "treatment" of individual women.

This team is a direct outgrowth of the unit, it was planned as a roving "treatment" team and the gatekeeper of the unit. Behavior modification seems its major approach. (From the Coalition to Stop Institutional Violence).

Meanwhile another approach by the authorities in MA is to create so-called "hidden" locked units of an average of 10 beds each in general hospitals. Women can be sent there and subjected to behavior modification programs. Having these units in general hospitals associated in people's minds with the teaching of the latest and best in medicine is "an attempt to legitimize the labeling, drugging and caging of human beings". At the medical center of the University of MA, a shock room is part of the unit. The possibility of psychosurgery exists within any hospital.

All of this points to the fact that the blocking of the behavior modification unit only spurred the MA authorities to find more and better ways of manipulating women prisoners.

At Alderson, the maximum security unit was closed last January. However, the building still stands and is used occasionally for "security risks".

All of Alderson itself is becoming more and more of a control unit. Its isolation in terms of geographic location, intolerable health care, forced druggings in the general population and recently, a proposed mailing limitation by the Bureau of Prisons to the mailing of only five free letters a month for each woman is suspiciously indicative of behavior control.

(Reprinted from No More Cages, a journal by and for women in prison)

Cop Convicted In Assault

Susan Goding

Policeman Daniel Marr has been found guilty and sentenced in the beating of Aleen Levine, the door person at Peg's Place, a women's bar in San Francisco.

The charges stemmed from an incident last March when a group of policemen converged on Peg's Place. They had been to a bachelor party of another police officer and had rented a cable car to bar hop in. According to the driver of the cable car they were “the worst group" he ever saw. “Let's get the dykes", they said when they got to Peg's Place.

Levine, who was hit on the head with a pool cue, says she regrets that she did not bring in more physicians to testify on her behalf. “I was hospitalized for 5 days (following the incident)...6 weeks later (my head) still hurt and one day I lost all coordination...When I returned to the doctor, I was told that I had ‘post concussion syndrome’, part of my brain had been damaged...the doctors said that that kind of injury could not have been inflicted by a fist (but rather) by some blunt instrument”.

Marr was fined $1000 and sentenced to 3 years formal probation, which means he must report to a probation officer. He was also sentenced to doing 200 hours of community service.

Kevin Guerin, also involved, was convicted of disturbing the peace and fined.

Another police officer, Michael Kelly, was never brought to trial because "conflicting testimony" prevented the District Attorney from filing charges of criminal assault. The conflicting testimony consisted of Kelly's denial of the charge.

Kelly contended that he used only necessary restraint on customer Erlinda Symaco. According to witnesses, Kelly (estimated to weigh 200 lbs) tackled Symaco and pinned her to the floor in a strangle-hold until investigating officers arrived on the scene. Symaco weighs about 140 lbs and is partially disabled by a back condition. She was hospitalized for the next 3 weeks, has been in severe pain and wears a neck brace now. She may need surgery as a result of the assault.

Levine and Symaco have filed a civil suit against the city for medical expenses and damages.

(Some information reprinted from The Gay Community News and Nexus)