Nuclear Industry Devastates Community

Navajo Women Are Fighting To Stay Alive:

Women for Survival

The first uranium mines in America were opened by Kerr-McGee near Red Rock, Arizona in the Navajo Nation in the early 50's to supply uranium for military weapons programs. Thirty years later, one-quarter of the miners are dead of lung cancer and another quarter are ill and permanently disabled. (And they say nuclear power never killed anybody.) With social security payments of only $200 a month, the widows of the dead miners, some with as many as 9 children, cannot feed and support their families adequately. Consequently, a food, blanket and money drive is underway to help them and their children get through the winter.

The major killer in uranium mines is the radioactive radon gas released from uranium ore. The decay products of radon gas become attached to dust particles in the air. The dust particles are inhaled and may stay in the lungs where they cause cancer.

Several studies between 1900 and 1940 established clear statistical evidence of high rates of lung cancer among European uranium miners. Despite the evidence of dangerous health effects, the US government and uranium companies began large-scale mining with little or no regard for the consequences to the miners in the rush to implement the belief that nuclear power was the tool to perpetuate capitalism. Virtually nothing was done to regulate levels of radon gas in uranium mines. When confronted about it, the Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) chose to ignore the data and resisted all attempts to establish safety regulations. The Public Health Service found radon concentration in US mines to be 20 to 230 times European standards. During the Cold War era, warnings about the dangers of radiation were labeled as a part of a Communist plot.

Finally, in 1971, after 20 years of uranium mining, limits of radiation exposure and ventilation standards were established. By that time it was already too late for hundreds of uranium miners. It is estimated that 70% of the Navajo miners who worked in the Red Rock mines will eventually die of lung cancer and other respiratory diseases because of radiation exposure on the job.

The first victims of uranium mining in Red Rock, who worked for $1.60 an hour minimum wage, suffered Kerr-McGee's blatant disregard for their health and safety. The miners were never told of the dangers of radiation in the mines. Clean drinking water was not provided, and thirst from the constant uranium dust forced the miners to drink contaminated water that dripped from the mine's walls. The miners were forced to enter the mines only minutes after dynamiting, violating the 24-hour waiting period necessary to let the uranium dust settle.

The dust was so bad, they spit up black mucus and got headaches from coughing. There was no ventilation in the mines to remove the deadly radon gas, even though it was known that ventilation would substantially reduce the risk of cancer. When the Red Rock mines’ uranium supply ran out in 1968, they were abandoned, leaving behind more than 70 acres of uranium tailings, and several hundred miners who had been exposed to deadly doses of radiation.

Delores Yazzie, the widow of miner Peter Fred Yazzie, feels that not only her husband, but she, too, has been the victim of uranium mining.

“He was sick the last four years before he died and wasn't able to work. It's been too hard for me to make it by myself. I have nine kids and the social security is not enough for me to pay for food and send my kids to school. I don't have enough money to pay for water and electricity. It makes me nervous thinking about money that I don't have. In the winter I have to chop wood and get well water when the snow is all around. Sometimes I can't chop enough wood so it makes us cold at night, almost freezing sometimes.”

Delores Yazzie says she should get compensation from Kerr-McGee and the other companies that caused her husband to die. But the companies never told her husband about workmen's compensation and now she fears it is too late to collect. She thinks somebody should do something about her problems and those of others in Red Rock.

Red Rock residents have been trying since 1971 to get compensation. The federal government and Kerr-McGee ignore the claims and deny any responsibility. The federal government is involved not only through the AEC, but also through the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) who signed the leases and the US Geological Survey who authorized the mining plan. The BIA, "trustees" for the Navajos, has leased their land for uranium mining without regard for environmental effects, royalty rates, or social and economic impacts, and without even notifying the Navajo landowners.

There is no reason to believe that present conditions in uranium mines are safe. The Oil, Chemical and Atomic Workers union, which testified before a Senate subcommittee, said that three Kerr-McGee uranium mines in the Grants area of New Mexico have habitually operated at radiation levels exceeding the new federal shutdown level by as much as 65 times.

Indian uranium miners are guinea pigs for the nuclear industry and the government's test of the hazards of uranium mining. The results of today's "safe" radiation levels will become known in 30-40 years, about the time the world's uranium supplies run out and the atomic age will be over.

Meanwhile, the problems of the Red Rock community continue: the widows can't get credit anymore at the trading post, the men who have not yet died fear that they too will die soon and no one will accept any responsibility for the unnatural epidemic in the Navajo community.

The Mt. Taylor Alliance, a multicultural coalition dedicated toward preservation of the people, land, water and traditional cultures of New Mexico, and Women for Survival have launched a food and blanket drive for the widows and families.

Our first shipment went to Red Rock just before Christmas. At that time, Red Rock residents met with present and former Public Health Service workers, and representatives from New Mexico support groups. They shared information about increasing numbers of birth deformities, leukemia, mental retardation, babies born with smaller than normal head size, and babies and children dying of unknown reasons. The group is planning

MORE ON PAGE 18

manifestation of dominance as practiced by the white man's Patriarchal civilization." Women for Survival stated their belief that the rape of earth is the same as the rape of women by men. "We know that this dominance-rapist pattern is manifested everywhere in Patriarchal civilization: the dominance of man over woman, man over nature, white over other races, rich over poor, heterosexuals over lesbians and gay men, and adults over children. Through challenging the nuclear industry, we are challenging this whole value system of hierarchical power relationships whose power lies in domination, control, and fear; a system that places priority on destructive technological progress and the accumulation of power and profits at the expense of life; a system based on destruction and war.

"We must end the nuclear threat before it becomes the ultimate violent act. As feminists, we call for liberation through cooperation, community, control over our own lives and resources, self-sufficiency, and decentralization of power. We call for respect for the earth, her resources and her inhabitants."

Women for Survival can be reached at 206 Sereno, Santa Fe, NM 87501.

Kramer vs. Kramer: Crap vs. Crap, Crap Wins

Joey Thompson

This highly praised movie is merely another Hollywood fuzz piece. The movie, produced by Stanley Jaffe and starring Dustin Hoffman and Meryl Streep, treats crucial social problems with trivial, easily-rectified but unrealistic solutions.

The movie story - substantially different from the poorly written book - opens with the beautiful, well-dressed Joanna leaving her progressive, upwardly mobile but insensitive husband, Ted.

Joanna, after hearing several limp lines from Ted about how much she is wanted, needed and loved, rushed out the door in pursuit of life's meaning and an approaching elevator. She leaves her abandoned husband to wonder who will take care of the cherubic and motherless child.

The movie takes off from there - into "moving" scenes which depict a confused and struggling father coping with a beautiful but obstinate young child and his trying job which promises advancement - at least it did until he spends more time with the child than the job - whereupon he is fired.

Ted, who don't forget was tossed aside because he had no understanding or patience for his overworked, bored and unappreciated wife, undergoes an unexplained and overnight transformation into: super-dad.

Suddenly he becomes the patient and enduring father who, while he had his impatient moments, manages for the most part to nurture a loving, caring relationship with his child.

He has a few encounters with Joanna's "feminist" woman friend down the hall who tries unsuccessfully to fill him in on why Joanna left. But husband (and many viewers) can only see that the selfish Joanna left a helpless, vulnerable child.

Joanna appears 18 months later, is seen mournfully watching Billy through the window of a cafe situated across from the kid's school. Convenient, of course.

She watches--tearful, but impeccably dressed, and beautiful.

Next, a meeting with hubby to inform him that after months in California "getting herself (and a tan) together" she has returned and wants Billy full-time.

Of course, by then, hubby's relationship with Billy has blossomed and he refuses to let Billy go. A court case ensues. Expensive lawyers are retained.

'Tis about this time that husband's company tersely informs him that he hasn't been paying much attention to his important advertising job and he is fired.

But Ted is no teddy bear. And finds gainful employment minutes before the court convenes (unemployed would destroy his chances of gaining custody).

Turns out in court that he had to take a pay cut to $29,000 a year from $32,000. Poor boy.

And lo and behold dear untogether Joanna has also landed a job - paying $31,000 a year - which enables her to buy expensive clothes, hairdos, and make-up.

And here's where the movie really falls apart. How many single parents earn that kind of money?

How many middle-class, well-paid men jump to the opportunity of fathering, mothering, laundering, cooking, cleaning, etc., etc., without the use of a daycare center, cleaning lady, shrink, etc., etc.?

Losing a parent is a traumatic experience for children. Massaging and healing the wounds is a long-term commitment.

Kramer vs. Kramer, written, produced and directed by men, does not portray this.

How many separated folk can afford expensive lawyers, costly court cases?

Hollywood movies aren't real, and Kramer vs. Kramer is no exception.

It doesn't even scratch the surface of an important social issue. It treats single parenting and divorce with simple-mindedness and ease. Instead of attempting to alleviate single parenting problems for thousands of people, its slick treatment will frustrate and infuriate parents who are often ill-prepared for the formidable task.

The book?

It is worse and doesn't rate more than a sentence.  
This review was reprinted from Kinesis, February, 1980.