letters

Sub Special

Dear BMR,

I'm taking advantage of your September Subscription special to start a reader who's never seen BMR before. Keep up the good work.

Thanks,  
Linda Harford

Demands Poster

Big Mama Rag,  
Enclosed is $1.75 for a "Demands of Women" poster, black on red. Glad we decided to subscribe! We appreciate the articles, analysis, and news from all over.

Thanks!  
Carol Rogers  
Marshfield, WI

Enjoy BMR

Big Mama Rag,  

Please continue our subscription to Big Mama Rag. We enjoy the newspaper. Thanks a lot for the good work.

Kris Melroe  
Lesbian Resource Center  
Seattle, WA

Prison News

BMR,  

Please publish this article if you are able. (See page 10 for the article.) It was written by myself. We really need the publicity to show what is happening to us here at NCCCW.

I received the latest issue of BMR today. It was great! I enjoy the paper so much.

On your resources page you said "Prison" was free to women in prison. It isn't. It's $6 to subscribe for anyone. Thanks so much for advertising us though.

In Sisterhood,  
Karen Batton

COLLECTIVE

Foreign Sub

Dear Big Mama,  
Here's an $8.00 cheque for a year's subscription. I didn't know how much you wanted for Canadian sub so if this isn't enough please let me know.

I've really enjoyed the few times I've had my hands on a copy of BMR and am excited by the prospect of more. Keep up the articles on class, race issues.

Also, I am specifically interested in lesbian parenting—especially artificial insemination—if you have any back issues that deal with this please send them with a bill.

If you'd like Canadian information on the same topic, I'll send you what I know from Vancouver.

Hope to hear from you soon!

Lyn Machknal  
Vancouver, BC

Ed. note: Because of high mailing costs our foreign subscription rate is $10 per year. Our April 1979 issue has an article on "Do-it-yourself Artificial Insemination.” We will send along this issue along with billing information.

Juanita Thomas

Dear Sisters:

In corresponding with Juanita Thomas, a battered woman who has been convicted of murder, she has asked me for assistance in getting something she has written to women's newspapers for publication. Therefore, I am sending you a photocopy of the statement she sent me, and also a version which I typed from her handwriting.

In her cover letter to me, she indicated that she is writing a story. She also says she keeps a daily diary and hoped someone would like to publish it, as she is about finished with it. If anyone is interested in these things, please contact Ms. Thomas or me.

Background information on this case was published in the August 1980 Big Mama Rag.

Sincerely,  
Betty Wheeler  
Amarillo, TX

STATEMENT FROM JUANITA THOMAS

On Friday, June 20, 1980, I was convicted of murder in the first degree, in Ingham County Circuit Court in Mason, Michigan. I plead self—

MORE ON PAGE 13

BMR'S phone number: (303) 322-2010

Eileen Bresnahan, Susan Goding, Constance Perenyi, Vicki Piotter,  
Judy Barlow, Lori Bradford

SUPPORTERS

Susanna Smith, Bobbe Ross, Kate Sharp

CONTRIBUTORS

Phyllis Crawford, Kathy Riley, Mel, Marty, Meg Gouraud, Bobbe Ross,  
Susanna, Debbie Squires

INSIDE BMR

Local news  
Letters  
Homebirth/Tampons  
Hot Briefs  
Genital Mutilation...5,6

Prison Information...8-10  
Culture

More On......  
Resources  
Classies/Calendar

Big Mama Rag is a feminist periodical published monthly for women by  
Big Mama Rag, Inc., a non-profit corporation. Manuscripts and artwork  
may be submitted to 1724 Gaylord St., Denver, CO 80206. Deadline for  
material will be announced each month in Where We're At. Please enclose  
a stamped, self-addressed envelope with all manuscripts. No responsibility  
is accepted for unsolicited material. We reserve the right to  
edit all material for length. Subscription rates are $6 per year for  
individual subscriptions in the U.S., $10 in Canada and $12 to institutions.  
BMR is free to women in prison and in mental institutions.  
This publication is on film at the New Alexandria Library for Lesbian  
Women in Chicago and will soon be available on microfilm through Bell  
and Howell. We are indexed by the Alternative Press Center, P.O. Box  
7229, Baltimore, Maryland 21218.

home to mama

Big Mama Rag

Vol. 8 No. 9

Fat Women’s Issues vs Looksism

Dear women:

Are you still publishing? Please send subscription information in the enclosed envelope.

Several years ago you were very supportive of fat women's liberation. Have you recently carried any information on this subject? Do you have any editorial position on fat liberation?

I am asking because, as a fat woman, I have found too often that my closest allies (radical lesbian feminists) balk at supporting my particular liberation struggle and take the opinions of the male medical establishment as more valid in defining fat women's issues than they take fat feminists’ definitions. I feel myself deeply a part of the women's movement, and have felt much pain over the women's movement's refusal to hear from radical fat women. I would like to support a feminist newspaper that supports my struggle, or at least is willing to struggle constructively.

Please answer as honestly as you can.

Sincerely,  
Vivian Mayer  
Bethany, CT

BMR Best

Dear Sisters,

Indeed, control of our bodies is “primary to our struggle as women." Right on to your Points of Unity and coverage of control of our bodies issues last month. The genital mutilation story, especially, was a real eye opener.

I've been reading BMR for a while now, and want you folks to know I think you're doing a real fine job. Best in the country, in fact.

Here's my $6, please grace my humble abode with your fine newspaper.

In struggle,  
Linda Hardesty  
Pittsburg, PA

WOMAN  
to  

WOMAN  
feminist center

FOR OCTOBER:

PAPA AAAI

Mon-Th 10am - 8pm  
Fri-Sun 10am-7pm

10% OF ALL PROFITS FOR THE NEXT FOUR SATURDAYS

WILL GO INTO A FUND TO HELP WOMEN GET TO THE

First Black Lesbian Conference: Becoming Visible

THE CONFERENCE WILL BE HELD IN SAN FRANCISCO

FROM OCTOBER 17 - 19

2023 E. Colfax 320-5972