national

The Task -- Reconstruct Feminism

Laura Carlson

The prospect of summarizing the "Common Differences: Third World Women and Feminist Perspectives" Conference held at the University of Illinois Champaign/Urbana campus, April 9-13th is staggering. The conference, organized by Chandra Talpade Mohanty and Ann Russ of UIUC managed to cram into a four-day period, 38 workshops, 11 panels, 5 keynotes and numerous other events. The formation and impressions cannot be distilled into a single article.

Over 850 women representing 35 countries gathered to discuss the realities of women's condition in their countries and the direction of their struggles. The wide-ranging dialogue resulting proved both challenging and stimulating for me, as a white North American feminist. It challenged me to set aside assumptions and definitions of women's liberation, to take direction from the varied experiences of women's lives and from struggles. As we talked in forums on subjects as diverse as "Women in Militant Struggle", "Women in Literature", and "Women and Religion", we quickly realized that we lacked bedrock definitions. The conference title itself posed recurring questions: What are our commonalities? What are our differences? And how do we define "feminist perspectives"?

No clear-cut answers to these questions emerged from the conference. However, I believe that simply recognizing that we, as feminists, do not have answers, or rather that we have many different answers, is a first step towards strengthening our unity as women on a global basis. In broadening perspectives of women's struggles many assumptions, especially of white North American feminism, proved insufficient to encompass women's activism in the Third World. The consensus on commonalities and differences which emerged from the conference spoke to the need for finding similarities in the structure of the oppression of women, while at the same time we deepen our understanding of the disparity of specific forms.

The conference developed around a perceived need for women globally to discuss "common issues". To have a purpose, we had to gain an understanding of conditions we share as women, and of goals and visions we share. As the organizers recognized, "we can no longer be naive about our assumptions of 'sisterhood' and 'solidarity'." Indeed, many presenters criticized the concept of "common differences", objecting to assuming universally agreed upon commonalities among us. The entire conference forced each of us to examine why women from around the world would gather to discuss political issues. Do we have common interests that mandate meeting as women rather than, say, as members of the Third World, or a specific country? If so, what are they? What do we have to offer each other, and especially what solidarity can exist between women of oppressed nations and oppressor nations? Or between white women and women of color within a country? Can we define our commonalities based on the universality of patriarchy, that is, are our issues the same (male oppression) only with different forms and contexts?

Women of oppressed nations almost unanimously answered "no" to the last question. Instead, our common interests most often expressed lay not solely in our social and biological experience as women, but in opposing the imperialist structure that oppresses women, as women of color and as members of Third World countries. Stressing the importance of understanding the connection between these struggles, many Third World women urged white North American feminists to abandon preconceived notions of "women's issues" and to respect the self-defined issues of women in Third World countries; our major concentration should be on bringing about change in this country. Third World speakers emphasized the realities of neo-colonialism and foreign domination in defining the obstacles to their liberation. Many defined an economic basis of the patriarchal oppression they experience as women. In short, Third World women most frequently cited our shared experience of living on a planet whose resources are controlled by a global patriarchal/capitalist economy.

The concept of differences proved further grounds for debate. Some speakers argued for moving beyond differences to emphasize needs of basic survival. Others pointed out that since First World feminists dominate feminist theory to ignore differences in a dream of global sisterhood is to accept their definition of issues as the path to women's liberation. Emerging from the culture of domination, such a definition would be at best short-sighted and at worst dangerous. As U.S. feminists, we must counter the ideology of our culture, but our thoughts remain shaped by this ideology. Any theory emerging from our experience alone will not be relevant to Third World women and will contain fatal flaws for forming a worldwide unity of women. Furthermore, to create a single image of liberation for women denies the integrity of women's varied experience and visions. The important intersection of struggles against many forms of oppression in women's lives gives rise to different immediate goals. We must support women's struggles as they are defined on their home front, rather than defining women's struggles and searching for them worldwide.

The major differences we experienced were as women of oppressed and oppressor nations, and as white women and women of color within this country. In both cases, discussing paths and goals revealed large gaps in our understanding of how to move forward together. As a white U.S. feminist, I nonetheless felt welcomed and that I have an important role, as long as I am willing to accept the leadership of other women and acknowledge and work to broaden my own perspective. To make a sincere and total commitment to the freedom of all women requires this. As a Black participant from Chicago put it, "If you are willing to march beside me in my struggles as I define them, you are my sister."

In discussing differences, conference participants also had to realize that although our backgrounds were very diverse, we all spoke English and had some academic training. We could not consider ourselves representative of the world's women or of the women of our own countries. Many Third World women cautioned the conference against viewing them as prototypical of their countrywomen, and reminded us that much division and debate occurs within cultures. Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak (India/U. of Texas-Austin) outlined a