To Be A Sister: Recollections From Peru

Andrea Gabriel  
Part one of a two-part article.

A young Indian woman sat on her iron-posted bed in Lima, cutting pictures out of a slick magazine depicting the life of bourgeois women and the American tourists whose lifestyle they shared. She pasted these in a collage on one half of a big white sheet of cardboard. On the other half she pasted photos of women like herself, their faces sober and determined, women whose beauty was natural and whose only wealth was their own resourcefulness and dedication to struggle. Underneath her double collage she wrote: “What kind of world do you want to be part of? What kind of woman do you want to be?" When she finished, she carefully removed the photos of movie stars and singers that were pasted on the wall above her bed and tacked up her new poster.

In the following months, similar statements appeared in various rooms of the centuries-old house she shared with some 12-20 other young women. All of the women were domestic servants. Some had only recently arrived in the city. The youngest was fifteen, but she had been living on her own since the age of eleven.

Lydia, the young woman for whom the contrasting images pasted on her poster were the decisive reality of her life, was only 19, but she was the undisputed leader of the household. She had replaced an older woman who was both a foreigner and a nun, and who had been appointed by the Church to chaperone the young women. The house belonged to the Church, and when the women living there asked that the nun leave, they fully expected that they themselves would be asked to leave as well, or that another chaperone would be sent to replace her. They were prepared to defend both their sovereignty and their right to occupancy of the house. But, to their surprise, they were left to organize their life on their own, with the sole requirement that they host a priest and several nuns each Sunday morning in a short service of mass, and that they call on "las hermanitas" for help and counsel when needed.

Actually, “las hermanitas" (the little sisters) were carrying out a rebellion of their own, using their own living quarters to house Argentinian and Chilean refugees, and helping to organize a revolutionary nucleus within the otherwise pro-government Catholic Church.

I came into the situation together with a Chilean woman, Alicia, who lived with "las hermanitas" and who had worked with me in the agricultural wing of the Women's Patriotic Front in Chile during the years of the Popular Unity government there. We had met by accident in a small book center which was the only place in Peru where literature on the emancipation of women was available.

Alicia had begun to talk with the young domestic servants about doing a play depicting the transformation that was typical of their own lives, leaving the countryside to escape the harsh reality there only to find themselves trapped in new forms of servitude and alienation in the cities and finally, learning to know each other and to unite to form a union that could help them fight for better working conditions and ally with other poor people to end their common oppression. The women had already done one play at Christmastime, depicting a family Christmas scene in a home such as those where they worked as domestics (showing with pathos and humor their own role there) and a second scene in a home such as that they had all left behind. That play had been performed only once, for "las hermanitas" and other progressive church people, but the one they were hoping to do now they intended to take out to Lima's parks and plazas, especially to the park where thousands of domestic servants gather on Sunday afternoons (their only day off during the week).

We practiced the play every Sunday, exchanging roles and developing a fine sense of detail and insight. For the young women, Sunday was a day of intense self-inflicted discipline. They started with a house meeting at 6:00 a.m., followed by marketing and housecleaning, a political education class at 10:00 (which included instruction on how to organize a union), mass at 11:30, a potluck brunch to which they invited their closest friends and supporters, and then play practice, combined with learning revolutionary songs. The day sometimes ended with a dance or quiet discussions. Lydia insisted that native dances were to be emphasized, and she would leave to go to her room in protest if rock 'n roll music took over. Lydia's influence was decisive, but her role as leader gave her many headaches as she struggled to help others through personal and interpersonal crises, to learn and study on her own, and to establish links with people who were doing similar work on a national scale.

In their house meetings, the women had decided that no men were to be allowed in the house beyond the front foyer, except on Sundays when men who met everyone's approval were invited to the day's special activities. The foyer was often filled with shy couples or with boyfriends waiting to spend a little time between shifts with a sweetheart. Many of the women worked all day as domestics and attended classes at night in a nearby high school. They were infinitely better off than the majority of their counterparts who were expected to “live in." Some women who could not live at the house because their jobs required that they "live in" came to the Sunday political education classes and other activities.

Gradually, as class struggle in Peru intensified, the household became a center for broad political organizing, with groups of women going off to demonstrations and cultural events (drawing on a common fund established among them to pay for bus fare and other expenses), and giving support to women organizing in factories and on farms outside the city. It eventually became a target of repression, as was the house of “las hermanitas" and the little library around the corner where I had first met Alicia.

Many women gave up being domestic servants in Lima's wealthy neighborhoods to rear their own families. They often eventually became street vendors to support or help support the babies who jogged along on their mothers’ backs, peering out of colorful mantas. Whatever their occupations, women who had migrated from the countryside usually ended up establishing their families in one of the immense "new towns" on the outskirts of the city, where half the population of Lima lived.

Ana was one such woman. She had five children by the same man, but he was often away from home looking for work and Ana sold everything from hot cocoa and barbecued chicken to building supplies and plastic toys. For years she had sold on the streets, and she had even spent three months in jail for spitting in the face of a government official who accused her of “cluttering the streets" with her cooking paraphernalia and her children. Eventually, she managed to build a makeshift store next to her family's straw and cement dwelling. Her business lay less than a mile up the hill from a major highway and was successful enough to provide her with a little security. As her children grew older, they helped run the store, and Ana's family became "old-timers" in their neighborhood.

They worked hard to support their families while paying taxes to build beautiful boulevards in other areas of the city where the government officials lived. But they became angry as government corruption became more obvious and as local leaders who were genuinely concerned about the people's problems were jailed for insubordination. As time went on, construction programs stopped altogether, prices increased, and Ana's neighborhood became a battleground occupied by military tanks and troops.

I lived with Ana's family and was a delegate from our block to the local comité de Lucha (struggle committee) whose initial purpose was to get transportation from the highway up the hill where thousands of people trudged daily to their homes after a long day's work. The committee was patterned after the organization that had been set up by the government years earlier to implement its programs, with the difference that government officials were expressly excluded from it, women replaced most of the men as delegates, and young college students and workers with revolutionary ideas guided its politics. The young people were not outsiders but were the sons and daughters of people like Ana.

Even though women were far more numerous than men in our committee, most of them expected the men to attend liaison meetings with other committees, to do the research necessary to back up their demands, and to speak at neighborhood rallies. Gradually, under prodding from younger women, some of whom had previous leadership experience in recreational and club activities, many older women began to chair meetings and to take on responsibilities which were entirely new to them. This was possible, I think, partly because many older men were still somewhat skeptical of the new committee and did not join actively in the leafleting, marches, and rallies until they could see some results coming from it. A bus was promised to extend its route up the hill, and when the government later reneged on its promise the men joined the women and young people in militant actions.

Shortly after securing a bus route that was at least partially acceptable, gasoline prices doubled, bus fares tripled, and the entire city blew up in rage and rebellion. It was at that point that our "new town" was occupied by the military and I was forced to move away.

One woman who worked as a clerk in a government office and was an active member of our comité de Lucha told me as I left that she would study every night to prepare herself better to lead the much more difficult battles ahead.

This article will be continued next month.