arson, the

Lynn

then poured the substance all over
the room and lit it. The clinic
was totally destroyed with damages
estimated at more than $100,000.
The same day, during the police in-
vestigation, a Cleveland police of-
ficer asked a counselor, “What do
you expect with these people kill-
ing babies?"

*February 23, 1977 - In St. Paul,
Minnesota an unidentified person
broke into the St. Paul Planned
Parenthood Clinic, soaked the floor
with a gasoline-like substance and
lit it. Three floors were destroy-
ed and damage was estimated at
$259,000. Since then, the
clinic personnel have been assaul-
ted by threats, bullets fired
through windows, $5,000 worth of
broken windows and a failed bomb-
ing attempt.

*February, 1978 - A repeat attempt on
the St. Paul Planned Parenthood
Clinic. The professionally constr-
ucted bomb failed to detonate.

*August 18, 1977 - The Ladies Clinic
in Omaha, Nebraska was firebombed.
The same day, a crude letter to
the Omaha World Herald asked, "You'd
bomb a concentration camp, why not
abortion centers?” According to
the Militant, there were signed
letters and a person who bought
gasoline nearby that night paid by
check.

*February, 1978 - At the Cincinnati
Women's Center Clinic, a chemical
bomb and packets of Right-to-Life
literature were thrown through a
window in the middle of the night.
Damages were more than $3,000 and

*November, 1977 - Someone broke into
the Cincinnati Planned Parenthood
Clinic and set a crib on fire.

*January 6, 1978 - P.E.A.C.E. (People
Expressing A Concern for Everyone)
claimed credit for the mass disrup-
tion of abortion clinics in New
York City, Minneapolis, Baltimore,
Anchorage, Omaha, and Fairfax,
Virginia. Approximately 30 persons
nationwide were arrested on tres-
passing charges. Those arrested in
Fairfax, Virginia were acquitted.
Abortion rights activists there
have filed a personal suit against
the demonstrators for their ille-
gal actions, and against their
lawyers and county officials for
complicity.

Constance Perenyi

*January, 1978 - At the Northwest
Women's Center, an abortion clinic
in Columbus, Ohio, ten small fires
were set throughout the building.
The damage came to $200,000.
Only days before the arson, Judy
Hauser, director of the clinic,
had completed a series of debates
with Right-to-Lifers there.

The clinic was closed for five
days. The acid that was in the
chemical bomb is on the U.S. gov-
ernment list of chemical warfare
agents.

*March 1, 1978 - The Akron Women's
Clinic in Akron, Ohio was broken
into and the bathroom was set on
fire. A day before the fire, Akron
city council had passed a restric-
tive ordinance, requiring “parental
notification" and a “waiting per-
iod" before a woman can get an
abortion in Akron. Norma Goldberg,
director of the Akron clinic, had
said on a radio broadcast that if
the mayor didn't veto the ordin-
ance, she would get an A.C.L.U.
injunction.

*February 15, 1978 - Cleveland, Ohio's
Concerned Women's Clinic was van-
dalized. The damage included cut
phone lines, slashed furniture,
and iodine-splashed walls, floors,
and ceilings. The clinic closed
for three days. Police came and
failed to dust for fingerprints.

*February 18, 1978 - The Cleveland
Concerned Women's Center reopened.
Aurelia Elliot, a 48-year-old
technician, was working in a back
room. She unlocked the door to
admit a “deliveryman". He threw
a gasoline-like substance into her
eyes, temporarily blinding her. He

*March 17, 1978 - Six anti-abortion-
ists disrupted an abortion clinic
in Boston, Massachusetts. They
screamed "murderer" at patients,
tried to break into examining
rooms and staged a sit-in.

State’s Funds
for Abortion

The recent attempt by RESPECT LIFE,
INC. to ban Colorado state funds for
abortion has failed. They could not

*June 9, 1978 - In Rochester, New York
three Right-to-Lifers chained
themselves to an examining table in
a Rochester hospital that performs
abortions.

*June 14, 1978 - At 3:38 a.m. the Emma
Goldman Clinic for Women in Iowa
City, Iowa was firebombed. Three
Molotov cocktails were thrown at
the back of the clinic house, caus-
ing damage to a fire escape and
part of the roof. The clinic had
in recent weeks been picketed and
harassed by anti-abortion groups.

get the signatures needed to get the

amendment on the November ballot.
Only fourteen states still use

state funds to partially or totally

fund Medicaid abortions. These are
Alaska, California, Colorado, D.C.,
Hawaii, Idaho, Illinois, Maryland,
North Carolina, New Jersey, New York,
Pennsylvania, Washington, and West
Virginia. 
However, on July 4, the California
Assembly approved a new budget that
cuts state abortion funds by two
thirds. Now funds for abortion will
be provided only in cases of rape,
incest, for unmarried women under
sixteen years of age, and if a woman's
life is in danger.

There have been many reports of per-
sonal threats against abortion
clinic staffers, but perhaps the
most disturbing come from the St.
Paul clinic. The child of a board
member received a note at school
to the effect, "If your mom doesn't
stop killing babies, we'll kill
you." Another board member recei-
ved a 4 a.m. phone call from a man

law and a right to life

who described her two children and
which buses they took home from
school, followed by the threat that
tomorrow they would not be coming
home.

FERRI OE ORK

There have been no arson charges a-
gainst any persons in any of these
cases. Local police are either unable
or unwilling to be of either prosecu-
tive or protective assistance. Police
in Omaha, St. Paul, Cleveland, and
Akron have used a curious rationale
for their inaction. They say they
can't investigate unless private
patient records are turned over by
the clinics involved. They say their
primary suspect would be a relative
or lover of a patient. Thus, the cli-
nics must clear themselves, and in a
manner betraying professional ethics,
before anything will be done.

Ohio police have a composite draw-
ing made by the Cleveland Concerned
Women's Clinic staff of the man re-
sponsible for that firebombing. Ap-
parently there is evidence to inves-
tigate in Omaha, Nebraska as well.
And there are obvious similarities
in some of these abortion clinic ar-
sons; the way the fire was started,

June, 1976,

threatening letters before or after,
and a heightened local political cli-
mate over abortion rights.

The National Abortion Rights Action
League (NARAL) requested a United
States Justice Department investiga-
tion. Justice Department officials
say that a woman's right to abortion
is constitutional not civil, but if
a conspiracy could be proven, then
an investigation could be considered.

However, since last spring, the
arsons and bombings had been under
investigation by the U.S. Treasury
Department's Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco and Firearms. As of August,

investigation of all but the last
three cases has been dropped. Treas-

ury spokesman Bruce Tibbo says,
"There were no substantive leads to

operation) in all 50 states.
states.

non-therapeutic abortion services.

services for poor women.

so determined by two physicians.

a day

History of the Hyde Amendment

In 1973, the Supreme Court made abortion in the first 12 weeks of preg-
nancy legal without restriction (except that a licensed M.D. perform the
The decision overthrew state law in 46
This Supreme Court decision on the legality of abortion could
be reversed by the Supreme Court, itself; by a Constitutional Congress;
or by the passage of an amendment to the Constitution of the United

But funding for abortions for most women was another matter.

1976 - Congress passed legislation attached to the Fiscal 1977 Labor-HEW
appropriations bill which prohibited the use of any federal funds for
abortion except in those cases where "the life of the mother would be
endangered if the fetus were carried to term." An injunction prevented
this language from being implemented until August 4, 1977. Prior to that
time, federal assistance for Medicaid abortions continued.

June, 1977 - The Supreme Court ruled in two cases, Maher v. Roe (CT), and
Beal v. Doe (PA), that states are not constitutionally required to fund
non-therapeutic or elective abortions. In a third case, Poelker v. Doe,
the Court decided that public hospitals were not required to provide
These decisions, in contradiction to
numerous lower court decisions, provided impetus to efforts by state
legislators and members of Congress to restrict funding of abortion.
Subsequently, most states have cut off funding
except where the woman's life would be endangered. As of Jan., 1978, only
16 states were still funding abortions for poor women.

December, 1977 - Congress amended the Fiscal 1978 Labor-HEW appropriations
bill, ending a bitter five-month deadlock, with very restrictive language
allowing federal funding of abortions in only the following three cate-
gories; (1) when the life of the woman would be endangered if the fetus
were carried to term; (2) for victims of rape or incest, when such rape

or incest had been reported promptly to a law enforcement agency or public
health service; and (3) when severe and long-lasting physical health dam-
age to the woman would result if the pregnancy were carried to term when

Constance Perenyi

follow, no defendants, or primary
suspects." Reports are that the Tre-
asury Department had not even contac-
ted or interviewed victims of the
violent episodes.

Many clinics across the country now
receive regular phoned-in bomb

At the National Right-to-Life Convention in Boston,
there was a workshop entitled

“How to Disrupt an Abortion Clinic.”
FE Piers CAS Seda eee ak eR ac I Pancha aD Re ee = SEES

threats in an attempt to close them
down for at least a short period.

Some of them are just informing their
patients and going on with their
work.

A national U.S. pro-choice coali-
tion, the Committee for Abortion
Rights and Against Sterilization A-
buse (CARASA) is organizing groups of
women who can be called immediately
to clinics that are threatened by
anti-abortion violence.

The anti-abortion movement is well-
financed, with much thanks, no doubt,
to the Catholic Church, and well-
organized. They do a lot of direct
political work, lobbying and organi-
zing voters. They do a lot of expen-
sive, sensationalist advertising.

MORE ON PAGE 12

Reprinted from NARAL