16

Black Hills Survival Gathering

by Kim Womantree, Susanna Smith and
Marty

In the 70's, several large corpora-
tions, such as Anaconda, TVA and Uni-
ted Nuclear, received permission from
the government to explore for uranium

and coal in the Black Hills of South
Dakota. Upon discovering the wealth
of minerals there they were prepared
to make a “sacrifice” of the area on
the altar of the “energy crisis."

The Black Hills Alliance (BHA) was
formed in March of '79 to support the
struggles of all land-based peoples
who are fighting for their survival,
and, specifically, to stop the plun-
der of the Black Hills.

They sponsored an international sur-
vival gathering, held July 18-26 in
South Dakota. It was attended by a-
bout 4-5,000 people on any given day.
It included workshops, forums and
strategizing sessions. Five areas
were covered:

1) Appropriate Technology/Self-
Sufficiency included everything from
tofu making and solar oven construc-
tion to European community housing.

2) Health for Survival included
radiation and chemical contamination

workshops, sterilization abuse, popu-
lation control, holistic health and
women's health workshops.

3) Education for Survival included
a survival school for children.

4) The Citizens Review Commission
provided a wealth of information on
the four principal multinational
corporations (hereafter, "mnc") ac-
tive in the Black Hills: Union Car-
bide, Rio Algom, Ltd., Burlington
Northern R.R. and Tennessee Valley
Authority (TVA).

5) The Forum on Indian Genocide
and the Planned Extinction of the
Family Farm tied together the strug-
gle of Indian treaty rights, the ran-
chers' struggle over land, water and
mineral rights and Third World strug-
gles from Puerto Rico to South Afri-
ca, to the control of the "mnc" over
all. It included workshops on stop-
ping the building of powerlines in
Minnesota, and coal mining in Wash-
ington, Oregon and the Southwest.

Workshops

Numerous workshops were offered in
each area, two of which we include
here:

Ros Everell, of the Committee to
End Sterilization Abuse, held a work-
shop on sterilization. She described
eugenics laws, passed around the turn
of the century, which are on the
books in 16 states. They say "social-
ly inadequate persons should be ster-
ilized," which includes "feeble-minded,
insane, criminalistic, epileptic,
blind, deaf, deformed, dependent."
This is a historical basis for ster-
ilization. Some states have even pro-
posed compulsory sterilization for
people on welfare.

Women are sterilized when they go
to have an abortion, when they deli-
ver a baby. They are told their wel-
fare benefits will be taken away if
they refuse. Amorphous terms are
used to describe sterilization -
"simple surgery," "tying your tubes.”
The implications of this "simple sur-
gery" are often not made clear.

A new reason for sterilization is
cropping up. If women work with cer-
tain chemicals, they are being forced
into being sterilized in order to
keep or get these jobs. The companies
such as American Cyanamid in W. Va.,
of course don't consider cleaning up
the workplace, much less the implica-
tions of even using these dangerous
chemicals.

Sterilization is a form of genocide
for Third World people - 1/4 of Na-
tive American women and 1/3 of Puerto
Rican women of child-bearing age have
been sterilized.

Other forms of genocide were des-
cribed in a workshop on population
control. Contraceptives banned in the
U.S. for having been proven dangerous
and even fatal to the user are mar-
keted in Third World countries. Ex-
perimental abortions are performed on
women in various clinics around the
world, for example in Pakistan, where
thousands of women were raped in the
Pakistani/Indian war.

Governments try to regulate popula-
tion according to their own inter-
ests. The population density of India
or Latin America is no greater than
that of northern Europe or the east-
ern U.S., yet the U.S. tries to mani-
pulate us into thinking that "over-
population" is a major problem in
those countries. So population con-
trol is pushed through sterilization,
experimental abortions and unsafe
birth control methods in Third World
countries, and on Third World women
in this country. The population in
the U.S. and northern Europe is sup-
ported by taking the resources of
the less industrialized countries.
It's a matter of distribution of re-
sources, not "overpopulation."

Strategy For
Four Corners

Strategizing sessions were held the
last weekend of the gathering. The
four corners regional meeting includ-
ed: Colorado, Utah, Wyoming and Ari-
zona. Participants were asked to ans-
wer certain questions such as:

What are the threats to survival in
your area?

What is being done about these
threats?

We heard about the Indians living
on the Acoma reservation in Utah.

Eight women have died of abdominal or
uterine cancer, a disease unknown be-
fore the uranium mining began in 1953.
The old people are afraid and can't
sleep at night because of the incess-
ant pounding. Things fall off the
kitchen counters. Babies are more
often stillborn or deformed. In Mor-
mon-controlled Utah, there is little
access to media and no support net-
work for these people now.

And the same problems were mention-
ed over and over again:

- radioactive sites in cities.

- energy "development" that turns
natural country into suburban shop-
ping centers, company towns or de-
serts buzzing with poison to all life.

- uranium-caused sickness and death
among Native people.

- Ft. St. Vrain, right outside of
Greeley, CO, which is shut down 60%
of the time because of malfunctions.

- Rocky Flats, our very own radio-
active nuclear trigger plant.

- nerve gas storage.

- water: who controls it and to
what use it will be put, who uses it
afterwards.

Some suggested actions for the Den-
ver area were:

- Most of the "mnc" that are ex-
ploiting the land have their corpor-
ate headquarters in Denver (Anaconda,
Amax, Union Carbide). It was suggest-
ed that we keep in contact with peo-
ple on the reservations, and as the
corporations move in out there, we
demonstrate at their headquarters
here.

- CERT (Council of Energy Resource
Tribes) is the “representative” of
the Indian nations that have uranium
and coal on their lands. They do all
the negotiating with the U.S. govern-
ment. Their aim is to sell the mining
rights as high as possible and get
the highly paid jobs to the reserva-
tion, rather than a long-range policy
of saving the land and the people
from death. Whites, under the direc-
tion of Native people, could visit
CERT headquarters in Denver to pro-
test these short-range policies.

Other suggestions were to reach as
wide a range of people as possible to
inform them of the dangers uranium
development poses to their health and

their children's lives. These ways
included: slide shows, in cities and
at fairs, forums, going into the sch-
ools, and most of all, going door-to-
door in our own neighborhoods, talk-
ing with our co-workers and our poli-
tical groups. This type of one-to-one
communication is the hardest politi-
cal work to do but is also the most
effective.

We think that education is vital,
because when it comes to a showdown
and the “mnc" bring in the armed
forces, people around the country
will know what is happening and why,
and will support the resistance move-
ment.

Analysis

The Black Hills are a sacred place
to the Lakota people. They live on
the plains to the east and go to the
Black Hills on certain occasions and
with reverence.

Corporations such as United Nuclear
and Union Carbide have done and are
doing exploratory drilling in the
Black Hills for uranium and coal,
only waiting for government permis-
sion to start mining. They will deep
mine and strip mine the Black Hills
for their profit and to add a few
more years to the American way of
life. For the same reasons they plan
on strip mining the western slope of
Colorado for oil shale, as they plan
on mining Big Mountain in Arizona,
as they have been and are mining all
of the Four Corners area for uranium
and coal, as they plan on mining Mt.
Tolman in Washington and northeast
Oregon for coal. The "national sacri-
fice" list goes on and on.

Our oil-based economy is breaking
down, because of U.S. losses in Viet
Nam, Iran, etc. As a long-range
plan, the “mnc" are trying to convert
to a more nuclear-based economy - to
keep electricity flowing, people buy-
ing and profit margins high. This
planned conversion not only entails
exploiting American land and kicking
the Indians and farmers off their
land, but contaminating air and wa-
ter for hundreds of miles.

Assumptions on which the Black
Hills Survival Gathering were based
are:

The "mnc" are moving on a global
scale to strip the earth of its min-
erals, the majority of which are lo-
cated on indigenous or other "land-
based" peoples' land. The strategy of
those who wish to stop the plunder
of the earth must no longer be iso-
lated to one region or nation but
take on an international perspective.
On an international scale it is the
land-based peoples who will be hit
first by multinational greed and
where the fiercest struggles will be
waged in the immediate future.

We think in any struggle it is
those who have the most to lose who
must be trusted to make the right
decision. It stands to reason that
their decisions will be the most
practical and radical. Therefore, we
accept the leadership of the people
living on the land when we are work-
ing in those struggles.

The Black Hills gathering was at-
tended by mostly white people, where-
as a similar, though much smaller,
survival gathering held in New Mexico

Big Mama Rag Vol.8 No.8

in April, was more Native based.
White people played a minor role
there, and respect for Native cul-
tures was much stronger. Childcare
was a priority. Perhaps one of the
main purposes of the Black Hills
gathering was to reach and educate
white people, in which case this
goal was met.

To fight the corporations that rip
up the land and rip off people for
profit is an issue for women to work
on for many reasons. The majority of
women in the world are fighting for
their survival against the complete
power of life and death imperialism
has over them and those close to
them.

In this country, the uranium is
most often located on Native lands
and the tailings and contaminated
water are left for the Indians to
live with. On the Pine Ridge reser-
vation in South Dakota, WARN (Women
of All Red Nations) discovered that
the majority of wells were contamin-
ated. The rate of miscarriage on the
reservation is six and one-half times
the national average and the infant
mortality rate is twice the national
average. According to Dr. Rosalie
Bertell, radiation affects the immun-
ity system, leading often to cancer,
and affects the genes, preventing the
birth of healthy children.

Another reason feminists, and fem-
inism, must be included in the survi-
val movement is that this movement
may well determine the survival of
the majority of the human race -
that is - all but those who have the
money for expensive shelters and med-
icine to avoid radiation poisoning.
If the movement succeeds, the ideas
of feminism must be present to avoid
a slide back to the traditional roles
for women. And if the movement fails,
feminism will cease to matter in the
general devastation of the planet.

As feminists, we feel the need to
form autonomous women's groups which
will work on anti-nuke issues, such
as uranium mining and related health
issues. We think there were certain
things lacking at the survival gath-
ering. There was no childcare for
participants until late in the week,
and the co-op set-up placed the bur-
den again on the parents. Two work-
shops, on women's sexuality and self-
examination, were cancelled. We are
presently waiting for a reply to our
letter to the BHA inquiring why they
were cancelled.

However, at a women's gathering
held the three days before the sur-
vival gathering, we as women had de-
cided not to raise lesbian or femi-
nist issues as a group. Clearly there
is a contradiction here: We feel the
need to raise feminist issues in the
survival movement, however, at this
survival gathering we realized there
was no way to raise these issues as
a group without creating disruption
and without making judgments about
other (in this case, Native) cul-
tures. We do not want to be racist
and arrogant, we do not want to be
seen that way. The survival gather-
ing was a ten-day event focusing on
“mnc" greed and its effects on land-
based peoples. We were in the posi-
tion of someone who is invited to
dinner. You do not go into another
person's kitchen and start your own
meal if you have accepted her invita-
tion to partake of what she is ser-
ving. So we confronted sexism and
raised feminist issues in workshops
and forums as individuals, and sup-
ported other women.

So, we need to form autonomous
women's groups to do our anti-“mnc"
work. We may sometimes work in coal-
itions with white leftists and/or
Native (or other Third World) groups.
We need to demand that childcare be
provided at all events and that wo-
men's issues be seen as survival
issues, also. We feel that these
demands will be met because we will
be doing work on these survival is-
sues, and because there was obvious
respect for women shown at the Black
Hills. For example, in a crowd of
about 5,000 women and men, we were
never physically or verbally harassed
as women. This is unusual as we all
know. Women led the majority of work-
shops we attended and there were
many strong, angry women speakers.

Finally, we feel it is in our self-
interest to work on survival issues
so we can stay alive and healthy, so

MORE ON PAGE 17