bmr:

where we're at

Hello again! Well, it's been an all too long & all too short
month off from BMR. Hope you missed us!

We were welcomed back after many changes & confrontations.

As a collective, we are now 5. Joan Pettijohn, who has been
a supporter for many months, has finally joined the collective
(after many months of threatening to do so). Yeaaaaa!!! It's
encouraging to see some growth within the collective numbers
as it is so easy to get discouraged while seeing so many ot-
her feminist projects fold. A grave farewell to Meanad and
Persephone Press (see letters on page 19).

But of course, with growth goes struggle--probably the most
accurate description of these past 2 months with BMR, and the
"feminist" community.

While BMR is “only” a news journal, we have always seen our-
selves as a political project--a vehicle for feminist revolu-
tionary process. Seeing ourselves in that light, we are then
confronted with the question of political responsibility in
the Denver communities & society at large. So we find oursel-
ves in ongoing struggle with revolutionary movements (which
tend to ignore or negate feminist politics) and the feminist/
women's movement (which is largely capitalist and anti-revolu-
tionary).

But politics are not so easily or clearly defined...and
neither is political criticism. There is often confusion bet-
ween "political criticism" and "trashing." By definition, cri-
ticism is used when confronting a group or individual where a
basis of unity exists. Your (group's) own perspective must be
clear, and the criticism must be specific and constructive.

Criticism may sometimes be misinterpreted on the part of
the recipient as "trashing," if they are unwilling to accept
the criticism. It's easy to say...we're being trashed...when in
fact you're being validly criticized because our society
pushes a philosophy of individualism. Individualism means...I
can do whatever I want no matter how that decision or action
supports ruling class values & ideas and works against us.
It's a wonderful philosophy to encourage racism, classism,
sexism, capitalism, etc. Just ignore and deny cooperation and
social responsibility.

On the other hand, it is too easy to “trash" in the name of
"responsible political criticism" because of our socialization
as women to be individualistic, woman-hating, self-hating,
competitive, indirect & passive!

So taking in mind the serious need to politically criticize
and yet not trash...where does this lead BMR?

In the case of an anti-psychiatric perspective which BMR
takes...our supposed comrades (feminist & revolutionary) on
both sides fail to see or admit to the danger of psychiatry/
therapy as a strong social control used to direct our minds
(towards viewing the world as individuals' problems), and
incarcerate and severely torture our bodies & actions. (See
pages 12 & 13 on Electroshock, and pages 4 & 7 on Local news.)

eovuer: Pen and Ink Drawing by Lee Hoover, 1983

COLE CHIVE sore Ross, tori Bradford,

Susanna Smith, Deb Luger, Joan Pettijohn

Supporters: Sue Coding, Sue Doell, Linda

Lane, Kay Young, Claire Ellington, Liz Lewis,
Candy McCullough, Rozz Leight, Dee Berman,
Morgan Jiavonna, Kathy Riley

contributors: Vickie Barriga, Louise

Knapp, Patricia Silva

Big Mama Rag 46, a feminist periodical published monthly
by Big Mama Rag, Inc., a non-profit corporation. Manuscripts
and any work (please!) may be submitted to 1724 Gaylord St.,
Denver, CO 80206. Deadline for material submission will gen-
erally fall between the 15th and 18th of the preceding
month. Please enclose a stamped, self-addressed envelope
with all manuscripts. No responsibility is accepted for un-
solicited material. We reserve the right to edit all mater-
ial for length with the input of the author. Subscription

Page 2 - Big Mama Rag, October, 1983

In Opinion & Analysis of The Guardian-Independent Radical
Newsweekly, December 22, 1982 & May 18, 1983 issues, two act-
ivists from the psychiatric inmates liberation movement wrote
on the connections of fascism & oppression with the labels &
concepts of "mental illness." In another issue, The Guardian
printed an opinion which defended the concept of "mental ill-
ness," denying the political & social basis for people's
actions. It went so far as to advocate the use of Thorazine,
electroshock, and psychosurgery. The Guardian itself has not
taken a position on the issues either way.

As BMR has related to the feminist community here in Denver,
we have been confronting issues of RC (Re-Evaluation Co-Coun-
seling), Feminist Therapy & other "alternative" therapies
(behavior modification, Neuro-Linguistic Programming, etc.).
Feeling all were set up in the name of vehicles for social
change, they yet, in practice, are classist & racist and are
used just as additional avenues into the psychiatric institu-
tions & incarceration.

The feminist community has been extremely defensive (& hos-
tile) to this perspective. It not only threatens many women's
livelihoods (as therapists) but many feel it is threatening
their only survival techniques. And that is exactly what the
psychiatric system wants us to believe...that they are our
only answer and that the difficulties we have in coping are
our individual problems, rather than social oppression. Psy-
chiatry says learn to accept your oppression rather than fig-
ht back & change the system.

Process? Well, the 2 most threatening issues dealt with in
the BMR collective (for months now) have been psychiatric
assault and anti-Semitism/Zionism/Israel/Palestine. These iss-
ues are core to our hearts and survival, and directly threat-
ening to Lori as an ex-psychiatric inmate, and to Deb as a
Jewish woman.

So our process too must be criticized. For instead of con-
fronting these issues head-on, we have sidestepped them for
all too long, for fear of hurting each other and creating
more disagreement. What has resulted is a wavering of trust.
How do we criticize the Israeli government's genocide against
the Palestinian people while still recognizing the long his-
tory of genocide against the Jewish people? And how threaten-
ing are those discussions (and avoidances of those discuss-
ions) to Deb as a Jewish woman? How do we learn about the ab-
uses/assaults of the psychiatric system & destroy the myth of
“mental illness," without Lori being put into a very vulner-
able and threatened position?

So within the collective, we waver between very painful
confrontative discussions and silence!...And thus so, our
levels of trust waver with each other too!

As for our upcoming issue on anti-Semitism/Zionism/Pales-
tine/Israel, it will now be postponed until December...need-
less to say why. BH _St- yseg/e__the BMR Collective

inside BMR:

Where We're At..............2

Review

LUCE OV Gs ot ain e K's 0ie-ais sis s Prances Farmers ss sc

Electroshock Update.......13

Local/Rape Hotline....4,5,6,7

Hot BRACES. os gewinscaces sd & 9 ig eet Ds
National: Canadian Activism........ walt
| = eri Held Host ides isig ws
-Women Against Imperialism.10 fe eee age an a
Merle Woo Speech........0s.« CEs CRM OTIC ATy sso ns poms 2 Paloma aol ee Bee
in Ree rece: eee Classifieds & Ads.......22,23
PI SOM NCW = sinew ons. 2 a wise» 0 5 16
RESOULUCES - . "sa Niles Gir sur she se

Donna Dimaulo.............16

Rates are $9/year (11 issues) for individuals in the U.S.,
$15 for Canada, Mexico and plain brown wrapper, $18 overseas,
$22-U.S. institutions, $24-Mexico, Canada and $26 overseas.
Free to all U.S. women incarcerated in prisons or psychiatric
institutions. BMR is on file at the New Alexandria Library
for Lesbian Women in Florence, MA and is available on micro-
film (Vol. 1, #1 Oct.'72 through July '79) directly from BMR
for $75. BMR is indexed by the Alternative Press Center, P.O.
Box 7229, Baltimore, MD 21218. Our phone # is 303-322-2010.