hot briefs

Compiled by Vicki Piotter  
The Lesser Crime  

Both cases involved alcohol, both in-  
volved wife-beating, and both of the  
accused said they had not realized they  
had killed the other person. Garry  
Smarch, of Whitehorse, recently got  
three years in prison for beating his  
common-law wife to death with his fists.  
Early in 1979, Christine Linklater, of  
Old Crow, was sentenced to life in pri-  
son for shooting her husband, who had  
repeatedly beaten her. The obvious ob-  
servation: killing a woman is less of  
a crime.  

-Kinesis  

Anger is what is  
needed, anger at  
the conditions of  
an oppressive so-  
ciety and at the  

people who keep  
it that way. With-  
out anger there  
won’t be any  
change.  

Too Many Deaths  

A 16-year-old girl sentenced to 55  
days in jail for traffic violations  
was found hanged in her cell, one week  
before she was to have been released.  
Anne Venne of Plattsburgh, NY, sent  
to the Albany County Jail when she  
could not pay $170 in fines, died of  
asphyxiation after she was discovered  
in her cell. Justice Roger Danshaw said  
he felt the sentence was "very lenient"  
and said the apparent suicide was "very  
unfortunate" but that Anne Venne had  
been accorded all her rights. Venne was  
the fourth inmate to have committed  
suicide at the jail since June 1977.  

-Matrix  

What Price Freedom?  

In Papua, New Guinea, there is a  
growing movement among women and some  
young men against the practice of pay-  
ing bride price. Recently, a young  
widow hanged herself after her hus-  
band's parents refused to let her re-  
marry—four years after his death—  
because they had paid a high bride  
price for her and intended to keep her.  

-News and Letters  

Justice At Last  

The Justice Department has signed  
a consent order stating it cannot re-  
fuse to hire someone solely because  
they live out of wedlock with a person  
of the opposite sex. The order came as  
a result of a suit filed by Kathleen  
Bishop, who had lost out on a job be-  
cause of living with her boyfriend for  
seven years. The Department's ration-  
ale at the time: cohabitation out of  
wedlock is "widely regarded as a sign  
of low character."  

-National NOW Times  

A Party for Bigots  

At its 30th national convention the  
Socialist Workers Party (SWP) decided  
to end its support of and intervention  
into the lesbian/gay rights movement.  
The SWP had dropped their policy of  
excluding open lesbians and gay men  
from membership in the early seventies  
when the new wave of gay liberation  
exploded onto the political scene,  
joining coalitions and building new  
groups around this struggle. However,  
at the '79 convention, the SWP flatly  
stated to its members that "coming  
out" (especially on the job) is not  
political, but purely personal, and  
even has dangers of leading into  
"petit-bourgeois utopian lifestylism."  

-The Guardian  

Light My Fire  

According to the US National Fire  
Academy training manual, arson and  
lesbianism go hand in hand. The unsub-  
stantiated characteristics of the fe-  
male arsonist are said to be the fol-  
lowing: a) she usually sets her fires in  
or near her own house b) she sets fires  
during daylight hours c) she sets small  
fires d) she is thought to be homosex-  
ual.  

-San Diego Update  

where we’re at  

Well, literally, we're still in the basement of 1724 Gaylord, still  

freezing, and ardently looking forward to spring.  

We had a flood down  

here during the middle of the final night of last month's production.  
It was nothing serious, but by the time what pass for carpets here had  
gotten thoroughly soaked, the atmosphere resembled nothing as closely as  

the Okefenokee Swamp.  

Perhaps we can use our soggy feet (and, therefore,  

soggy brains) as an excuse for the rather glaring foul-ups more than a few  

of you faithful readers no doubt spotted in last issue.  

One that has  

caused us particular grief with our subscribers (especially you librarians  
out there) is the mistaken belief on the part of the February issue that  

it was the January issue.  

In fact, there was no January issue, but some  

anti-feminist gremlin no doubt flowed in with the flood and stuck Jan-  

uary on the February cover.  

We apologize for any confusion this has caused.  

As to the rather strange redundancy of certain happenings in the  
‘Decade of Feminism" feature--each collective member was responsible for  

researching two years for the piece.  

As is common with collectively written  

articles, everyone was late with their assignments, and the whole thing  

was never proofed as a unit.  

Embarrassed is a gross understatement.  

Which brings us to the subject of proofers--we need some.  
If you can read, you can proof, so don't be shy, come on by.  

And we again make our  
regular appeal for reviewers--books, poetry, movies, happenings (relevant  
to women, of course).  

And while we're on the subject of things that we need, let's not forget  

money. (What, again!?!)
Production costs are on the rise again.  

It wasn't until after we got the issue back  
that anyone read through it from start to finish.  

To say that we are  

embarrassed is a gross understatement.  

If you can read, you can proof, so don't be shy, come on by.  

And we again make our  
regular appeal for reviewers--books, poetry, movies, happenings (relevant  
to women, of course).  

And while we're on the subject of things that we need, let's not forget  

money. (What, again!?!)
Production costs are on the rise again.  

We have received a notice from the  

printer that ink and paper have gone up, and another price rise is ex-  

pected.  

So, pursuant to improving our financial picture  
begins at home--support your mama,  

(as they say in big business), we are having another wonderful BMR benefit.  
The info is on the back cover, and we hope to see everyone there.  

(Yea!) All  
Charity  

We also want to remind everyone of the upcoming theme issues: Women  

and Institutions in April and Class in June.  

We welcome any article that  

you might want to submit on either subject, especially Institutions, since  

that issue is closer.  

For more elaboration on the themes, see the back  

page of last issue (the one that says January on the cover, that's really  

February).  

You might want to take a drive by and see our new paper box at First  

and Steel, in front of the Safeway.  

And if you do, and you try to buy a  

paper, and the box jams (or any of our boxes jam) and you lose your coins,  

please let us know.  

We'll make a cheerful refund, if we can't talk you out of it.  

Mama  

Footbound Road  

China's Civil Aviation Administra-  
tion is advertising for comely, "well-  
proportioned" young ladies to serve as  
hostesses on overseas flights, accord-  
ing to a report in the New York Times.  
The Times says that the new pragma-  
tists, in their drive to gear up  
China's economy, are interested in  
the appearance of modernity, as well  
as foreign exchange. Instead, it seems  
that the new Chinese pragmatists, well  
on their way down the capitalist road,  
are interested in wiping out all the  
gains women made with the Cultural  
Revolution. How soon before footbind-  
ing is restored? Everyone knows the  
most desirable woman has the least  
amount of real freedom.  

Pocket-Pinched  

When the B.C. Canada Human Rights  
Branch discovered recently that an em-  
ployer had patted and pinched a number  
of his female employees, it made him  
pay for assertiveness training courses  
for his staff. Confronted with the  
women's complaint, the employer evi-  
denced total ignorance about the dynam-  
ics of sexual harassment. He simply  
could not understand why his employees  
had not rebuffed him forcefully. "The  
employer said these women should have  
said they didn't like having their  
breasts grabbed," commented Hanne Jen-  
sen with the B.C. Human Rights Branch.  

-Kinesis  

Photographer Decked  

In California, feminists poured out  
to demonstrate against the "Los Angeles  
Magazine" for running an advertisement  
that encouraged violence against women.  
The ad showed a beautiful, fashionably  
dressed, but distraught woman fleeing  
from a leather-jacketed male pursuer.  
In an inset photo, the same woman was  
shown sprawled out on a brick staircase  
apparently left for dead. On the edge  
of the inset photo it read, “Decked out  
for the holidays." The name of the  
photographer was on the ad for the posh  
boutique, The Ultimate Collection.  
Kathy McMillan, who owned the boutique,  
wrote a letter of apology for the next  
issue of the magazine and fired the  
photographer after being besieged by  
calls of protest, and said she was also  
outraged, having not seen the ad before  
its publication.  

-National NOW Times  

Adios, Las Hermanas  

Las Hermanas Coffee House, a land-  
mark in San Diego, noted by its beaut-  
iful and colorful outdoor mural, has  
closed due to decline in use of the  
space, lack of woman energy and the  
near doubling of rent. Opened in 1974  
as a place for women to get together  
without the trappings of the dominant  
male culture, the Las Hermanas worked  
collectively to provide concerts,  
food, and a variety of programs to  
women in the San Diego area. She will  
be missed.  

-Thursday's Child  

Unequal Equality  

A Philadelphia housewife, Herta  
Tuttle, is fighting a Family Court  
order which requires her to seek em-  
ployment in order to "contribute equal-  
ly" to the support of her two children.  
Tuttle receives $100 weekly for child  
support from her policeman husband.  
She is demanding the court recognize  
the dollar value of her work in the  
home, and claims that unless it does  
it is impossible to equally divide the  
responsibility of support as the court  
has tried to, citing the state's ERA.  

-New Directions for Women  

Hidden Dangers  

The miseries of cabin fever and un-  
ending housework have now been recog-  
nized in court. A Norfolk, VA, home-  
maker got a temporary reprieve on a  
shoplifting charge when a judge said  
that "being home doing housework all  
the time" was not good for her and  
was part of her sudden problem with  
the law. She lost the initial re-  
prieve, however. At the time of the  
sentencing, the judge said he had not  
known she had just been convicted of  
another theft charge. He went back  
and found her guilty, giving her a  
suspended sentence.  

-Ms. Gazette  

Big Mama Rag Vol.8 No.2  

The Biggest Pimp  

A prostitute from Strasbourg is taking  
the French government to court, accus-  
ing it of pimping. The dispute began  
when she was told by the government to  
pay $100,000 in back taxes. The govern-  
ment had based its claim on what they  
think is an average working year for a  
prostitute: five customers a day at  
$25 each, 200 days a year. "If the gov-  
ernment says I'm a whore and then takes  
my money, that's pimping," she said.  

"I don't even know a pimp who'd demand  
this much."  

-Kinesis  

Wrist Slapping  

The heads of several French pharma-  
ceutical companies were found guilty  
Feb. 11 of involuntary homicide in  
the 1972 deaths of 33 babies caused  
by their companies' products. The de-  
fendants were given suspended sen-  
tences ranging from one to twenty  
months. The babies died, and scores  
of others were injured, because of an  
overdose of hexachlorophene in their  
baby powder. Uncorrected negligence  
kept the overdose from being detected.  

-The Guardian  

Young Women Wait  

The Supreme Court said it will hear  
arguments this fall and decide some-  
time in 1981 whether parents have the  
legal right to be notified before  
their daughters undergo abortions. The  
Court agreed to review a Utah law,  
currently being challenged by an 18  
year-old woman, that requires doctors  
to notify parents before performing re-  
quested abortions on minors. The woman  
at age 15 went out of state to have  
her abortion to avoid her parents be-  
ing told. The woman's lawyer says the  
Utah law violates her constitutional  
rights to have an abortion “without  
undue interference by the state."  

-00B  

Test the Texts  

According to the Council on Inter-  
racial Books for Children, "State  
bodies, like public schools, have no  
right to purchase with public funds  
and to require children to read texts  
which in any way belittle the worth of  
females or minorities, or stereotype  
them. Our legal advisors believe that  
class action suits can be brought  
against local school systems that vio-  
late the Constitution by buying text-  
books which fail to give all students  
"equal protection."  

-Media Report to Women  

Every Mother’s Duty  

Bonnie McCormick joined a sit-in at  
a nuclear power plant after reading  
a school paper by her teenaged daugh-  
ter on nuclear hazards. McCormick and  
her daughter were among 95 protesters  
arrested last year at the Philadelphia  
Electric Company's nuclear power plant  
at Limerick, Penn. Last month District  
Court Judge Charles Dasch sentenced  
McCormick to four days in prison and  
referred her daughter to juvenile  
authorities. The judge then criticized  
the mother for giving her daughter a  
criminal record. McCormick responded:  
"The judge told me I wasn't a good  
mother for doing what I've done, the  
fact I was condoning breaking the law,  
but this goes beyond the law. It's the  
health of my daughter and her daugh-  
ters. As scared as I am of going to  
jail, that's nothing compared to how  
I feel about the hazards of nuclear  
power.”  

-Hersay