A Statement from Diana Press

Press Suspends Women’s Publications

Coletta Reid and Kathy Tomyris

Over the past year many women have expressed concern about and interest in the survival of Diana Press. This article is to give women who care about our work a better understanding about where we've been, where we are now and where we're going. We're going to try to deal here with the many issues and questions that have come up around us in the last year. This article was written by the two women currently managing the press and trying to put it back on its feet. We are Coletta Reid and Kathy Tomyris. Coletta was one of the founders of the press and has been with it since 1972. Coletta comes from a rural white working-class background. She is thirty-six and has a nine-year-old daughter. Kathy came to the press in July, 1978 from North Carolina where she was co-owner of Ladyslipper Music and an Olivia Records distributor. She is twenty-eight, from a middle-class background and white. Both are lesbian feminists.

Brief History

Since many of you may be more familiar with recent controversy around the press than our background, we would like to give you a brief history of Diana Press. Diana Press was started in January, 1972 by a group of women in Baltimore, Maryland who wanted to learn skills in printing. After about six months a decision was made to try to make the press self-supporting and able to pay salaries. For the next 34 years three or four working-class women worked at the press. Casey Czarnik and Coletta owned and ran the press; the other women worked with/for them. During that period most of our money, labor and time was put into establishing a stable and solid feminist business. From trying to make the business both financially successful and feminist, we became involved with many other feminist businesses around the country, both in sharing information and helping each other out. We tried to articulate the purposes and goals of feminist businesses in a 1974 article in Quest: a feminist quarterly, “Taking Care of Business." We always felt ourselves to be aligned with other struggling feminist businesses as well as other women in printing and publishing.

In 1976 we became involved in Feminist Economic Network, an association of women's businesses aimed at sharing skills and resources. The various women's businesses in FEN joined their profit and loss statements and balance sheets in order to have the assets necessary to borrow a large sum of money to buy a women's building in Detroit, Michigan. Much controversy surrounded the purchase and opening of that building. After a difficulty-ridden six months, the building was forced to close and FEN dissolved.

Working with other feminist businesses, particularly the Oakland Feminist Women's Health Center and Laura Brown had proved so exciting that we decided to move our entire operation from Baltimore, Maryland to Oakland, California. There were a number of other factors that entered into this decision. One was the fact that we had to move out of our Baltimore workspace, quickly becoming too small and inefficient for the growth of our business. We found that real estate in Oakland cost one tenth of real estate on the East Coast and that there was a lesbian real estate broker in Oakland willing to help us find a building. We thought that we would find more skilled women workers in the Bay Area, and Women's Press Collective, already in Oakland, was on the verge of closing. We felt that combining the two presses would bring the best of both together. We had been in close contact with Wendy Cadden and Judy Grahn of Women's Press Collective since 1972 and we were very excited about working with them.

While en route to Oakland our move was greeted by a paper by Martha Shelley called "What is FEN?". The article helped create a climate of distrust of us in the Bay Area that became virtually impossible to break through. Our first six months were devoted almost entirely to setting up the business, getting control of a much larger workspace (painting large areas, building offices and a darkroom, etc.), and finding skilled women with whom to work. We immediately found ourselves in a financially more difficult situation than we had ever been in in Baltimore. We ourselves became prey to the distrust around us. Disagreements grew among the women who worked at the press and at the Health Center, all of which took its emotional toll. Finally around the first of September, 1977, some six months after we had arrived, all our equipment was operating and we were able to get a larger press and folder. In the largest risk we had ever taken, we combined the three titles we had agreed to publish in Baltimore with the titles waiting at Women's Press Collective and a new title chosen together, a total of eleven books. We ordered paper and supplies on credit, and geared up for a big production push. For the first time, production of the books we were publishing became the priority for our operation. We went out on a limb--it broke off.

Even if everything had gone smoothly, producing that many books that fall with unfamiliar equipment and new personnel was unrealistic. As it was, the vandalism on October 25, 1977 destroyed much of our back list, equipment and current work. Furthermore, it made it emotionally impossible for many of the women at the press to work with the same energy and enthusiasm as before. Some had lost the will to go on, but stayed because they felt bad about leaving. After that vandalism there were disagreements among the leadership (Casey, Coletta, and Laura Brown) as to the direction the press should take. Basically these disagreements prevented any positive direction from happening for an entire year. The press has been in a holding pattern of sorts. Since the vandalism we have been consumed with maintaining our back list, making up for the vandalism, and trying desperately to put out some new titles with a constantly dwindling staff.

The financial condition of the press since the vandalism has been precarious. We have existed on a month-to-month hand-to-mouth basis. The insurance payment, most of which came eight months later, and the donations that we received, kept us going for the past year, but did not give us the relief necessary to recover. The vandalism wasn't the only cause of our problems though. Our overexpansion would have made the year extremely difficult as it was; coupled with the vandalism it became nearly impossible to keep going.

Disagreements among the leadership came to a head in the summer of 1978 culminating in Casey Czarnik and Laura Brown leaving (or being asked to leave, depending on your perspective). When Casey left we lost one of our most valuable assets, not only an excellent printer and designer, but also one of the major forces behind the creation of the press. From that point on our financial position left us little choice but to hire essentially inexperienced printers. The leadership was assumed by a management team formed from the women who had been at the press the longest and Kathy, who had just moved here to become production manager.

Break Up

Over the next six months the burden of running a financially failing institution slowly eroded their numbers and morale. Most of the women at the press were here during the FEN controversy, the vandalism, the leadership disagreements, and Casey and Coletta's long and painful break-up. These women were being asked to work for little money, not even-subsistence wages, while under emotional strains that were tiring and demoralizing. It is hard to say which drained us the most; both made it harder for everyone to keep coming in to work. We were all under tremendous financial and emotional pressure. Our personal inability to meet our own financial commitments as well as the press's daily precariousness was really more than any of us should have been asked to shoulder. By mid-December it became clear that we were not making any progress and that a drastic change in direction was necessary if the press were to be saved. A decision was made to close the shop temporarily, consolidate equipment, personnel and goals, and reorganize towards financial stability.

Hindsight being what it is, we can now look back at the chain of events that brought us to this point and see some of the mistakes we made. The first was our decision to expand without a sufficient financial base. The next was our inability to start functioning again until six months after the move to California. We then prematurely decided to make publishing our own titles a priority without first establishing a solid printing business in the Bay Area. A major financial error was the purchase of a large press that was difficult to operate and has not run at all for the last ten months. The vandalism occurred at a crucial time when we were already financially and physically overextended. And finally, the inability of the leadership (Coletta, Casey, and Laura) to agree immediately after the vandalism on what steps to take perpetuated the problems. These factors created an unstable situation that continued throughout the next year. The attempts of the management team to reverse this trend came too late and were not drastic enough to work.

Direction Change

Probably most of our readers will be shocked and surprised at our change in direction since we are known primarily for our publishing. There are two factors which have influenced our choice. One is the knowledge that women's publishing and small publishing in general is under tremendous pressure from New York publishers right now, because of the demonstrated viability of the feminist market. Commercial publishers are willing to bring out good feminist books right now. It seems absurd to publish books that could be published by large publishing houses and be unable because of limited resources to do as good a marketing job as they could (advances, distribution, promotion, etc.). Our publishing program came into existence to fulfill a need for good feminist literature that was not being met by New York publishers. Much of the heaviest criticism we've received has come around our publishing program. There have been many reports that we have failed to pay royalties and that we have supported ourselves off of money that was due our authors. First of all, it is important to know that all our books had sharing-of-net-profits contracts. That means that after costs of production, advertising, and distribution are paid any excess monies are split between the author/illustrator and Diana Press. We devised such a contract in 1972 in order to compensate for the fact that we had no money to start a publishing program. All that we could offer was our own labor and the use of our equipment. Once a book reached the break-even point then the receipts were shared. Generally speaking, Diana Press's share has only been enough to pay for the paper for the printing of the next book. Until last year only the books of Rita Mae Brown had sold enough to earn any money for the author.

It seems to us that the voiced discontent of many of our authors is due in large part to unfulfilled expectations. When we moved to California we envisioned a much larger and more successful publishing operation. But when none of our prospects materialized and in fact our sales decreased, many authors felt we had lied to them.

In addition our communication with authors became practically non-existent. We became overburdened with trying to survive and so let this correspondence slide, along with other things. We know now that we should not have allowed our other problems to monopolize us and hurt this vital link to the women who wrote our books. We are sorry.

There have been various reports that Diana Press is being sued by a number of authors. We are being sued by Rita Mae Brown, not for non-payment of net profits, but for not selling enough copies of her books. We have a lawyer and we are defending ourselves, and have been advised that there is no evidence to substantiate Rita Mae's claims.

We were requested by a lawyer for the executrix of Jeannette Foster to provide her with an accounting in March, 1978. At that time, Say Variand Women in Literature had not yet reached the break-even point. We have just provided a second accounting that shows the book started earning money in 1978. The reports asserting that we deliberately withheld money from Jeannette Foster forcing her to remain in a nursing home have both tragically misrepresented the situation.