bmn:

Hello again, we are still here. Are you still out there?  
Please continue to write letters, send articles & graphics to  
us, we love & need to hear from you. We are hoping to still  
get articles & graphics by & about older dykes/feminists/political women. Under the foot of the "youth culture," older  
people are deserted & displaced, drugged & institutionalized.  
Talk to the women in our movements who have so much history &  
politics to share--interview your mother or grandmother about  
her work/life & send what you hear on to BMR.  

Speaking of still being here, our finances are still pretty  
bad as in not making ends meet. We are doing fundraising at  
this end, & thank all those who have sent in donations, through  
the mail. The Denver-based Film Festival Committee showed several lesbian films, followed by the Still Ain't Satisfied  
Feminist Singers & a dance, in conjunction with the celebration  
of Lesbian & Gay Pride Week here in Denver. It was great  
to be in a whole roomful of lesbians. The Festival Committee  
donated part of their profits to BMR (thanks!!! women we can  
go to print now) & the rest will be used to show more films  
here in Denver.  

The campaign to Save & exalt the nuclear family, & eliminate  
lesbians & gays is certainly intense these days. With JoAnn  
Newark rotting in a military jail because of the crime of  
lesbianism, as homophobics respond to the issue of AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome) by trying to re-institute  
anti-sodomy laws, as fundamentalists heighten their "biblical"  
attacks on homosexuals & lesbians which help build the fascist  
politics on the rise in the US, as in Northampton, MA  
the organization of N.O.A.H.-National Organization Against  
Homosexuals organize against Lesbians & Gays there, as the  
upsurge in Lesbian & Queer bashing by the KKK & fundamentalist  
Christians goes on unconfronted... to name just a few attacks  
on us as lesbians & women. It is important for political les-  
bians to keep on pushing for an analysis of our oppression &  
exploitation as lesbians in connection with the ongoing sys-  
tems of white supremacy & imperialism. In a time when fascist  
politics are gaining support we have to fight the foot that's  
on our necks by taking on more than "single issue" organizing  
tactics. The celebration of Lesbian & Gay Pride Week this  
year must lead us into continued activism for the weeks to  
come. Political work based on confronting the oppression of  
all lesbians--Third World, Chicana/Mexicana, Asian-American,  
Jewish, differently-abled, & older lesbians & lesbians incarcerated in jails & mental institutions especially--is a nec-  
essity.  

Here in Denver this need to organize as lesbians in  
solidarity with other issues is made clear through the case of  
Sally Goodman, who works for Martin Marietta here in CO. Martin  
Marietta launched a campaign of harassment against the United  
Auto Workers, Local 766 (on file are more than 400 grievances  
from 1982 alone by union workers against the Corporation).  

cover:  

Original work by Laurie White.  

collective:  

Deb Luger, Lori Bradford, Susanna Smith, Bobbe Ross  

supporters:  

Liz Lewis, Sue Goding, Linda Lane, Claire Ellington, Joan  
Pettijohn, Kay Young, Candy McCullough, Kathy Riley.  

contributors:  

Patricia Silva, Clara Kaplan, Barbara Wish, Vickie Barriga,  
Louise Knapp.  

Big Mama Rag is a feminist periodical published monthly  
by Big Mama Rag, Inc., a non-profit corporation. Manuscripts  
and artwork (please!) may be submitted to 1724 Gaylord St.,  
Denver, CO 80206. Deadline for material submission will gen-  
erally fall between the 15th and 31st of the preceding  
month. Please enclose a stamped, self-addressed envelope  
with all manuscripts. No responsibility is accepted for un-  
solicited material. We reserve the right to edit all mater-  
ial for length with the input of the author. Subscription  

Page 2 - Big Mama Rag, July 1983  

where we’re at  

Then the government got involved in the union busting, as the  
Defense Department's Defense Investigative Services decided  
to reconsider her "security clearance," making issue of her  
private life & political views: sexual preference, socialist  
connections, feminist politics & her constant pro-union  
stand.  

We have stuffed this issue to our individual subscribers  
within the US with a leaflet with lots more information on  
Sally's case. For others who want more info but didn't get a  
leaflet, write or call Jaye Wilde, 400 So. Decatur, Denver, CO  
80219, Phone (303) 922-5727. Sally is especially in need of  
support & money now; she was in a serious car accident, with a  
long-term recovery period involved.  

Bobbe's article this month on women & alcoholism/Brown Bag  
Readers Theatre ends months of silence in the pages of BMR  
(& much of the rest of the feminist press) on the issues of  
alcohol & other drug dependency. In our lesbian communities,  
alcoholism is killing lots of our sisters, deaths we remain  
oblivious to. The stereotype of the "alcoholic" keeps us from  
identifying alcohol use & addiction in our communities & our  
society at large. As a political issue, women alcoholics are  
very hidden by our culture, because we (the patriarchy most  
of all) don't like to think of women being DRUNK. We hope  
that Bobbe's article will connect with women who are or have  
been using/addicted to alcohol & other drugs & inspire you to  
write about the politics of your own use or most importantly  
your struggles for recovery. We would like to see the connect-  
ions between the politics of oppression & the politics of al-  
cohol & other drug dependencies explored by women--using the  
pages of BMR as a forum. How & how often do we drug ourselves  
to be able to tolerate our pain & fear & anger, to be able to  
keep on doing our political work? How does that work in our  
movements?  

Alcoholism & other drug use/addiction are very difficult is-  
sues to talk about. We are all very defensive on the subject,  
our self-interest being real apparent as users & those in  
recovery. The stigmas surrounding alcoholics & drug addicts  
have defined them as sinners, criminals & sickos; dirty & sick  
--out on the fair streets of our cities. Not an image that any  
of us would like to be identified with, or talk about any of  
our friends being connected with. That alcohol kills is not a  
reality that we like to be connected with & yet for alcoholics  
& other drug addicts it's real. Too consistently in the femin-  
ist movement & in our social communities we refuse to deal  
with the issues of chemical dependency as the life-threatening  
reality it is. When we do this we deny the long-standing oppr-  
ession of women in recovery which hurts them & us.  

Collectively we are collectively tired, but continue on  
knowing that in just one more month we will be on vacation.  
This means we will not meet in August, & not publish a Septem-  
ber issue. See you next month. Big Mama Rag —  

inside BMR:  

Where We're At.........+--2  
Letters..................3  
Local x  
Alcoholism/Theatre....4,5  

Hot BLASTS... wwe pene c «Oph  

International  

Gypsies Organizing..10,11  
& 12  

Italy Protests.........13  

Voices  
Psychiatric Assault...8,9  

Chilean Struggles......13  

Armagh-No. Ireland..14,15  
National  

M@@SUTE Tee eceecsade ceed  
Political Kidnapping...16  
Welfare Poem...........16  
America Held Hostage....5  

Calendar/More-On.........17  
Classifieds & Ads.....18,19  

RESOURCES.... ce cccceecese dl  

Rates are $9/year (11 issues) for individuals in the U.S.,  
$15 for Canada, Mexico and plain brown wrapper, $18 over-  
seas, and $22 for U.S. institutions. BMR is free to all  
women incarcerated in prisons or psychiatric institutions.  
BMR is on file at the New Alexandria Library for Lesbian  
Women in Florence, MA and is available on microfilm (Vol. 1,  
#1 Oct. ‘72 through July '79) directly from BMR for $60.  

BMR is indexed by the Alternative Press Center, P.O. Box  
7229, Baltimore, MD 21218. Our phone # is (303) 322-2010.