hot briefs.

tOLW ty

ty

How NOW, Anyhow?

A Milwaukee, Wisconsin, lawyer who
is a member of N.O.W. and considers
himself a "feminist" recently defended
gang members accused of brutally
beating, gang raping, and threatening
a woman with a knife.

Alan D. Eisenberg used in the
defense many stereotypes about women
who are raped. He did not deny that
several members of the gang, the
Outlaws, had sex with the victim, but
he insinuated that she had "invited"
the rape. He stressed that she willingly
took a ride and willingly went
to the clubhouse where the attack
occurred. He repeatedly asked her
about her job as a go-go dancer,
about how much she had to drink, and
about whether or not she smoked marijuana.

Eisenberg also tried to circumvent
Wisconsin's new sexual assault law,
fought hard for by feminists, concerning
the woman's past sexual conduct.
At one point in the trial, he said,
"The defense contends that the woman
is the most animalistic, maniacal,
degenerate, perverted woman that the
state has ever put on the stand in
a court of law."

During one point Eisenberg asked
for a mistrial because the courtroom
was filled with "...radical feminist,
lesbian separatist banshees..."

The jury found the Outlaws guilty.

Can Continental Can

For the first time, a court has
backed a woman worker's complaint
that her employer did nothing to stop
sexual harassment by co-workers. The
Minnesota State Supreme Court ruled
June 6 that Continental Can Co. must
pay $5000 damages to a 30-year-old
woman who was forced to quit after
being repeatedly grabbed and teased
by male co-workers.

The woman charged that her complaints
to supervisors fell on deaf ears, and
thus the company's tacitly supported
the harassment. The court agreed, ruling
that the state's human rights act requires
management to take "prompt and appropriate
action" when informed of sexual harassment
by its employees. Past decisions have been
limited to a company's liability for actions
of supervisors.

Bridekillers

Two Indian newspapers have charged
that unwanted wives are being burned
to death in that country.

The conservative publication,
Hindu, of Madras charges that 200 to
300 women are burned to death each
year in India. And the Indian Express
of New Delhi reports that Delhi
actually has an organized band of
"bridekillers." The Express says
that 350 women were burned to death
in Delhi in 1975 and 200 in 1978.

The Express goes on to say, “Until
women acquire importance as a voting
group...a woman can be roasted alive
every day of the year...and our veg-
etarian society will not turn a hair."

Teaching Racism

Tina Bahadori, an honor student who
had won the right to deliver the valedictory
address at Atlantic City High School, was
forced to cancel her speech due to a racist
petition campaign begun by several of her
teachers in collusion with the school
administration.

Eighty signatures were collected
from about half the school's teachers
against Bahadori giving her speech
due to the “hostage crisis" in Iran.

Costly Arrest

Jane Margolis, a leftist and an executive
board member of San Francisco Communication
Workers of America local 9410, has received
$3500 and a letter of apology from the
Secret Service for their part in her
arrest on the floor of her union's
convention last year in Detroit. A
spokesperson for the Secret Service
said that the award is the "first of
its type we're aware of."

Margolis asserted that she was held
because she had planned to ask President
Carter, who was speaking to the
convention, a hostile question.

The Secret Service said in its letter
of apology that, "It was his (the
agent's) belief that he was assisting
a Detroit police officer in making an
arrest. At the same time, the Detroit
police officer believed that the arrest
was being made for violation of federal law.

Margolis was handcuffed and held for
40 minutes.

"It is now apparent that no arrest
should have been made under the circumstances,"
the apology goes on to say.

Margolis had sued the agency for
$1 million.

She plans to donate the settlement
to the union's defense fund.

Dykes Seek Comic Relief

LESBIAN

The San Francisco Lesbian Chorus,
invited to sing at a midnight entertainment
to raise money to repay the campaign debts
of gay City Supervisor Harry Britt, walked
out in protest over the racist and woman-hating
remarks of a female impersonator "comedian."

The man, Charles Pierce, wowed the
predominantly male audience with
"jokes" such as:

“Why do Iranian women wear veils?
Because they're so ugly. They should
keep ‘em on, keep ‘em on." and

“Why do they put cocks on weather-
vanes? Because wouldn't a cunt look
funny flapping in the breeze?”

He also said that he wouldn't want
to "stand down wind of a weather cunt."

The chorus said later that they wondered
if the racist slurs and violently anti-woman
attitudes expressed on stage would even have
been noticed if the chorus had not walked out.

Britt later apologized for Pierce's
remarks.

So Who’s Responsible?

A Chicago woman filed suit against
the Cook County Sheriff's Department
after the Department evicted her belongings
from her Prospect Heights apartment,
even though she had paid her rent. Bonnie
Albrecht said she returned home one evening
to find that all of her belongings, including
$500 in cash, had simply been turned into
the yard. Many of her things were subsequently
lifted by passers-by. The county sheriff's
department admits it made the wrong eviction,
but denies any responsibility for her loss.

Chinese Justice

Fu Yuehuan has been sentenced to
two years in prison for accusing her
Communist Party Secretary of raping
her and for demonstrating publicly
after the charges were dismissed.

In October, 1979, her trial for libeling
the rapist and causing disorder was adjourned
after a witness testified in her favor. In late
December, an official report announced that a
new investigation had failed to reveal any truth
in the allegation of rape and said that Yuehuan
was “morally degenerate” and had knowingly
committed libel.

She was not convicted of libel, however,
because the report concluded that the libel
had not caused undue damage. She was sentenced
for "violating public order" for a demonstration
in January, 1979, when she and other demonstrators
blocked Peking traffic for more than an hour in a
demand for human rights.

Susan B. Porn

A San Francisco "joint" called the
Film Den features "Fantasy in Flesh,"
a coin-operated booth where you put
a dollar in the slot, the curtains
part, and there sits a naked woman
with whom you may chat, but may not
touch, for about 90 seconds.

Only one coin will operate this
slot—the Susan B. Anthony dollar.

Cleaver Cleaver

Former Black Panther and self-admitted
rapist Eldridge Cleaver has apparently
split with his new born-again Christian
friends because he believes that the
falling-on-the-knees posture of many
“born-agains" induces homosexuality in men
because of “its essential femininity," especially
in the use of ejaculations as "Come inside me, Lord."

Cleaver was chased off the stage of a college
for pointing out the very faggoty way born-agains
relate to Jesus.

Cleaver helped to start a new church called
Christlam, a combination of Christianity and Islam,
which is based on male supremacy, and includes
a group called “Guardians of the Sperm" and a
course for young men which will teach them how
to accost women on street corners. Cleaver said
that the course will “teach men how to deal with
the following situation: "You see a good looking
woman on the street corner. Immediately you want
to screw her. We teach pursuit. How to insinuate
yourself into her life once you find her. How to
pin her down.”

Cleaver boasts that he beats his wife when she
rebels against his authority. Said Cleaver, "You
take this battered wife thing. That's mostly
lesbian propaganda. I consider it an insidious
movement. There are all kinds of institutions to
service and defend those so-called battered wives.
What nobody's saying is that most of the time the
bitch needed her ass kicked.”

Cleaver's Guardians of the Sperm organization
teaches men to conserve their vital bodily fluids
and to protect them from lesbian ideologues who
he believes thwart the male sperm in its sacred
mission of sexual intercourse.

"The dwelling place of God is the male sperm,”
says Cleaver, and sex these days is dangerous for
this "vital element." "You're sending sperm into
a minefield—there's artificial chemicals, nooses,
traps inside the female body—put there to murder
sperm.”

He also believes that "little men with large
penises will come into their own."

Double Shift

According to a study of households in 12 countries,
done by the Washington-based Worldwatch Institute,
the total number of hours wage-earning women spend
working, at home and on the job, exceeds the total
working hours of either wage-earning men or non-wage-earning
women by as many as 10 to 15 hours a week.

Sexist Suit Suit

A New York City lobby attendant has won the right
to sue her employers for back pay and reinstatement
after a court ruled that employers who insist their
female workers wear revealing clothing are violating
the 1964 Civil Rights Act.

Margaret Hasselman charges that the mini-poncho that
she was forced to wear in her job with Sage Realty
Corp. made it impossible to do her job of greeting
visitors and providing lobby security without facing
intense sexual harassment. The outcome of Hasselman's
suit, filed in 1978, will affect thousands of other
women, especially waitresses.

Sage Realty, which owns extensive property along
New York's Third Ave., operates in what Hasselman's
lawyer calls a “sexually charged atmosphere!"
Sage's president, Melvyn Kaufman, personally interviews
female applicants for the well-paid lobby attendant
jobs. At her own job interview in 1975, Hasselman
was asked to remove her trousers so the interviewers
could inspect her legs.

When Sage presented its employees with the "uniform",
a poncho so short it revealed the wearer's buttocks
and midriff if she moved, one lobby attendant quit
her job.

Another refused to don the outfit and was fired on
the spot. Hasselman braved it out for a few days,
but found herself the target of avid photographers,
obscene remarks, and lewd propositions. Hasselman
realized that visitors and passersby assumed she
was a prostitute.

Hasselman's lawyer praised the ruling which will
allow Hasselman to sue. "Women who are forced to
wear degrading clothing on the job in order to cater
to male sexual fantasies will now be able to assert
their legal rights under the civil rights laws,"
said the lawyer, Mer-ick Rossein.

Invisible Women

A man who recently returned from a trip to Iran
reports in Akwesasne Notes that glued to the walls
of the hotel in which he stayed in Tehran were the
pictures of the martyrs of the Iranian revolution—
but all of the pictures are of young men and boys—
no women.

He was subsequently taken to a cemetery wherein are
buried people who were also killed in the revolution.
He says:

"The Iranian people have a custom of laying the
‘headstone’ flat on the grave. Often there is a
little monument which contains the person's photograph
above the grave...There were portraits of people
from all walks of life. Young boys...men in their
sixties or seventies...men in business suits...high-school-age
boys...I pointed out that all of the photographs
were of young men and asked about women, whether
they had been martyred also.

‘Women were very active during the demonstrations,’
she (Mary, the interpreter) said. ‘In our country,
we are tired of the exploitation of women—the
exploitation of their figures, and their faces.
That's why we do not have pictures of women's faces
in the cemetery. Many of these graves are of young
women.'"

Giving Credit

Items in this month's hot briefs came from the
following sources: off our backs, Thursday's Child,
New Women's Times, Gay Community News, Her Say,
Workers World, the Guardian, Akwesasne Notes, and the