hot briefs

Compiled by Vicki Piotter  
The China Shuffle

Three members of the first all-woman  
delegation to the US from the People's  
Republic of China were at the first  
national convention of the National  
Women's Studies Association this sum-  
mer. Huang Ganying, Xu Manquin and Lin  
Shangzhen said that although virtually  
all laws in China are non-sexist, there  
is still the idea in people's minds  
that men are "better" than women.

When asked about the fate of Chiang  
Ching and the Gang of Four, who were  
purged after Mao Tse Tung's death,  
the three would only say, "Thank you  
very much for your concern about the  
internal affairs of our country."

When asked about lesbianism in the  
People's Republic, Huang Ganying said,  
"There is no lesbianism in the People's  
Republic-- the issue never arises, I'm  
not sure exactly what you mean."

-New Women's Times

Policing Feminism

A women's liberation group in Ire-  
land has been told to register all  
future meetings at their local police  
station. Two uniformed officers who  
waited outside a meeting about women  
in Ireland said they turned up at  
this particular meeting because it  
was "political." Peggy Eagle, who  
organized the meeting said "We will  
not be intimidated and we have no in-  
tention of doing what the police  
want."

-Women's Report

Sit-in Sat On

Two thousand South Korean riot police  
stormed an opposition party headquart-  
ers occupied by 200 women protesting  
the loss of their jobs at a textile  
factory. On August 11, one woman killed  
herself as the police charged the door  
and 20 others were injured when fight-  
ing broke out as the police hauled the  
women away. The women occupied the  
headquarters in a sit-in to demand new  
jobs. The women said they had chosen  
the party headquarters because they  
didn't believe the police would raid it,  
even though all demonstrations have  
been outlawed by South Korea's author-  
itarian president Park Chung Hee.

The women anticipate many more demon-  
strations, however, as South Korean  
textile firms have laid off hundreds  
of workers, mostly women, in the past  
few months; they said that these  
"incredible acts of violence" won't  
stop them from demanding new jobs.

bnrr:

tables.

collective of five (driven) women,

going.  
with the support group.  
Colorado 80206

copy is September 18.

where we’re at

We are in the process of painting and cleaning up the office.  
It's surprising how much a fresh coat of paint can do to boost morale.  
By next month we hope to be finished painting and to have purchased some drafting  

We just bought a reconditioned IBM correcting Selectric II typewriter.  
Having two typewriters will make production time less hectic and will save  
us from having to find a typewriter to rent every month.

We have been getting some response to our plea for sustainers, but more  
are still needed if we are to continue to put out larger issues of the paper.

Lisa Gould left this month to move to Boston.  
Lisa's energy and enthusiasm will be missed.

Rumor has it that a support group is forming to help keep Big Mama Rag.  
It is unclear yet just how the support group will work.  
We are looking forward to sharing some of the work and responsibility of the paper.  
Anyone interested in working with the support  
group should send their name and phone number to BMR, 1724 Gaylord, Denver,  
and we will see that you are contacted.

It is time to start planning your articles for the upcoming theme issues.  
The October issue is "Women and Culture."  
Suggested topics are reviews of women's art, music, literature; arts and crafts; feminist imagery in art; women's roles in film; culture, politics, and money.

The November issue is entitled "Women and Technology."  
Suggested topics are interviews with women in technological fields; examination of how  
knowledge of technology is controlled by men and used to oppress women;  
how women are taught to fear technology from an early age (like math and  
science in school); how technology has affected women's jobs.  
The deadline for this issue is October 18.

The theme for the December issue is "Women and Dependencies."  
Suggested topics to examine what constitutes dependencies (drugs, alcohol, food, relation-  
ships) and how these affect women's lives.

Once is Enough

Feminists in Yakima County, Washington have been stunned by recent rev-  
elations that rape victims there are routinely required to submit to poly-  
graph tests. Of the women who report  
having been raped, 60% flunk the  
test. Prosecutor Jeff Sullivan says,  
"A charge of rape is potentially so  
damaging that we use every tool we  
can to determine whether a rape oc-  
curred." Cheryl Ficek from Yakima  
County Rape Relief is charging that  
the prospect of taking a lie detector  
test is an added indignity that dis-  
courages rape victims from reporting  
attacks. As it is, authorities esti-  
mate 9 out of 19 rapes in the county  
go unreported.

-Longest Revolution

Safety in Numbers

For the third consecutive year, a  
gay pride banner has been strung  
across the main street of the small  
north Georgia community of Martin,  
population 300. The banner reading  
"Gay Pride Refuses to Hide" was pre-  
sumably put up by the town's two  
gay citizens.

-Gay Community News

Our Bodies,  
Ourselves

The Renton, Washington school board  
has reversed its ban, as reported in  
last month's Hot Briefs, of the book,  
"Our Bodies, Ourselves." The book on  
women's health was returned to high  
school library shelves after parents,  
women's groups and the ACLU seriously  
objected to the book's removal.

-Northwest Passage

Curbing Crawlers

He: kerb-crawled her, followed her  
home, knocked on her door and asked to  
pay for sex. She: hit back, breaking  
his nose and cutting his eye. So who  
got a sentence of 120 hours community  
service? She did. When a woman shows  
she can defend herself, the law doesn't  
like it. The Daily Mirror (a British  
newspaper) enjoyed it though: "Tattooed  
punk rocker," they called her, "19 year  
old redhead." And she lives in Dyke  
Road. (As reported in Spare Rib, a  
women's liberation magazine from Eng-  
land.)

By next

We are now back to a col-  

We are

Suggested topics are reviews  

The deadline for  

Suggested topics  

The copy  

We hope  

Suggested topics  

are how drugs  
RI PaGaL 3S

High Court Hypocrisy

The Supreme Court currently has 5  
female clerks and 27 male clerks, all  
of whom are white—there have been  
only two black law clerks in the  
Court's history. Each of the nine jus-  
tices has a messenger to run errands.  
All are black, except one, who is from  
Thailand. There are eight courtroom  
attendants, three are black and three  
are women.

=National NOW Times

-L.A. Free Press/Quash

Over-ripe Custom

Iran has lowered the age limits for  
marriage to 15 years for boys and 13  
for girls, reverting to traditional  
Koranic custom. While there was no  
official confirmation of the report,  
the decision would be in line with  
the general policy of Iran's tradi-  
tionalist Moslem rulers. Islamic rule,  
based on the Koran, says that girls  
are physically ripe for marriage at  
13, and boys at 15.

~Women's Report

Activist Acquitted

Maria Antonia Palla, who was put on  
trial for "offending public morals  
and inciting to crime for the crime  
of abortion" was acquitted in Lisbon,  
Portugal following a worldwide cam-  
paign of support. She was put on trial  
May 14th because of a script she wrote  
for a TV show called “Abortion Is Not  
a Crime” in which she said that abor-  
tions didn't have to be butcheries,  
but could be safe, clean, inexpensive  
and legal. Both pre- and post- revolu-  
tionary Portuguese governments have  
banned all abortions.

-Media Report to Women

Anchors in a Sexist Sea

Of five Japanese national television  
networks, four started using anchor-  
women in evening news programs that  
until March of this year had male  
hosts. But, as a news director at one  
network said, "We use women announcers  
for those topics that are suitable for  
handling by women." He ruled out poli-  
tics and economics as "too stiff for  
women." He said viewers would complain  
if women were given such formal topics  
to read; “We like to use women for  
topics that give the flavor of life."

-National NOW Times

Cut Tubes or Cut Pay

You have to be sterilized if you are  
a woman before you can get a job at the  
Hudson Bay copper smelter in Flin Flon,  
Manitoba, Canada. The smelting company  
said it will refuse to employ women of  
childbearing age due to the dangers of  
lead poisoning. Five women who are now  
working in the smelter have been told  
they will have to take other jobs,  
which means a cut in pay.

"Instead of banning women from the  
Flin Flon smelter, the company should  
be reducing the risk to all workers  
there," said the Canadian Association  
of Industrial, Mechanical, and Allied  
Workers.

-Upstream

Big Mama Rag Vol. 7

Crunching Cramps

The Warner-Lambert drug company is  
currently seeking FDA approval to mar-  
ket its new product "Ponstel" as a  
remedy for menstrual cramps. The drug,  
mefanamic acid, available by prescrip-  
tion only, is currently sold as a rem-  
edy for arthritis. Mefanamic acid was  
tested on a group of women with habit-  
ual menstrual cramps under the direc-  
tion of Dr. Penny Wise from the Univ-  
ersity of New York. She reports that  
the drug effectively relieved pain,  
while also reducing dizziness, nausea  
and menstrual flow, apparently by low-  
ering levels of body chemicals that  
help cause cramps. Any adverse side  
effects connected with the drug use  
were not reported in the study.

-Newsweek

Mutilation Madness

A recently published report by Fran  
Hosken shows that genital mutilation  
of women is not only widespread throu-  
ghout central Africa, but thriving.

An estimated 30 million women are af-  
fected; modernization and industrial-  
ization have worsened the problem with  
Western style hospitals and doctors  
more than willing to perform the oper-  
ations at great profit to themselves.

The practice of cutting away the  
clitoris and sometimes the labia min-  
ora is to “preserve the family" and  
to prevent women from becoming "wild"  
with no control over their sexuality.  
A direct correlation has been made be-  
tween genital mutilation and polygamy  
which is still practiced in much of  
Africa, since "how can a man satisfy  
all his wives? It would ruin his  
health."

-Open Road

Prescribing Death

During a three-year period (1973-  
1976) there were 64 psychiatric drug-  
related deaths of state hospital in-  
mates in California, mostly from "ex-  
cessive and inappropriate prescribing."  
A government-sponsored investigation  
indicated that there was at least pro-  
bable criminal responsibility on the  
part of psychiatrists and nursing per-  
sonnel in a large number of these  
cases, yet local district attorneys  
have not charged anyone to date.

-Through the Looking  
Glass

-New Women's Times

Coping With Doping

Everyone is familiar with the way  
women are exploited to sell every-  
thing from sugar to motorbikes but  
apparently doctors are bombarded with  
sexist advertising by drug companies.  
Drug companies spend millions a year  
depicting conditions that up until  
now have not been regarded as medical.  
Tired mothers with too many children  
and depression encourage doctors to  
prescribe tranquilizers for what are  
essentially social problems. Or, the  
mother with her children in the super-  
market with "Now she can cope: Stela-  
zine, the one to turn to." There is  
a series of advertisements using sed-  
uctive soft focus women selling con-  
traceptives, tablets for heavy mens-  
trual loss, etc., etc. The money  
spent on drug advertising is more  
than the money spent on educating  
doctors.

-Women's Report