Assata Shakur Fights New Prison Transfer

UNS

Black activist Assata Shakur, imprisoned at the Federal Correctional Institution for Women in Alderson, West Virginia, is currently fighting against another transfer to avoid greater isolation and confinement.

This time, New Jersey prison officials are trying to place Shakur into another maximum security prison rather than allow her to stay at Alderson and be released into general population -- to halt any interaction she might have with other prisoners.

Assata Shakur  
-Worker's World/LNS

Wanrow Retrial

The Washington State Supreme Court declared that Wanrow was entitled to a jury that considered her actions regarding “her perceptions of the situation, including those perceptions which are the product of our nation's long and unfortunate history of sex discrimination." A mistrial was declared and Yvonne Wanrow was released from prison.

Again, instead of dropping the charges of felony murder, the prosecution pressed for a retrial. Before facing trial a second time, the Washington State Supreme Court agreed to hear an appeal from Wanrow on the constitutionality of the felony murder charge being brought against her. Under this charge, to find Wanrow guilty of murder, the prosecution has only to prove that she was in the process of committing the felony of assault on Wesler, and as a result of that assault, he died. They do not have to prove any intent to kill.

"I'm very proud to say that there are women today being helped by this State Supreme Court victory. With that change in the law, the Wanrow Instructions, judges are compelled to instruct juries properly, to consider the woman's perspective.

An Indian woman in South Dakota was acquitted for defending herself against an attack by her husband. The judge took into consideration the Wanrow Instructions.

It's worth all the pain, all the energy spent, to help another woman in the court.”

Below, the Yvonne Wanrow Defense Committee offers suggestions as to how people can help out with the case:

1. Financial Support

FROM Page 1

Expenses are estimated at $75,900 minimum. Yvonne Wanrow's legal team includes attorneys Liz Schneider (Center for Constitutional Rights in New York), Susan Jordan of San Francisco (who represented Inez Garcia), Mary Alice Theiler of Seattle, and law student Chris Arguedas of New Jersey. Though part of the legal work is donated, trial costs are immense. Expenses include phone, travel, court costs, paperwork, and outreach/publicity. Please send tax-deductible donations to: Yvonne Wanrow Defense, Center for Constitutional Rights, 853 Broadway, 14th Floor, New York, NY 10003.

2. Self Education

Send in your name and address if you want to be contacted about future developments of the case. Keep informed about the current status of Yvonne's case and similar cases about women and Native Americans defending themselves.

3. Outreach Work

Yvonne will need all our support to win. We must work together in our social, religious, and political communities to build a network of concern. Please let us know if you want to set up a defense committee, do a community benefit, write articles, or do speaking engagements. The Seattle Defense Committee is coordinating activities nationally. Write: Yvonne Wanrow Defense Committee, 1206 Smith Tower, Seattle, WA 98104.

4. Media Pressure

Request that your local media - newspaper, radio, and TV - carry information about Yvonne's case. Inform them about its current status.

5. Show Your Support

Write state prosecutor Donald Brockett in Spokane and let him know that you have heard about the case and support Yvonne Wanrow.

A year and a half before her conviction in New Jersey, Shakur was kept under 24-hour watch in a basement at the Middlesex County Jail for Men. After her conviction, the state transferred her to Alderson, claiming she was a security risk and constituted a high potential mark for escape. This claim still prevails even though after six years of imprisonment, Shakur has never been a disciplinary problem, has made no attempt to escape, nor was ever the object of any escape attempt.

During recent arguments on an appeal of her transfer, the Deputy Attorney General of New Jersey stated flatly that the New Jersey Department of Corrections would never permit Shakur to enter general prison population in any institution in any state or jurisdiction.

Evelyn Williams, one of Shakur's attorneys, said, "...if the vindictiveness toward Assata remains unchecked, there will be unparalleled, arbitrary moving of prisoners across the United States at any time, to any place, absent any reason on the willful and irresponsible aberrations of State Correctional Officials."

Early this year, the Washington State Supreme Court turned down a 7-2 decision against Wanrow, stating that the felony murder statute is constitutional, remaining one of the few states that still has this law. With that ruling, prosecutors Brockett and Caruso said they were going to try Yvonne Wanrow again as soon as possible, which could be as early as this spring.

Wanrow said, "I don't know these two men, but from what I understand of the last six years, it's a game to them. I know these people look upon this as a game-- a prosecuting attorney said it to my face. At the time he didn't know I was fighting a case; he was bragging about his job as a prosecutor. My friend asked him, ‘Don't you stop to consider there are human lives involved’? He said, 'No, it's a game. Can't you see? I have a good job, short hours, good fringe benefits, go to court, finish that case, go across the hall and finish my game of chess.'

It's really hard for me to understand this mentality, but I know I have to keep struggling, I can't give up. I'm only one person who is fighting for her freedom. There are many more, countless numbers. It's hard for me to accept that this is happening today and that this very minute some cops are beating up on some Indian people, a woman is being raped, a child is being beaten, a black person is being railroaded in the courtroom. The inhuman treatment people have to go through. If I quit fighting, I know these people will put me in jail, then take my kids away from me. I will have no guarantee that my children will be taken care of, that they will be respected, that their rights will be recognized, and that they will be educated in a proper manner, the way that I, as an Indian person, know that they should be raised.

"When I heard them announce 'The state of Washington versus Yvonne Wanrow' I took it very personally; I knew that the state of Washington was at war with Yvonne Wanrow. They are at war with me because I am an Indian, a woman, and a mother..."

I reserve the right to keep my own ideals, to raise my children the way I see fit."

When Yvonne Wanrow goes to trial a second time, experience shows that she will not be tried by a jury of her peers. In addition, her trial will take place in the midst of a fishing rights controversy in Washington state and a growing anti-Indian backlash movement; this is sure to create a similar atmosphere of racial tension in the courtroom.

If Yvonne Wanrow, 33, is unable to gain her freedom she faces separation from her children and her community for the next 25 years. Her case is similar to many other women's self-defense cases, such as Inez Garcia, Dessie Woods, and Joan Little. By refusing to become the passive victim of a violent assault, Wanrow has been made the criminal and the object of an extensive legal assault, which has been trying for more than six years to put her in prison in the interest of "justice" and the “protection of society."