Workshop Sows Seed

Group Forms to Meet Needs of Working Women

Vicki Piotter

A small group of women are
currently exploring the possibility
of forming an organization which
would respond to the needs of local
working women and offer organized
support for their struggles in the
labor force. The need for such an
organization was first discussed at
a "Women Working" workshop held at
Woman to Woman earlier this summer.

The women, who have met three
times since the workshop, are begin-
ning to explore different labor
situations involving local women,
i.e., the current strike by eight
women against Rice Paper Box Company,
the struggle to unionize Russel Sto-
vers Candies, and the attempts to set
up a Household Workers Union.

The group has also been dealing
with direction: should the group
limit itself to specific workplace
actions or should it include broader
political actions? How much energy
should be spent on legislative action
and on union organizing? How should
membership be defined? The women
agreed their main priority lies with
organizing the unorganized, at the
same time supporting existing union
struggles. The group also expressed
the need to get familiarized with
the functions and limitations of
existing laws and agencies, to know
the legal rights working women do
have, and to make this information
available to the women who need it.
They have not yet decided what form
or structure the group should take
on, although Union W.A.G.E., the
Union Women's Alliance to Gain Equal-
ity, is one group being considered.

Union W.A.G.E. defines itself
as a non-profit, politically non-
partisan organization of working
women, including those unemployed,
retired, and on welfare, fighting
discrimination on the job, in unions
and in society. Union W.A.G.E. is
dedicated to building an organization
which will properly represent working
women on a national level and is
dedicated to achieving equal rights,
equal pay, and equal opportunities
for women workers.

For Denver women to form a chap-
ter, we must agree to the purposes
and goals of Union W.A.G.E. (the
goals are listed below), obtain non-
profit status, have an active core
of at least 7 women, and enforce the
membership fee of $7.50 a year, which
entitles members to a subscription
of the Union W.A.G.E. newspaper.

The center organization is loc-
ated in Berkeley, California; however,
chapters are essentially autonomous,
dealing with local issues. Membership
is open to union and non-union women,
unemployed, retired, welfare women,
etc., and men are allowed an associ-
ate membership with no decision
making power.

Coalition of Labor Union Women

Another organization the group
has discussed is the Coalition of
Labor Union Women (CLUW), which has
established a Denver chapter. One
drawback voiced about CLUW is that,
unlike Union W.A.G.E., it restricts
its voting membership to those
already in unions. The group feels
that a working women's organization
should have real input from women
who are not organized.

Another expressed drawback to
the Denver chapter of CLUW is that it
is heavily infiltrated by and under
the direction of the October League,
a Maoist group violently opposed to
radical feminist ideology, as well as
feminists and lesbian feminists work-
ing within that context. Denver CLUW
states its membership at 35, half of
whom are October League members, and
many of whom are men. Some of CLUW's
membership fees go to support a news-
letter, "Fight Back," a major interest
of October League.

Most of the women feel that
Denver CLUW is reluctant to support
local women's efforts to fight sexism
(a word October League does not rec-
ognize) in the labor force, in unions
and society at large. For this reason
and the fact of CLUW's restrictive
membership, the group feels the
formation of another working women's
group in Denver would not be a dupli-
cation of efforts. However, the group
does remain open to working with CLUW
as a separate organization.

How We Work For Our Living

Most of the groundwork for the
working women's group came directly
from the "Women Working" workshop,
July 24th, where we discussed in
depth our personal job experiences
and how they relate to women at large.

The six-hour workshop had input
from two meatpackers, a nurse, a
janitor, a machine operator, a box
maker, three household workers, a
telephone operator, a clerical worker,
a waitress/bartender (formerly
employed as a telephone installer),
a postal clerk, an employment coun-
selor, a hospital clerical worker,
and a warehouse employee.

However diverse our jobs, as
each of us explained our job situ-
ations, our special problems and
specific needs, we centered on the
same themes - isolation, unorganiza-
tion, and the feeling of powerlessness.

Ruth Parker, a nurse specialist
at Colorado General Hospital, ex-
plained the dynamics of the recent
nurses' struggle with CGH to keep
their maternity care program alive.
(See BMR August for more details.)
After being informed that maternity
care (read, “women") was not a hosp-
ital priority and that the program
would be cut, the eight nurses
involved with the program organized
to prevent the cutback, with their
only real support coming from the
mothers who had received the nurses'
care, the Women Everywhere Radio
Collective, Big Mama Rag, and Woman
to Woman.

Ruth said the hospital was very
aware of their efforts to fight the
cutback; however, every attempt the
nurses made to open up the line of
communication went unrecognized as
the administration continually kept
the nurses in the dark as to the day-
to-day status of the program and
their jobs. In fact, doctors who
were not involved with the fight
were kept informed from the top, and
in turn maintained the hierarchy of
privileged information.

Ruth expressed anger that doc-
tors have the power and respect,
where nurses go unrecognized and are
not taken seriously. She asked how
nurses can get power so that they
aren't continually forced to prove
something of value to women is of
value; how nurses can receive the
respect their profession affords
them; and how the power balance be-
tween doctors and nurses can be
eliminated.

A Wife by Any Other Name

Those of us present were good ex-
amples of how hard it is for women in
traditional service jobs (nurse,
waitress, secretary, household work-
er) to get organized and unionized.

Most of Colorado's nurses are state
employees where striking is illegal
and the question of walking off the
job, despite the law, presents a
conflict of ethics for many in the
profession. "If I don’t provide the
patient with care, the patient won't
get any." Doctors don't have this
conflict. It has been built into law
and been reinforced in ourselves and
society that it is unethical for
nurses (read, "women") to be anything
but sacrificial.

For household workers, the problem
of organizing is not a question of
ethics, but one of isolation - how
to find the 2 million women scattered
throughout individual homes. The
household workers at the workshop,
like 80% of all house cleaners, work
individually for individual families.
They receive no sick pay, no paid
vacations, no pensions, no health
insurance, no overtime, no guaranteed
work week, no severance pay, no work-
men's compensation. The average in-
come of the household worker is only
$2,700 per year.

One of the women had been involved
with a short-lived Household Techni-
cians Union earlier this year in Den-
ver. She had been contacted by an-
other worker through an ad she had
placed in the work wanted section of
the classifieds. By this method,
eight women were brought together to
discuss wages, benefits, etc. One
thing they learned was that their
wages largely depended on their rac-
ial or ethnic backgrounds, with the
white women receiving the higher
wage. The first meeting the women
agreed to work as members of a house-
hold technicians cooperative for not
less than $3.50 per hour (some of
the women had been receiving $2.00),
to refuse work from people showing a
racial prejudice, and to try and get
more women to do the same. Unfortunately, after the initial meeting
there was nothing real specific to
offer the women in the way of other
benefits, and the Union came to a
standstill.

We discussed one group actively
working to organize household workers:
the Household Technicians of America.
The HTA formed in 1971 and now has
800 dues-paying members, all on the
East Coast. The HTA is working to
professionalize the job and increase
both the annual wage and job benefits
for the nation's household workers.
One woman said the HTA hopes to
ultimately establish something like
the Musicians Union which draws up
its own pay scale, rather than neg-
otiate with all the millions of
present or would-be employers -
employers either like it, or don't
get any services.

Right now the union is negotiating
with a life insurance company to
develop a health plan and group pen-
sion plan whereby both workers and
employers can contribute. However,
the HTA is having that frustrating
problem of not being able to find the
"invisible" members of the profession.

In talking about the problems of
organizing unorganized women, discus-
sion turned to waitresses. Although
there was only one woman at the work-
shop currently employed as a waitress,
many of the women had done waitress-
ing jobs before and contributed to
the discussion.

We talked about how one of the big-
gest hurdles for waitresses in organ-
izing on the job lies in the method
in which they are paid - the tip.
Relying on tips to provide the major
portion of salary, companies get
away with paying their employees
state minimum wages ($1.20 per hour
in Colorado) and force the major
responsibility of payment onto the
customers, who may or may not pay
for services they receive. We dis-
cussed how some women prefer the tip
system, thinking they can earn more
than if they had a union shop forcing
the company to pay a higher hourly
wage, benefits, etc. It was said,
however, that by maintaining the tip,
the company will always pay low
wages and that tips don't always
make up the pay difference, offer
job security, provide sick pay, etc.

Examples were offered on how it is
expected of waitresses to put up with
obnoxious and insulting customers; how
it is often a job requirement to show
sexual availability to male customers;
and how when waitresses start to make
waves about conditions or wages, the
threat of "easy replacement" is used
to keep them away from any serious
organizing.

On a more positive note, we discus-
sed the advantage of women who work
in retail businesses, dealing direct-
ly with the public, in that they are
immediately visible to the business's
patronage in case of a strike and/or
picket.

Last Hired - First Fired

Turning away from traditional job
situations, we talked about the
women who make it into non-tradition-
al jobs and the different isolation
and job problems they face.

Karen Hennessy, one of the women
hired by Mountain Bell as a telephone
installer and subsequently laid off,
was a good example of how women have
to struggle with the company to get
hired in the first place, struggle
with them to keep the job, and more
often than not, struggle with the
union for support and fair represent-
ation.

In the summer of 1974, a group of
women were hired as installers and
cable splicers to fulfill Mountain
Bell's EEOC-enforced affirmative
action requirements. (When the EEOC
forced AT&T in 1973 to sign an
agreement to hire more women into non-
traditional jobs, AT&T was labeled
the "most oppressive employer of women
workers in the U.S.). One week after
1974 had ended, one week after Moun-
tain Bell had submitted their 1974
affirmative action statistics to the
government, the women were taken out
of the field and put to work as
clerks and operators, along with a
cut in pay. In March of 1975 the

More on page 11