Women and Technology

Possible Alternatives For Change

Judy Barlow

This is the second of a two-part article on "Technology and Women." For part one of this article see the November 1979 issue of Big Mama Rag.

Ever since the advent of the industrial era, philosophers and scientists have studied and tried to understand what ramifications the industrial society has on its people. Sociologists and psychologists have tried to explain the people's behavior or help them find ways of coping. They have suggested means that management might use to increase workers’ productivity while keeping the workers satisfied, ignorant, and/or powerless. Economists and business executives have suggested ways of keeping the profits high by keeping wages low. There are speakers who travel across the country giving seminars on union busting and keeping the workers divided. There are advertising and publicity agents who teach management how to present a good public image in spite of what the corporation's true motives are, which one can assume to be making a profit.

Take Nestlé's for example. While Nestlé's is dumping baby formula on Third World nations causing untold cases of infant malnutrition and death, it is promoted in its television commercials as a wholesome company that produces fine products that good mothers buy for their families. General Electric, which has just received that patent on a bacteria that “eats" petroleum, is portrayed in its television commercials as a producer of quality products who cares about all of “its people" from the employee working on the assembly line to the nuclear family that purchases a G.E. appliance.

How do we expose these corporate giants for what they really are—capitalists who would sell any product for a profit regardless of the effect it has on the people? They are skillful liars and deceivers. They have money and power. They seem insurmountable. But are they really?

—-that’s the kind of “Industrial Relations” this company likes to see!

Technocracy

There are those that would argue that capitalism is already being undermined. In 1929, of the 200 major corporations, 56% were owner-controlled. By 1963, only 15.5% of the top 200 major corporations were owner-controlled.

Some argue that since the majority of U.S. corporations today (84.5%) are presumably controlled by management rather than by capitalist owners, that the power is really already being taken away from the capitalists.

In 1932, a new system and philosophy of government called technocracy was introduced. The philosophy of technocracy states that the nation's industrial resources should be organized and managed by competent persons for the good of everyone instead of being left to the management of private concerns for their personal best interests. What technocracy actually espouses is government by technicians. They ask who would be better qualified to manage and govern a technologically advanced society than the technicians and scientists who make that technology possible. They argue against capitalist methods but have yet to give up capitalist ideals. The bottom line is that in order to succeed in a capitalist society, a corporation, whether it is managed by capitalists or technocrats, must show a profit. This may mean not meeting pollution standards or dumping bad technology on Third World people.

Another weakness in the structure of technocracy is that the power would be taken away from those with money and put in the laps of those with technical knowledge rather than returning the power to the people that technology affects. Does money still buy knowledge? Where did these technocrats come from? What about women? How and where do we fit in? Are these the same technocrats who marketed the Dalkon Shield, pesticides, nuclear reactors, etc.? Are they really any better than the capitalists? Do they provide better alternatives?

Current technocratic theory has many weaknesses. Although technocrats argue convincingly that power over technology is being shifted from the capitalist owners to the management/technicians because only 15.5% of the large corporate giants are controlled (through stock ownership) by their capitalist owners, they do not consider that most stock owners have a common interest and that is to maximize profits. And while this power is being taken from the capitalists and distributed to those with technical knowledge, what is happening to those who do not have this knowledge? Women and minorities have traditionally been discouraged, if not forcibly excluded, from getting this knowledge. The son of the white corporate executive, however, has the money and influence to get into the best schools; and therefore, this knowledge (read power) is more accessible to him. It seems as though a change from pure capitalism to technocratic management of technology would have little effect on the people.

So what should we do to make technology the servant of the people instead of the people being the servants of technology? The answer, at least at first glance, seems clear: Distribute the power over technology among all of the people it affects.

Socialism/Communism

During the Cultural Revolution in China, Maoists instituted a number of reforms to distribute power over technology among the people. Every factory was to be run by committees of revolutionary cadres, workers, and technicians. Technicians were expected to work with workers and party members at every level of decision-making. Educational programs were instituted to teach cadres and workers the expertise required to work on research projects along with technicians and scientists. Technicians were expected to spend periods of time on the production lines of factories, and production workers would rotate jobs among themselves to decrease alienation, acquire more skill, and broaden their grasp of the factory as an integrated system. It seems as though technology would tend to be used beneficially rather than destructively in a society where technology is controlled by the workers.

In both socialism and communism, workers democratically control production. Where this is not the case, neither socialism nor communism can exist in the Marxist sense. Marx proposed two stages in the development of worker-controlled economies after capitalism is overthrown. Socialism, according to Marx, is merely a transitional stage between capitalism and communism. In socialism, the bourgeoisie and peasantry class still exist. As socialism develops, these classes are integrated into the working class. Communism, on the other hand, is a classless society.

In socialism, there is a political state, although ideally it is gradually eliminated. Under communism, no political state exists. Marx believed that communism could not exist until all scarcity had been eliminated—where supply and demand are not equal, some people will have more than others, thus setting up a sort of class difference. Under socialism, one's income would be proportionate to one's work, but under communism, there is no correlation between how much one gets and how much or how well one works because scarcity will have been eliminated.

Marx also points out that major social changes in any given society are the result of revolutionary rather than evolutionary processes. Those who have power do not voluntarily give it up. If the people want to assume power over technology, they must be prepared to wrestle it away from the minority that hold it.

Preparing for the Revolution

Before we can begin to plan for revolution, we must first decide how we will manage technology after the capitalists and technocrats are overthrown. In so many so-called socialist societies, the bourgeoisie refuse to let go of their power and a tyrannical dictatorship develops. The people may be left with even more alienation and less power than they might have had under a capitalist system.

Because there is currently no global example of true socialism or communism, one might ask if it is a viable political alternative. Perhaps the main weakness of socialism and communism is in expecting the bourgeoisie to relinquish their power, and one might wonder if true socialism and communism can really exist at all. Although there is no historical evidence that it would work, neither has it been disproven. Marx did say that communism can exist only in a time of post-scarcity; otherwise, the struggle to overcome scarcity may be so great as to elicit concessions from the working class that are inconsistent with the development of a socialist society. Mao Tse-tung has written of the dangers of uncontrolled technological growth in poor socialist countries and warned that if technological growth is placed above all else, it can only lead to the same sort of technologically induced evils that capitalism is famous for.

So where do we go from here? How do we get from where we are to where we want to be? Where do we want to be? Capitalism has too many built-in evils to be desirable. Technocracy seems to have many of the same problems that capitalism has. Socialism appears to be a possible alternative but has yet to exist in its true sense. The transition to communism is only possible in a mature socialist society. We must also remember that the capitalists are not going to let this country peacefully evolve into a socialistic state and that a revolution will be necessary in order to implement any major social changes.

Perhaps the answer for women and feminists is to play a strong integral part in the overthrow of capitalism in order to ensure that any new system of government implemented will be as responsible to women's needs as we want it to be. Perhaps the time has come for all revolutionary feminists to formulate a viable means of revolution and to work with all oppressed peoples to find and implement that means.

Sources for this article include selected writings of Marx and interpretations of Mao Tse-tung, John Kenneth Galbraith's The New Industrial State, and Bernard Gendron's Technology and the Human Condition.