“4

Inez From Page 3

Jimenez because her roommate had been
fighting with him and Castillo over
drugs. At neither trial was the pros-
ecution able to prove a conspiracy,

a drug connection or a relationship
between Garcia and Medrano. Jordan
argued that the heroin issue was an
attempt to prejudice the jury.

A major issue in the first trial
was the supposed lack of evidence that
Inez had been raped. In her original
report to police, she said Castillo
and Jimenez had been "fresh" with her,
and "they tried to rape me, you know.”

In the second trial expert evidence
was allowed substantiating how many
women find it difficult to report not
only that they had been raped, but the
details. Garcia said she reported the
rape “in my own way...any Latino
person would understand." She had
been given no medical exam.

At the beginning of the retrial,
supporters were worried about the
10 man, two-woman jury--mostly white
and middle-aged. The jury took two
days to reach a decision. One
woman juror later said that while
the men could not put themselves in
the same position as a rape victim,
they really thought how they'd feel
if a wife or daughter had been
raped and how long it would take them
to get over the "rage, shock and
horror."

"I never knew before that I was a
political person," Garcia said after
the acquittal. "But I know that I
met a lot of women in prison who I
promised to help."

"We're all just really happy that
it's over and that she won," Jordan
said. "The jury was convinced that
the prosecution didn't have a case at
all. One woman juror told me, ‘If
that girl were white, she never would
have gotten accused."

But the fact that she was accused
and tried has left the defense comit-
tee with thousands of dollars of
debts. It's making a strong appeal for
donations. Checks should be made pay-
able to the Viva Inez Defense Fund,
and sent to 584 14th St., Oakland
94612.

(Most of the information in this
article--particularly portions about
Garcia's retrial is courtesy of
Susan Rothaizer. Many thanks to her,
and also to Liberation News Service).

Levy From Page 4

the Luceros have temporary custody
of Betty. At the same time she laid
down some very stringent conditions.
Donna currently has visitation rights
for at least 2 days a week plus any
other times that Betty wants to see
her. Therapy was a major issue in the
order. The Luceros were to get indi-
vidual therapy on their own to deal
with Jeanette's death. Betty was also
to have therapy with half the cost
paid by the Luceros, and half paid
by Donna. It was advised that Donna
take part in Betty's therapy to
facilitate the girl's progress. Donna
herself was not ordered to seek ther-
apy.

To date, although these orders were
given in January, no one has seen
a therapist. The Luceros have not
kept either their appointments or those
made for Betty. Last week in a meeting

of the principals and their attorneys,
the Luceros announced that they are
separating, and do not now have
enough money to pay for therapy.
It is not known how the Judge will look

upon the Luceros' action when the
next Court date on the 23rd of June
comes up. One of the reasons for the
therapy sessions was to provide the
Judge with more information to use
in making a final custody order.
During all of the legal battles, and
arguments, Betty has been staying with
the Luceros and only after the court
order has she been seeing Donna with
any frequency. Before the order, Donna
and Betty had seen each other on only
4 occasions when they had been inter-
viewed together. It is not too sur-
prising under the conditions that
Betty might have felt abandoned by
Donna. In the space of a couple of
weeks, she lost both of her "mothers."
Recently Betty has been telling
both Donna and the Luceros that she
wants to live with Donna. She has once
again started to ride the bus with
Donna after school hours and the two
are having a chance to reestablish
some continuity in their relationship.
Now all they can do is wait for
the next court hearing. It is hard
to explain to a seven-year-old that
everyone must act according to rules
laid down by a court. Donna can
only hope that the court’s original
statement that she is the preferred
guardian will result in her being
granted final custody of Betty. Of
significant legal importance in the
case so far is the fact that Donna's
lesbian relationship with Jeanette's
mother has not barred Donna from
being considered by the court as a
fit parental figure for Betty. We
can only hope that this enlightened
approach will continue in this case.

Rape and Self-
Defense From Page 3

The clearest legal precedent so
far was set recently in the case of
Yvonne Wanrow, a Native American
mother who shot a child molester when
he burst drunkenly into her home at
5 a.m. He had attempted to molest
Wanrow's son the previous afternoon
and had infected her babysitter's
7-year-old daughter with venereal
disease. (See Jan-Feb and March BMR).

The Washington State Supreme Court,
in overturning her murder conviction,
said this about the trial judge's per-
sistent use of the male gender in de-
fining self-defense to the jury:

"The impression created--that a
5'4" woman with a cast on her leg and
using a crutch must, under the law,
somehow repel an assault by a 6'2"
intoxicated man without employing
weapons in her defense...violates
her right to equal protection under
the law.

"She was entitled to have the jury
consider her actions in terms of her
own perceptions of the situation inclu-
ding those perceptions which were the
product of our nation's long and un-
fortunate history of sex discrimination.

In the case of Inez Garcia, who was
finally acquitted last month of murder-
ing the man who helped rape her, the
issues were complex--and more clearly
political. Inez's case raised uncom-
fortable questions for people who
thought they were being asked to sup-
port revenge, not self-defense. The
crucial points were that Inez took a
gun and went out after the man who had
raped her, and her clear assertion that
a woman who is raped has the right to
kill back.

The political implications were not
missed. The Free Inez Garcia Commit-
tee, which strongly challenged the
“rape made her crazy" defense strat-
egy of the first trial, put it this
way, "In vindicating Inez, we must
define her act as she does herself:
as a conscious, concrete expression of
outrage at a violation of her honor
and dignity, and as a blow against
the humiliating oppression of women."

The defense strategy in the second
trial--justifiable homicide through
self-defense--was different. By
stressing the actual and threatened
attempts on Inez's life, it fell far
short of saying that a woman who is
raped has the right to kill back.

But it was a well-planned defense,
designed to ensure Inez’s integrity and
to win acquittal within the confines
of a legal definition of self-defense.

But as a ‘precedent’ for self-

defense against rape--that's not
likely. The commercial press, while
reporting it as a victory for femin-
ists, was still saying “alleged rape."

FEN From Page 11

ed us why we were here. We told them
we were here for a specially-convened
membership meeting.

"Laura Brown came down and started
screaming, 'Get the hell out of my
building.' Some FEN women started coming
down, and some guards.

"She said, ‘Get these women out of
the building.' Laura grabbed Sandy
Bunnell, who is a former board member
and a newspaper reporter for the
Free Press, and was digging her fin-
gers into Sandy's arm. Sandy said,
‘Let go of my arm,' and Laura an-
swered, 'Get out of my building.'

"At this point, the doors to the
cafeteria were opened and some peo-
ple including myself, decided to go
up to the credit union office.

There were two stairways. A few of
us made it past the door. Women
then panicked and started running
out of the cafeteria.

"I saw Maryel coming upstairs with
someone's arm around her neck trying
to pull her back. Maryel is a big
woman. She broke away. She was in-
credibly upset, saying, 'I don't be-
lieve this is happening. Why are you
beating up on other women?!'

"People were grabbing other people.
People yelled ‘calm down.' Somebody
gave orders to call the police. (Jo-
anne and Laura later took credit for
this.) Joanne was standing around
looking scared and angry. I appealed
to her to call for order, I said, ‘You
started this project, you have author-
ity here, you can stop this.' She
started yelling at me, ‘You bitch, you
bitch,’ louder and louder. I said,
‘I'm not the bitch here,' and at that
point she slugged me in the mouth. I
just freaked, couldn't believe that
she had hit me. Then she ran. I
chased her and grabbed her by her arms
and said, ‘You're not gonna fuck me
over again.' One of the FEN women fol-
lowed me and told me to take my hands
off her, and there was a guard with her
who said, 'If you hit her you're gonna
get it.' So I let her go.

The police came and told us we were
trespassing. Everyone was told to
leave the building including the cre-
dit union women, who were told it was
off-hours.

“We all decided to meet at the health
center and discussed this for a couple
of hours, about what happened. We de-
cided to keep communication with each
other, and drew up statements of what
happened.

Racism

I was told that Faye Roberts, Pam
Carter, and Jenette Salters were still
supporters of FEN, so when I called
them, I was surprised to find out that
the opposite was true. As I mentioned
before, these women seem to have been
used as showcase Blacks.

Pam Carter: "We were under the im-
pression that we would have autonomy over
the health center, but that's not what
came out in the wash." She was impres-
sed by the organization and efficiency
in Oakland, but she has negative feel-
ings about being manipulated and de-
ceived.

Faye Roberts: "We solicited a lot of
donations for equipment for the health
center, and that was supposed to be
ours, but now it's in receivership al-
ong with everything else. We could
see what was going on but at first we
didn't want to believe it."

FEN, Violence And The Law

One of the thorniest problems in try-
ing to understand FEN is the question
of law. Stalin, Hitler, and Nixon
understood that people want law, want
government that at least appears leg-
itimate, rather than an arbitrary re-
gime whose only law is the gun. Those

KATHY PRITCHETT
(303) 572-4906

Big Mama Rad Vol. 5 No. 3

men took great pains to establish a
facade of legitimacy.

Why do people want law? Because they
think it can protect the weak from the
strong (e.g. minimum wage laws). It
also lets you know what the rules are,
so if you follow them, you hope to be
safe from arbitrary arrest (hah!).
Mostly, it lends the appearance of
justice to tyranny.

Since the law has been made without
consulting us, we--or rather, the so-
cial movements of our time--have simult-
aneously tried to change it and to
disregard it, to sow contempt for
draft laws, anti-abortion laws, etc.
One position which has gained wide
acceptance is that you don't call the
police to solve your problems. That
only gives them more power and a wedge
to enter your community and spy on you.

FEN has lived inside and outside the
law, according to its needs. The wom-
en of FEN have used the law by setting
up corporate structures, by calling
the police to protect their property.
They have broken the law through il-
legitimate business practices, under-
paying their employees, and committing
acts of violence against women.

We have to look at the purpose of
the group; are they ignoring the law
in order to help women, or to help
themselves at our expense? Are they
an underground railroad or a female
mafia? The women of FEN say, "We
can't allow ourselves to be limited
by patriarchy law." But in the ab-
sence of our own feminist law, we are
open to exploitation by any female
hooligans who come in the name of "sis-
terhood."

I would like to include another in-
stance of FEN's use of violence:

Nancy Stockwell is a reporter for
PLEXUS, the Bay Area feminist news-
paper. During the time she was re-
searching her article on FEN, Kathleen
Barry came to her with an 11-page ar-
ticle defending FEN. Nancy said it
was too long to print as is, and they
should edit it.

While checking some of the salient
points, Nancy called Joanne Parrent.
Joanne said the article was accurate
and “You don't need to call Barbara
and Laura." She indicated that they
had helped write the article. Nancy
asked why their names weren't on it.
Joanne said, because it has to come
from a community source. Nancy said
that was dishonest and she would re-
fuse to print it.

Kathy and Nancy had a vociferous
argument on the steps outside the
PLEXUS office. Since the argument oc-
curred outdoors, Nancy believes
that anyone could have heard the con-
tent of the dispute.

A couple of days later, Nancy dis-
covered that the left front fender of
her car had been hit. A note was left,
stating, "You better watch out. The
power of the press is not yours to de-
cide."

Nancy is reluctant to blame the wom-
en of FEN. "There are at least three
main possibilities: a) coincidence;

b) someone from Oakland who was just
plain mad at me; c) agents. I am not
going to come to a conclusion which
serves the purposes of agents."

The graphics used are not a part of
Martha's article; they are the work
of BMR's resident crazy, Tea.

Rape From Page 3

"Like a pimp?" and "Did he smell?"
The police department's treatment
of Kristin's case, when compared to
the treatment Lysandra received, ex-
plains the statistics which show that
when Third World men rape white women,
the number of men brought to trial
are disproportionately high and the
conviction rates and sentences are
much more severe than any other kind
of rape, even though the actual per-
centage of interracial rapes is low.

723 E. 17th AVE.

DENVER, COLO. 80203