Chicanas Meet in Boulder

Conference Confronts Sexism and Racism

Vicki Piotter

The 1977 Conferencia de la Chicana
(Chicana Conference) came to an end
April 23rd after two full days of dis-
cussion and activity concerning the
current social situation of La Chicana.

The conference, which was free of
charge, was held at the University of
Colorado in Boulder and was the first
of its kind in the state. It addressed
both sexism and racism and encouraged
Chicanas to emerge from their tradi-
tional role of homemaker to one of
active participation in their communi-
ty. 
Teens Blea Gutierrez, a conference
organizer, explained that the idea for
the conference originated a year ago
in Pueblo, Colorado. "I was at El
Congresso, a congress that meets once
a year to discuss the problems of the
Chicano people. In one of the work-
shops there was disagreement as to
what the resolutions were going to be.
The disagreement was between a group
of solely women from Alamosa and a
group of men and women from Pueblo.

When the disagreement was being
discussed, the narrator, who was male,
said to one of the women from Alamosa,
"You're just going to have to get your
stuff together, jita." Jita is a word
which is equivalent to "little girl."
He then called her ‘baby.’

There were lots of jeers and boos,
but nobody said anything about it. At
that time I became furious and asked
if I could speak. I went to the mic
and essentially came down on sexism,
speaking to the fact that the terms
(jita and baby) were minimizing terms
that had connotations of dependency
and child-like behavior.

To my surprise the audience began
to stamp their feet, throw fists in
the air and were very supportive of
what I was saying. It scared me off
the stage, as I was not in the habit
of doing things like that at that
time, but that night I committed my-
self to putting on a Chicana confer-
ence."

One year after the incident in
Pueblo, over 400 people, 75% women,
came from all over Colorado and neigh-
boring states to partake in panels,
workshops and decisions concerning La
Chicana. The two days covered the top-
ics of religion, traditional values,
forced sterilization and health issues,
daycare, affirmative action, aging,
the various social, legal, and educa-

tional institutions, and the concept
of "machismo" (See page 11 for the
statement on machismo issued at the
conference.)

Chicanas with a wide range of per-
spectives, backgrounds, and ages par-
ticipated. There were women active in
the Catholic Church to women active
in socialist organizations. There
were students, teachers, homemakers
and office workers. For many, it was

Story Behind the National Boycott

Workers Strike at

Deb Taylor

On April 5th, 92% of the 1473 members
of the brewery union at Coors Beer Co.
in Golden, Colorado voted to go on
strike. They then began a nationwide
boycott of Coors beer which has been
endorsed by hundreds of unions, Chicana
groups, gay groups and feminist groups.

This is the first strike in 20 years
at Coors. There is a strong political
content to this strike. It is not a
strike for better wages, but for
workers' rights on the job.

The two key issues of the strike are
workers' seniority rights and shift
schedules. Seniority determines prior-
ity of promotions, work schedules and
lay-offs. Until now, workers have been
able to build up seniority in the com-

pany no matter what department they
worked in.

Now, the management wants seniority
to be based on length of time in a
particular department, not the company
as a whole. Workers who have worked for
10 years will have less seniority than
newcomers when they switch into a new
department.

Shift schedules is the other important
issue. There are three shifts (day,
evening and graveyard). Years ago the
workers voted to have straight shifts
rather than rotating shifts. Now in the
new contract being negotiated the man-
agement wants to take this away from
them and have rotating shifts. Workers
will not be able to plan their lives or
get used to a sleep schedule because
they will never know from one week to
the next what their shift will be.

All had input into the work of the
conference, resulting in resolutions
intended to be a basis for action for
Chicanas in 1977. The resolutions,
which met the agreement of the confer-
ence body, included a plan to hold
annual conferences in various parts of
the state in order to reach all as-
pects of the population; to provide a
Chicana newsletter; to upgrade women's
position in the church and to stand
up to the church's traditional view
of women; to disseminate information to
the community about the laws that gov-
ern education; to demand education and
health care in the areas of birth con-
trol for all within the community, men
and women alike; to stop experimenta-

tion in underdeveloped countries with
birth control methods using Latina
sisters; to uphold the right of equal
pay for equal work and paid maternity
leave; to demand daycare centers for
the Chicano community; and to put an
end to forced sterilization.

Two issues arose during the presenta-
tion of resolutions. They were the
campus-based orientation of the confer-
ence and the failure to include a res-
olution on the Coors beer boycott, an
issue which heavily affects women and
minorities.

The campus-based orientation was
evident in one resolution which focus-
ed more on the problems of women on
campuses. This part of the resolution
was deleted with the agreement of the
group as a whole.

The second issue, concerning a state-
ment of support for the Coors beer
boycott, was notable by its absence
from the initial resolutions. When
the issue was raised, the conference
women immediately adopted a resolution
in support of the boycott and the
striking workers on the basis that
Coors is a major capitalist corpora-
tion that oppresses women, minorities,
and workers in general.

One woman commented that the initial
omission of a statement against Coors
only proved that Chicanas need to have
conferences regularly in order to de-
velop a deeper political consciousness
of all the issues.

Conference organizers said that in
addition to bringing Chicanas together
to share issues, another objective of
conferences should be to educate
people to the values, traditions, and
language of the Chicana. They cited
the racist practice of “lumping” all
minority women into one category with-
out regard to different cultural
values.

Irene Blea Gutierrez stressed that
the conference was not a tactic by
Chicanas to divide the Chicano move-
ment. She said that the area of sexism
was never fully addressed by the

More on Page 14

media when he was turned down by
Congress as under-secretary of the
Navy because he was too conservative.
He allegedly contributes heavily to
the John Birch Society.

The Coors Co. is the fourth largest
beer producing company in the country.
Located in Golden ten miles from Den-
ver, Colorado, Coors has been doing a
booming business with its “Rocky Moun-
tain Spring Water." Last year's profits
were 75 million, up from 59 million
the year before.

There are 8000 workers at Coors,
with 2000 employed in the brewery.
Only the brewery workers are organ-
ized in a union; the rest of the
workers are unorganized.

There has been a union in the brew-
ery for the past 47 years, but for a
long time the company controlled the
union. Only in the past few years
have more independent and dedicated
workers begun to fight the company.

It is interesting that this change
in the union is correlated with the
hiring of younger workers, minorities
and women. Previously, the work force
was white, middle-aged men. With the
expansion of Coors into a national
company, they have had to hire many
new workers--thus opening up positions
for young people, women and minori-
ties. Also, there was a suit brought
by the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission regarding the lack of mi-
nority workers.

Women were first hired to work in
the brewery only five years ago.
There are now 65 women working there
and about half of these women have re-
turned to work, crossing the picket
line of their union.

A striker, Jan Turner, told me that
she knows some of these women person-
ally. She said that one woman re-
turned to work because her husband
made her. They had just bought a
house and he wanted to keep up with
the payments. Another woman had
legal problems because her husband had
just left and she needed a lot of
money. Two other women wanted to be

More on Page 14