/in the interior of the country, the U.S. mining companies are looking at the development of strip-mining for precious metals—a venture  
which would destroy the total environment by destroying the greater part of the central mountain range (the only such range in Puerto Rico)  
and by transforming the use of 80% of the fresh water into industrial use for the processing of the metals.  

To achieve this, the United States plans to further depopulate Puerto Rico. But to do so, it must first destroy the Puerto Rican  
independence movement and convert Puerto Rico into a state, giving the few rich men in control of the Statehood Party, and their  
managers, a share in the industrial parks.  

The struggle of the Puerto Rican people for their national liberation—their independence from the United States—is a struggle that  
increasingly needs and uses arms to combat United States government violence, attain independence and rebuild society for all the people,  
a socialist society.  

Part of the repression by the U.S. government in the period of 1940-1950 was the campaign to relieve social pressures which  
threatened to transform an army of unemployed people into independence militants. This mass of unemployable workers were bombarded  
with a propaganda campaign promoting the United States as a haven for work (“the streets are paved with gold”) and good living. Air  
fares were dramatically lowered, and the Puerto Rican (Colonial) Department of Labor made it easy by advising anyone and everyone on how  
to manage the fare and adjust to the new conditions.  

At the same time, the Puerto Rican independence movement came in for a strong campaign of repression and intimidation. In the 1950  
Nationalist rebellion against this repression, 200 were killed and 5,000 imprisoned.  

In New York, Chicago, Philadelphia, and other cities where Puerto Ricans were encouraged to go, they found an exploitative factory  
system that most often paid at below minimum wages, and far below what non-Puerto Ricans were paid.  

They were forced by racism and discrimination into ghettoes that not even the poorest North American wanted. Often, more than 10  
people had to live in one, two, or three small rooms without hot water or heating in winter, and with broken, filthy toilets in the public  
hallway. Most still live under such conditions, more than 30 years later.  

/in all more than 500,000 Puerto Ricans left their country. Today, nearly four million live in the U.S.  

The transformation of the U.S. system of production from mechanical to technological and automatic spells a sad future for Puerto  
Ricans as well as all oppressed people. Because of their mis-education, lack of technical skills, and denial of access to science, the greater  
part of the population is condemned to permanent unemployment.  

In a crisis situation, the U.S. government will certainly opt for fascism. And this means genocide for the unemployed masses of non-  
white people.  

Both in Puerto Rico and among Puerto Ricans in the United States, only one way out of this blind alley is real: revolution and the  
transformation of society.  

The heightened resistance of the armed clandestine movement, which today, William Webster calls the “Achilles Heel” of U.S.  
imperialism, and which is mobilizing the Puerto Rican people toward the final offensive of people’s war tomorrow, is the reason why:  
Independence and Socialism for Puerto Rico; and War in America, are the logical cries for this time period.  

REPRESSION AGAINST THE CHICANOMEXICANO STRUGGLE  

The ChicanoMexicano struggle within the U.S. imperialist borders has become more clearly defined as an anti-imperialist struggle. The  
ChicanoMexicano Commission of the Movimiento de Liberacion Nacional, M.L.N., believes that as a people we have the right to re-occupy  
the land taken from Mexico in the invasion of 1848 by the U.S.  

Since 1848, with the imposition of the unjust imperialist laws surrounding the Treaty of Guadalupe, the ChicanoMexicano people have  
been denied access to our resources, freedom of movement, protection under the law, the retention of our land, and the right to self-  
determination in the occupied territory north of the Rio Grande. We have been the victims of multiple injustices and crimes at the hands of  
U.S. imperialism. We are a colonized people who are subjects of colonists who devised methods of psychological destruction aimed at  
uprooting our people from their past in order to destroy our culture, distort our history, change our traditions and moral values, disrupt our  
concept of family, and finally to complete the colonization process, ruin our language. Colonization has already had an effect on our people.  
We are forced to be afraid of being Mexican, because racism dictates that white is superior to brown. The imperialist colonizer has used  
subtle and refined methods to carry out this process of control, in which racism plays a major role. We are still led to believe that we have  
“democratic rights”, yet the opposite takes place in our daily lives—we are an exploited, harassed, oppressed, repressed people, and we  
do not see it, because we have gone as far as to internalize the pervasive racist attitudes of society and consequently reject and  
discriminate against our own people from Mexico, our Mother Country.  

The only way we can be a people with dignity is by recovering our language and Mexicanidad.  

The ChicanoMexicano Commission of the Movimiento de Liberacion Nacional has taken the position of a reunified and socialist Mexico.  
This means regaining our homeland, the occupied territory now known as Texas, Utah, Nuevo Mexico, California, Colorado, Nevada, and  
Arizona. Because Mexico is a dependent capitalist state and the northern part of its country is occupied by U.S. imperialism, and its people  
colonized, we have but one recourse, revolutionary struggle for the socialist reunification of the Mexican Nation.  

With this we deal a severe blow to U.S. imperialism by recognizing that we are a colonized people and there will never be any justice  
under their control, whether in the northern or southern part of our divided nation.  

We consider that our immediate task is to begin developing a national consciousness amongst our people. We are Mexicanos: and only  
through an anti-imperialist struggle can we gain the liberation of our people.