Women’s Liberation Integral To Chinese Socialism

Linda Gordon

Editor's note: This is an edited version of her article, The Fourth Mountain: Women in China, which is about her trip to China in 1972.

Copyright 1973

by Working Papers

(23 Mt. Auburn St.  
Cambridge, Mass. 02138)

Certainly my collection of anecdotes from a three-week trip does not constitute a scientific survey. And yet I could not avoid seeing the common thread in the stories, and drawing some conclusions about how Chinese women themselves experience their recent history. Many Americans, particularly feminists like myself, tend to apply categories from their own experience to third world revolutionary countries like China, and are disappointed at the large areas of sexual inequality that remain.

For example, a few weeks after returning, I heard a China scholar, Shelagh Leader, argue at a women historians’ conference that women's liberation in China had been a failure because certain goals—ending sex roles, breaking down the family, equalizing women's representation in political leadership, etc.—had been subordinated to male-defined values. This analysis of contemporary China is accepted by many American feminists and for that reason seems worth discussing.

There are two things wrong with the analysis. First, the goals that Leader identifies were those of the feminist movement of Kuomintang China (1921-1949), a movement that involved a tiny fraction of Chinese women, all of them urban middle or upper-class intellectuals. The orientation of the movement was to attack the family in order to win opportunity for higher education and admission to the professions for women. It did not touch the experience of the majority of peasant and working-class women in China.

The second problem with the analysis is the matter of the values that Leader labels male-defined. Feminist goals, she said, were subordinated to "economic development and political control." Behind that phraseology is the idea that somehow economic development and employment benefit only men.

All the schools have hours as long as the normal working day or longer, so that both parents can easily work full-time. There are “service stations" where sewing, mending, dressmaking, shoe repair, knitting, etc., are done cheaply.

There are also many prepared-food shops, whose prices are set so the cost of a meal is as low as cooking at home. And since in Chinese cooking most of the labor is in cutting up the ingredients, there are also shops that sell raw foods pre-chopped, so a worker can design a dinner menu, buy all the ingredients, and then fry it up in a few minutes!

It seems unlikely that the Chinese would want an organization that was not ultimately responsible to the general policies set by the national leadership. That is the obligation that results from having the Party's authority behind the women's liberation struggle.

The governing policies are not feminist. I saw no sign of a feminist analysis or strategy operating in China. What I mean by that is an analysis of sex roles (not just sexual inequality) that locates those roles at the basis of class society and postulates as a goal the abolition of as much of the sexual division of labor as is biologically possible.

China’s social policies are raising expectations that will create contradictions if women do not get their fair share.

From Previous Page

First, don't allow yourself to become ill. Sometimes you may feel that an unregulated lifestyle is romantic, poetic, and attractive. But it isn't appropriate for the present situation. No one cares about you more than you care about yourself. And nothing can be worse than to lose your health at this time. Good health is the most essential thing. Look after it and take tender care of yourself. Secondly, keep yourself cheerful. Only by remaining cheerful can you have youthfulness, vitality, and the ability to lead a full life; the reserve strength to endure the hardships of our situation, to have good future prospects, and to have pleasure. I'm not talking about a mere contentment with life, but about the joy of struggling ahead and progressing. That's why, every day, we must do meaningful work, study, contribute something of ourselves to others. Loafing only makes our lives empty, weary, and withered. Thirdly, get into the habit of using your brain. Get rid of your aversion to deep thinking and your strong inclination to always follow the crowd. Think well about what you are about to say or do. Consider where your action will actually be effective, whether or not it goes against your deepest convictions and whether you are willing to accept responsibility for it. If you act in this way, you will have no regrets; this is what is called a rational person. You will not be gypped or trapped by sweet words nor tempted by small gains. You will not fritter away your passion nor waste your life, and you will avoid worries.

Fourthly, have the determination to drive ahead to the end. Women who are fully aware of the present moment have to know how to shed every rose-colored fantasy. Our joy is a battle within a storm and not playing the harp under the moon or reciting poetry in front of a flower.

Without a strong determination, you will certainly quit halfway. You will either be in a continual state of distress or will become corrupted. The strength of your endurance is cultivated through persistence. Without a great aspiration, it is impossible to resist greed and to avoid becoming a victim of comfort. Only those who work for all humankind, not just for themselves, have this kind of aspiration.

Morning of the Eighth of March

P.S.: I have finished writing this article and have reread it. I feel that some parts are inadequate, and I have quite a few more things I'd like to say. But because of the deadline, I don't have time to tidy it up. I also feel that if some prominent leading people were to say the same things at a meeting, they would be accepted as hitting it right on the head. But since this comes from a woman, it will probably be ignored. However, since it's written, I want to communicate it to others who have similar feelings.

To call water conservation projects, fertilizer factories, electrification—all that is creating such rapid economic development in China—"male defined" is to slip into the most unfeminist notion that women are only a special interest group, not human beings, and do not benefit from the general improvement of the human condition.

In China, the process of women's liberation cannot be understood separately from the process of the entire revolution. It has been true everywhere, as Sheila Rowbotham shows in her excellent book on women in revolutionary periods (Women, Resistance and Revolution), that women gain from a general democratization and lose from a rightward turn in politics.

For women, the liberation meant, most importantly, the abolition of slavery. Chinese women were immediately entitled to personal freedom. They could no longer be sold, or married without their consent, or beaten, or forced to work without pay.

Women made special progress, and “women's issues" became especially important during three periods in the history of the People's Republic of China: immediately after the revolution; in the Great Leap Forward at the end of the 1950s; and in the Cultural Revolution of the late 1960s.

Between each of these explosions of energy, women probably lost some ground, and I think they have lost some ground since the Cultural Revolution. It is the nature of the process that it is never steady. At best, it is two steps forward and one back.

Support For Women

One important kind of support comes from the dissemination of birth control propaganda. Birth control is valued in China only secondarily as a means to control population; primarily, it is a way to free women from child-care responsibilities that tie them to their houses.

"Two children are enough for every family" is the attitude that is urged by birth control counselors. Of course, having more children is not illegal, and many Chinese couples—especially peasants, more conservative on this as on many social issues—continue to have large families. In some localities, a conference with a birth control counselor is required before a marriage license is issued.

Another kind of support for women in the workforce is an array of institutions for child care and even housework. Full-time child-care centers, usually located in a parent's place of work, accept children from the age of eight weeks; women get paid maternity leave until their children reach that age.

Hu Yu-chen, a woman member of the revolutionary committee of a large Shanghai textile mill, told me a story about her work that shows what this kind of support can mean. One day a woman factory worker came to her to ask for help in getting a divorce. Hu asked why she wanted a divorce. "Because we fight all the time and he even hits me." Hu was surprised and upset because the husband was a veteran cadre. She asked further about the cause of the fights, and it turned out that the key problem was the husband's refusal to do his fair share of the housework.

Hu was nervous when she learned this because the husband was an important man, and she had only recently been elected to the revolutionary committee. But she knew it was her duty to criticize the husband. "So, I went to the Party Committee. They said, ‘Just talk to him and persuade him to give up his bad ideas.’ So I went to talk to him. I said, ‘You are a cadre and she is a worker. How can you have such ideas?....You are wrong. Your wife works. You should do housework.’ So under my criticism, he recognized his mistake."

By this time the wife had moved out and refused to go back: "He always promises to change, but never does.” Hu went to the husband and told him to leave work, go home, clean the whole house, and cook dinner, and she convinced the wife to go home just for a discussion.

At the dinner, Hu not only insisted that the husband criticize himself formally but asked his eldest son to give his opinion. He criticized his father openly, a more painful event for a Chinese than for an American father. And the family, according to Hu, lived happily ever after.

There is a strange combination of a most traditional and a quite radical view of marriage here: a commitment to permanence and monogamy but also to the intervention of the "state" or its equivalent in support of social values that include sexual equality.

It is important to understand that this intervention from the state follows from policies established by the male-dominated Communist Party (the Central Committee of almost 200 has only a few women).

Like American feminists, it has been difficult to interest women in fighting to abolish the sexual division of labor if the work of the men in their lives is not very desirable, and if the political power that their men have is insignificant. This is the case in China where most people of both sexes must do hard manual labor all day all year.

It might be helpful at this point to recall the Chinese image of the “fourth mountain" as the description of women's oppression. In this model, not only is sexism not fundamental, it is the opposite. It is a kind of male bad habit laid on top of the real problem. I noticed little if any consciousness of the ways in which sexism oppresses men as well as women, that common refrain of contemporary American feminists.

If a Chinese feminism emerges, we must assume that it will be very different from ours. It might not even conceive of itself as a “liberation movement" since it might well accept the images of liberation defined by the Marxist-Leninist-Maoist tradition. It might remain simply a civil rights movement, a campaign for equality.

China's social policies are raising expectations that will create contradictions if women do not get their fair share of the returns. But the contradictions may indeed remain, as they have been resolved in other ways that others have been—within the Communist Party, through another Cultural Revolution led this time by women.

Contemplation of that possibility is evidence of the enormous achievement for women of the Chinese revolution. Begun 24 years ago with women nearly slaves, the male leadership of the Chinese Communist Party has brought them the possibility of education, dignified work, individual wages, control over their own reproductive capacity; and has conducted an impressive amount of anti-sexist education of men and women. If indeed the contradiction between women and their masters has been reduced to a contradiction among the people, that is powerful evidence for the efficacy of socialism as a way of attacking women's oppression.