_ the bookbind

Isn’t

‘“Happiness

Everything’

by Roberta King

FINAL PAYMENTS  
By Mary Gordon  
Random House  

If you are a woman who grew up Catholic as I  
did, (and even if you aren’t), you shouldn’t  
pass up Final Payments. It’s guaranteed to  
stir up fading memories and to bring them  
back to life with sometimes painful clarity.  
But, even more important, this moving and  
sensitive book will give you a deeper  
understanding of yourself.  

Isabel Moore, the protagonist in Mary  
Gordon’s first novel, is a woman obsessed.  
Or perhaps possessed is more accurate. She  
is possessed by guilt — guilt which blackens  
and distorts almost half of her life.  

Raised in a clannish Irish Catholic  
neighborhood in Queens, she gives up  
eleven of the best years of her life to care,  
singlehandedly, for her invalid father, a  
victim of several paralyzing strokes. Be-  
tween the ages of 19 and 30, Isabel has no  
life of her own. Except for two women  
friends and weekly visits from family friend  
Father Mulcahy, she lives in virtual seclu-  
sion (her mother died when she was two)  
with her nearly helpless father.  

As dismal as that may seem, the decision  
was, for Isabel, inevitable and straightfor-  
ward. She did not believe she had a choice or  
that she could get help in any way. She  
believed she was the cause of her father’s  
illness.  

A professor of medieval literature at St.  
Aloysius, Joe Moore was a man whose faith  
should have moved mountains, it was so  
strong and single-minded. Western Civiliza-  
tion was, for him, the Church. He was the  
classic ‘‘pillar of the Church.”’ Then one day  
he discovered his 19-year-old daughter in  
bed with her boyfriend, David Lowe, one of  
his prize students. Three weeks later, he had  
his first stroke.  

Even after her father’s death and all her  
years of sacrifice, Isabel is still tormented.  
Both on a conscious and subconscious level,  
she continues to wrestle with her inner  
conflict, the seeds of which were planted  
early. She sets out to launch her own life and  
seems, on the surface anyway, to be doing  
well. But as time goes on it becomes  
increasingly clear that she is crippled by her  
past; she is incapable of enjoying her new  
life. Isabel journeys to the depths of a living  
hell and then, on the verge of disaster, she  
finds a compromise and settles a long-stand-  
ing feud with her own conscience.  

Undoubtedly, Isabel’s case is an extra-  
ordinary one and certainly not all Catholic  
women run into the kinds of problems she  
faces. But the elements that go into the  
making of her turmoil are present in the lives  
and psyches of many women, particularly  
Catholic women.  

As so many women have done (and are  
doing), Isabel drifts gradually away from the  
Church as she gets older and Mary Gordon’s  
description of that process captures the  
experience perfectly. ‘‘...when loss of faith  
comes gradually as it did to me, the issue  
seems plain and no longer compelling...And  
so it was not that it was torture for me to sit  
through Sunday Mass...it was simply bor-  
ing. It had occurred to me in high school that  
it did not make good sense for there to be  
only one possibility open to men. And when  
the Church ceased to be inevitable, it  
became for me irrelevant.”  

That’s how the process unfolds on a  
conscious level. But what goes on beneath  
the surface is something else again. It’s not  
easy to break away completely from years of  
childhood indoctrination. Isabel’s intellec-  
tual loss of faith can’t erase the deep  
emotional and psychological scars that  
continue to exert a powerful influence on her  
outlook and behavior. The matter is further  
complicated for Isabel, however, because old  
beliefs and fears are wrapped up in her deep  
love for her dogmatic father, to whose  
existence she attached no less than ‘a  
murderous importance.”  

What happens to Isabel is frightening.  

MARY  
GORDON  

Still aware of the forces that control her,  
she sets out to pursue a ‘‘normal” life. She  
sells the house where she and her father  
lived, moves upstate, begins the first paying  
job of her life, and falls in love with Hugh  
Slade — a very unhappily married man  
whose love for her is genuine.  

But Isabel is not free to shape her future.  
Locked in the iron-clad grip of her gloomy  
past, she becomes sickeningly masochistic  
and comes dangerously close to destroying  
her life. While nursing her father she was  
being punished enough and there was  
no need to inflict further damage on herself.  
She was above reproach, considered ‘‘a  
saint’’ by everyone who knew her. But after  
his death, her guilt is fueled by the  
realization that, on some level, she had  
wanted him to die - so badly she could taste  
it.  

The dynamics that create a woman like  
Isabel — filled with self-hate, agonizingly  
ashamed of her sexuality, incapable of  
enjoying the pleasures of this life without  
feeling monstrously selfish — are complex.  
And you can’t hang the blame entirely on the  
peg of her Catholic upbringing. Neverthe-  
less, Isabel’s unhealthy state of mind is  
clearly reflective of an ideology which  
revolves around sin, selfishness, guilt,  
punishment, retribution, penance, sacrifice,  
self-denial, virginity and chastity. This  
emphasis on the negative, on the repression  
of human joy and spontaneity, breeds  
neuroses in the dark corners of the  
subconscious — neuroses which do not die  
easily.  

In its enthusiasm for the hereafter, the  
Church loses sight of the joy and value of the  
present and maintains a peculiar disregard  
for the beauty and richness of this earthly  
existence. “‘Happiness isn’t everything,”  
Father Mulcahy tells Isabel. ‘‘We weren’t  
meant to be happy here. We were put here  
so we could be happy in heaven. For all  
eternity. What's sixty or seventy years,  
happy or unhappy, compared with that?”  

(Apparently, that is the kind of thinking  
which is behind the Church’s simultaneous  
opposition to both birth control and abortion.  

Which means that a woman who wants to  
remain loyal to her faith has two choices —  
to bear unlimited numbers of children or to  
abstain from sexual relations. But then  
again, ‘“‘happiness isn’t everything.’’ Espec-  
ially women’s happiness.)  

It’s impossible to read Final Payments  
and remain uninvolved — a cool onlooker.  
One of the ways in which Gordon draws you  
deeply into the novel is through her skillful  
use of first-person narrative. Through it, you  
are brought directly into the deepest  
recesses of Isabel’s mind and suffer with her  
the misery, shame, and horror of her  
self-imposed crucifixion. Your own exper-  
ience may never have been as extreme as  
Isabel’s but it’s easy to identify with her just  
the same.  

Final Payments makes no hasty judge-  
ments and offers no easy answers. There are  
powerful lessons to be learned but the  
meaning of those lessons will be different for  
everyone. Although it’s clear that much of  
Isabel’s behavior is destructive, you are  
never convinced that she did the wrong thing  
in caring for her father. She genuinely loved  
him and the complex web of motivation  
involved in that decision is left for the reader  
to untangle.  

Final Payments offers a vision of the  
Church which is critical but not cruel, which  
penetrates the sham of the institution itself  
but is compassionate and understanding of  
individuals. Throughout the novel, you feel  
nothing but affection for Father Mulcahy  
who (despite his problem with alcohol) is, as  
Isabel says, ‘perfectly good.’ And the  
image of the priests visiting Isabel and her  
father who ‘‘argued about baptism of desire,  
knocking dishes of pickles onto the carpet in  
their ardor” achieves a level of gentle irony  
that is nothing short of inspired.  

Although Final Payments deals with  
sorrow, pain and death, it is also very much  
about happiness, love and life. Gordon’s  
original, vivid and often very funny imag-  
ery, metaphors and dialogue make it a joy to  
read from beginning to end. It is a deeply  
contemplative, enriching, and delightful  
experience.  

Caner ee ener  

14  

Equal Times September 11, 1978