international

Against US Intervention In Nicaragua

bombing of fuel storage tanks in Corinto, the sabotage of pipelines on the Atlantic Coast, the numerous incursions deep into Nicaraguan territory by the contras, are all courtesy of US backing. With thousands of Marines to the south of us and thousands to the north, with Marines afloat east and west of us, we come to a new and deeply felt appreciation of the intentions of our government. As the sovereignty of Grenada was destroyed by the US invasion, so is the sovereignty of Nicaragua being threatened. Nicaraguans will never surrender to this. They will fight until there are no Nicaraguans left. If we as US citizens at home or away surrender to or ignore our government's adventures, we surrender all sense of value and responsibility we owe toward the struggle for liberation in Central America.

The struggle of women in Nicaragua Libre goes forward. Our own battles must include solidarity with these women, with their revolution.

The possibility of an imminent land invasion of Nicaragua by the US exists -- it may well be at hand.

We write this with a sense of urgency and rage. An invasion here watched silently and unprotested on American television will mean that we as women haven't had the courage or vision to support a revolution whose fundamental purpose continues to be the enrichment of life for all of its people. If we want peace generally in the world, we must also want it in this most specific of places, Nicaragua. We speak as women who believe that within the imperative to defend a free Nicaragua, lies the imperative for us to fight against our own government's intention to annihilate the idea, and the living reality, of sovereign Nicaragua.

Nicaraguan women are liberating their country and themselves as women: organizing the literacy and immunization campaigns, fighting in the militia, and abolishing prostitution.

Moving on, the march stops at the German Consulate. The women protest the installation of Cruise and Pershing II missiles in Western Europe, accusing NATO of intimidating people all over the world in the name of "stability" and "democracy."

The CIA is the final destination. The metal doors to its building at 555 Battery are locked in anticipation of their arrival. S.F. police and a tactical riot squad stand by, watching the women carry out a tribunal against the CIA.

A policeman picks on one of the women, slams her against his car, and places her under arrest. He is overheard saying to his commander, "I hate to hit women, but these women have no respect for authority." In response, the women chant, "Who're the real terrorists? The San Francisco police!"

This demonstration is part of an ongoing campaign: “Women: Confront the US War Machine." Sponsored by Women Against Imperialism, the campaign is targeting all branches of US militarism -- local ROTC and army recruiters, the CIA, the FBI and the police. Like the women's demonstration waged against the Oakland Armed Forces Recruiting Station in August, this is part of an effort to build an anti-imperialist women's movement that will help to stop the US War Machine. For more information, call W.A.I. at (415) 652-4401 ext. 656, or write to 3543 18th Street #14, San Francisco, CA 94110.

DARE Calls

Dykes Against Racism Everywhere (DARE)

Dear Friends: As you probably know, the situation in Nicaragua at this time is extremely critical. Counterrevolutionary groups (Contras) funded by the CIA have caused extensive damage to Nicaragua's industry and agriculture and have killed many Nicaraguans, especially in the North on the Honduran border. 

The Nicaraguan people, currently mobilized for defense, are shorthanded for harvesting their main source of foreign exchange - the annual coffee crop. Nicaragua is seeking hundreds of North American volunteers to live and work with people in the mountains for two weeks or longer, contribute to the economy, and experience firsthand the reality of their revolutionary society.

Participants pay for their own air transportation (available at $500-600 round-trip for brigade volunteers). Nicaragua provides all food, housing and transportation inside the country.

The United States has 25,000 troops in the area on the pretext of joint military exercises with Honduran troops. These "exercises" will last well into next spring. The United States has also imposed an unofficial, but extremely effective trade embargo, making it very difficult for Nicaragua to gain access to consumer goods and food as well as jeopardizing trade with other countries. Nicaragua is in a state of emergency, preparing for an invasion that could come any day in any form.

Reagan's invasion of Grenada has made it clear that this administration is committed to bullying, sabotaging and, if necessary, invading any country that refuses to bow to the will of the United States.

Living in a country which has caused so much damage and inflicted so much pain, we feel an urgent need. A need both to make it clear to our government that we are totally opposed to their policies and actions against Nicaragua and to support the people of Nicaragua as they struggle to keep their revolution alive.

We are writing you now to let you know that there are several ways that you can show your support for the Nicaraguan people. We have enclosed a flyer about international coffee harvesting brigades to which donations are welcome, if you yourself are unable to join. (See box - ed.) We have also included a call, issued by MADRE, for contributions of material aid. You can also write to the following legislators to voice your opposition: Rep. Tip O'Neill, Sen. Robert Byrd, Sen. Howard Baker, Sen. Charles H. Percy - all in Washington, D.C. 20510, Tel # U.S. Congress (202) 224-3121.

Please do whatever you can...and a little more.

In solidarity, Dykes Against Racism Everywhere

MORE ON PAGE 16

Big Mama Rag, January, 1984 - Page 11