rity what will happen to the E.T.R.s in P.E.s?  
Behavior Modification In Women’s Prison  

Women prisoners at the Huron Valley Women's Facility in Michigan successfully organized and won a sex discrimination suit against administrators of the state prison system. Superintendent Gloria Jean Richardson has taken actions designed to misinterpret, warp and ignore the rulings of Judge Feikins, who handed down the decisions in the case.  

On May 15, Richardson issued a formal invitation to the population to attend a Superintendent's Forum Meeting in the gym, at which time she announced that some women would be transferred to a corrections camp and that since the women wanted to be equal to the male prisoners in Michigan, they would have to accept the bad with the good, and that therefore their property would be drastically reduced. When a number of women responded that the property reduction clearly had nothing to do with the orders of the judge but instead was Richardson's way of venting her malice, she became very hostile, threatened to have the women removed, and made further misleading and false statements about how the Court decision had affected work pass programs in the State. When one woman turned to the resident body and urged everyone to write letters to the Department of Corrections and Legislature asking whether the men's property policy could be changed to apply to women, Richardson ordered her out of the gym. Shortly after the meeting, Judge Feikins received a formal complaint filed by two women involved in the original suit, fifteen affidavits, over 100 individual letters, and a petition containing over 200 signatures. As a result of this strong show of solidarity, the judge issued a temporary restraining order making it temporarily illegal for Richardson to take any action to decrease the amount or type of property allowed each woman at Huron Valley. Once again, the women came together to fight and got results. As one woman wrote in the prisoner's newsletter: "You have seen too much injustice to remain mute or still any longer; Justice is the word that indicates our goal. And it must be noted that the pending matter of the T.R.O. (Temporary Restraining Order) is self-explanatory, however, we are optimistic about the outcome. But if we should fail in this struggle, we will have succeeded in another victory. For once again, we have joined together to struggle on."  

OO  

Huron Valley Women's Facility was built in 1977 to house 290 women. Today 450 women (approximately 75% Black, 15% white, 8% Chicana and 2% Native American) are locked up there and the severe overcrowding makes the usual repressive conditions even worse. The administration’s solution was to dump some of the prisoners into a local jail—the Kalamazoo County Jail—but the women included a protest against that jail in their suit, and Judge Feikins agreed that the conditions at the jail were terrible—so bad, even by the standards of the State, that the jail could not be used to solve overpopulation problems. Caught between inadequate state prison facilities and even more inadequate county facilities, the Michigan prison system has two options: build more prisons or release more prisoners. Their choice, of course, is to build another prison. In the meantime, as the result of a court order, some prisoners will be moved to Camp Pontiac, a corrections camp where they will work for the Department of Natural Resources or be enrolled in a Childcare Training Program. Some of the women will earn “incentive good time" as a result of their work—something previously reserved only for male prisoners. The 71 women being transferred to the camp are the first in Michigan penal history to work in a corrections camp. The men who are currently at Camp Pontiac will be transferred somewhere else while the state builds a new camp next to the existing one—at which point the women from the old camp will move into the new one and the men will be transferred back to the old one.  

But while the state is shunting prisoners from one institution to another and building yet more buildings to lock up more people, various groups on the outside are pushing for different "solutions." The Detroit Free Press has published articles recently which reflect the attitude of many people that overcrowding in prisons is something to be avoided—not because it is part of a system of oppression, but because overcrowding can create riots and hostage-taking, situations which are perceived by some people as threatening to the surrounding community. But building new prisons costs a lot of money and because of this country's rapidly worsening economy, the same people aren't happy about paying for more prison construction. So, in a roundabout way that has much more to do with racist fears of “rioting criminals" and higher taxes than with a political analysis of prison, a lot of people are moving toward supporting better work programs, job training, supportive services and "controlled return to the community."  

The “problem of overcrowding” is not limited to the Michigan prison system. In every state across this country the courts are sending more and more people behind bars. As the economy gets worse and people have to struggle even harder to survive, as confrontations between racist white cops and people of color become even more frequent, and as more women defend themselves against physical abuse, the courts are filling up with more people, and “justice” is dumping them into prison.  

The transfer of women to Camp Pontiac is not the only change at Huron Valley—the administration is also in the process of expanding the psychiatric unit into a behavior modification unit. Behavior modification—forcibly changing the behavior of a human being through the use of extreme isolation, drugs, and sophisticated reward and punishment mind games for the purpose of creating a "new" person more in line with the standards of the white male ruling class—is being used increasingly in prisons everywhere. The federal prison at Marion, Illinois has long been known for its behavior mod programs and now is being used as a model for old and new prisons in the process of "modernization." Most prison authorities are reluctant to use the term "behavior modification" because it has been exposed as a viciously racist and repressive weapon, so they disguise the true meaning of the treatment. A few years ago when women from Bedford Hills prison in New York were transferred to Matteawan Hospital for the Criminally Insane, they were put in a behavior mod program called "Steady"—"Steps Toward and Eventual Acceptance of a Disciplined You."  

The control units being created at Huron Valley are part of a statewide plan to strengthen the bonds between psychiatric institutions and prisons. Like overcrowding, the union of psychiatric and prison control is not unique to Michigan—prisons across the country are expanding psychiatric “treatment” of prisoners and building behavior modification units at a terrifying rate; at the same time, state psychiatric institutions are expanding their facilities to include wards for prisoners, and medical hospitals are building more psych/behavior mod units. In Michigan a 1978 revision of Chapter 10 of the Mental Health Code paved the way for the transfer of women between prisons and psychiatric institutions and the building of behavior mod units. Prisoners who are labeled "mentally ill" by the State have been transferred out of prison psychiatric units into the Center for Forensic Psychiatry near Ann Arbor. At the Forensic Center, a special 30-bed ward in the center of the building has been set up just for prisoners. The first transfers were supposedly “voluntary” (although as the anti-psychiatry movement points out, there is no such thing as voluntary incarceration), but future transfers will not be; State Corrections Director Perry Johnson said that the revision "corrected defects in the previous code which had made it impossible to make involuntary transfers." From the sound of it, the State now has absolute power to transfer a prisoner from a prison to a State "Mental Hospital" against her will.  

The 1978 revision also called for changes in the psych-units of the prisons so that “recovering mentally ill prisoners" can be segregated from the general population. When one woman at Huron Valley asked a resident psychiatrist about the changes she saw happening around her, he assured her that the control units were not behavior mod units. The cute name they have come up with in this case turns out to be "Protective Environments" (P.E.s). The P.E.s will have “quiet rooms" for "E.T.R.s"—"Emotionally Troubled Residents." And what will happen to the E.T.R.s in the P.E.s? The psychiatrist explained that “Every resident in this unit will be evaluated and placed on a certain level and from there they will proceed to work or earn their way to the next step. The way this is to be done is to earn points and according to the number of points that you earn will determine how far you are able to progress and when you reach the best hall then you stand a chance of moving to another unit or to a program." Obviously behavior modification. These new units are being installed now at Huron Valley and at Kencross Correctional Facility near Sault St. Marie, and funds are being requested to build one at the Riverside Correctional Facility at Ionia.  

Behavior Modification has arrived in Michigan, and no amount of prettier words from officials can hide the truth.  

KKK RE  

The attacks against women locked up in the State of Michigan are similar to the attacks against prisoners across the country. But the spirit of solidarity and resistance is growing everywhere.  

No More Cages  

Unjust Treatment  

Privacy Suit Filed  

Jeanie Ambrose, Kathleen Cowart and Patricia Smith, prisoners at Oregon Women's Correctional Center filed a civil suit on the basis of lack of privacy suffered because of the presence of male guards at the prison. Guards have opened shower doors while prisoners were bathing, observed women using the toilet, and because the guards are also assigned to the hospital unit, they are present while prisoners describe their personal problems to the doctor.  

The women say “that this is very embarrassing to have to describe these problems in front of a male officer."  

The suit asked that the Corrections Division be prohibited from assigning any male officer to duties within the women's center except in an emergency situation.  

In December 1978, male prisoners at Oregon State Penitentiary won a suit they brought over the frisking of prisoners by women guards.  

"The conditions of this small prison got beyond us, hence, we three women, through the assistance of a legal assistant at Oregon State Penitentiary filed a Suit in Equity For Injunctive Relief. Our complaint alleges that the Corrections Division is denying our right to privacy, under the Oregon and U.S. constitutions, and have subjected us to cruel and unusual punishment under Oregon Law, by assigning male officers to a women's correctional facility.  

We had contacted six prison editors across the U.S. to pass on the issue of the women's prison here in Oregon. To date, three have responded. Further meaning did the three remaining prisons ever receive the material mailed???  

When our lawsuit was filed 3/14/80, Administration since is daily retaliating. Before this date, I was being escorted to Oregon State Penitentiary to seek legal assistance from a paralegal on the men's side. However, the Superintendent of OWCC terminated my meetings with him, this has crippled me, as his knowledge and adequate work was the only way possible for the women prisoners to seek relief through the court system.  

Further reflection on our suit, Judge Barber (Marion County) failed to recognize he had appointed the men counsel in 1978 on a suit of the same against female guards. Hence he says he has no statutory authority to appoint the women (indigent prisoners) counsel.  

However, I do still correspond with my legal assistant at Oregon State, but the legal mail is opened and delayed. But he is doing all he can to see that we are appointed counsel. The Oregon State Bar, Prisoner's Legal Services of Oregon, and the American Civil Liberties Union, have been contacted, asking them if they could represent the women of OWCC. The PLSO at present are discussing the possibility of their office taking their case.  

However, the PLSO to date are representing Oregon State Penitentiary on a very involved Class-Action Overcrowded Suit, In Federal Court in Portland. In fact my legal assistant is the man who initially filed the overcrowding suit.  

Hence the two court cases mentioned above are just two of many violations of prisoners’ rights. We have an ongoing problem of legal mail tampering, and inmates of both prisons being denied their rights to disciplinary procedures.  

But I also feel that when news is spread, it generally receives some replies—issues of the penitentiary world are not new, nor singled out, some prisons and county jails are worse than others.  

I will send on information as to the progress of our suit.  

Also in the struggle,  

Jeanie Ambrose et.al.  

OWCC, Salem, Oregon  

Through The Looking Glass