4 Remember Daddy:

In June, the Women Everywhere Radio Collective interviewed women with a variety
of backgrounds on their feelings about their fathers. The radio collective aired
the women's responses on Father's Day. Here are reprinting the candid remarks below:

“My feelings about my father are mixed. A lot of the early roots of my politi-
cal commitment came from both my parents, but from my father more than my mother.
I identify with my father as the political heavy of the family and have a lot
more respect for him than for my mother, and I know all this is not coming
from valid places. A lot of it is coming from them as victims of a whole kind of
sexism that wasn't out in the open back in those days. My mother had pressures
that only a woman would have had-- to please her family. She needed their love
and approval more than I think men need the love and approval of their families;
men seem to get it no matter what they do. Also, my father is more outspoken
than my mother. He would have very heavy, emotional political discussions with
my sister and I when we were kids, which my mother would certainly be in agree-
ment with. She could have said the same things and said them just as well, but
for lots of reasons we're all coming from, she didn't say them; he did. So I
have a lot of respect for him that overshadows respect for my mother that's mis-
placed and messed up.

In many ways we haven't had space for just having a relationship as two
people because I identify with him, not just as a person, but as part of a whole
cause, and he doesn't come through enough on those causes for me. I'm still
like an approval junkie off his approval, but his politics haven't developed
for twenty years, so it's absolute horseshit for me to think I need his comment-
ary on everything."

"My father always hated women. He always blamed all women for the fact that his
own mother ran off and left the kids behind when women weren't really doing that.
He should never have gotten married. He's the kind that much prefers being off
by himself, but he also likes to sit around in a bar and pull out a wallet and
show the pictures of the wife and kids that are somewhere out there loving him--
like he's this responsible man with this adoring family, which is hardly the
truth.

For the longest time I hated my father; he was very cruel in a lot of ways,
especially to my mother. He had total control over her. He used to drink a lot
and gamble and not come home. When he would come home, my mom would hide her
wallet that had our last seven dollars in it, and she'd hide it in our bedroom,
thinking he would leave the kids alone about it. But he'd be drunk and he'd be
looking for the wallet and go ripping through everything trying to find some
money, and he'd get real mean about it. All the kids used to conspire with my
Mom against my Dad, and we had a real strong bond that way. When my Dad would go
out of town-- he was in the Navy-- it was really a relief.

I think my father is what made me a feminist. I saw my parents' marriage and I
saw him to be the whole messed-up part of marriage. I said I'd never get married,
I'd never live with a man, and I'm sure he was an influence on how I feel about
men in that kind of nuclear family situation. I mean, he had my mother begging
just because he brought in whatever money there was to be brought in. As a kid,
I kept asking her, ‘when are you going to divorce him?’ Now I can understand
a little more that both of them were involved in the relationship. It took my
mother a long time to even gain a sense of herself-- certainly sexism was part of
it.

“My father never told me there was anything I couldn't do. Anything I wanted to
do, I could do it, I could try it. He had wanted to be a scientist and couldn't,
so that got put on me. It was a big thing-- I could be a scientist! He also
showed me by example that there wasn't anything too lowly for a man to do; he
shared in the work completely in our house. I think he was an exceptional man--
it was real hard to find any sexist undercurrents going on. He did a lot for
bringing my mother out of some of the sexism that she had been brought up with.
He was real fair with both my brother, my sister, and I, whereas my mother made
some exceptions for my brother because he was male. We could see that and we were
thankful that he was there to be real fair with us."

"My father has always liked to think of himself as a “reasonable” man. He al-
ways discussed things with the family; he encouraged the girls to get a college
education and he shared the housework with my mother. But for all my father's
belief in being modern, we all knew that he was still a real patriarch in the sense
that anything he did couldn't be challenged.

When I was 15 or 16 my father started acting stranger and stranger. He
would accuse my mother of poisoning him and he would burst into tears or tantrums
for no reason. He would also come into my bedroom at night and try to stroke me
sexually, only he'd act like there wasn't anything sexual going on. If I tried
to shut the bedroom door at night, he wouldn't let me. My Mom kind of knew what
was going on, but it was only when things got pretty obvious that she'd tell him
to stop it; even then, she'd never acknowledge exactly what he was doing. I felt
very vulnerable because everybody was pretending that none of this was happening
and I didn't know how to fight it.

A couple of years after I moved out of the house, my father found out he had an
illness which affects people's emotions. Once that was discovered, things got
better again. I'm supposed to be able to understand that, but I felt very uncom-
fortable around him for a long time. The worst part is that if we had felt more
comfortable questioning his authority, if he hadn't had the power that says,
‘Father’ can do no wrong, something might have been done sooner. As it was, he
had the power to put me in that vulnerable position, and nothing can be done to
justify that.”

Big Mama Rag Vol.5 No.6

Thoughts On Father's Day

"Basically, I feel real positive about my dad; I always liked my dad. He was
the storyteller in the family; he had run away when he was 15 and joined the
Navy and he rode the rods and talked about cowboys. I don't even know how much of
it is true, but he told wonderful stories. I guess I analyzed this later, but I
think I really envied his freedom-- I identified with him. He was the one who was
going out in the world while there was my mother, home, cooking and doing child-
care and that sort of thing. As I got older, when I started developing a feminist
consciousness, it struck me the ways my father oppressed my mother and that was
hard to deal with.

I see my father obviously much less romantically than when I was a kid. Our
relationship probably doesn't have much depth anymore-- I've still never been
able to tell him I am a lesbian, although my mother knows, and I suspect that
has a lot to do with some kind of deep-seated rejection. I have always felt very
close and I suppose at some point I have to deal with that.”

"The most striking thing about my father is the fact he tried to maintain ab-
solute and total control over every aspect of his children's lives, and all of
his children happen to be women. He had three daughters and no sons. He did
things like hide our mail if we got political mail he didn't want us to read.

My sister wanted to marry a Black man when she was 17 or 18 and my father re-
fused to let her see him, so she decided to get pregnant so that my father would
let her marry him. Instead, he tried to put her in a mental institution, but
needless to say, the institution let her out the next day saying the only thing
*wrong with you is that you're pregnant.

He told us what to think, how to behave, and one of his main beliefs in life
was that anger was an extremely unChristian and destructive sort of behavior.
That was his major control over us-- if we raised our voices at each other, he
took us to the bathroom and washed our mouths out with soap and he would lock
us in our rooms and say, 'don't come out until you can talk to your sister better
than that.'"

"My father was a wonderful father. He raised us as Christians; he always told
us we got out of life what we put in. He's been gone for a good many years, but
he was a very good influence on me. He was a hard worker. He was the type of
man that never punished anybody, but you always knew when you were in his bad
graces.

At the time I was growing up-- he was a truck driver-- he took the boys out
with him lots; us girls were mainly in the house, but he never failed to take
all of us somewhere every week. We were raised in a very small town and if there
was a fair going on, he always loaded his truck full of kids, besides us, and
went, and he was always with us as much as he could be."

"I don't have real strong feelings about my father. He left when I was about
five. Before he left-- well he left and came back and left and came back--
he was an alcoholic and used to beat my mother. It was really bad, although I
don't remember feeling hate for him while he was doing this.

In my neighborhood there were hardly any fathers anyway. His being gone, while
I lived in that neighborhood, wasn't that big of a deal, but when we moved when I
was 11 to this neighborhood where everybody had fathers, that's where it became
dramatic to me that people really had fathers. My teachers would say, 'what does
your father do?', and I would say, 'I don't know, I think he's a steward in a
motel somewhere', and they would say, ‘Are your parents divorced?', and I'd
say no and they'd say, 'Well surely he must do something, he's not dead is he?',
and I would say, ‘No. I just don't know where he is or what he's doing.'
That would make me feel out of place and that's when I started wanting to have
a father; it was sort of socially acceptable.”

"My father has always been the rock in my life. No matter what has happened
to me I have always known that my father would bail me out or rescue me, or
that I could go home and stay a few days, that whatever my behaviors or sit-
uations, it would always be tolerated, if not accepted. This has given me a
real sense of security; it has also given me a lot of privilege because I've
never had to experience being totally up against it and not having any resourc-
es at all. I'm very grateful for that and I take pride in acknowledging that
part of our relationship.

The part that frustrates me and makes me angry is that we have never been
close, we have never been intimate, we've never laughed together. Even now,
if I want to see him I have to call on the phone and make an appointment with
him to have dinner like a week from now. So, our relationship is real stilted
and formal. He never calls; he never writes. Even though I'm at the point in
my life where I'm very fulfilled and very satisfied, I sometimes wish my
relationship with my father was very different.

Always, somewhere in the secret part of his mind, he's hoping I'd be differ-
ent; hoping that I'd get married, live in a house with a picket fence with a
respectable husband and two children. That would be easy for him. But, I'm not
going to do that and he's not going to be gentle and fond and teasing, and I'm
never going to be able to drop in on him unannounced. But, I can call when I
need to and I think he knows that if he needed me I would go to him, but I
don't think he'd ever call; it just wouldn't occur to him. So, on the one hand
I wish him ‘Happy Father's Day’, but on the other hand, I know it won't make
any difference that I did."

More on page 14