ae Ps i

Big Mama Rag Vol.8 No.11

Evangelism / The Electronic Church

And Conservative Politics

Lori Bradford

Bible-Bangers Unite! Evangeli-
cal faith has been a persistent and
significant part of American culture
for many years, it's part of the "Old
West" and “the taming of the African
Peoples.” What has been discovered
recently through the parallel growth
and development of the electronic
church (religion on TV) and of all
electronic communications is that
there are a lot more Fundamentalists
(and potential Fundamentalists) out
there than any feminist might care
to think.

Evangelists like Billy Graham, Oral
Roberts, and Jerry Falwell have used
the media for decades often with
explicitly political messages. But
the original emphasis in getting re-
ligion on TV was as a service to the
ill and aged who were unable to at-
tend their local churches. Now the
electronic church reaches out to the
“unchurched" who are still believers
and do not get their needs met by
their churches anymore, and because
of the increased technology involved
in TV, one hour of religious program-
ming reaches more people than Jesus
might have preached to in his whole
career.

Recently conservative Christians
have poured money into the creation
of Christian owned and operated
radio and TV stations (and Christian
owned and operated political leaders).

Ben Armstrong, executive director of
National Religious Broadcasters
writes “I believe that God has rai-
sed up this powerful technology (te-
levision) expressly to reach every
man, woman, boy and girl on earth
with the even more powerful message
of the gospel." At a time when other
TV channels continue to swamp us with
bad news, crime and violence, and
dramas that condone lifestyles/language
which conflict with old values,
religious programming offers hope

and meaning to a very large mass of
people in America. Christianity

is an easily accessible formula

by which any who desire could com-
pletely govern their lives.

The incredible success of the elec-
tronic church is in part a result of
the application of a revolutionary
technology (but a more important
factor is America’s cultural drift to-
wards conservatism). At the center
of this expanding technology is the
computer. When the electronic church
sends out mailings and appeals for
funds, it is no longer a hit-or-
miss system. Computer listings now
target the appeals for funds to fit

the characteristics of the recipients.

Leaders of the soul-saving video
encourage viewers to write or call
in on toll-free numbers and share
their personal problems and needs.
The mailrooms of the more success-
ful electronic churches are examples
of the best of modern communication
technology. (God will provide) Mail
is sorted first by the presence or
absence of money. Letters are then
sorted by subject, and paragraphs are
then retrieved by computer and woven
into some appropriate prepared re-
sponse that can then be "personalized."
On-line printers dash off
these “individualized answers."
Many organizations have a mailroom
capability for processing 20,000 or
more letters a day. Because
of this technology we can see that
the electronic church easily succeeds
in its initial goal of spreading the
gospel to one and all.

Evangelist’s Millions

American Consumer Inc. agreed to
refund $103,000 to customers who had
purchased the "Cross of Lourdes" at
$15.95 each. The refund was part of
a plea bargained agreement reached
in U.S. District Court in Philadel-
phia.

American Consumer, one of the coun-
try's largest mail-order companies,
was charged with fraud and a possible fine of $1
million.
The crosses in question were sold

were false.
~Post Amerikan/Washington Post

Favorite Views

God himself has instituted Marriage, the husband is the divinely appointed

From Falwell

head and children belong to the parents.

Welfare recipients ought to be left to starve until they decide a job is a

good deal.

Feminists...

the washed-up losers of the world.

We should return to the McCarthy era, where we register Communists... We
should stamp it on their foreheads and send them back to Russia.

No anti-family advocates should be part of the public school system.

No law be introduced to force private schools

to achieve minority balance.

From James Robison

The ERA is a common perverted cause.

Not voting is a sin against the almighty God.

The second concern of the electron-
ic church is a part of the larger
push to revamp the American cul-
ture, to get America right with God.
We can expect (and have already seen)
the evangelicals move to make a
grave impact on the political scene
in America. The electronic church
can be counted on to give them both
a spiritual and financial base.

It is the conservative politics,
and not any specific religion, that
made Reagan appeal to the Bible Bang-
ers. The transformation of an evan-
gelical preacher into a political
mover is a process that has received
careful attention. Political lobby-
ing organizations have been estab-
lished as the political arms of the
various versions of the "Body of
Christ."

Moral Majority, Inc. is an off-
shoot of Falwell's Old Time Gospel
Hour ministry based in Lynchburg,
Va., having 37 chapters nationwide.
The stated purpose of the Moral Maj-
ority is "to preserve Biblical Moral-
ity" and "to mobilize the grassroots
of moral America." The Christian
Voice is the lobbying arm of the
American Christian Cause. Earlier
this year Christian Voice compiled
a rating of all the members of Con-
gress on how they voted on "fourteen
key moral issues"—ranging from
prayer in schools to the security of

Taiwan. From the ratings, a "hit
list" of 36 senators and congressmen
with a poor moral voting record was
issued, equating Christian morality
with political conservatism.

Through Christian lobbying, they
call for strong stands against any-
thing anti-family: communal living,
abortion, homosexuality, polygamy,
child or wife abuse, abusive use of
alcohol or drugs, pre-marital sex,
incest, adultery, pornography, no
fault divorce, and the ERA. Falwell
hopes that the renewal of the eight-
ies begins with joining hands of
church and political leaders.

Falwell is the director of a reli-
gious empire that employs 15,200 peo-
ple and has an annual budget of over
$60 million. The mainstay of the
organization is the Old Time Gospel
Hour, a program seen on 324 televi-
sion stations in the U.S., Canada,
and the Caribbean. The Falwell con-
glomerate also includes the Liberty
Baptist College (the I Love America
Singers from Liberty Baptist College
performed at the Republican Conven-
tion), the Lynchburg Christian Aca-
demy, a summer camp, a Bible Club,

a "youth ministry," a "bus ministry,”
a “media ministry," and a missionary
singing group that have traveled to
Australia, Korea, and Japan.

The Christian Broadcasting Network
is owned and directed by Pat Robert-
son (ex-marine captain) who hosts the
700 Club, a popular daily religious
program. One of Robertson's favorite
subjects is politics. He likes to
talk about what's wrong with America
and how to fix it. Again we hear
that America is under attack by gays,
abortionists, liberal politicians
and Supreme Court judges, uppity wo-
men and communists.

PTL (Praise the Lord, or People
That Love—a daily religious show)
hosted by Jim Bakker is contacted
by 20,000 viewers each day by letter
or phone. In a year 30,000 call in
to be born-again through Christian
telephone counseling. His 700,000
PTL partners support Bakker monthly
even though PTL was threatened with
financial collapse (when money dona-
tions increased rather than decrea-
sed). His impact has inspired the
Atheist Journal to name Bakker the
most dangerous Christian in America.
The $3 million PTL network is
one of the best in the world.

Last year in a telethon PTL raised
$1 million in one day. Christian
programming is broadcast 24 hours a
day from their own satellite. PTL

-Nemsweek
network finances other electronic
ministries featuring their own pro-
grams as well as those of Oral Rob-
erts, Robert Schuller, James Robison
and others.

By investing around $60,000 for a
receiving dish and transmitter a
local station can hook up to the
satellite’s free programming and
broadcast pre-recorded religious
dogma 24 hours a day. Christian
businessmen are encouraged to own
their own television station, for
the glory of God, never mind that it
is a damned good business opportu-
nity. Bakker flares up at people
who blame America for oppressively
contributing to the world's poverty,
asserting that the original princi-
ples of America—such as the freedom
of men and free enterprise—are Bib-
lical principles that naturally re-
sult in success.

And so we connect with the tip of
the iceberg that connects the inter-
ests of capitalism and fundamental-
ism. Behind the successful evang-
elical movement lies the expert advice
of political pros, not religious
leaders. Ed Ateer, for example. Ed

Ateer, a veteran marketing man for
the Colgate-Palmolive Co., set up a
non-partisan, inter-denominational
group called the Religious Round-
table. Among its 56 members are
most of the major television evan-
gelists and prominent New Right
Politicians. The group sponsors
rallies, seminars, and training
sessions aimed at increasing the
political sophistication of evan-
gelists. Reagan was the only presi-
dential candidate to appear at the
Religious Roundtable's National
Affairs Briefing, a religious revi-
val/political rally held in Dallas.
15,000 faithful were told by James
Robison "It's time for God's people
to come out of the closets and
churches and change America.” Reagan
responded, "I know you can't endorse
me. But... I want you to know that I
endorse you." The Moral Majority,
Inc. and Christian Voice raised more
than $3 million dollars to elect
Reagan and other conservatives into
office.

Just as churches support big gov-
ernment, U.S. churches save millions
of dollars annually in government
granted tax breaks. American
churches enjoy the following tax
advantages: They don't have to pay
real estate taxes on their property;
They don't have to pay income taxes
on their free-will offerings or con-
tributions; They don’t have to dis-
close how much property they own,
or how much they take in in contri-
butions.

Martin Lawson and Stanley Lowell
did a study to find that the offi-
cial value of religious exempt
real estate in the United States
was $118 billion.

The high finances of church and
state are the more obvious contra-
dictions from a government that is
supposed to have embraced the separ-
ation of church and state. The
subtle connections are more the
source of our oppression. Earl
Ofari in The Myth of Black Capital-
ism states that "The church served
as a natural safety valve through
which much of the resentment and
hostility felt by black people to-
ward their condition could be chan-
neled into an acceptable and harm-
less escapism," in which the Bibli-
cal promise of a glorious afterlife
in fact numbed themselves to reality
maintaining the slave ethic.

The church supports in every way
a lifestyle that embraces the de-
mands of capitalism. Historically,
church tenets, in many different
religions, have altered to meet the
demands of society it seems, rather
than the demands of God. The
consistent support of the church
for the nuclear family, the "Pro-
testant work ethic," imperialist war
threatened by the U.S., and solu-
tions for the individual rather than
the masses (by individual salvation)
reflect back to Ofari's concept of
the church as a safety valve. All
forms of organized religion, from
the Metropolitan Community Church
of the Rockies to Calvary Temple
are dangerous to a radical political
movement, and are more easily recog-

MORE ON PAGE 13

Mail-Order Crosses

The Los Angeles Times (Feb. 1980)
listed the following estimates of
the revenues of top TV evangelists:

Oral Roberts $60 million
Pat Robertson 700 Club $58 million
Jim Bakker PTL CLUB $51 million
Jerry Falwell $40 million
Billy Graham Assn. $25 million
Rex Humbard $20 million
Jimmy Swaggert $18 million
Robert Schuller $15 million

These sums go untaxed at both ends: the
evangelists don't have to pay taxes
on this income, and contri-

butors can deduct their donations

from their taxable income. So double
the figures and you'll have a
more accurate idea of just how much
these charlatans are cheating the
already overburdened American tax-

payer.
-Post Amerikan