an:

Scraps From Maria's Table

Chocolate Waters

How to be a Radical Right-On in Denver, Colorado--A suggested course of Study:
Lesbianism 101--1. Cut off all your hair--preferably by placing a bowl on top

of your head.
Wormin Fundamentalist Bookcenter.
housepainter or bus driver.
shirts, suspenders and hiking boots.

Mae Brown or buy a pair of her underwear for $1,000.
a cocksucker 7. Do not read poetry unless it's written by Judy Grahn.
8. Do political work only with dykes who have

"Edward the Duck" by heart.

2. Write for Big Mama's Sanitary Napkin or staff the Wormin to
3. Make your living as a garage mechanic,

4. Be seen in nothing except blue jeans, flannel
5. Form a cheerleading section for Rita

6. Call Gloria Steinem
Know

given away their male children. 9. Subscribe to every women's newspaper in
existence. 10. Let Jill Johnston piss in your bathtub. 11. Own 20 copies of
“Lavender Jane Loves Women." 12. Be monogamous. 13. Buy a speculum. 14. Make
sure your friends who have money feel guilty about it. 15. Come out to your
parents, your straight friends, supermarket clerks and people passing by on
the street. 16. Criticize everything. 17. Be certain the hair under your arms
is at least 6 inches long and the hair on your legs is longer. 18. Fart
proudly and announce that this is just a natural body function.

Advanced Radical Lesbianism- (when elementary lesbianism has passed the acute

stage and reached the level of chronic) 1.

Know the difference between P.C. (politically incorrect) and P.R.O. (politically right on) and use these terms

in all your conversations. 2. Get a job with the Colorado Federal Feminist
Flunkies Union or begin something new and different like Diana's Grave or
Vertigo Productions or the Women's Institute of Alternative Psychobaloney.

3. Start your own all-women's business. 4. Wear white sailor pants and
Hawaiian shirts. 5. Decide that Rita Mae is really an agent--just like Gloria
Steinem. 6. Drive a Volkswagen. 7. Be able to recite Robin Monsterchild's poem, "I Want a Women's Revolution Like a Hangover.” 8. Frequent the Six Pits
or the Velvet Crunch. 9. Subscribe to Our Bodies and the Lesbian Tidal
Wave. 10. Spread the rumor that Jill Johnston has joined a hippie commune

and gone straight. 11. Own an autographed copy of Meg Pagan's

"I Know You Know That She Knows We Know, Ya Know?" 12. Understand the political significance
of not being a couple and then go ahead and be one. 13. Wash out your
tampons so that they may be used over again. 14. Convert Holly Near and Far
Away. 15. Publish your own book. 16. Support and validate your friends for
everything. 17. Get into spiritualism and dance around the moon late at night
naked. 18. Change your name to Whole Wheat Flour.

Graduate Lesbianism-(when Advanced Radical Lesbianism has become terminal)
1. Wear eye make-up if you feel like it. 2. Have all your radical women's
projects funded by the government or the Rockefeller Foundation. 3. Be a
therapist or a lawyer and read Business Week. 4. Buy a bra to wear with your
pantsuits. 5. Rita Mae who? 6. Feel free to like Gloria Steinem again. 7.
Own a Rolls Royce or a Porsche, and drink Chivas and smoke Shermans. 8. Go to
discos. 9. Cancel your subscriptions to women's publications except Sinister
Wisdom and Emerging Grasshopper. Subscribe to Albatross if you want to.
10. Jill who? 11. Know all the words of Gwen Ovary's "You Wanna Be My Sugar
Whatta?" 12. Be able to invite all your ex-lovers over for dinner. Have
affairs with your lovers' lovers. 13. Make a planter out of your speculum.
14. Use a blow dryer. 15. Have your books published by Doubleday or Random
House. 16. Buy a 20-inch color television and an expensive stereo system.

17. Be upward

mobile and understand the importance of hedonism. 18. Reclaim

your Christian name. 19. Play bridge. 20. Go bowling or at least play basket-
ball. 21. Cheer for the Broncos in the Super Bowl. 22. Consider the possibilities of going straight and becoming a Republican.

P.S. Move out of Denver.

Our Right to Love:
A Lesbian Resource Book
Ginny Vida, Editor
Prentice-Hall Inc.

Review by Ona and Corinne

This is indeed a resource book
in the best sense of the word. Every
aspect of lesbian life is represented
by well-written articles and personal
testimony by over 40 women. This comb-
ination of intensely personal and
diverse individual accounts with a
comprehensive overview of the subject
is very effective. Relationships,
health, legal problems, sexuality,
culture and media are just some of
the topics covered. The book is
replete with photographs of lesbians
from all walks of life which empha-
size the diversity of lesbian experi-
ence.

So much for that,
Chocolate

Throughout, it strives to present
a positive, optimistic view of lesbian
life without ignoring the difficulties
inherent in defying the heterosexual
norms of society. Published by
Prentice-Hall, the book is surpris-
ingly free of editorial censorship.

It is amazing to see so important a
book coming from a major publishing
house. As Rita Mae Brown states in the
foreword, "Five years ago this book
could not have been published. Five
years ago the truth about us was not
welcome.”

The main emphasis of the book is
not how to change the system but
rather how to live comfortably within
it. There are only two articles deal-
ing with radical feminist theory:
Charlotte Bunch's “Lesbian-Feminist
Theory" and "The Answer is Matriarchy"
by Barbara Love and Elizabeth Shank-
lin. The section entitled Lesbian

Commentary:

Page 9

Art and Feminism

Dona Calacone

Many feminists place a low priority
on the arts, especially the plastic-
visual arts (painting, sculpture, etc.)

Within the feminist community, as within

the society in general, art is seen
either as a nice diversion and respite
from the rigors of daily living, or as
the product of an elitist system, a

totally unnecessary commodity represent-
ing upper-class values and interests or,

worse, as merely a placebo diverting
valuable time and energy away from the
real political struggles at hand. Art
which is not overtly political--which

does not quote slogans or wave banners--

(especially abstract art) is considered
apolitical and well beneath the serious
concerns of feminism.

If this is the extent of our analy-
sis we are losing a great deal. We are

denying the considerable power of visual

imagery. This indictment of art is

short-sighted and narrow in its failure
to see beyond the oppressive contempor-
ary situation. It confuses the current
patriarchal capitalist institutions of

art with the broader concept of what art

is, should or could be. Moreover, to
deny that art is an important vehicle

for social and attitudinal change is it-
self the expression of a classist, elit-

ist attitude. This is exactly what the
patriarchy wants us to think. It tells
us that art represents universal values
and truths; that art is classless and
has no special interests. These plat-
itudes have been used for years to ex-
clude from the realm of serious art all
imagery which reflects anything other

than capitalist upper-class values. The

experiences of women and of black, poor
and ethnic peoples are almost totally

unrepresented in books, publications and

major museum collections throughout the
country:

This is the desire of the system and it
is just another means of social control.

Activism presents essays on lesbians
in the academic world, in professional
organizations, unions, religions, the
gay movement, and the women's move-
ment. In short, advice on honing
one's social survival skills. In

the Lesbian and the Law section,

Jean O'Leary reports the progress of
efforts to repeal repressive state and
local statutes. Another informative
essay is “Lesbians in the Military",
which presents a grim picture for any
young lesbian considering a career in
the military. This is perhaps the
most homophobic institution in the
country, where lesbians are persecuted,
shunned, ridiculed and eventually ex-
pelled, all without redress.

We felt that the book's exclusion
of lesbian history was a definite
drawback. It easily could have con-
tained at least one essay on, for ex-
ample, the several attempts in the

past to found women's communities.
The closest it comes to history is in
the reminiscences of Del Martin and
Phyllis Lyon who describe the diffi-
culties they encountered in founding
Daughters of Bilitis in the 1950's.

Our Right to Love is expensive
($12.95) and has a decidedly unattractive
and hard to read cover (designed
by a man) but is a valuable addition
to the small stock of informational
books for and about lesbians. Every
library should have a copy and it'd
make a nice gift for families and
straight friends.

The book was compiled and edited
over a period of two years by Ginny
Vida of the National Gay Task Force.

In its preface she states the purpose
of the book:

"It is our hope that this book
will contribute toward improving pub-
lic understanding of lesbian life." 

More on page 11.