Still “Protected” By Family Structure

Mexican Women Defined By Class

S. Siordia de Kjolseth

To understand the position of women
in Mexico, one should always first
try to understand the basic structure
of Mexican society. Mexico's social
classes are based on terms of wealth
and most everything else derives from
this. Of the three general divisions
of the social sphere—high, middle,
and low—most of Mexico's population
falls into the lower social class, so
most women in Mexico come from this
low-income group. Although there
exists some types of racism on color
of skin, particularly in some areas,
the typical "Mexican Racism" is based
on wealth.

One common aspect between these
social classes is the ties that exist
between families in the same social
grouping.

The separation between these social
classes by their wealth is so great
that for a woman to pass from one
class to another seldom occurs through
her own achievements. If the family
provides the means, a woman will deve-
lop accordingly. For example, women
who come from the upper middle class
or high middle class will, in theory,
have access to any type of activity
or profession. They have the opportun-
ity to study and train without having
to support themselves.

The position of the family becomes
essential in education. In Mexico,
the institutions of higher learning
are free, so one would think that
the poor have the same opportunity
to get skills and an education.
However, the institutions of training

WIAP
From Page 4

light and sound. Rental of Macky
auditorium for the evening cost an-
other $950.

Another criticism at the plenary
session was that the concert ought
to have been optional for participants
who might have wanted the extra $4.50
used for other purposes, such as addi-
tional reduced fees.

The concert was planned, Webb said,
“because we wanted a high thing for
the gay community, and we were in a
situation where we could do that; we
were in a position where we could
splurge."

Webb also said planners were

happy about contributions to the
conference travel fund. "Last year
we got about $70. This year it was
$550—and women got about one-fifth
of what they asked for."

The purpose of the conference, ac-
cording to a WIAP brochure, was to
provide a "forum for a wide range of
persons considering themselves fem-
inist therapists and does not es-
pouse or require any one definition
of ‘feminist’ or 'therapist.'

Our wish is to provide an opportun-
ity for exchange, learning and
growth in a field which is new and
evolving."

The conference featured three

and higher education do not supply
the textbooks, the accommodations,
food, clothing, etc., and student
grants and aid are practically non-
existent.

The women in Mexico who are profes-
sionals and skilled workers generally
come from wealthy families and urban
areas. The great majority of women
from the countryside are completely
excluded from education and skilled
training. There are, of course, women
from the wealthy classes who can be
considered rural. If they are not
sent to the city to develop a skill
it is usually for the reason that
women are still very protected by
the family structure and have not,
traditionally speaking, the independ-
ence that is enjoyed by the male.

When a woman does choose a career

there is great pressure for her to quit
working after she marries. Many
professional women set aside their
skills in order to follow the tradi-
tional role of housekeeper and mother.
If they decide to keep working after
starting a family, it is again thanks
to their higher social status and
position to relegate their household
chores to the Mexican institution

of domestic service or "maids" (sir-
vientas, criadas).

Maids of urban wealthy households
come mostly from the rural areas, from
peasant families. Usually the younger
daughters are sent to the cities to
supplement the meager incomes. They
become the maids of the prosperous
professional women in the cities,
especially in Mexico City. As in most
other Latin American countries, the
capital is the center of development
and services.

The institution of servantry is so
prevalent that the state officially
recognizes it as a type of work.
Theoretically, any hired maid should
enjoy Social Security, minimum wage,
and so on, but how much this is true
is not known. The state simply cannot
control all these functions within
the households.

In addition to the maids, there are
many other working women in the cities
who can only keep working with the
help of the extended family. When
both parents of a family work it is
usually due to having a relative liv-
ing in the same house, usually a
grandparent, to take care of the young
children.

It is very frequent, however, that
women are the heads of the family
and do not have the help of a relative
to take care of the children. In this
case, children stay alone in the
house; sometimes the older ones take
care of the younger ones. Sometimes,
when possible, the mother takes them
along to their work to help (Child
Labor).

Women’s labor is used extensively in

factories, but very few of them, if
any, provide any type of childcare
services. When women in the cities
switch jobs from maid work to that
of factory work it is usually to have
more independence at certain hours of
the day and to have access to basic
medical and social services provided
by their unions.

In any case, women work these jobs
without receiving the same pay as
men, especially in the Mexican north-
ern border cities which have a great
number of "maquiladoras," or assembly
factories for American industries.

In addition to poor women in the
cities, there is a vast majority of
women that stay in the countryside
who work the land with the men, in
addition to doing the cooking, laundry
and other household chores.

With the failure of the land reform,
the number of landless peasants has
been growing since the 1950s. Al-
though the Mexican Territory has been
distributed to the small “campesinos”
over and over, these farmers have not
had any help from the government or
banks, with the result that more and
more of them have joined the streams
of migrant workers. Up to the 50s,
these migrant workers were absorbed
by the industrial proletariat of
the large cities, but since then their
employment sources have declined so
that they have to move from place to
place according to the crop's seasons,
mainly in the northwest and the United
States.

A great number of these workers
move with their families. Following
the pattern of the migrants in the
States, the hiring of whole families
is on the rise. It is cheaper for the
growers to hire families, since they
can profit from child and woman labor.
Growers do not provide food or cooking
facilities, so that more and more
women are traveling with their families
improvising temporary kitchens

and laundries for the group.

There is another sector of peasant
women mostly in the south and south-
eastern Mexico. They still remain on
small farms, tending the land and a
handful of animals. They are under
precarious living conditions and are
isolated from all but their peasant
communities. They are a basic founda-
tion of the family income since they
do everything from collecting the
fruits and vegetables, selling and
trading them in the town markets, from
the threading of lamb's wool, to weav-
ing and selling the blankets. Their
pattern of life has not changed in
many years.

In talking of the present Mexican
realities, there is another developing
work resource for Mexican women—the
tourist resorts’ service employment.
The official Mexican policy is to
use the tourist industry as a foolish
resource to help in repaying the
tremendous foreign debt. (Mexico's
debt to the US is second only to
Brazil.) These tourist resorts have
been draining peasants from the
countryside. Employment is seasonal
with the result of producing greatly
impoverished barrios around the
wealthy hotel societies. This is the
case in Acapulco, Puerto Vallarta, and
so forth. This policy has been so
enforced that even one of the most
notorious "achievements" of the form-
er Mexican president, Echeverria, was
the creation of the Cancun tourist
resort, which is said to belong to

... The Typical “Mexican Racism”
is Based On Wealth.

his family. One wonders if this
"industry without chimneys," as tour-
ism is called in Mexican official
circles, is the best answer for
employment in Mexico. Is it really

a help for individuals and for the
country to remove women from their
small farm industries to take them
as seasonal employees as chamber
maids in hotels?

In conclusion, the position of women
in Mexico can only be understood in
the framework of the strictly defined
economic social classes. Wealthy
women have access to most or every
type of work if allowed by their
family's ideology. But women from the
lower classes, from the rural areas
or the cities, have the greatest deg-
ree of injustices to carry on their
shoulders. In addition to suffering
the same oppressive situations their
male counterparts have to endure in
Mexico as an underdeveloped society,
they also have to suffer the restrict-
ive social structure for women as
underpaid workers, main cohesive part
of the family, and the traditional
role of housekeeper.

main speeches: "Major issues in
Feminist Therapy," by Phyllis
Chesler, author of Women and
Madness and a member of the WIAP
faculty; “Issues of Concern to Black
Women in Therapy," by Barbara Briggs,
a WIAP faculty member and instructor
at the University of Northern Colo-
rado, and "Homophobia and Psycho-
therapeutic Work," by Dorothy Riddle.

Workshops were diverse and covered
subjects such as "Lesbian Health
Care and Sexuality," “Battered
Women,” "Psychic Healing,” "Treating
Hispano Women," and “Assertiveness
Training." Some spoke to specifically
political subjects, as in "Classism
and Feminism."

"The actual content of the work-
shops was the heart of it (the confer-
ence)—making some bridge between
the individual and society," Webb
said. Tapes of the workshops will
be transcribed and available by sum-
mer.

It was evident at the conference
that WIAP had dealt with some of the
major criticisms made last year.
Reduced fees were offered; women were
offered a variety of barter options,

while workshops dealt with more

specifically political subjects.

Yet a number of women who approach
feminist therapy from a radical fem-
inist perspective were absent this
year.

For some of them the larger issues
raised last year were not addressed
in a comprehensive way: What is the
nature and class base of feminist
therapy in a capitalist society? To
what extent is feminist therapy con-
cerned with professionalism—the per-
petuation of "expert" therapist and
client “recipient"? And finally, to
what extent do feminist therapists
put an organizational priority on
the issues of forced therapy and
forced drug use?

Possibly the crux of the matter
is that WIAP, as an academic institu-
tion, was formed primarily to pass

KATHY PRITCHETT
(303) 572-4906

on skills and credentials to pro-
fessional therapists. Its stated
goals are: To provide continuing
education to practicing professionals
in order to increase their skills
and sensitivity to those outside the
dominant white male system; to offer
graduate training in *female-system
psychology, and to enhance the
personal growth of participants.
Within such a framework, the in-
stitute is not likely to question
the very premises of "professional
therapy" or to base a program on
the non-academic knowledge and po-
litical orientation developed in

723 E. 17th AVE,
DENVER, COLO. 80203