You Can't Get An Abortion In Puerto Rico, But You Can Sign Up

Far Sterilization Courtesy Of The US Government

(Editor's Note: The following inter-
view was given by Lirio Marquez and
Ronnie Lovler, two feminist journalists
from San Juan, Puerto Rico. They
visited Denver recently as part of a
cross-country tour sponsored by the
American Friends Service Committee.)

BMR: Could you start by talking about
how sterilization in Puerto Rico is
coercive?

Lirio: Since sterilization has had
the unofficial backing of the govern-
ment and the church for such a long
time, people have stopped questioning.
Many people think it's a sort of nor-
mal occurrence.

Ronnie: But I don't think it's a real
choice. Women are choosing, but after
many years of conditioning. Their
mothers were sterilized, and their
grandmothers were sterilized. I inter-
viewed one woman, and she told me she
was married and had two kids and her
mother was dying of cancer. She said
she had promised her she would get
sterilized; it was like a deathbed wish.

BMR: How does the propaganda for it
work? Is it tied in to the Pill being
hazardous?

Lirio: For a long time the Pill wasn't
available; like there wasn't any kind
of family planning available; steril-
ization was the only means.

Ronnie: That's real important. Until
the end of the sixties you either got
sterilized or you did nothing. That
was the only option a woman had if she
didn't want to have more children.
Other than total abstinence.

Lirio: The only IUD that you used to
be able to get in Puerto Rico was the
Dalkon Shield (which has been taken
off the market). A lot of friends of
mine started using it when it first
became available. And a lot of them had
problems. But I don't think this is
true for the whole population; many
women don't even know about such things
as the IUD or the Pill. Women out in
the country know about sterilization.

Ronnie: Now that it's official from
the government, there is a heavy push
for sterilization. Like most of the
women when they go into the hospital
to have their babies--In the past they
really pushed you to be sterilized at
the same time, and they still do. They
come around after childbirth, and they
say, Well, what kind of method are
you going to use now? How many kids
do you have? Maybe you should think
about sterilization.

Lirio: In 1973 the man who headed
family planning was very, very big on
sterilization. I don't know if he had
some personal hang-ups of his own,
but he was sterile. That was the first
thing he told me when I interviewed
him. But he was really into steriliza-
tion and overpopulation. He said in
the long run it was cheaper: You could
provide a woman with pills or the IUD,
but in the long run they were going
to get sterilized anyway. So you might
as well sterilize them in the beginning
and save some money.

BMR: Is there a movement to counter
the whole argument of overpopulation
causing poverty?

Ronnie: There's some work being done,
but not as a women's issue. It's a
political issue with the independence
parties who see it as a form of geno-
cide. Something to bring up here
is that while there's so much emphasis
on sterilization, you can’t get an
abortion in Puerto Rico.

Lirio: A rape crisis program just
started; it's under government aus-
pices, but the woman who put it to-
gether said they were having a very
hard time getting a hospital to per-
form an abortion on a rape victim.
Because the doctors just won't do it.
BMR: Because of the Catholic church?
Ronnie: I think it's the money.
Puerto Rico was an abortion capital
before it became legal (in the US).

When I was in college, all of my
friends went down to Puerto Rico to
get an abortion.

BMR: And that illegal underground
isn't going on anymore?

Ronnie: It probably is, but not as
much. There's a clinic in the Virgin
Islands; and if you have a bit of
money together you can fly over to it.
And then, there's not the need for
women from the states to come down
anymore.

BMR: But abortion isn't illegal per
se.
Lirio: It is illegal. I don't know
how the government put it together,
since Supreme Court laws are supposed
to apply to Puerto Rico. But somehow
they put it together that the laws
of Puerto Rico already apply to it,
and they can't force a doctor to do
an abortion -- and they keep it along
those lines.

BMR: But there must be some sort of
Catholic influence...

Lirio: When you look at it from a
religious standpoint, sterilization
is just as much of a sin as abortion.
Yet even at the beginning of the ster-
ilization program, the church sort of
subtly endorsed it. The priests would
go around condemning it, but at the
same time they were giving out the
information on it. And since the re-
sponsibility was in the doctor's
hands and not the woman's hands--be-
cause a doctor recommended it for
sort of health purposes--she was ab-
solved. And then, if you were ster-
ilized, you only had to confess once;
if you were taking the Pill, you had
to confess every month.

BMR: Are sterilizations done only
in hospitals?

Ronnie: There are clinics now--
about 25 or 30 of them throughout
the island. And there are waiting
lists, people waiting for months for
the time when they can get their
sterilizations. Because of all the
years in which sterilizations were
done, and there was nothing else.

BMR: Do people really want to limit
their family size?

Ronnie: Women are starting to enter
the workforce a lot more in Puerto
Rico now, and they need to be work-
ing because of the poor economic
conditions. I know they've start-
ed family planning programs within
some of the industries during the
last two years. Again, I think it
is important that everything is
geared toward women; nothing says
that it is a dual responsibility.

BMR: Could you talk about the actual
approach used for sterilization?

Lirio: Well, the first approach is
usually that it is good for your health.

Government Rules, Abuses Continue

And doctors in Puerto Rico are viewed
by most people as being almost holy;
so people tend to listen to what a
doctor says.

Ronnie: That's a good point. Doctors
have been instrumental all along the
line in getting sterilization on the
road. They've taken it as a solution
to poverty--a Malthusian kind of ap-
proach. They say, If we have less peo-
ple, we'll be able to take care of
things--and we know what's best for
you anyway.

Lirio: At the same time, it's a good
way to make money from upper income
women.

Ronnie: Another thing too, in Puerto
Rico the word sterilization is never
used. They always say “the operation."
It's a euphemism. So you never really
get down to talking about exactly what
you're doing.

Puerto Rico has the highest inci-
dence of sterilization in the world.
A 1968 study showed that more than
35% of the women of childbearing age
have been sterilized.

Puerto Rican women are also the
youngest in the world to be sterilized.
Two thirds are between the ages of
20 and 49.

The key agency carrying out ster-
ilizations is the Family Planning
Agency of Puerto Rico. It receives
$750,000 of its $900,000 budget from
the US Department of Health, Education
and Welfare.

Unemployment is 30% in Puerto Rico.
Unemployment and poverty oppress and
oppression breeds discontent. For the
US, controlling the population of
Puerto Rico is an attempt to divide
the country and limit political un-
rest so that superprofits for US cor-
porations will not be threatened.

Information from CESA:
(Committee to End Sterilization Abuse)

Norma Jean Serena: Sterilized For Being Poor

"Some women had signed only the ord-
inary surgical consent forms custom-
arily presented in hospitals, and
necessary for the delivery of a child.
Others were misinformed, and thought
that the operation was reversible.
Still others proceeded with steriliza-
tion under duress--threats were made
that their children would be taken away
or welfare would be cut off if they
did not proceed with the operation."

--Akwesane Notes (on
the sterilization of
Native American women)

By Kathy Riley

The first complaints about Norma
Jean Serena surfaced in early 1970
when welfare officials in Armstrong,
Pennsylvania heard about her from the
neighbors.

A Native American, Serena was preg-
nant with her last child; she had
little money, and she was living with
a Black man. Caseworkers were told
that “it was dangerous for neighbor-
hood children to be coming and going
when Negro men were in the vicinity.

But instead of viewing those com-
plaints for what they were--obvious
racism--the Child Welfare services
department pressured local hospital
officials to perform a “therapeutic”
sterilization on Serena.

Still under sedation after child-
birth, she signed "forms for treat-
ment". The result was a tubal liga-
tion she knew nothing about until
after it was over. The medical report
listed her "socioeconomic" status as
the reason why “additional pregnan-
cies would not be advisable.”

Shortly afterwards, her three child-
ren were taken away to foster homes
on the premise that they were ill,
and it took Serena three years to get
them back.

Today, seven years later, she is
a plaintiff in a suit charging she was
a victim of a systematic conspiracy to
steal her children and sterilize her
without her consent. The case is ex-
pected to be tried this summer, after
long delays. While the state will be
picking up a large part of the tab
for the defense, the court refused
to waive court fees for Serena--un-
usual in a welfare case.

Norma Jean Serena

If Serena wins, however, it will
be the first time the courts have
ruled that forced sterilization is
a violation of a woman's constitution-
al rights.

Support for Serena's case has come
from Women Against Sterilization
Abuse, a Philadelphia-based group
organizing around the politics of
forced sterilization.

They are one of several feminist
groups across the country fighting
abuses, which are aimed primarily at
poor and minority women. A 1973 study
shows that 20% of Black and 22% of
Chicana women under 45 who are or
were married have been sterilized, as
opposed to 16% of married white women.
Furthermore, women on welfare are
twice as likely to be sterilized as
those not on welfare, especially if
they are not white.

Not all coercion is as blatant as
that used against Serena; steriliza-
tion abuse occurs when a woman has
not given her full informed consent;
when she is under stress from abor-
tion or childbirth, when she hasn't
been told about alternatives, about
the permanency of tubal ligations,
about possible complications, or of
her freedom to change her mind any-
time before the operation.

Tubal sterilization is a major
operation requiring an anesthetic.
Statistically, it is no more safe than
continued use of the pill, and it is
more dangerous than the IUD. The mor-
tality rate is 25 per 100,000 women,
and side effects include bleeding,
uterine perforation, bowel trauma and
increases in menstrual cramps and
bleeding.

Early in the women's health move-
ment, women fought--and are still
fighting for--the right to choose ster-
ilization as a means of birth control--
at any age and regardless of the num-
ber of children they have. It used
to be that hospitals and doctors
wouldn't permit tubal ligations until
a woman was over 30 and had several
children.

But the right to choose steriliza-
tion is different from the use of
sterilization as a means of social
manipulation.

Since 1974 the government (HEW)
has had rules covering most of the
elements of informed consent. Adopted
under pressure of a court order, the
rules also ban sterilizations for
anyone under 21, and require a 72-hour

More on Page 14