letters home to mama

Boycare Policies Challenged

Dear Editor,

We are writing to inform women about the results of the anti-male child policies at the Michigan Women's Music Festival. The policy was that to create a women-only environment, all male children would stay at another campsite. We knew about this policy before we went. Other mothers with sons did not. What nobody counted on was that the male child care would be 15 miles away and that the anti-son policies would be enforced in an inhumane and anti-woman manner. Here is what happened:

After 40 hours of continuous driving, we arrived at the Festival site at 4 A.M. We knew we had to take Jesse, Diane's 8-year-old son, to another campsite, but we thought we could catch a few hours' sleep in the truck in the parking lot before taking him. Also, we had gotten separated from the other car of women we traveled with, whose sleeping gear we had, and we were anxious to find them and return their stuff. We were greeted at the gate with, "Do you have any dogs or male children?" When we stupidly said yes, we had an 8-year-old boy, we were told to high tail it on down the road to the other campsite, that we could not even camp in the parking lot. We explained that we were exhausted, that it was dark and we didn't think we could find the way, that we wanted to get our friends' sleeping gear to them. The reply was, "Sorry, the rules are the rules." Someone gave us a map; we tried to follow it and got lost. After thirty minutes of waiting for someone to come with us and show us the way, we got new directions and finally got there but could find no one up. We camped overnight, got Jesse settled in, and made our way to the Festival the next morning.

The atmosphere there was all sisterhood and wonderfulness, but we could not get into it. We were exhausted, bitter, and angry. A bad beginning.

MORE ON PAGE 21

Anarcha-Feminist Affinity

Dear Friends,

The unconscious desire of radical feminists to dispel an authoritarian culture—an intuitive inclination to destroy disputing power relationships, to resist human vulnerability to leadership, domination, and the entire political gamut of patriarchy—was essentially anarchistic but comes to blossom today in the emergence of anarchafeminism. While intimate non-hierarchical working patterns of a personal/political process were a natural formation, as anarchists, women realize when we stopped short or struggled and looked back to patriarchal structures we were missing an anarchist analysis—a total vision of revolution.

But for women, anarchism defines authority not only “out there” but as an oppressive part of our relationships and everyday personal lives. An anarchist-feminist analysis sensitizes women, I believe, to the extreme pervasiveness of patriarchy. As an anarchist, she certainly defies hierarchical life but is all too aware of the revolutionary will of the anarchist which can distort to a will of power. Anarcha-feminism is for me the uncompromising desire for freedom. It is to reject every aspect of authoritarian life. It means the elimination of all human domination, all internal power politics, all hierarchies, all leaders, all governments—even that of national liberation.

In an anarchafeminist environment, patriarchy could be more clearly defined. Competition would be virtually absent, and if aggression and antagonism be present, at least we know they spring from truly subjective emotions rather than from a need for ego building.

I envision an anarchafeminist affinity where revolutionary lifestyle is combined with revolutionary theory to embody the whole of life, an analysis which entails all the false

MORE ON PAGE 21

Need for Girlspace Affirmed

To the Editor:

As a woman who has worked almost exclusively with children for the past four years—as everything from a preschool teacher to the parenting of a lover's son—I have followed with interest the debate over sex-segregated child care at the Michigan Womyn's Music Festival. During this year's festival, I worked shifts in both male and female childcare, and had the opportunity to talk to many women involved in the conflict in one way or another. Surprisingly to me, many of the questions and arguments were centered around political issues such as separation, lesbian unity, liberalism, and changing the world through our children.

I think that there is a point here that is being lost amidst all the discussions and political correctness. Who is separate childcare for? Certainly not for the women who attend the festival, for if they choose they do not have to be around the children for the whole four days. The issue of separate childcare should revolve around one point: Do female children have the same right and need for a male-free area as we ourselves do?

How many of us remember being ten, and male classmates' comments about just budding breasts? Or Kindergarten years of playing mommy, mommy, mommy? Of being three and being punished for trying to recover a hammer that a little boy had taken away, already knowing that it was his male privilege? Are not these oppressions as important as those of the adult woman comparable to being whistled at, denied a job interview, or frightened to walk alone? Those of us who as women children did not immediately submit to the pressure of tradition may have faced constant battle, ridicule, or punishment. This has not changed. Girls with lesbian mothers may have more support at home than most of us ever did, but if they are involved with any public institutions, they still face this sort of treatment every day. Sex oppression does not automatically begin at age twelve. I have seen it consistently among classes of three-year-olds. Is it too much to ask that they, too, have one weekend in which they have a chance to get away from this, just like the rest of us?

During the festival, I was able to witness some marvelous spontaneity among the girls that I do not think would have happened if there had been boys present. I do not believe that girls would have been sitting for half an hour, self-absorbed in examining

MORE ON PAGE 21

Black Hills Struggle

Dear Big Mama Rag,

I feel it is my responsibility to inform you of some errors that occurred in Kim Womantree's article "Struggling In and Around the Black Hills," which appeared in the Vol. 7, No. 8, September 1979 issue of BMR. Besides misspelling the names involved, Michele Feingold, Carol Doughty, and myself had little part in the writing of the article. The opinions expressed within it are those of Kim Womantree entirely. Also, in mentioning the network that grew out of the women who came together at the demonstration in the Black Hills, she says it is a “network of lesbians,” and gives my name and address as a contact. However, the network is not only of lesbians, but of all women who were involved in the women’s activities there, or who would like to become involved in the ongoing planning and sharing of ideas with us. I also feel it is important to stress that the viewpoint her article takes is not necessarily that of the network, which will define itself according to the needs of the women involved. Our only known concern in the network so far is for the present and future state of the Earth and the people and animals who depend upon it for their lives.

Personally, my own feelings are that woman-identified women when "coalescing in coalitions,” as Kim puts it, must assert ourselves as

MORE ON PAGE 20

Are not these oppressions as important as those of the adult woman comparable to being whistled at, denied a job interview, or frightened to walk alone?

More on the Velvet Hammer

Dear BR,

In the August issue, you ran an article on the Velvet Hammer, an interview with Linda Ryan and Linda Foley, which I feel requires a response.

When the Hammer first opened, I interviewed Linda Ryan for the story which appeared in BMR. At that time she came across optimistically and very positive about the future of the bar. In the time between the opening and closing, both Lindas became progressively pessimistic and bitter. It is easy to understand why. Yes, some people did rip them off in various ways. Yes, it took a lot of time and energy. Yes, they were conned by others.

Support was inconsistent at best. And, many women took advantage of the bar for special events and fundraisers, but once these were held, many of these women weren't to be found frequenting the bar at other times. Granted, many women simply do not have the money to spend in a bar. And, others just don't go to bars. However, there are many who could be found as regulars at the Three Sisters and Globe. Several of the latter could be counted upon to air their righteous feminist confrontations at Ryan and Foley and an hour later be sighted bellying up to the bar somewhere that such confrontations would not be tolerated. It seems rather contradictory to confront the V.H. owners about women's music on the jukebox (not enough to hear in a feminist bar), art on display, politics, personal behavior, and support of projects, while skipping off to another bar; to hang out at the non-feminist Three Sisters or not to contend with the sexism of some disco when attending the Globe. This, of itself, speaks poorly of many who claim to be ardent, political feminists.

Thanks are to be extended to both Lindas for their support of many groups, including BMR. Few people know what Ryan and Foley did on their behalf, at no small expense. It is to be remembered that the Globe and Sisters did not deem it necessary to lend aid to the struggling projects, which did receive financial assistance from the Hammer.

Where was all the support from the community? It was left to the small percentage who did appreciate the space to be able to sit and talk without blaring music and swirling lights. We had a pleasant place and we lost it, for whatever reasons.

Speaking for myself, as a member of the community, I feel a sense of loss. An inner anger at those who bitched and yet, failed to support the bar.

However, I do feel the article failed to point out a few other things. My criticism of the interview stems from the one-sidedness of it. More so the lumping together of the criticism of those who frequented the bar and those of us who worked there.

I worked at the bar for quite some time, seeing a lot of things change. I saw the bullshit, the rip-offs, the whole mess it became. Though I have come out of this thing somewhat the wiser, I have maintained a sense of optimism. There was a lot of good. Good times with food, music, sharing laughter, and good-hearted women.

I put a lot of time into the bar along with several other women. Hard work most of the time, learning to deal with the variety of the women who came into the bar.

But, I would point out a few things in regard to the article. I, as someone who saw most of what happened, feel let down by all-inclusive statements regarding employee theft and being conned. The implications make it difficult to let it just roll off. There are many of us who gave time and energy to the bar out of friendship or good faith, whose honesty has been clouded by the remarks made in the interview. As a friend of both women, I am angered by their lack of consideration for those of us who contributed.

MORE ON PAGE 20

-Carol Arber

On Dependencies

Dear BAR,

Just got here from Palo Alto (not a BMR in sight) and found your paper in front of the Rainbow Grocery—evidently one known by the company one keeps.

I can't subscribe yet because I won't have an address until after Oct. 1. In the meantime, here's $10 to go on with.

I am especially interested in your issue on "Dependencies." Five years ago I weighed 270 pounds (or maybe 272—who was counting), I now hover around 150 without trying. Believe me, losing 120 pounds is better than psychoanalysis and not Freudian. Additionally, I have become single, moved 1300 miles with two girls and two cats, and am starting a Ph.D. program. If I were still fat, I'd still be the perfect wife and mother in Palo Alto.

If this experience, or rather my reflections upon it, are of any interest to you for your December issue, perhaps we can talk. Of course, the ramifications of controlling any sort of obsessive dependency are pervasive and one's entire set of perceptions and relationships is changed.

Additionally, one of my tightest friends in Palo Alto is phobic about flying and driving. Yet she works every day to overcome her fears. Imagine deliberately putting oneself in a position where you know you will experience paralyzing panic. Yet she does it and it doesn’t kill her. My respect and admiration for her are boundless.

My respect for you all at BMR is at a pretty high level, too. Many thanks.

Donna Breed

Editor's note: Yes! We are interested in your reflections on Dependencies for our December issue. Please submit articles by Nov. 20.

Bloodroot Struggles

Dear Women,

We have great trouble selling BMR here; yet we often enjoy reading it ourselves. This last issue was particularly interesting. How you discussed work, the Velvet Hammer interview, and especially what is going on in Berlin.

Please note: We opened Bloodroot March '77, began breaking even a year ago June, and don't feel burnt out yet, though often very tired. We wish we could talk to the two Lindas about the Velvet Hammer—feeling much pain over what went wrong. We often feel feminists and/or lesbians have so little hope for women's enterprises that we are quick to criticize a positive effort to "do" for ourselves and each other, to denigrate and to abandon for something the boys are doing instead. Of course, we are not a bar. We wanted a pretty place for women and we wanted to be an example to women, straight or dykes, of how four women can do it—work, be lovers, and run a desirable top-notch restaurant with only women's music and feminist books. Just that we are always puzzling over how to do it, how to minimize the failures. The thievery freaked us out at the Velvet Hammer, too.

Much good luck to you.

Selma, for Bloodroot Feminist Restaurant and Bookstore, Bridgeport, CT

Feminist Vision

Dear Women of Big Mama Rag,

Enclosed is a check for a subscription to BMR. Along with it comes my thanks for your continued existence, consistent high quality of news coverage and articles, unrelenting feminist vision, and devotion to the issues which affect all women. Take care of yourselves.

In sisterhood,  
Michelle Cliff