more on page

where we are at from page 2

there. We can give support to the struggles of women, take
our understanding from their voices, accept their definit-
ion of their struggles.

We have heard, how can we criticize nationalist women for
not being feminists, for not demanding a feminist agenda
from the revolutionary movements first before working with
them? How can we criticize when, as one Irish woman said,
she has a tank in her yard? Issues of survival make them-
selves issues of feminists. In that same article, "Women
In Ireland: Fighting Back Against The Armed Patriarchy",

BMR, Oct. 1981, another woman said that the uncritical
support of some feminists to the nationalist struggle is
of little help to women--the struggle for women's liber-
ation will also involve challenging the attitudes of the
church, among other things.

Organized religions are involved in women's issues. Next
month, in our Religion and Spirituality issue we hope to print
articles exploring the role and effect of churches and reli-
gion in women's lives, here in the U.S. and abroad. This edi-
torial is heavily weighted in a discussion about organized
Christian churches--specifically the Catholic and Protestant--
the churches that have the most power in our (the BMR collec-
tive) lives.

We hope to include a broad range of articles dealing with,
not only how religion has/is affecting us but including our
expectations of religious or spiritual beliefs.

In preparing this editorial, the four of us on BMR have had
some of our most heated and painful exchanges. Obviously, for
us, discussing spiritual needs is a vulnerable topic. In talk-
ing about spirituality, we are talking about systems of ethics
for relationships--relationships with each other and our rela-

Pentagon Action from page 6

tionship to the "cosmic unknown" which do not necessarily in-
clude a higher being or power.

We know that for some women, spirituality fills the need to
reclaim their/our roots. With knowledge about other beliefs,
former, discarded beliefs, or by defining new beliefs of
spirituality, women are trying to create new choices, choices
in how we relate to each other and the environment.

We also are very aware that other religions have different
ethics and values than the WASP dominated culture we live
under. Some religions, such as Judaism and Native American
religions, have helped peoples keep their cultures intact
while they were being assaulted by more powerful cultures. We
encourage women to use the pages of BMR to discuss the need
to affirm historical roots that helped us to survive, yet are
also oppressive to women in themselves. Women who are claiming
matriarchal roots and goddess worship have to examine
these similar issues. Matriarchists are reclaiming a past re-
ligion, yet have been criticized by feminists as exclusionary
and racist in their practices.

In the Religion and Spirituality issue we hope at least to
explore these issues, these issues that too often create pain-
ful obstacles for unity. We see this issue as a beginning in
the development of a critique for systems of relationships.

We welcome articles and graphics for this issue. We are al-
so interested in making sure we ask the right questions. If
you are in struggle around any of these issues, send it in,
we need to put all the questions out so we can figure it out
together. Copy deadline is January 18th.

This month's issue is a general theme issue. We invite all
women to attend the critique on January 11 at 7pm, 1724 Gay-
lord St, Denver. At the critique this issue will be examined
page by page, article by article. Sometimes we end up in great
discussions! Coffee will be served.

and concurred with their

thoughts. I said I wanted to
be a diplomat like Henry Kis-
singer and travel around the
world and make everybody und-

erstand everybody else.
It wasn't until I started

studying the history of U.S.
involvement in Vietnam that
my perspective began to
change -- very slowly at
first. I realized that we
had been fighting a people,
not a government, and that we
had no right to do this. I
understood that the men who
died were young and that the
draft affected the poor who
had little choice. Choice
was important to me, and I be-
came interested in protest as
a means for change.

The anti-nuclear movement
provided a current cause, and
I observed indirectly, through
the medium of radio. I
taught myself to play protest
songs on the guitar as a way
of expressing the anger. Dur-
ing my freshman year in col-
lege, I became a body at meet-
ings and demonstrations. Some-
times I sang at campus anti-
draft rallies.

Competition in the sighted
world had paid off. I was
admitted to a prestigious
school which presumably can
help me get a good job if I
graduate. I was warned by my

parents not to throw this op-
portunity away on too much
political activity. When
they discovered my plans to
participate in a Pentagon ac-
tion on April 28, 1980, my
parents managed to physically
prevent me from going. Be-
sides disagreeing with my po-
litics, they were afraid that
I might get hurt and they felt
my handicap was being exploit-
ed somehow by the movement. I
was eighteen, so I left home
and school for about a year.

During that year, I came
into contact with tuned-out,
turned-on young people--with
black mothers trying to sup-
port children on CETA salar-
ies (the program was cut at
the end of the summer, pend-
ing elections)--and with wo-
men, working as clerks, who
were given such low incentives
that each stress became mag-
nified. Issues of sexual har-
assment and abortion hit so
close to home that I started
to take a "feminist perspec-
tive". I admitted to myself
that I was gay.

I lived alone for much of
the time and felt isolated.
People said, "But you always
wanted to be independent."
Independent, yes, but lonely,
never. I returned to college

this fall.
Recently, I have begun to

think about competition and
blindness. I was always pre-
sented with overachievers as
role models and encouraged to
compensate for my handicap.**
Perfectionism and overcompen-
sation are not ingredients
for the psychological stabil-
ity of sighted people, and I
suffered much emotional pain.
Yet, blind people who do not
overcompensate are labeled as
having adjustment problems.

For a blind person to be
considered well-adjusted, she,
he must behave and look, as
much as possible, like a sigh-
ted person and must, there-
fore, adopt the value system
of the sighted world. Thus,
sex role stereotyping is en-
forced, to the point of absur-
dity, among the blind and
partially-sighted. Blind
boys had better like baseball,
and blind girls had better ap-
ply make-up.

I have also observed that
blind and partially-sighted
individuals who did not att-
end special schools develop
a sense of guilt about their
friendships with other visu-
ally impaired people. This
guilt is fostered by sighted
people who tend either to di-
scourage such associations or
to condescend to them like
some charity. I am reminded
of a white attitude on campus
which says, "The blacks hang

out together and do not int-
egrate themselves." It's the
same mindset that argues a-
gainst all women actions and
gay alliance. This society
mistrusts and denigrates
groups of oppressed people.
In an effort to overcome
our handicap, we often do not
admit that we are oppressed
and much less understand the
connectedness between our st-
ruggle and those of other op-
pressed people in this world.
That's what Women's Pentagon
Action is all about -- con-
necting issues such as rape
and war, racism and uranium
mining, ableism and sexism.
For ten minutes in front of
the Pentagon, I spent ten
days in the Arlington County
jail. I was the only blind
person among 44 women conf-
ined to the prison gymnasium.
In the past, I would have ta-
ken pride in being the only
one. Now, I would like other
blind and partially-sighted
women to join me in struggle.

**Many might shrink at my use
of the word "handicap". I
become confused in such de-
bates and feel that attempts
to eradicate words such as
“disability” and "handicap"
represent wishes to deny that
a problem exists, and thus,
to avoid dealing with it.

Big Mama Rag, January, 1982 - Page 13