A Less Than Perfect Victory.  
Supreme Court Rules on Weber and Affirmative Action

LNS

Brian Weber's hope of squashing an  
affirmative action program negotiated  
between the United Steel Workers and  
the Kaiser Aluminum Corporation came  
to a dismal end June 27 when the Supreme  
Court reversed two lower court rulings  
in his favor and held the plan legal.  
If successful, Weber's suit could have  
meant the end of hundreds of affirmative  
action programs throughout the  
country.

Weber, an employee at a Kaiser plant  
in Gramercy, Louisiana, filed a suit  
against both the company and the USWA  
in 1975, charging that the affirmative  
action program made him, as a  
white man, a victim of "reverse discrimination."  
The program was similar to others negotiated  
by the union with several other major aluminum  
and steel companies. It reserved for  
Blacks half of the places in an on-the-job  
apprenticeship program for skilled jobs  
(with a 5% goal for women). Although Black  
and white applicants to the program were selected  
from separate lists, Weber claimed  

means Women  
guaranteed an  
a hope he  

Injured on the Job  
Woman Denied  

Approximately 278,000 workers'  
(compensation) cases were reported nationally  
in 1978. The workers' compensation program provides  
nationwide mandatory insurance that all but the smallest  
of employers must carry for workers. Originally set  
up about 60 years ago, it guarantees disability and  
death benefits for workers but prohibits them  
from suing the company they work for if they  
are injured on the job.

that because he had more seniority  
than some of the Blacks admitted,  
his rights were violated under Title  
VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act.

"It would be ironic indeed," Justice  
William Brennan wrote in the 5-2 majority  
opinion in response to Weber's claim,  
"if a law triggered by a nation's concern  
over centuries of racial injustice and intended to  
improve the lot of those who had  
'been excluded from the American  
dream for so long' constituted the  
first legislative prohibition of all  
voluntary, private, race-conscious  
efforts to abolish traditional patterns  
of racial segregation."

The decision was generally hailed  
as a victory by civil rights activists.  
Over 20,000 delegates at the 70th national  
convention of the NAACP stood and applauded  
when it was announced, and the director of the  
NAACP, Benjamin Hooks, told New York  
Times reporters that a victory for  
Weber would have set back the cause  
of affirmative action "ten years."

A member of the staff of the national  
Southern Christian Leadership Conference  
(SCLC) office in Atlanta read a statement  
issued by SCLC chairperson Joseph Lowery  
to LNS in a phone interview.

"The spirit of this decision,"  
Lowery stated, "will hopefully reverse  
the recent trend to abandon strong  
affirmative action programs in this nation.  
It offers encouragement to the federal  
government to intensify enforcing efforts  
in both public and private agencies."  
Lowery added that "Black organizations must  
pressure both private and public businesses  
to accelerate programs to employ, train  
and upgrade minorities access, whose progress  
has been deferred by discriminatory practices.  
If America was serious about establishing  
a truly equitable system," he  

Compensation  

then that she learned that no employee  
covered by workers' compensation can sue an employer.

Upton also learned that it is  
virtually impossible to get payment  
for medical treatment "not directly  
related to the injury." The enduring  
physical and emotional stress of the  
accident and its aftermath so depressed  
her that she attempted suicide three times.  
The company's regular workers' compensation  
insurer, the  

Her insurance claim wouldn’t be honored,  
she was told, because "you didn’t  
lose your hand all the way up to your wrist."

"Benefits to the injured vary from  
state to state. There have been  
glaring gaps in insurance coverage  
under the program. Many states fail  
to adequately compensate employees in  
various types of injury cases.

One such case is that of Kathy  
Upton, a clerk-technician at Zapata  
Haynie Corporation plant in Reedville,  
Virginia. On May 30, 1978, while  
grinding fish in preparation for testing  
protein levels and possible contamination,  
Upton caught her hand in the grinder and  
all four fingers were instantly severed at the palm.

Upton assumed that the accidental  
death and dismemberment policy available  
to Zapata employees would provide some  
financial relief. She was wrong. Her  
insurance claim through Prudential wouldn't  
be honored, she was told, because "you  
didn't lose your hand all the way up to your  
wrist."

Next, turning to the state's workers'  
compensation program for help, Upton learned  
that while her initial medical costs would be  
covered, her weekly disability allowance would be  
only $74 a week for 100 weeks. And,  
though her fingers are gone for life,  
the best settlement offer under the  
program has been $17,500.

After being told by several co-workers  
that the grinder machine she used should  
have been equipped with a safety tray device,  
she decided to sue Zapata for negligence. It was  

Hartford Insurance Company, is balking  
at paying new hospital and psychiatric  
care costs. Upton is challenging this decision,  
on the grounds that there is a definite relationship  
between the accident and the subsequent emotional  
problems. She is seeking a hearing before the  
Industrial Commission.

Upton rejected the lump settlement  
payment of $17,500. The nerve endings  
keep growing to the surface of her hand and  
new surgery is needed to correct this. By  
accepting the lump sum, Upton would give up  
her right to receive future medical payments.

"They're trying to cut out all medical  
expenses that may come up in the future,  
and they want to stop me from seeing my psychiatrist,"  
Upton said. Hartford officials declined comment.

Zapata Haynie, a subsidiary of an  
offshore oil drilling firm that has  
construction and fishing plants around  
the country and overseas, has denied  
any responsibility for Upton's accident.  
They offered her old job back, but she has  
rejected the offer.

A Prudential spokesperson was  
"sympathetic but steadfast" in the  
policy interpretation that defines  
dismemberment as loss of the hand to  
the wrist. "I wish under circumstances  
like this, we could pay all the money in  
the vault, but we have to go by the policy," he said,

concluded, "goals and quotas would  
have to be set and reached by certain  
dates. There's just no other way."

total  
"will only be won  

victor  

The decision says nothing  

about women  

and it leaves  

many questions unanswered.

At a press conference in New York  
City, a day after the decision was  
handed down, representatives of the  
Affirmative Action Task Force, the  
National Lawyers Guild, and the National  
Conference of Black Lawyers spoke about the  
"narrowness" of the ruling and the need to  
continue to fight to expand and defend affirmative  
action programs.

"The decision does not dispel the  
myth of 'reverse discrimination',"  
the Task Force stated. Facts show  
there is no such thing as reverse  
discrimination. One has only to look  
at the growing disparities between  
Blacks and whites in employment, wages,  
life expectancies, etc. to see the  
system of discrimination against  
Blacks as well as other minorities.

Although the decision upheld the  
use of quotas in voluntary programs,  
the justices' use of vague phrases  
such as "conspicuous racial imbalance"  
and "traditionally segregated job categories,"  
coupled with their failure to address  
other legislative, executive and constitutional  
measures upholding affirmative actions, left  
those at the New York press conference  
feeling that many key questions were  
still unanswered.

After pointing out these gaps, the  
Task Force statement noted that the  
decision was "only a partial victory  
for those denied access to job training,  
employment and/or educational  

In Bordentown, New Jersey, one  
must work in order to receive welfare.  
The city's "workfare plan" forces all  
physically able women and men who qualify  
for public assistance to work jobs for the  
city, or they don't get their welfare checks.

"No work - no welfare," states  
the city's mayor, who initiated the  
"workfare" program. The mayor claims  
his program cuts welfare fraud.

There is nothing voluntary about it;  
nor is this program intended to teach  
people skills or trades. No one would  
suggest that the jobs which are available  
contribute to the welfare of the  
participant, but have an opposite effect.  
The jobs: dusting, raking leaves,  
repairing street signs, painting, etc.,  
are the undesirable jobs which the city  
is pawning off on welfare recipients.

In Bordentown, the welfare  
recipient pays twice,  
once in taxes and then again  
with physical labor.  
While a state or city cannot opt  
to do away with welfare programs,  
"workfare" accomplishes it for them.

Calling the program "callous,  
arbitrary and illegal," the State of New Jersey  
said the city of Bordentown's workfare  
program was contrary to state law  
since it required welfare recipients to  
work for their public assistance.  
The Division of Public Welfare brought suit  
against the city, but the director of the  
State Welfare Division didn't find  
issue with the concept of "workfare."  
The problem, he said, was whether a city  
could initiate the program on its own,  
or be subject to state statutes.

Faced with the forced work program,  
23 of the 26 Bordentown residents in the public  
assistance program dropped out.  

The number of people applying  
dropped 90% when the "workfare" was  
installed. The city claims to have  
installed a program where people could  
have a little more pride and dignity.  
Apparently the participants didn't  
think so.

The concept of replacing welfare  
with workfare is catching on.  
Connecticut and Pennsylvania currently  
have workfare bills before their legislatures.  
Alaska's legislature has petitioned Congress  
to allow states to adopt workfare without  
fear of losing federal welfare funds; which  
happened when federal funds were withheld  
from the workfare program in Utah, pending  
HEW approval of the state's program.  
HEW is currently studying a version of  
workfare in the State of New York for the  
possible implementation of workfare in  
other states. Bordentown's mayor has  
said he has received inquiries about workfare  
from state and city officials in more than 20 states.