14

conferences

In Des Moines, Iowa, October 9-10, some 400 participants will develop issue papers and express concerns at a conference on older women. After the conference, the Older Women's League Educational Fund plans to launch the OLDER WOMEN'S LEAGUE as a membership organization with chapters in every state. For materials from the conference and information on the league, contact OWLEF, 3800 Harrison St., Oakland, CA 94611.

~K.P. Frank/Madness Network News

The Committee for the Visibility of the Other Black Woman: The Black Lesbian, is organizing a national conference on the problems of black lesbians. To be held at P.S.136 in Harlem October 10-12, the conference is entitled, "BECOMING VISIBLE- SURVIVAL FOR BLACK LESBIANS." If you are interested in performing, exhibiting, speaking, or leading a workshop, would like to make a donation to help with expenses, would like to attend, or want more information, write to the Committee for the Visibility of the Other Black Woman, c/o Georgia M. Brooks, PO Box M564, Hoboken, NJ 07030. Or phone Georgia Brooks at (201) 795-1794, Luvenia Pinson at (212) 982-6280 or Jeanne Gray at (212) 860-4936.

The LOLITA RACLIN RODGERS MEMORIAL FEMINIST FILM CONFERENCE will take place November 14-16 in Evanston, Illinois at the Speech Building, 1905 Sheridan Road at Northwestern University. Sponsored by the Feminist Film Seminar (Feminar). Feminar is presenting a weekend conference devoted to an in-depth exploration of issues pertaining to the study of women in film, feminist film criticism and feminist filmmaking. As part of the conference, there will be a special presentation of West German feminist films. Free day care will be available throughout the conference. There will be NO CHARGE for any of the conference events. For more info contact The Feminar, Northwestern University Film Division, 1905 Sheridan Rd., Evanston, IL 60201.

BECOMING VISIBLE: The First Black Lesbian Conference will be held October 17-19 in San Francisco at the Women's Building, 3543 18th St. The theme of the conference is “Becoming Visible." Conference planners state: "As Black lesbians, along with all other women of color and white women we have been struggling for many years for the same goal, 'to become visible.’ In our own communities and in areas throughout the Western regional states, voices, screams, and fears of Black lesbians are not being heard; our concerns and ideologies are not being supported. This conference gives us the opportunity to say we are indeed present and struggling with the total lesbian community in fighting the battles of sexism, racism, classism and homophobia. Our purpose is not to separate the fight from the struggles of other women. Our intent is to create a workable network and support system for Black lesbian women." In order to assist in getting an estimate of participants, fulfilling housing and childcare needs, the importance of pre-registration is being stressed. The fee (sliding scale) is $5 to $25. Do not send cash. Make checks or money orders payable to: Becoming Visible, Pacific Center, PO Box 908, Berkeley, CA 94701.

resources

WOMANFAIR, the third annual conference of the South Central Women's Studies Association, will be held at the University of Texas at Arlington, October 18-19, 1980. The goal of Womanfair is to increase our understanding of the social, ethical, political, aesthetic and religious aspects of women’s experience and promote the value of women's culture. The major conference topics are: Pioneers Then and Now: Women Innovators; Silver Threads and Golden Notebooks: Women and the Arts; Healing and Helping: Physical, Mental and Spiritual Health; Getting and Spending: Economic Woman; Bearing and Caring: Families in the 1980's; Majority and Minority Women: Myth and Realities. For more information contact WOMANFAIR CONFERENCE, Box 19528, University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX 76019, or call (817) 273-2219.

The National Organization for Women (NOW) will hold its 13th Annual National Conference October 3, 4 and 5, at the Hilton Palacio del Rio and the Convention Center in San Antonio, Texas. The NOW National Conference is the major decision-making body of the organization and will set NOW's goals for the upcoming year and years. Topics covered by the conference will include new directions in the ERA ratification effort, feminist goals in lesbian and gay rights efforts, the development of an all-new anti-Hyde amendment campaign, advancing homemakers’ rights in Social Security, AFDC, and other federal programs affecting the family, and whether nuclear energy problems should be considered feminist issues. For more information contact National NOW Conference, Attention Nancy Thompson, #1048, 425 13th St. NW, Washington, DC 20004. Phone (202) 347-2279.

The SECOND ANNUAL SOUTHEAST WOMEN'S HEALTH CONFERENCE: CONTEMPORARY ISSUES IN WOMEN'S HEALTH will be held January 8-11, 1981 in the Reitz Union of the University of Florida in Gainesville. The three-day event will feature keynote speakers and workshops on such topics as Politics of Health Care, Lesbian Health Concerns, Women and Violence, Special Concerns of Third World and Native American Women as well as the Physically Challenged, Wholistic Healing and many more. Early registration is $15 with special consideration for women without the entrance fee. To register or for more information write Health Conference, Amelia's, 12 NW 8th Ave., Gainesville, FL 32601 as soon as possible. The last conference in 1976 drew over 600 women from all over the world. Join in the second wave of women-controlled health and pre-register today. Write for childcare and housing information. Keynote speakers to be announced.

publications

1970-1980 Ten Years Publishing Women, THE FEMINIST PRESS has released their new catalog which “builds on our past and indicates new directions for the future." To help them celebrate their tenth year as a feminist publisher, send for the catalog. The address is The Feminist Press, Box 334, Old Westbury, New York 11568.

AZALEA is a quarterly magazine by and for 3rd World Lesbians, with writing, graphics, commentary and photos. To subscribe or to submit articles, etc., write AZALEA, 306 Lafayette Ave., Brooklyn, NY 11238.

A GAY BIBLIOGRAPHY-- 6th Edition-- 1980 is a selective non-fiction list of 563 items in 16 pages. Books, articles and pamphlets are grouped under topical headings. There are separate sections for periodicals (213 titles), for films and film-strips and for bibliographies. Prices: 1 or 2 copies, $1 each; 3 to 9 copies, 85¢ each; 10 or more copies, 70¢ each. Canada orders, pay in US money or add 15% for currency exchange. Prices include mailing in US and Canada. Orders under $25 must be prepaid. Checks or money orders should be payable to "Barbara Gittings- GTF" and sent to same at PO Box 2383, Philadelphia, PA 19103.

BROOMSTICK is a feminist national magazine by, for and about women over forty. They have published monthly since November 1978. They print articles by midlife women discussing experiences from a feminist political perspective. They state, "Because we want to participate in the developing of an older women's network and movement, we also feature articles about events, books, organizations, and periodicals of particular relevance to women over forty. What we print either throws light on the relationships between our lives and the structure of society around us, or proposes changes which would make things better for us." Prices: Individual Yearly Sub-- US $7.50, Canada $10.00, Overseas $15.00; Institutions $15.00. Women's and alternative bookstores-- discounts of 40% or more. Write Broomstick, the San Francisco Women's Center, 3543 18th St., San Francisco, CA 94110. A sample issue will be sent for 50¢ in stamps or coins.

FERITY, Hawaii’s only feminist news journal, is expanding and is changing its format to newspaper-magazine. The larger format will be 13 by 10 inches and can accommodate photos, more graphics, comics and the like. For those not aware of Ferity's history, it started as an outgrowth of a consciousness-raising group in the early 70's and at the time was called WOMAN ALIVE. In the spring of ‘78, it changed its name and focused on feminist analysis. Ferity is looking for articles of analysis, monographs, photos, editorial cartoons, poetry and short stories. Of course, manuscripts should be double-spaced and typed for efficient editing. Artwork should be camera ready. Any work that cannot be used will be mailed back as soon as possible. Send to Ferity, 1820 University Ave., Honolulu, HI 96822.

groups-projects

LOCAL VISION, an independent woman's video company in Yellow Springs, Ohio, is producing a documentary revealing the circumstances surrounding a mother's four-year legal battle to regain her parental rights. The precedent-setting case involving the right of a lesbian mother to remain the legal mother of her own child will be heard before the Virginia State Supreme Court in February 1981. Funds are needed to continue and complete the video project. The company is appealing for donations and/or ideas for possible funding. Send either to Liz Mersky, Local Vision, PO Box 289, Yellow Springs, Ohio 45387.

Through October 31, 1980, all lesbian mothers who need financial help for their custody case, the LESBIAN MOTHER'S NATIONAL DEFENSE FUND is making the following offer: You can be part of the LMNDF Third Annual Bikeathon. Women will be bicycling down the west and east coasts to raise money for lesbian mothers.

Any pledges or donations you raise for the Bikeathon will be sent directly to your attorney, expert witness or child care worker. For more information, call or write: LMNDF, PO Box 21567, Seattle, WA 98111. (206) 325-2643.

Big Mama Rag Vol.8 No.9

Minnie Bruce Pratt is working on an article on the rise of the Ku Klux Klan (KKK) and feminist response to it. She wants to get in touch with 1) women willing to clip references to the Klan, local or otherwise, in newspapers to send to her, and 2) any women who are doing anti-KKK/anti-Nazi work, particularly feminist and/or lesbian focused anti-KKK work. She would appreciate response and will keep names confidential unless otherwise indicated. Contact her c/o Feminary, PO Box 954, Chapel Hill, NC 27514.

The CLARK FORK CONFLUENCE OF FEMINISTS AND ENVIRONMENTALISTS is a network of women living in the Northwest who are involved in making connections between feminism and environmentalism, women’s roles and technology. They have organized several roundtables for feminists and environmentalists in Montana in which participants have attempted to identify commonalities and differences between the feminist movement and the ecology movement. They are very interested in contacting others who share their concern in building connections between the feminist and ecology movements. For more information write to them at 315 S. 4th E., Missoula, MT 59801.

A national network to combat the widespread problem of housing discrimination against people with children has been formed. It will consist of representatives from national housing and civil rights organizations, women's groups and local groups. For more information contact: CHILDREN'S DEFENSE FUND, 1520 New Hampshire Ave NW, Washington DC 20036.

Articles for teaching GAY AND LESBIAN ISSUES in secondary and elementary schools are being solicited by the Education Exploration Center. They are seeking articles from teachers, students and parents on how to teach gay and lesbian materials, how to slip the subject matter into other lesson plans, student reactions to gay/lesbian speakers, coming out to other teachers or other students. Write them at PO Box 7339, Powderhorn Station, Minneapolis, MN 55407.

culture

The world premiere of EQUAL TIME IN EQUAL SPACE, a community video project about women's experience of incest, will take place at the Women's Building, 1727 N. Spring, Los Angeles CA 90012, from November 6-16th. The project was conceived and directed by Nancy Heath Angelo, and is co-sponsored by the LA Women's Video Center and Ariadne: a Social Art Network. The piece consists of multiple video screens arranged in a circle; the audience will take part in a consciousness-raising group of women who have experienced incest. These six women share their stories, their feelings, and their feminist analysis about the sexual abuse of children. For more information contact Terny Wolverton at the above address or call (213) 467-4893.

The CRAFTWOMEN'S CATALOGUE is the result of artists and feminists who do fine work and who are seeking alternatives to the role of total consumer that the technological society has cast us in. The catalogue is filled with handcrafted work by women artists across the country. The catalogue states: "We thought women might want to make their own links to one another's gift and utility-buying, reaching directly through a catalogue to other women in their homes, and having a special enjoyment as we negotiate our business. Women supporting one another with their money as well as their minds and hearts." (Prices for items in the catalogue range from $1.25 to $200.00) To receive the Craftwomen's Catalogue send $1.50 to CC, 2528 Milvia, Berkeley, CA 94704. If you are an artist who would like to be included in the next catalogue, send your name and address and you will be informed of details.