Kate Millett

IN IRAN.

Janet Sergi

Political theories and strategies are dependent on local conditions and not based on abstract universals. Voting is not always democratic: to vote without correct information or analysis from several sources.

Kate Millett's use of pacifist and democratic tactics is successful in this culture, but may not be appropriate at this time for her in Iran. Laws and customs will undergo changes during the revolution; however, it is up to the Iranians to determine their own direction and tactics. The best propaganda for democratic pacifism is the continuing effective challenge of American society by Americans, as seen in the Anti-War, Civil Rights, Anti-nuclear, and Women's Movements.

Kate was horrified that she was a political prisoner in Iran without basic human rights or civil liberties. The concept of human rights is the basic premise of Anglo-Saxon political thought. Just as Marxists judge the validity of human rights only in their relationship to economic justice, the Islamic revolution, with the Koranic law as the basic premise, may or may not have this same priority on civil rights as we do. Without knowing the basis of Islamic law, one can't judge if Kate's treatment was unjust when she was ousted from Iran. Not only women are suppressed in Iran. Many minority religious sects, Jews, separatist Kurds, Pakistanis, as well as many intellectuals and various kinds of Marxists are equally denied a voice and weapons by the Khomeini/Bazargan government. So the oppression of women in Iran, as Kate pointed out, is directly tied to the present direction of the revolution by Khomeini. Since the revolution is in such an early stage, there will be many changes in the future.

One historical example we have is the Bolshevik consolidation of the Russian Revolution and its suppression of all loyal opposition such as the Mensheviks, Social Democrats, Anarchists, and eventually intellectuals, Jews, peasants, and even any officials in the Stalinist purges of the '30s. It is important that the Anti-Shah opposition of all stirrings in Iran is closely watched by the world press to help stop either the physical or political slaughter of various types of revolutionaries.

Kate's identity as an American did not help her. Guilt by nationality linked her in the minds of the Iranian students to the Western imperialists that raped the Iranian economy under the Shah. One man in the audience called her a C.I.A. agent. SHE IS NOT. However, the C.I.A. is exploiting the oppression of Iranian women in the world press to discredit the entire anti-Shah revolution. The Shah was a pseudo-liberal on women but an absolute tyrant over lives. The C.I.A. encourages the internal fighting of various sections of the revolutionary movement in hopes to weaken the revolution. An in-fighting revolutionary state allows a right-wing counter-coup to take place, which would again get the flow of oil to the west.

The educated minority of feminist women who marched in Iran are not representative of all the women of Iran, many of whom are illiterate, rural women. They did not claim to be. Whether they are a vanguard segment or just a selfish elite will be judged by history. The same criticism of the women's movement in America is made by pointing out the class and race of most feminists: white and middle class. Just as there are many reasons there are not presently a proportional number of Third World women in the feminist movement, it doesn't invalidate completely its success or goals. Likewise, the relatively small size of Iranian feminists doesn't discredit them. The general revolutionary movement in Iran probably speaks to the most pressing needs of the rural majority of women. But there is the need for a sophisticated analysis of demands of feminists for urban women.

The old Anarchist demands of an absolute separation of church and state and its accompanying equation of tyranny and religion finds another historical example in Islamic Iran. The tyranny of religious doctrine over any form of dissent has many examples: the witch burnings in Catholic Europe. The feminist premise of the worldwide nature of patriarchy seems to predict that women will suffer under Islamic rule, as symbolized by the forcible wearing of the Chador. To cover a body as a sign of respect can only mean to hide something ugly or sinful. That modern Iranian men were not equally ordered to cover their heads prompted one woman to shout: give the man a scarf. The burning of prostitutes' homes, thus outcasting them into the hostile streets, again reminds us of the depths of hatred of women's sexuality by men.

The Islamic absolute prohibition of alcohol and “immodest dress of women” can only be criticized for its absoluteness and harshness of punishment. The evils of alcoholism and the sexual exploitation of women's bodies in capitalistic cultures are well known. Sobriety campaigns and the somber dress of lesbian separatists are our ways of dealing with the underlying dangers of these things. The religious justification of killing homosexuals accused of homosexual rape is a very dangerous sign, especially since the "victim" was also given fourteen lashes. Again we must condemn the practice and expose the underlying links between patriarchy and rape; the male fear of homosexual love and its accompanying reduction of power of male heterosexuals over each other and over women.

Rigidity in thought and action are the underlying premises of the excesses of the Islamic Revolution in Iran. Such self-righteous absolutism weakens the revolutionary class as much as any foreign agent or philosophy can. It also brings about the conditions for a right-wing coup. The suppression of women's rights in Iran is only the first sign of the very dangerous ground the Islamic revolutionary is beginning to tread. Kate Millett is exposing these fundamental errors to a worldwide audience. It is up to the Iranians to continue the revolutionary process with this historically tested knowledge.

IN DENVER

Janet Sergi

Kate Millett spoke to 250 people on April 16th at Phipps Auditorium about her recent ouster from Iran. The mostly female audience listened attentively to her well-delivered speech, which was hotly debated afterwards by several Iranian students. There were 30 Iranian picketers outside.

She was asked to be the American representative of an International Women's Day Delegation to Iran for a March 8th celebration. She planned to give a small speech and a few seminars. The revolutionary events catapulted her into the world press. The feminists who invited her were not given a room for their event by the revolutionary committee in Tehran. After much discussion, a spontaneous march to the Hall of Justice to demand co-ed education, abortion rights, the right to wear clothing of choice, the right to divorce, and equal employment and wages occurred. The 5,000 women chanted for six hours. Many men attacked them. Kate said they were lumpen-proletariat men organized by government bourgeois men. They threw stones, used knives, and beat women all along the march.

Kate used her knowledge of pacifist techniques and called a press conference to publicize the lost rights of Iranian women and to get press coverage for the next demonstration. Male supporters of the women encircled the 20,000 women marchers at the last demonstration and literally saved the women's lives from hostile Muslim men.

Kate was confined by the militia to her hotel and ousted without explanation after days of Kafka-like torment. Kate emphasized the lack of civil rights in Iran today for herself and others. If even war criminals such as the Shah's cronies can’t get fair trials, then civil rights begin to erode for all. Koranic Law, like Canon Law, doesn't recognize the civil state and thus is the base for much of the oppression of women and gays in Iran. An example of the real oppression of women in Iran is the burning of the homes of prostitutes, leaving them homeless in the hostile streets.

Kate told of several homosexual men being executed just like the Shah's SAVAK agents for homosexual rape and how their victim got fourteen lashes. She questioned if in fact they were rapists or just plain homosexuals whose mere existence threatened the patriarchal arrogance of the present regime. After word of her lesbianism spread, she feared for her life even more.

Kate is starting a local chapter of an Iranian women's support group. Call Debra Tooley

890 Dexter #105
Denver, CO 80220
399-9129
or write: Circle of Support
3rd Floor 59 East 4th St.
New York, NY 10003

After the speech, two Iranian women questioned Kate's expertise on Iran and the validity of the feminist representation of the interests of the majority of Iranian women. Kate responded that if Muslim women choose to wear the Chador and live by Islamic law, fine, but allow the feminists to live the way they choose. One man called Kate a C.I.A. agent and several men said Koranic Law protects women's rights.

There was ample security for Kate by the women in the audience and by the organizers. A tasteful art display of photographs from Iran graced the downstairs wine reception.

Marge Piercy Speaks

Michele Feingold

Marge Piercy shows how much is within us all. Her poetry and prose speak of women changing and becoming and of what the future can be if we have the courage to create it. She lives her convictions in activism and her creativity in writing, but she always takes the social and solitary time to maintain that balance we need to be whole.

Marge spoke on Thursday, April 12 at Colorado College in Colorado Springs, sponsored by the Colorado College Women's Commission and the University of Colorado at Colorado Springs Women's Resource Center. Women from Boulder and Denver came to share the evening with the Colorado Springs women's community. Marge read her speech, entitled "Owning Our Past and Birthing Our Future: The Future as a Vital Myth for Women," as a poet, caressing the words and rarely pausing. The tempo did not allow some women to savor and digest each idea and image.

The speech wove a tapestry of women's lives: their dreams, their oppression, their awakening, and their future victory. She spoke to the oppression of women of all ages, backgrounds, and lifestyles, but she has an acute anger and determination in regard to the situation of low-income and minority women. While there are no magic answers, there is the love and anger of women joining together to transform and save the world, certainly more productive emotions than despair. We need to create our own myths: of Earth-love, of cooperation, of liberation, to take the place of the patriarchal myths that have destroyed us for so long.

One thing Marge has learned in her political lifetime is that we need everyone who helps to change the world for the better. Before the system is transformed, there has to be someone who works on school lunch programs, someone who reforms the police force, someone who stops the nuclear power plant. Everyone's contribution is important and necessary.

Marge concluded by reading one of her new poems, then answered questions. In response to a question that sounded like a challenge, she said that she is currently spending time working against the compulsory-pregnancy movement. (She herself had a self-induced abortion when she was 18, and watched her best friend die from one.) She does not publish through a women's press because of their limited circulation; she writes to those women who are not yet feminists.

Marge Piercy knows how to integrate meeting her personal needs with meeting our collective cultural and political needs. She is an example of what we can be if we do not deny the many facets that make us wise, feeling, productive, and truly human.