hot briefs. ..

Depo Delima

In England the practice is spread-
ing of giving the contraceptive in-
jection DepoProvera automatically
along with the German measles immuni-
sation. If a woman becomes pregnant
at this time, the chances for severe
foetal abnormality are about 1:3.
Though the risk of becoming pregnant
using other contraceptive methods is
no higher than normal during this
period, many women will doubtless
find themselves in a terrible dilemma.
Should they agree to being injected
with a substance which has distress-
ing short-term and unknown long-term
effects, or risk being forced to
give birth to a severely brain dam-
aged child, as doctors have said
they will not perform abortions for
women refusing the DepoProvera.

Ka.

Light’s Off On Safety

Recently a woman was raped and
beaten in the women's lavatory of a
building at the General Electric Riv-
erworks Plant in Lynn, Mass. There
has been no arrest made and no known
suspect. There have not been many
women at this plant since World War
II, however GE has been forced in re-
cent years to hire more women by the
Equal Employment Opportunities Com-
mission. Having low seniority, women
are often working on night shifts
in very nearly deserted buildings,
their bathrooms, an afterthought by
GE, are in inaccessible places, poor-
ly lit, with no consideration for
safety and location. This recent at-
tack was not the first such incident
at the plant. Over 1200 members of

the International Union of Electrical,

Radio and Machine Workers Local 201
have signed a petition supporting a
public meeting to discuss the prob-
lems of security for women at GE.
Said one worker, "If GE is truly com-
mitted to having women in its work-
force, they should be committed to
making it a safe place for women to
work."

New Rape Law

The state of California has passed
a bill which prohibits courts from
ordering rape victims to undergo psy-
chiatric examinations in order to
assess their credibility.

Patriarchal Logic

The following statement is from
an article in Medical Aspects of
Human Sexuality: "Father/daughter

incest reported to authorities.
While brother/sister incest is pro-
bably occurring more often, it is not
reported due to its transience and
relative lack of detrimental se-
quale. Mother/son incest is reported
only rarely and usually involves
severely disturbed individuals.
Physicians should also be alert to
the possibility of sexual abuse of

sons by fathers, since such cases
have been reported."

Siliconized

Doctors at Lankenau Hospital in
Philadelphia are reportedly using in-
jections of liquid silicone, commonly
used for breast enlargements, to
sterilize women without the benefits
of surgery, hospitalization or even
a general anesthesia. This new pro-
cedure, which its developer, Dr. Rob-
ert Erb, believes is reversible, is
expected to be tested on as many as
100 women at eight other East Coast
hospitals and research centers during
the next year. The procedure involves
injecting the silicone into the fal-
lopian tubes, which carry the egg
from the ovaries to the uterus to be
fertilized. After a few minutes, the
silicone hardens into a rubbery con-
sistency and forms a plug that blocks
the movement of an egg.

-Union Wage

Miner Dies

Eleanor Brown is the second woman
miner known to have died in an under-
ground US mine. She was killed last
March when her head became pinned be-
tween two machines, one of which was
a continuous miner reportedly not in
operation at the time. Ms. Brown had
been fighting a sex discrimination
suit against the coal operator she
worked for. Women in US coal mines
have been filing such suits with in-
creasing frequency, as they face har-
assment along with horrible working
conditions.

Harnessing Harassment

Women who complain of sexual har-
assment would be protected from be-
ing fired under a major piece of
legislation unanimously approved by
the Connecticut state legislature's
Labor and Public Employees Commi t-
tee. The bill adds sexual harassment
to the state's anti-discrimination
law and makes it punishable under
the Unfair Labor Practices Act. Cur-
rently employees can file an unfair
labor practice complaint only if
they have been fired. The new legis-
lation would prohibit an employer
from firing a worker who complains
about sexual abuse “or refuses to
comply with such demands."

Not One More

One hundred fifty people gathered
in Boston to attend a memorial ser-
vice for Millicent Davis, a battered
woman who was brutally murdered on
March 4 in Chelsea. The memorial
service was organized by women from
Transition House, where Millicent
had taken refuge from the violence
of her boyfriend, who has since
been charged with murder for hacking
her to death with a meat cleaver.
Said Nathalie Paven from Transition
House: "If we were to gather here
every time one of us was beaten we
would be here every 18 seconds. If
we were to gather here every time
one of us is raped we would be here
every 3 minutes. If we were to gath-
er here every time a violent act is
perpetrated on a woman we would
never leave."

Fearless Leader

Rosalynn Carter, campaigning for
her husband Jimmy, said in Iowa: "I
can tell you that my husband would
not be afraid to declare nuclear
war."

Midwives Making Waves

The Director of Matrix, a Californ-
ia midwifery school, is charging that
the recent upsurge of prosecutions
against midwives, mostly in the state
of California, is "decidedly econom-
ic." The director's claims come on
the heels of continued preliminary
hearings into the second degree mur-
der charge against Rosalie Tarpening,
a midwife who delivered more than 350
babies without incident before assist-
ing at the birth of an infant last
summer who died at birth of a congen-
ital weakness. Tarpening is also
charged with grand theft for taking
money for her services, and with four
counts of practicing medicine without
a license. Medvin, the director of
the midwife school, said that the med-
ical community at large is "alarmed"
by the increasing number of home
births and are dead set against it
because it would mean "an incredible
loss of revenues" for baby doctors,
and for hospitals.

Purse Power

A purse snatcher may think twice
about his next victim: he picked on
a group of Los Angeles women who had
just won approval from the city to
hold a “Women Take Back the Night"
rally. The man grabbed the purse of
one of the four women as they were
leaving a restaurant; her colleagues
jumped the snatcher and belted him
with their own handbags. The man,
confused and afraid, attempted a get-
away... only to be hotly pursued by
his intended victims. Noreen Smith,
one of the women, quoted the would-
be purse snatcher as crying out, "I
can't believe it. What are you doing?”

Abreast of the Times

Faberge, the perfume company, may
soon be marketing anti-cancer bras-
sieres. If early testing is success-
ful, they will sell a device worn in-
side a bra which is designed to de-
tect breast cancer by measuring
changes in body heat. The device is
made of paper thin, pliant material
containing heat sensitive chemicals.
Cancer cells often multiply rapidly
and emit heat. In the breast, deep
veins can carry this heat swiftly to
the surface, where it should change
the device's color. No one knows if
this device to cash in on the breast
cancer scare works.

Endangered Species

Playboy Enterprises is being pla-
gued by a shortage of bunnies. Margo
Aspen, a public relations director
for Playboy, says that bunny recruit-
ing is proving increasingly difficult
because of plain old physical discom-
fort. Bunnies are apparently tired of
wearing constant smiles, corset fit-
ting costumes and pointy high heels.
Aspen says despite the low numbers of
women who want to become bunnies
these days, Playboy is not planning
to change the requirements. Says As-
pen, "We have an image to maintain."

Creative graffiti on a nasty new poster...

Valium Victims

In 1979, doctors in the US routine-
ly prescribed Valium to about 20% of
the adult population for problems of
stress, says Marjorie Silver in the
Wree-Review. Of those receiving the
prescriptions, some 70% were women.
Valium, a tranquilizer known as ben-
zodiazepines, was introduced, along
with Librium, in the early 60's and
ever since has been pushed by the
pharmaceutical industry. Hoffman La-
Roche, the world's largest drug man-
ufacturer, makes over $300 million
profit annually on sales of Valium.

A Guatemalan factory worker has
been released from prison blind, af-
ter being arrested for handing out
a press release in the country's cap-
ital city, according to Amnesty In-
ternational. The human rights organ-
ization says that 16 year old Yolan-
dita Urizar de Aguilar was arrested
last fall by Guatemalan authorities,
after she handed out a statement ac-
cusing the Guatemalan government of
murdering a fellow citizen. Amnesty
says the teenager was blindfolded,
beaten and raped after her arrest,
and was finally released without be-
ing convicted of any crime. Urizar
is now free, but is blind as a result
of the torture.

INS Unwelcome Mat

The International Ladies Garment
Workers Union (ILGWU) has won a prec-
edent setting contract for workers
in a Los Angeles garment shop. The
contract protects the mostly women
workers at Hollander Home Fashions
from abuse by the Immigration and
Naturalization Service (INS). Since
most of the workers are Hispanic and
many are undocumented, the provisions
are critically important.

No Favors Granted

An Alameda county court awarded
two waitresses $275,000 in damages
in their successful lawsuit against a
local union leader for sexual harass-
ment. In one of the first cases of
its kind, Terri DeLoache and Karen
Seritis charged that Ray Lane, the
Secretary-Treasurer of the Hotel and
Restaurant Employees and Bartenders
Union Local 28, had propositioned
them for sexual favors and attempted
to recruit them for prostitution.
When the women refused, they found
themselves out of work and barred
from the union hiring hall.

Giving Credit

Sources for this month's hot briefs
News and Letters, Through the Looking
Glass, Newsfront International, GPU
News, Mom's Apple Pie, Hersay, Spare
Rib, Plexus, The Progressive, New
Women's Times, Women's Information
and Referral Centre Bulletin, Peer Per-
spective, Ms. Magazine, Gay Commun-
ity News, The Guardian and Upfront
America.

You can get this photo as a postcard for 15p from Sisterwrite,
190 Upper Street, London N1 or Gay's the Word, 66 Marchmont St, London WC1.
Another new card by the same photographer says “'Lesbian mums rule OK!" (send sae).

-Spare Rib