national

Midwives Gear Fight For Birthing Rights

Andrea Gabriel

Lora Lenahan and Aurora Bolivar are packing up their belongings for a move to El Paso, Texas, where they hope to participate in the struggle to keep open El Paso's five-year-old Maternity Center. Both women are practical nurses who are interested in training as midwives with Shari Daniels, founder of the Center. The Center serves women from Texas, New Mexico, and Mexico, most of whom cannot afford hospital care and many of whom share the philosophy that childbirth is not a disease, that women should have the right to choose the circumstances under which they give birth.

The El Paso Maternity Center philosophy is a threat to the medical profession, especially where women like Shari have shown that midwives can give better overall care than doctors. Over 2400 women have given birth with the help of the Center's services, and hundreds of women have trained with Shari as part of the Maternity Center's program. There has not been a single maternal death, and the percentage of infant deaths is half that of El Paso County and one-fifth that of births across the border in Juarez.

Recently the El Paso County Commission has outlined regulations that would severely restrict the services midwives can give, mostly by placing so many requirements on expectant mothers that few would be eligible for home birth or Maternity Center care. (The proposed legislation contains nine pages of requirements for mothers.) Because so many women who are "ineligible" cannot afford any other kind of care, they are likely to resort to walk-in birthing service (coming to the hospitals for the first time when they are already in labor), which will greatly increase the likelihood of complications and seriously affect the health of both mothers and babies.

Shari has already closed down two of the three houses that have been part of the Maternity Center. She terminated the midwife training program as of March 14th so that she can devote more time to fighting the Commission's proposals and so that other women (trainees and mothers) will not be involved in legal suits. She is working with lawyers to prepare the ground for expected lawsuits against her and against the Center, and is seeking support from midwives and others both in Texas and around the country.

Shari is consulted widely as a specialist in birthing by members of the medical profession as well as by lay midwives and others interested in alternative birthing. She will have strong testimony to back up her case. One of the issues around which she expects to fight the courts is the use of Pitocin by midwives. Pitocin is a hormonal substance often used by doctors to induce labor. Midwives use it in cases of emergency to stop hemorrhaging. Legislation to stop its use for this purpose would handicap them greatly in providing safe services to women. Since another prescription drug, silver nitrate, is required to be used in the eyes of newborns to prevent the contracting of syphilis, there is a precedent for the use of prescription drugs by non-medical personnel.

New limitations being placed on the practice of midwifery, not only in Texas, but in New Mexico, Arizona, California, and elsewhere, are sometimes seen as an advance for women in that the practice of lay midwifery is at the same time made legal. But by imposing so many restrictions, the options for women are actually curtailed. A midwife is defined as anyone who attends three births annually. While nowhere can one be prosecuted for giving birth in solitude or with the assistance of untrained friends or relatives, the assistance of a midwife can now in some cases result in charges of "child abuse."

Since many women clearly cannot afford the services of doctors and hospitals (and some are wary of or opposed on religious grounds to the kind of services provided by doctors and hospitals), these women are being denied the kind of care that is safest, most comfortable, and most available and acceptable to them.

What Shari would like to see happen is the legalization of midwifery with stipulations regarding its practice agreed upon by a board of midwives. In El Paso, the Board of Health that will approve and oversee the action of the Commission is entirely composed of men. No midwives have even been consulted about pending legislation. Final action on the legislation has been postponed until municipal elections are over.

Women register with the Center for care. This includes full prenatal and postnatal care and education. However, between fifteen and twenty percent of the women who receive care at the Center cannot afford to pay at all.

Women are encouraged to give birth at home, but most choose to be at the Center when they deliver. Two midwives are present for every birth (three or four for home births). If a father or other relative or friend is present, they are encouraged to catch the baby once the head has delivered. Shari does not use forceps. She successfully delivers breech babies and handles other complications which would be illegal with the implementation of impending legislation.

As part of her campaign on behalf of alternative birthing, Shari has been giving week-long workshops in various locations, which include films on underwater birthing, demonstrations of use of acupuncture pressure points, fitting of cervical caps, and lectures on complications in labor, delivery and postpartum. Support for her ongoing work can be given by contacting the El Paso Maternity Center, 1119 East San Antonio, El Paso, Texas 79901. Aurora and Lora are moving to El Paso with the intention of involving themselves as much as possible in the activities of the Center. 

-Andrea Gabriel/BMR

"Aurora, Lora and baby on the way to El Paso"

Backed-up by the medical profession in the practice of midwifery is an asset, particularly in cases where surgery or other special procedures are clearly needed. Currently 7.5% of women who use the El Paso Maternity Center are transported to nearby hospitals for delivery, although Mexican women are denied such services in the United States and must be transported to Juarez. The Maternity Center pays for the hospital and medical services when these are necessary. A donation of from $200 to $450 is asked of every woman who registers with the Center for care.

More on page 19

Big Mama Rag, April, 1981 - Page 3