health

Crime, Punishment, And Rehabilitation:

(ed. note: The following article contains information from Phoenix Rising, and draws heavily from No More Cages, from an article written by the Coalition to Stop Institutional Violence, which is a group of feminists with ties to the women's movement, the prison abolition movement, and the anti-psychiatric movement.)

We are presenting a joint critique of the psychiatric and the prison industries to stimulate alliances between the anti-psychiatric and the prison abolition movements. There have never been clear lines between who can become labeled a "criminal" and who can become labeled a "crazy." Every day, there are hundreds of transfers between prisons, jails, state "hospitals," and private psychiatric facilities. The behavior modification techniques of drugging, electroshock, psychosurgery, isolation, restraint, stripping of rights which are returned as "privileges," and extensive step systems can be found in both correctional and psychiatric prisons. The two systems share both theoretical principles and methods of operation.

The psychiatric system and the correctional system pretend to help individuals and protect society. "Curing mental illness" and "rehabilitating criminals" are parallel lies claiming that people who are troublesome have personal problems for which there are only individual solutions. The goal of both systems is individual adjustment or pacification. There is a complete denial of the context of social and political injustice within an individual's life.

In this society, it is usually thought that "criminals" come from certain groups: poor people, people of color, and dissidents. In fact, the people in prison do come from these groups. However, rarely imprisoned are those middle and upper-class white professional men who commit the crimes of embezzlement, price-fixing, tax evasion, and consumer fraud. Acts committed by the ruling class such as chemical warfare, military atrocities, corporate irresponsibility, manufactured famines, and deliberate destruction of the environment are not considered criminal or illegal.

Prison officials in some states are now beginning to use what they call the "Unit Management Classification System"—a slicked-up version of the familiar old step system. This new system amounts to the same battering down of the prisoner into submission to the boredom, isolation, and power relations of the prison. However, by using the language of psychiatry, the correctional system is given the legitimacy of “objective and scientific procedures." A prisoner is observed, analyzed, and scored on checklists by the guards. Not one of the factors in these checklists is related to anything positive. Individuals cannot progress through the Unit Management system on the basis of ability to function as thoughtful, dignified, and resourceful people who could fully participate in active community life.

A person whose scores do not reflect contentment behind bars will be sent to the level of isolation necessary to wear her down. Time out of the cell can be reduced to zero. Visits with family can be completely denied. Access to any rehabilitation, educational, or recreational activities can be reduced to the point of intentional, mind-chilling sensory deprivation.

Marion Federal Prison in Illinois has had some problems with the courts over its Control Unit Program, introduced in 1972 to deal with prisoners involved in a work stoppage. It consists of nine-by-twelve-foot solitary confinement cells known as “boxcars." These are concrete cells within a larger metal shell, which are almost completely soundproof and are lit only by one sixty-watt bulb and a little sunlight which penetrates the narrow slit in the door. They result in extreme sensory deprivation. The Marion inmates spend up to 234 hours a day in these cells. Elsewhere in the unit, other behavioral techniques are used, including forced heavy drugging and electronic surveillance. In the first six years of the Control Unit, eight inmates committed suicide, and a ninth died of a heart attack after six years in solitary.

In a 1973 case, a court described the "boxcars" as cruel and unusual punishment, and ordered them closed. Another 1978 case agreed, saying that the use of the boxcars was "unconstitutional." However, the program itself was allowed to continue.

The warden of Marion admitted that the purpose of the Control Unit was not rehabilitation, but to "control revolutionary attitudes that are prevalent in the prison and in the society at large." An independent psychiatrist who testified at the 1973 hearing said that the program, far from doing good, actually did harm. "The setting and its organization," he said, "demeans, dehumanizes and shapes behavior so that violent behavior is the result rather than the cause...the organization and operation of the setting produces frustration, rage, and helplessness." In 1975, the U.S. Bureau of Prisons halted behavior modification programs in all prisons under its control. What happened, however, was that the programs, including the one at Marion, went right on operating; the operators just stopped calling them "behavior modification." Oak Ridge Hospital, in Penetanguishene, Ontario, is a hospital for the "criminally insane" which in 1972 introduced a massive experiment—the Social Therapy Unit. The most extreme part of this program is the Total Encounter capsule.

The Capsule is a small, windowless room, equipped only with a sink, a toilet, and a television monitor for playing back videotapes of what goes on in the room. Small groups of patients spend up to two weeks naked in this room, eating from straws pushed through the door. The Capsule is often used in conjunction with drugs in an effort to force inmates into breaking down communication barriers. Somehow the fact that prison psychiatrists are dealing with “bad” people seems to be taken as justification for almost anything. For those who would continue to fight back, there is the threat of more extreme measures, such as repeated electroshock and psychosurgery. These possibilities can and have become a terrifying reality for both correctional and psychiatric prisoners who are perceived as posing too great a threat to the stability of the institution. Because of the total dependence that institutions foster, it is very difficult for prisoners to make it on the outside. They are released to the streets with virtually no money, no place to go, no job, no skills. All too often the prisoner has lost family and community ties while incarcerated. The abuse a prisoner has suffered while in prison often reverberates in a more serious crime than the original offense, or in a deeper despair and repeated commitments.

People who have been incarcerated also carry the stigma of being an ex-con or an ex-mental patient. Faced with these obstacles, they often return to familiar situations where there are no choices to be made and they can at least get food and shelter. The "revolving door syndrome" contributes to the public perception that these brutal and dehumanizing institutions are necessary to keep society safe. In fact, these institutions profit from the disintegration of communities and damage the individuals who get caught up in them.

“Women Who Kill”—The Patterns Go Way Back

Liz Lewis Women Who Kill

Ann Jones Holt, Rinehart and Winston 1980 hardback $15.95

It was not so much the excesses of the mighty that the magistrates in all the colonies feared. It was the rising of the poor and despised, the rising of the servants, the wives, and the children.

Patriarchal anxiety on this account runs like a dark warp through all the jottings and preachments of the founding fathers. They feared their children's disobedience, their servants’ insolence, their wives scolding... So they shaped the law to their fears, giving themselves the right to destroy those who seriously challenged them.

In Women Who Kill, Ann Jones follows the theme of male dominance over women throughout the course of American history. Beginning with life in the colonies, she uses the personal case histories of women murderers to point out different manifestations of this dominance, and to examine women's ongoing struggles toward self-determination. Seen individually, many personal accounts used by Jones throughout the book could be seen as isolated cases of desperate women, reacting to extreme living conditions. But it soon becomes clear that while the tales of women murderers are drawn from a limited section of the population, they clearly represent the patterns of the power dynamic of the larger society. By looking closely at the lives of women throughout history who have murdered their spouses, lovers, and children (most murders committed by women are murders of loved ones), and by studying the court records, Jones is able to make observations about women's changing role in American society throughout history.

In colonial America, women participated in all types of work, were landowners, and were equal under the terms of civil law, and subject to equal treatment under criminal law, i.e., they suffered similar punishments for their crimes as men. In Puritan New England, women's position was not as oppressive as in the South, where a tighter reign was imposed, particularly over women of color. Jones points out how the relatively free status of women in New England during that time translated into a low rate of husband murder, while in the South women's lives were more confined, and the incidence of slaves killing their masters was high. Then, she traces the rate of infanticide (murder of children) and finds that it corresponds directly to the strict Puritanical ethic of colonial times. The strictness of moral codes, and the small size of communities led to very low tolerance of deviation from expected patterns of behavior. Women who bore children out of wedlock were punished severely, forcing many to choose instead to kill them secretly. Many women during this period were hanged or burned to death for murder of their children.

After the Revolution, with industrialization, as cities began to grow, manufacture went out of the home and the role of women in the workforce changed dramatically. With larger cities rather than small towns, women became more directly accountable to their husbands—the moral codes could not be enforced as easily by the church. The functions of middle and upper-class women were more severely restricted—they became servants and supporters of their husbands and children. And, working-class women, paid very low wages and also caught in oppressive marriages and families, also had very limited options.

There are many, many documented cases of women in this time period poisoning their husbands and children—an extreme but effective solution to an economically and emotionally oppressive situation. But when these cases came to court, even when there was overwhelming evidence against the women accused, they were often either acquitted altogether or sentenced lightly. Women were put on pedestals, and men in power chose to ignore the fact that there was a struggle going on, one which stemmed from nothing smaller than a societal structure where all women simply had little control over their lives and bodies.

Jones presents an extensive analysis of the power dynamic which sets up wife-beating as behavior that is considered domestic conflict (not within the realm of police or court interference), but which comes down hard when a woman decides to eliminate the immediate source of her oppression—her violent husband. The factors of race and class are also brought in—Black women have less claim to self-defense because in the eyes of white jurors they are not real "ladies" whom men should refrain from hitting.

And, Jones deals head-on with the familiar phenomenon known as blaming the victim. Focusing the attention on the woman (Why does she stay?—she must like it), the source of the issue is effectively skirted. The popular image of the beaten wife who passively stays and stays and stays is not borne out by rising divorce rates, jammed police switchboards, overcrowded shelters, and husbands shot, stabbed, and burned to death.

Through extensive research of media coverage of murder cases, Jones deals with the popular notion that the rise of feminism has directly caused an increase in murders by women. For a long time the court treated women murderers as "ladies," dishing out lighter sentences than would be given to men. But in recent years, the press, cueing into this supposed connection between feminism and crime, has devoted coverage mainly to cases where the woman accused was acquitted or sentenced lightly, causing within the (male) public a fear that women are "getting away with murder."

Overall, Women Who Kill is very interesting and useful reading. Ann Jones has done thorough research, laying the groundwork for a historical analysis which makes connections between women's criminology and overall social patterns of oppression of women.

Big Mama Rag, May 1981: Page 13