The issue of women and money is one long overdue for analysis  
and activism in the feminist movement. The lack of an economic  
analysis is one of the most glaring contradictions we face when we  
talk about mobilizing women around feminist issues.  

Recently the Washington D.C. feminist paper Off Our Backs  
printed an article highly critical of feminist businesses — contend-  
ing, in fact, that the concept of feminism is antithetical to the prac-  
tice of business.  

Several points were well made and well taken: if we are truly  
trying to transcend the capitalist ethic, if we are aiming for change  
which is radical rather than reformist, if we are looking for ways to  
relate to labor which free us of hierarchical patterns of operation,  
then there are several contradictions to be confronted in setting up a  
business.  

Most women-owned businesses are retail outlets, and here we  
are faced with the hard fact that the products they sell are made  
largely by exploited workers, often from materials made available by  
imperialist rape of third world countries.  

Also, it is necessary to ask how much money is, in fact, coming  
back into the movement from women-owned and so-called femi-  
nist businesses. Most of them tend to siphon money out of the wo-  
men’s community: from the women who support the businesses to  
the landlords, licensing authorities and manufacturers.  

Accountability  

The women who channel their business’ money back into feminist  
projects do so entirely out of their own goodwill, and may choose to  
withhold it at any time. Until the movement has a structured system  
of financial accountability in operation, it is unrealistic to hail  
women-owned businesses as a means of financing the feminist re-  
volution. And how many successful business owners would want to  
support the overthrow of capitalism, anyway?  

On the other hand, the women’s movement is in no position,  
financially or otherwise, to espouse purist politics. The argument  
against women's businesses comes, at times, dangerously close to  
purism.  

We are all trying to find some means of economic survival within  
an inherently exploitative and co-optive system. It is questionable  
whether running a business for a living is any more counter-revolu-  
tionary than working at any upwardly-mobile job.  

The argument that all revolutionaries should be working in fac-  
tories and unionizing is a dubious one. In a system which confers  
privilege upon some and not on others, the way to go must surely be  
not for those sisters with privilege to give it up, but rather to use it for  
revolutionary ends.  

As someone (was it Germaine Greer?) once said, what army, on  
breaking into the enemies’ armory, would steal only half the wea-  
pons? Having as little as we do, we need to make good use of every-  
thing that we have.  

However, in the light of the fact that only a miniscule percentage of  
all businesses are women-owned, and that of these, the vast major-  
ity are marginal, we reject the notion that women-owned businesses  
serve as a financial power base for the revolution. We believe that  
the boys whose system it is have everything far too well controlled  
ever to allow feminists to gain real financial power in the context of  
capitalism.  

Perhaps there can be no such thing as a feminist business. The  
sphere of business can be seen, however, as a field for exploration  
and a potential source of income for the movement.  

Criteria  

Before this can happen, though, a system of accountability has to  
be established. If any enterprise is to call itself feminist, those who  
identify as feminists have a right to demand that owner/employer  
relationships be redefined, and that movement projects benefit from  
the profits in the form of some visible commitment on the part of the  
profit-maker — not only so that money comes into the movement,  
but so that individuals don’t make enough money to be co-opted.  

Then again, perhaps feminist businesses can exist, based on cer-  
tain criteria and means of accountability. If businesses truly want to  
be feminist, they should commit themselves to functioning as dual  
business/political projects, with politics the ultimate priority. An  
example is the bookstore which serves as a feminist propaganda out-  
let, or the coffeehouse where women come together.  

One way to ensure that the political function remains a priority  
would be for the business end to support the political end, but not the  
salaries. If people have a stake in the business’ profit-making, they  
will be less willing to ensure anti-profit policies, and the political  
function of the project might eventually dissolve altogether.  

For example, bookstore workers whose salary is dependent on the  
store's profits may not be as willing to give discounts to women on  
welfare, or may be tempted to stock more best sellers than books not  
widely publicized in the straight press. Such a bookstore would in-  
evitably see its priorities shift.  

Also, if a “feminist” business is attempting to salary its workers, it  
is questionable (owing to the lack of broad saleability of feminist-  
oriented goods and services) whether the business would have any-  
thing left over to support a political project.  

More about the issue of salaries. Can and should salaries be paid  
to women running feminist projects if business profits don’t support  
them? Every revolutionary movement in history has had a few paid  
revolutionaries. Further, any feminist project worker can testify to  
the frustration and impossibility of giving the project the energy it  
needs while trying to scrounge elsewhere for survival money. Cer-  
tainly the movement should pay its workers.  

Alternatives  

One way to do this would be by establishing a sustainer system,  
supported by businesses and women who earn salaries. Women  
could then put their energies into feminist projects and be paid by  
those whose time is going elsewhere until such time as it’s someone  
else's turn to have the privilege of doing full-time movement work.  

Similar to this system would be a tithing arrangement, whereby  
women would pay dues on a sliding scale to support feminist pro-  
jects, including salaries.  

Another way of equalizing money within the feminist community  
would be to establish a protege system, so that women earning  
money with skills would share both these privileges with other  
women, possibly most effectively on a one-to-one basis.  

These are suggestions towards a system of operating which would  
eliminate salary hierarchies within women’s businesses. Another  
way to safeguard the project's political priority would be for the busi-  
ness to deal in a truly revolutionary product or service. In other  
words, businesses should best deal in propaganda or necessities of  
life: women’s health clinics and food co-ops are good examples.  

By not selling luxury items, the business would not be dependent  
for its survival on that class of people able to pay for luxuries. Also, it  
is more feasible to organize around living necessities than around  
luxuries.  

Nutritional Dangers  

Big Mama Rag  Vol. 4, No. 4  

Bottle Feeding Condemned  

Bottle feeding is one of the  
prime contributory factors in the  
high rate of infant mortality in  
developing nations, say Cornell  
University nutritionists.  

“Although bottle feeding is a  
serious public health hazard,  
promotional efforts of corpora-  
tions producing infant formulas  
continue to convince others to  
use their products, often result-  
ing in the discontinuance of  
breast feeding,” said Ted  
Greiner and Prof. Michael  
Latham.  

“For two-thirds of the world’s  
population, bottle feeding of in-  
fants is highly undesirable. In  
many instances, placing an in-  
fant on a bottle is tantamount to  
signing the death certificate of  
the child,” they said.  

Overdilution of expensive in-  
fant foods, leading to protein and  
calorie malnutrition, and con-  
tamination of milk formulas,  
causing infection and diarrhea,  
are the two main health hazards  
associated with bottle feeding,  
say the Cornell nutritionists.  

Mortality statistics from most  
poor communities show that  
gastrointestinal infections are  
the single largest cause of in-  
fant deaths. “The pediatric  
wards of tropical hospitals are  
full of babies dying of this man-  
made disease,” said Latham.  

Advertising and Profit  

These conclusions were made  
by Greiner and Latham in a re-  
cently completed study, titled,  
“The Promotion of Bottle Feed-  
ing by Multinational Corpora-  
tions: How Advertising and the  
Health Professions Have Con-  
tributed.” The report was pub-  
lished by Cornell's Division of  
Nutritional Sciences, a joint unit  
of the N.Y. State College of  
Human Ecology and the N.Y.  
State College of Agriculture and  
Life Sciences.  

The Cornell nutritionists sug-  
gest that advertising is possibly  
the single most important  
reason for the spread of bottle  
feeding.  

“Advertisements imply that  
nice people with nice houses  
who want nice babies, bottle  
feed their babies,” they said. “In  
fact, for the majority of Africans,  
Latin Americans and Asians,  
who don’t have access to re-  
frigeration and clean water and  
who are unable to afford for-  
mulas in adequate amounts,  
bottle feeding is incredibly diffi-  
cult and extremely bad.”  

“But the media onslaught is  
terrific, the messages are  
powerful and the profits are  
high. High also is the resultant  
human suffering.”  

Health Workers Co-opted  

Greiner, a graduate student,  
analyzed the advertisements for  
infant foods and found that, in  
developing nations, they are  
selectively placed in publica-  
tions serving low-income  
groups. A study of the content of  
various infant care and food pub-  
lications, published by commer-  
cial and government groups, re-  
vealed an anti-breast feeding  
bias.  

He also noted that novel sales  
techniques are used to promote  
bottle feeding in developing  
countries. They include “diaper  
derbies,” which are crawling  
contests between infants spon-  
sored by concerns making in-  
fant foods, and the use of  
clowns, magicians and circus  
performers to entertain and then  
advise on the benefits of bottle  
feeding.  

But Greiner feels that the  
most insidious of all modern  
marketing techniques is the en-  
listment of health profession-  
als, or persons taken by the  
public to be such, as unpaid  
salesmen for infant foods. These  
people tacitly endorse commer-  
cial infant food products by  
giving away free samples and  
free health literature printed by  
manufacturers of infant foods.  

“Americans are generally  
ignorant of issues facing the  
Third World,” Greiner said, “and  
bottle feeding is no longer a sig-  
nificant cause of disease in  
American infants.”  

Copies of the complete study  
are available, for $2 by writing to  
Dr. Michael Latham, Savage  
Hall, Cornell University, Ithaca,  
N.Y. 14853.  

Discrimination Suit Plaintiffs Fired  

Woodwoman  

Over a period of 18 months,  
the Pima Community College in  
Tucson, Arizona fired six women  
in connection with charges of  
sex discrimination filed with the  
Equal Employment Opportuni-  
ties Commission.  

The trouble began in 1974  
when non-faculty employees of  
the college charged the ad-  
ministration with sexist prac-  
tices in promotion and hiring. As  
the number of charges filed  
against the college increased  
(ultimately to 20), women who  
had filed found themselves  
under increasing pressure and  
harassment on the job.  

In March last year the women  
formed a group called the Em-  
ployee Rights Association to  
support their struggle against  
the college administration,  
which was refusing to respond  
to the charges. At around the  
same time, three of the women  
who had registered complaints  
with the EEOC were fired, os-  
tensibly for “breaches of confi-  
dentiality.” The college’s Board  
of Governors endorsed the  
firings.  

Big Mama Rag and Woman to Woman Feminist Bookcenter last  
month jointly sponsored a most successful event which they called  
an International Women’s Day Mini Festival. An impressive number  
of extremely talented local women (plus a guest appearance by Judy  
Grahn) made the evening a real high for all who attended. Variety  
was the spice of the evening. Activities included live music, poetry, a  
belly dancing performance, a karate demonstration, a vaudeville  
theatre performance, a body movement workshop, a herstorical  
movie entitled, The Emerging Woman, a socialist-feminist theatre  
group performance, a pot luck dinner with free beer, a feminist lit  
table, free pelvic exams by women from the Women’s Health Service  
Clinic, a booth by the Women Installers Defense Fund, and a disc-  
jockeyed dance to cap off the evening. Both groups are hoping that  
this sort of celebration will become a tradition in Denver. Also, BMR  
is hoping to do a series of coffeehouse type events utilizing some of  
the talent that emerged at the mini-festival.  

The only bad spot on the whole evening was the fact that someone  
left with Eileen Bresnahan’s (a BMA collective member's) down  
jacket. If anyone knows anything about the whereabouts of this coat,  
please contact the BMA office immediately. It is urgent, as the coat  
contains Eileen’s wallet, all her ID, $50 worth of food stamps, all her  
keys, her personal checkbook, and the Big Mama Rag checkbooks.  
The coat is a bright blue down-filled Jones brand jacket. If the coat  
and/or any of the things left in the pockets are returned, no  
questions will be asked. Especially urgent and difficult to replace are  
the keys, ID and checkbooks.  

The most exciting thing (for the collective) on BMA's upcoming  
agenda is the fact that we're doing a double June/July issue and are  
all taking a month off for vacation. The double issue will contain its  
usual local, regional and national news but will also feature a large  
section on local resources for women. We're hoping this issue will  
serve as an informative directory for women in Denver, women  
passing through Denver, or women considering moving to Denver. If  
you have any suggestions for resources we can cover or would like to  
report on any resources, please let us know.  

Lastly, another gentle reminder to keep your local impoverished  
BMR collective in mind if you ever have any odd jobs you need done.  
We clean, paint, babysit, wash windows etc. etc. etc. Very indus-  
trious folks are we, Spring cleaning anyone?  

Finally, there should be some way of ensuring that monies ac-  
cruing from “feminist” business operations go back to the move-  
ment if the business should fold.  

Hopefully women committed to business enterprises as their con-  
tribution to the feminist movement will take time out to consider  
these complex issues in depth.  

Retaliation  

The women filed new com-  
plaints with the EEOC, charging  
that the college administration  
had fired them in retaliation for  
their original complaints. At this  
point the FBI, in an unusual  
move, investigated the charges  
and sent a report to the U.S. Jus-  
tice Department. In addition, the  
women themselves filed suits in  
federal court asking for dam-  
ages, back pay, benefits and  
immediate reinstatement.  

By late 1975 three more  
women had charged the college  
with retaliatory action, claiming  
that they had been progres-  
sively relieved of status, staff,  
and responsibilities since filing  
their original complaints. These  
women were ultimately fired as  
well.  

In September, Pima College  
officials announced that they  
would file suit against the EEOC  
for conducting an “unlawful in-  
vestigation.” College adminis-  
trators claimed that they had not  
been permitted to participate in  
the investigations. The EEOC re-  
sponded that their inquiries had  
been conducted in a manner  
“completely proper and accord-  
ing to all regulations.”  

In October, yet another  
woman was fired. She filed a  
complaint claiming that her  
firing was the result of her open  
support for the other women in-  
volved in litigation against the  
college.  

Steinem Support  

Gloria Steinem, New York  
feminist writer and editor, spoke  
in Tucson and Phoenix in No-  
vember to raise funds for the  

More on Page 13  

bicycles  

Sales — info — Repairs  
319 East 17th Avenue  
Denver  
573-1177.  

“We cater to women’s needs”  
No Rip-Off!!