Black Feminists Organize in NY

Carol Lease

Last August I saw New York City. The Palisades looked like a fortress against the city across the river. Manhattan crowded with dominoes end on end ready to fall. I paid my dues at the Museum of Modern Art and watched a ragged man beat his skinny dog for refusing to drink gutter water. A family of old men set up house with a sofa and an old stove and table under a viaduct to the Brooklyn Bridge. The Staten Island Ferry transported hoppy school children and seagulls watched to know exactly when to fly out of the ferry’s path. And in New York City in August of 1973 there was a press conference announcing the existence of a Black Feminist organization.

Late last November the National Black Feminist Organization held its first conference in New York. About 400 women from widely diverse backgrounds attended plenary sessions, participated in informal discussions and workshops covering issues that included welfare, child care, addiction, employment, Lesbianism and “the relation of Black women to one another and to the Women’s Rights Movement.”

White women’s liberation groups, according to NBFO founders, didn’t respond to the specific needs of Black feminist women. “There was no real communication, no cultural communication,” explains Doris Wright a member of NOW. “I can’t be concerned with making it on Wall Street - not that NOW doesn’t try to do something about child care and welfare, but it’s only attracted white middle-class women.”

Black men see the Women’s Movement as a “takeover plot,” according to Reverend Magora Kennedy of the Boston Women’s Movement, “and say that if a Black woman isn’t having a baby and standing behind her man, then she’s not a woman.” She also cited Stokely Carmichael’s statement on the position of women and the Black Panther emphasis on “having male children for the revolution” as ways in which Black men had kept Black women “subservient.”

According to the report on the NBFO conference in the December-January issue of Off Our Backs, not all the women who attended the conference were in basic agreement with the women who had formed the organization, namely, that the NBFO is a part of the Women’s Movement addressing itself to the specific concerns of Black women.

These issues were not resolved in the plenary sessions and were probably discussed in workshops but since the white female press wasn’t allowed into the workshops and the Black female press was told not to report on them, whether or not any resolutions were reached on these issues is unknown. Press releases and workshop transcripts have yet to be released. Membership to NBFO is restricted to Black women only.

However, Jane Galvin Lewis, one of the co-founders, said that the direction of the NBFO will not be changed because of objections raised by some conference participants. “This organization was formed for certain reasons, and those reasons still exist. There are plenty of other organizations that Black women who don’t agree with our basic tenets can join. We see ourselves as part of the Women’s Movement, a part with a special interest. We're not separatist.”

Angela Wilson, a member of NBFO, was the sole Coloradan at the conference. She saw “feminism in action” by the fact that so many women of such different ages and experiences were present. She was impressed by the organization that went into the conference that was tight and got things done, but was “loose enough to let changes occur” and left plenty of room for the individual. There isn’t any leadership ego-tripping apparent yet in NBFO, a lethal aspect that “tends to break any movement because leadership then doesn’t listen to the people.” Workshops were closed to the white female press because it was felt that some women “wouldn’t be as open” if white women were present.

Busy Getting Established

As far as Denver is concerned, Ms. Wilson believes that no chapter of the NBFO has been established because “Black middle-class women in Park Hill and in other parts of Denver are too busy establishing themselves in professions and poor Black women are too busy surviving day to day.”

Also—the impressions that Black women receive about Women's liberation and Feminism come from the media which can often distort women’s issues, focus on outlandish, unrepresentative aspects of feminism, or actually report what is happening in established women’s liberation groups which is often irrelevant to their lives.

Don’t Black women and white women have some of the same political, social, economic problems and priorities? It seems that the dichotomy of this segregated society has prevented Black women and white women from forming an alliance. In Wilson's opinion it’s a question of how you want to die: “slowly by marrying and moving to Englewood or quickly by living in a Black neighborhood and having your brain and body deteriorate.”

“A lot of Black men are very oppressive. They are oppressed by white society and in turn oppress the Black woman. When they move up through education they leave the Black community behind and criticize the Black women for the ‘matriarchal’ Black family,” Ms. Wilson insists. The oppressed accept and imitate the oppressor. So white patriarchal society means a Black patriarchal society. The strength and resourcefulness that the Black woman has had to develop is critical not only to her immediate survival but to her discovery of her own Feminism.

Recognizing Sexism

Organizations that are community-based and have grassroots support are “those that survive.” The National Black Feminist Organization is no exception. Black women in their own communities will have to recognize sexism and oppression and organize around their individual Feminist needs and priorities. Ms. Wilson thinks that “maybe a way to organize a Black Feminist action group would be for those Black women who are in Women’s Liberation groups to recognize specific needs for themselves and then establish a chapter.

Or maybe a group of Black women who, say, work in a hospital, could organize better because in their everyday lives they confront sexist oppression and are forced to live with it. They have no choice.

Or maybe we could just get an office going... the fact that it was existing might help Black women realize their power. But Denver is a complacent city. I don’t think there are 10 or 15 Black Feminists in this city.”

In the Black civil rights groups and in white leftist politics the personal life of the militant was unaffected by her political beliefs. Here lies the difference in Feminist orientation. No separation exists between the political and personal life of the Feminist. She lives her politics.

Not the Women’s Fault

“It isn’t the fault of Black women in Denver that nothing is being organized considering the struggle Black women have to go through,” according to Ms. Wilson. “It is a positive step for a Black woman when she sees sexism and oppression and realizes that her struggle isn’t for tomorrow but today.” To realize the strength that organizing gives and the potential that a nationally organized group can give seems to be the next step for the Black woman in Denver.

The National Black Feminist Organization will have its first convention this summer to draw up a constitution and set policies. Whether or not Denver is represented will depend on Black Feminist consciousness in the Rocky Mountain Region.

Some arguments against Black feminism are that Black women can't afford to be competitive with Black men, that Black women have no time for Feminism because of their struggle to stabilize their families, that Black women tend to see all discrimination against them as being racist in origin, that Black women don’t have time to take up a white middle-class cause like Women’s Liberation unless they’re trying to hide from the realities of the struggle for Black liberation. Impressions of ceaseless distortive rhetoric that tend to perpetuate the power of those that mouth it—not the powerless!

The rhetoric ends when the facts emerge. It is a fact that many Black women identify themselves as Feminists, that a national organization has been formed around that realization, and that once again national census figures reveal an increasing numerical discrepancy between females and males in the Black population of this country.

More Females than Males

The 1970 census shows that there are 1,096,000 more Black females than there are Black males. The 1960 census recorded the difference in the female-male ratio to be 648,000. Up to the age of 14 the Black male population slightly exceeds the female population. Then the decline begins.

In “Jim Crow and Jane Crow” from “Black Women in White America,” Pauli Murray says that “... while it is now generally known that women are constitutionally stronger than men, that male babies are more fragile than female babies... that the male death rate is slightly higher and life expectancy for males is shorter than that of females, the numerical imbalance between the sexes (of Blacks) is more dramatic than in any group in the United States.”

Between the ages of 15 and 24 there are 92 Black men for every 100 Black women. In the 25-49 age group the ratio is 84 to 100. There are about one and a half million more Black women over 14 years of age than there are Black men. The social implications of these statistics place the Black woman in a position where her life transcends the issue of civil rights. Again Ms. Murray states: “Equality for the Black woman must mean equal opportunity to compete for jobs and to find a mate in the total society. For as long as she is confined to an area in which she must compete fiercely for a mate, she will remain the object of sexual exploitation and the victim of all the social evils which such exploitation involves.”

Women have been traditionally expected to marry, produce children and household labor, and be largely if not totally economically dependent on their husbands. This keeps women out of competition in the job market. But now there is an entire group of women that may not be able to marry and will have to be self-supporting perhaps while also supporting others. Can Black women afford to subordinate sex discrimination to race discrimination? Feminism is an undeniable economic reality to all women, and an urgent one to Black women.