Conference

From Page 1,

tionships. During lunch, the legal
caucus had gathered together and de-
cided which changes they wanted to make
in their section. They then divided
those motions amongst themselves.
Their organization paid off—every one
of their motions passed. Also during
this section, a member of the lesbian
caucus made an amazingly comprehensive
motion for lesbian civil rights. Her
amendment also passed by an overwhelm-
ing majority.

Lesbianism as a source of major con-
troversy also appeared throughout the
entire Relationships platform. It was
during the voting on Relationships that
Dottie Lamm, "First Lady of Colorado,"
moved to strike the entire section
providing for lesbianism as a political
choice. Debate and voting were ex-
tremely bitter over this particular
motion. Voting had to be done three
times, capitulating in a countdown
vote. The final tally was 206 for the
Lamm Amendment and 203 against. Later,
during a "catch-up" period for those
who hadn't had time to speak during a
particular section, Dottie Lamm made
another motion to reinstate the sen-
tence which said, "Lesbianism is a
political choice." Evidently, someone
had explained to her in the interim
the meaning of "politics." The new
motion passed resoundingly.

The final business of the conference
was the announcement of the delegates
who had won in the noon-hour elections.
Colorado had been allotted 20 delegates
to Houston with 5 alternates. The fi-
nal tally resulted in two Black women,
four Chicanas, one Native American,
and two open lesbians taking leading
positions, with the remaining posts
filled mainly by women of a liberal
bent. This, too, was a “victory” of
sorts.

Now what must be determined is the
true worth of the entire conference.
What is the significance of sending
delegates with a platform on women's
needs and demands to still another con-
ference sponsored, once again, by the
government? What real effect will any
of this have on our lives? Will the
patriarchy really listen to these de-
mands, demands which were predefined
and regimented by the same patriarchy?

(Editor's Note: The following is an
interview with Cano Lease and Made-
line Holdorf, two lesbian/feminist
women who participated in the Colorado
Women’s Conference.)

BMR: Can you give us some informa-
tion about how the conference was or-
ganized in Colorado, and about how
you became involved in it?

Madeline: In Mexico City in 1975,
there was an International Women's
Conference, and the edict that came
out of that was that the women would
go back to their native countries and
ask for the money to put on the con-
ferences. It was the start of Nation-
al Women's Decade which is going from
1975-1985. Five million dollars was
allocated in this country, $29,000 of
which Colorado got. The conference
committee got designated by Washington
in about September of 1976, and that's
when all of the workings started.
In August of '76 Janet Beardsley became
the chair by a vote of the committee
which numbered 15 at that time.

That's the Central Committee which

put on the whole conference. It in-
cluded the task force chairs and the
executive committee. Those women were
just women who volunteered to work on
a women's project. Janet was unop-
posed as chair.

BMR: Do you feel that there was sub-
stantial publicity done among the fem-
inist community? Do you think that
feminists from the community under-

Mon.-Sat.

stood the implications and importance
of this conference and could have be-
come involved if they had wanted to?

Carol: At first it was purely word of
mouth. Janet was asked by Mayor
McNichols to join the committee. At
the beginning stages of the conference
planning there was representation from
Big Mama Rag, and Woman to Woman Fem-
inist Center, but they didn't stay with
the committee.

I went to a meeting in early February
and announced myself as a lesbian fem-
inist, and got involved in the rela-
tionships task force, which dealt with
the issues that attracted most of the
radical women and lesbians. I just
stuck with it.

BMR: How were the task forces set up?
Who determined what task forces were
going to be included?

Madeline: Washington set it up nation-
ally so that all of the conferences
would have the same 7 areas of emphasis.
It was done by the Commission on the
Observance of National Women's Decade,
which includes 50 women from all over
the US, with Bella Abzug as chair.
Those women were probably set up by
their local governments to represent
their state on the commission.

Carol: I started on the commission 15
months ago, and for the first 8 months
I was the only lesbian on the committee.
Washington at one time said it would be
a good idea to have a lesbian on the
central committee, so Colorado was
partially covered by my involvement.
BMR: Was it a feminist conference?
Carol: No. The planners of the con-
ference never described it as a femin-
ist conference. No feminist process
was ever present. It was highly struc-
tured and bureaucratic, and that is
not feminist. I'd even question if the
conference was part of the women's
movement—definitely not the feminist
movement, and probably not the women's
movement. But feminists at the confer-
ence didn't understand that difference.
They use feminist and woman inter-
changeably. It was heartbreaking when
you're sitting there listening to them
call something feminist and it isn't.
But they were definitely politically
liberal women. There were no reaction-
aries on the central committee; they
were liberal women.

BMR: Did they feel they had made some
mistakes? Did they wish that they had
leaned more towards radical women to
keep it balanced?

Madeline: No, I never heard them say
anything like that.

BMR: What do you think of the implica-
tions of a conference that's funded by
the federal government?

Madeline: I think Washington decided
to get on the bandwagon as far as the
women's movement goes, and they decid-
ed to give women money to plan a con-
ference, and they forced women to com-
ply with the white male system. There
was so much bureaucratic jazz that wo-
men had to evolve their own "men" to
lead the conference.

Carol: But I think that happens any-
time you get government funding for
a project. That's a commonly known
thing that these conferences are
trying to institutionalize feminism.
Someone described it as a federally
funded social revolution—a govern-
ment funded revolution. On the other
hand, the way decisions were made
weren't totally set by the structure
and the process. It didn't have to
be that bad. It was that bad because
a lot of the women involved had no

Satisfy

Gay and Feminist

More on page 14

Book Store

1431 Ogden
832-3832

‘Greetings Good and Faithful Citizens, Sha

’ miss much.

W

ob
Scraps From: Mama's

Chocolate Waters

ticens, and
For those of you who missed my column in the last
Actually, I've been up in the mountains
Aspen trees, and have now decided to become an Aspen tree myself. If you
thought you saw me at the bar as much as ever—well, it was probably that
other Chocolate who's been interested in my identity...Speaking of identities,
I recently met a nonwoman in a sleazy Central City bar whose name is Chocolate
Dan. “What are you doing with my name?" I screamed across my Scotch. “What
are you doing in my territory?" he screamed, throwing his Scotch in the
general direction of my face. Turns out the real story of how he acquired
his name is almost as boring as mine.

Lays Potato Chips:
two months, you didn't
“communing" with the

Speaking of being...Muhammad Ali, who claims he's never heard of Gloria
Steinem (so who has?), had this to say about the Women’s Movement in a June
6, Village Voice interview: "For women to think that they're equal with men in
any way is bad. By nature woman looks up to man...If there's a fire in the
house, the woman will look to the man to get her out..." (Let's hope “The
Greatest" never gets caught in a fire with a dyke—or maybe let's hope he does.)
Ali went on to say that the white woman will never rule the world because the
world is ruled by the white man. (Perceptive, isn't he?) Arthur Bell, who
wrote the article and who would more appropriately be called Arthur Ding-A-Ling,
made the astounding statement that he (Ding) is "thankful at least one minority
group has a God figure." (??**!)

Just finished reading Tom Robbins' best-seller, Even Cowgirls Get the Blues.
It has got to be the Big Mac of pulp "kultcher"—full of crap.

Get the Blues.

Raves and cheers to Gingerlox and cast for the recent sequel to her play,
"Gloria Gaywemen, Gera nen." A special clap (interpret that as you
will) goes to Janie Hoback as Clitto, Morgan Starchild as Gloria, and Deirdre-
Who-Invited-All-These-Tacky-People? Reilly as Merline Jeeter. G-Lox herself
will undoubtedly go down in the annals (or is that anals?) of dyke humorists
with her now classic retort to the question, “But why is it always Daddy who
has ring around the collar?” - "Because men always have their heads up their
butts." As far as the reference to me writing lesbian porno, G-Lox can expect
to hear from my lawyer (who also writes lesbian porno).

There's a writer in Arkansas
who bills herself as

1 Labo, a new women's paper out of Fayetteville, AR.,
Sarah Feminist-Minor." No comment.

Received a chapbook last month by Marianne Wolfe that contains some of the
most finely-crafted poetry I’ve seen in awhile. The book is called The Poem
You Asked For and may be ordered by sending a mere $1.25 to Morty Sklar,
P.O. Box 1585, Iowa City, Iowa 52240. Don't, however, bother to send your
poetry to Mr. Morty's mag, The Spout That (Doesn't) Move Us (parenthetical
addition mine) unless you're particularly interested in the status of his
latest love affairs. In our last (and I do mean last) communication he felt
compelled to inform me about a dyke who's hot for his bod (says he) and closed
with this remark: "I can't hold out much longer - just opened a can of shrimp
and the smell got my tongue hard." So sorry, Morty, but a comment like that
really makes me feel entitled to a few cheap shots myself.

Nice Try for the Menth Award must go to the woman at the Boulder Women's
Conference who tried to change this sentence in the Colorado Plan of Action:
"We recognize the importance of male-female relationships..." for the word
"importance," she wanted to substitute “existence.”

Did you hear about the spontaneous demonstration of Bible freaks, fascists, and
other assorted Closet weirdos who assembled alongside the gay rights march to
the capital on June 7th? (Their presence was, of course, unreported by either
the Post or the News.) The mob, which consisted of 25-30 "people," threw beer
bottles, waved Bibles, and chanted "Gays will burn. Gays will burn." We've
burned before, but that's not the point. The point is—excuse my editorializ-
ing here, but this is my column and I'm allowed—the point is that it's time
for all of us dormant political dykes, feminists, sympathizers, etc. etc. to
start forming some alliances and get our shit together.

Most recent bumper sticker that is now being distributed in Miss Citrus Fruit's
next target (Texas) reads "Kill A Queer for Christ." How about "CHRIST IS
COMING - and boy is he ever pissed." Or "Anita Bryant Sucks Oranges."

Kisses and Kiss off,
Chocolate

P.S. If you think this new column format is confusing, how do ya think the
typist feels about it?!

P.P.S. From the typist: Next time, de cut me out, Cheeetate!

Alicia’s
Mexican Restaurant

278 Downing 777-9904

“Good Home Made Food”