Rape And Patriarchy...continued from

Judges, lawyers and juries have a record of misogynous attitudes and be-
havior when it comes to rape cases. A study of judges’ attitudes revealed
that they “are far less impartial than is frequently supposed.” (Gager)
Judges were prone to categorizing victims and joking about "assault with the
failure to please." Many states still require judges to repeat a 17th century
dictum to warn juries that it is easy to charge rape and difficult to defend
against it. In no other crime does the judge tell the jury to examine the
testimony with caution. (Cautionary instruction is prohibited in Colorado.)

“I never worry too much about being
fair-minded, because I know that in the end
justice always triumphs.”

NEW TIMES/LNS

Another problem is the lack of women judges; only 2% of the judges in the
United States are female.

Lawyers, most of whom are male, lack objectivity too. Most regard a rape
case as just another case. Their insensitive, badgering behavior is intensi-
fied when the witness is a rape victim. The woman-hating that is rampant in
the judicial system was expressed in a letter from a Michigan lawyer:

"I...note with great disapprobation and disgust the rancid, fetid
and feculent efforts of Women's Libbers and other fascists to change
the burden of proof in rape cases to the defendant...while the pros-
pect of any such change in the law provokes me to vomit, I have a
counter-proposal to make, which you may convey to the Center for
Rape Concern, whatever the hell that is: When a female has induced
the prosecutorial authority to institute a charge of rape against a
man, and that man is acquitted, without further delay the prosecutrix
shall be carried in a cart to the nearest public square and there
disembowelled alive, and then hanged by the feet and left to rot in
the sun." (Gager)

Serious problems exist in the attitudes of juries also. Juries tend to
vote according to their personal sexual beliefs. A study of jury behavior
confirmed "that juries tend to decide rape cases not on the behavior of the
accused, but by applying their own standards of conduct to the victim." (Gager)

The process of jury selection is unjust, too. It is not uncommon, even to-
day, for a jury in the South to be all or mostly white. Racist jurors vote
against the non-white person, victim or defendant. A preponderance of men on
juries has led to sexist decisions; until recently women were exempted from
or required to volunteer for jury duty in a number of states.

Like the police and the doctors, the law and the courts are inextricably
part of the patriarchy. Encrusted with misogyny, injustice and inadequacy,
the legal/judicial system must undergo radical change.

RAPE CASE DEPOSITION

DID HE COME?
the doctor wants to know.

DID HE COME?
the doctor with no face grunts
shoving a gloved hand up my cunt.

I say he came in

through the door

he came up behind me

came in like he lived there

or like it's just another hallway
to piss in

like he owned it,

like you.

DID HE USE FORCE?

the cops want to know

guns and nightsticks swinging
from their hips

DID HE USE FORCE?

I say he had the force of a sudden
storm

the strength of a desperate child

the power of knowing what he wanted.

BUT DID HE HAVE A WEAPON?
they ask staring.

I say he had himself; the advantage of
surprise.

He seemed to think that was enough,
that

and...

I am forgetting his hands

I want to forget his hands

(the horror of those hands...lona,
slender...

like other hands I love caressing...
but those hands...)

like hammers like clamps

like claws

I say yes he had weapons I believe
he had a whole arsenal of weapons
it is likely he is supplied by a
conspiracy furnishing arms.

AND WERE YOU ALONE?
they ask leaning in.

yes I say meekly and old porn films
flicker across their lips and
I scream I didn't know it was against

the law
I didn't see the sign "Go home alone at
your own risk!"

WHAT WERE YOU WEARING?
asks the official form
AND WHAT WAS THE PERPETRATOR WEARING?

I write: dressed then as I am now I was
as nude

as exposed as this;

he was naked as a knife.

WOULD YOU RECOGNIZE HIM?

the detective wants to know.
CAN YOU IDENTIFY HIM?

he asks from the back

of a fat scrapbook.

I say I see him
everywhere.

IF YOU SEE HIM CALL US,
the blue boys soothe.

I say if I see him I will call
on all the will power I have
to forget he's human.

I will kill him.

Now now little lady they murmur

you just let us handle this after all

you have to understand he's young
crazy poor...

I understand I say that he & I don't
make

anything but your dinner or

put another way

two victims only make a right

to change the whole

fucking

system.

Sign here.

-Elaine McCarthy, Heresies

CONTINUED ON PAGE 22