N

The Mountain States Women's Abortion Coalition (MSWAC) held a "Crimes Against Women Tribunal" on Saturday, November 11, at the CU Denver Center Auditorium. The purpose of the event was to present personal testimony of women who have had difficult experiences regarding abortions, birth control information, rape, welfare and health departments, and all areas of female oppression. Another purpose of the Tribunal was to publicly demonstrate that incidents of women's oppression are not isolated — that many, many women have experiences of this kind.

These are some of the comments made by participants:

"In Utah a person cannot get contraceptive help if she is under 18 without parental consent. I got pregnant when I was 16. My parents are middle-class Catholics and I'd always been taught that abortion was murder. They sent me to a priest for advice. Apparently, when your mother is the president of the Parish's Catholic Women's Club, abortion is OK. He suggested that I get an abortion."

A psychiatric nurse pointed out that "repeal of all abortion laws would be great, but then there would be problems with Denver's medical community, which is very conservative and would probably stop doing abortions altogether if there were no laws to protect them."

The Chairwoman stressed the need to ask for "more than we hope to get."

Attorney Sandy Nemser discussed prostitution as a class issue based on the distinction between call girls and whores. Referring to the then upcoming election, Nemser quoted Gloria Steinem: "If McGovern got pregnant, he'd come to some sort of decision about what to do about it. If Nixon got pregnant, he'd go ahead and get an abortion, deny it, and swear he was a virgin."

The Chairwoman announced that folksinger Judy Collins had planned to testify at the Tribunal but was unable to attend at the last minute. Collins made the point that she did not want to sing, but just to say how she felt.

Pat Schroeder, at that time campaigning for Congress from the First Congressional District, spoke openly about a woman's right to control her own body. She pointed out that Congress has given priority to heart and cancer research, but that birth control and reproductive research have not been as important to Congress. She then pointed out that only 12 out of 435 members of Congress are women.

A young woman from Fort Worth, Texas, said that she had made the decision not to have children and that as a heterosexual saw her choices as "(1) Taking a pill a day for thirty years, (2) having a series of abortions, or (3) getting a tubal ligation." She tried to get a tubal ligation, but "no doctor in the phone book of Fort Worth would give me one because they didn't think I needed one."

The Chairwoman introduced a gay woman from Boulder as "wanting to speak to express solidarity with us and our problems." To which the speaker replied, "Solidarity is not the question, because we're all women." She went on to discuss the health dangers of contraceptive pills and to offer some suggestions in dealing with rapists.

A female lawyer from Legal Aid remarked, "What I've learned (in working at Legal Aid) is that women are victims and see themselves as victims, especially poor women."

An attorney from the National Lawyers' Guild: "Abortion really is a class problem because it was never a problem with a rich woman. You could always go to San Juan." He went on to quote Tolstoy: "'The rich will do anything for the poor, except get off their backs.' The same goes for men and women."

I'm just a raindrop passing through  
So take me on your cheek  
and let me skip all up and down your face.  
Taste me in your mouth  
and slip your tongue right through me  
So I can burst in half  
and warm you through and through.  
Press me in your hands and crush me  
So I can slide between your fingers  
and trickle down your elbows.  
Hold me now and gently  
Touch me now and gently  
I'll be up and gone  
to find the sun that calls me  
Now this raindrop passing through.