... Malvina Talks Politics and Art

write from a feminist point of view
and she is a fine songwriter and a
great performer. She and I shared a
Program in San Francisco just before I
left. But I do not class myself as a
feminist songwriter.

I sang a couple of songs on a record
called Lingo Rising, which is an all
feminist album, and I asked Olivia to
distribute my records, since they are
into distribution as well as producing.
And after a great deal of discussion,
they decided they wouldn't handle my
albums because there were men on them.
Now this seems to be very shortsighted.
I was fighting this fight before they
were born, and I had to make my own way
in a recording industry where there
were no alternatives. There were no
all-women rock bands. There were no
women producers and recording compan-
ies, and I was fighting alone. I had
no help from anyone. And now they're
too pure to touch my stuff, and that
makes me mad. Now as it happens I
couldn't sign up with them. As I un-
derstand it they want an exclusive, and
I'm not going to give anybody an exclu-
sive. If they were able to sell a mil-
lion records a year, one could consider
it, but they're a small outfit like the
rest of us. I understand there was
quite a bit of discussion back and
forth on this question, but they're
doing something that's valuable, there
is no question about it. They are
bringing into use the talents of a
whole bunch of women in all fields. In
sound, in lighting, in production, in
publicity. It's a very fine thing they
are doing. But I move in a different
circle. There are many areas in which
to move. Theirs is one, and mine is
another.

BMR: Malvina, what directions do you

see the women's movement going in? Do
you feel that in the last few years it
has gone off the track of its original

purpose?

Malvina: Well, it's hard to talk about
a movement having an original purpose.
A movement can be so amorphous, have so
many directions, so many individuals,
such richness of experience in so many
different places, that no one can make
a direction for it. It moves, and it
is moving. And it has accomplished
many things. Not as much as we'd like,
it's still in process. But there are
more women getting jobs that they've
never had before. It's acceptable.
There are women in the front in many
movements, where before they had to
take a back seat, or be auxiliaries.
The fight for equality in wages and
so on has had some gains. The ERA
hasn't made it, but this isn't the last
try. When you consider the complexity
of life, you accept the fact that there
can't be one simple clear uncomplicated
women's movement. There are bound to
be conflicts, differences, and it's an
openly stated fact that the opposition
has sent stool pigeons, provocateurs
into the women's movement to cause dis-
ruption that wasn't even there in the
first place. But I think none of these
things are fatal. There's a strong
swell in the direction of women's
dignity, her rights to live her life as
she wants, as she needs to, and I feel
hopeful about it.

One wouldn't necessarily expect the
women's movement to look for changes in
the system, certainly not at first.

And if we limit it to people who are
conscious of the need to change the
system, it would draw it into smaller
confines. I'm pleased to see people

in the women's movement who are looking
for basic change in society. The time
for that is long past due. Many of the
worst things that are happening now are
due to the fact that capitalism has
been able to buy its way into a period
where it is a sick anachronism, tainting
everything it does. That's my feeling,
and it's the feeling of many women.
There are many women, however, who do
not agree; who are not inclined that
way, and they are interested in women's
liberation. And I don't think there's
any sharp division. I think you'll
find all kinds in any movement - women
who want to improve their situation;
middle-class women who want a better
deal in their relationship with the
law, with their husbands, with the
banks, with their jobs. You may say
they're utilizing it. That's like say-

ing a trade unionist is utilizing the
trade union movement to raise his pay.
I don't see it that way. I see every
struggle as a strengthening of the

movement, even if it's on a limited bas

is. They advance and they learn. They
learn something about politics. They
discover the kind of opposition they
have, and that sometimes it requires a
change in administration, or getting
more political class conscious people
out on the front to help them do what
they need to do.

BMR: Malvina, what do you think of the
women who define themselves as lesbian
separatists, and will work only within
that framework?

How do you see the direction of that
movement going?

photo by Deb Taylor

Malvina: Well, that's their privilege.
They may have some experience that
makes them much more comfortable work-
ing and living with other women and
that's alright, but I can't see them
laying that as a principle on the wo-
men's movement, and that's what some of
them tend to do. They push out anyone
who doesn't go in the lesbian direc-
tion. Now I've had the experience of
being called to conferences, concerts,
and I always ask first to see if men
are excluded. I refuse to sing where
men are excluded. I believe that those
women have the right to have all-women
meetings if they want to, but that's not
where I belong. I don't exclude any-
body but the FBI, and you can't tell
them anyway when you see them. But I
feel that to be in a conference or con-
cert of this sort is an education for
anyone, including any men willing to
come and learn how much women can do on
their own, what talents there are, how
much genius there is. Also they can
become allies and I don't want to sep-
arate myself from any possible allies -
including lesbians, gay men, including
anybody who will come and listen and
who will work in the direction of a lib
erated womankind and a liberated work-
ing class and a liberated people.

BMR: Malvina, you made quite a wonder-
ful stir in Madison, Wisconsin -recent-
ly over a rape song. Could you tell us
about it?

Malvina: I was in Madison, Wisconsin a
couple of days ago, and a statement of
the basic opposition to women's liber-
ation came from a Judge. A girl in
school, dressed in blue jeans and a
turtlenecked sweater, a tee-shirt and
shoes was attacked by 3 male students
and raped in the hall. And the Judge
gave two of the boys very light senten-
ces. And the leader he let off on pro-
bation with a statement somewhere to
the effect that the boys were not guil-
ty because of the permissiveness of
society, and because of the way girls
act and dress. And he got some sup-
port. He got phone calls and so on.
He also got a tremendous opposition.
Immediately in Madison there was a
petition circulated to recall him.
Faculty members of the high school, and
the University of Wisconsin Law School

made public a petition expressing out-
rage at Simonson's remarks. The
Madison Association of School Princi-
pals issued a statement objecting to
both the one-year probationary senten-
ces Simonson gave the 15-year-old
rapists, and the remarks he made about
permissiveness and rape. I had read
this story in the papers in Chicago,
and when I got to Madison I wrote a
song about it because I was going to
be singing in Madison.

The Judge Said
to the tune of "When

Johnny Comes Marching

Home." Repeat Last
Lines of melody for
chorus.)

The judge said "screw 'em",

Boys, you're only human,

They brought it on themselves,

By being born a woman,

Like a mountain's there to climb,
And food