Victims Harassed

Two Australian women are  
being charged with making  
false complaints after they  
reported that they had been  
raped. Margaret was raped  
by 9 men, and then grilled by  
police for 8 hours, during  
which time she was not  
allowed to eat or drink any-  
thing but water, and was  
asked such questions as “Did  
you enjoy it?” and “Did you  
climax?” Finally, exhausted,  
she agreed to drop charges,  
upon which she was charged  
with making a false complaint.  
Irene, who was raped several  
months ago, was charged  
similarly by police who de-  
cided she had not, in fact, been  
raped, after they had spoken  
with the rapist.

Mother Framed

Cynthia Forcier, a lesbian  
mother, has been accused of  
sexually molesting her  
5-year-old daughter. Despite  
the fact that the child, Kristi,  
complained of having been  
kicked by a little boy, her  
doctor interpreted minor  
bruises around her pelvic area  
and slight discharge as the  
result of molestation by her  
mother (Kristi and Cynthia  
had slept in the same bed  
during a visit as a treat for  
Kristi). Orange County auth-  
orities have offered to drop  
criminal charges against  
Cynthia if she will agree to  
relinquish all rights to both  
Kristi and her 8-year-old  
brother.

Hard Luck

Barbara Sherwood was mak-  
ing a phone call from an  
outside booth in Gardena, CA,  
when a man driving by  
stopped, pulled her out of the  
booth and tried to rape her.  
Unfortunately for him, Ms.  
Sherwood is a deputy sheriff.  
She pulled out her .38 and  
shot the would-be rapist twice.

George Kensey was treated  
for bullet wounds in the back  
and shoulder and booked on  
suspicion of rape.

Woman Kills Rapist

A 36-year-old San Diego  
woman, Virginia Tierce, is on  
trial for killing Louis Shark  
when he attempted to rape  
her. The prosecution is  
charging that Tierce was a  
prostitute, and shot Shark  
when he refused to pay her.  
Support for this argument  
includes the fact that she is a  
welfare mother (likely to turn  
to prostitution to supplement  
her income), and wore “lewd”  
clothing (midriff blouse and  
slacks). Her defense is being  
supported by the N.O.W. East  
County Rape Task Force and  
Rape Emergency Assistance  
League.  
Feminist Communications,  
San Diego.

Right On

Patti Lear Corman is divor-  
cing her husband, Rep. James  
Gorman (D-California), bec-  
ause he opposes her bid to  
oust Rep. Barry Goldwater in  
California's 20th District. Ms.  
Corman, who worked as an  
unpaid assistant in her hus-  
band's office, said that he was  
not opposed to her running for  
office unless she intended to  
run against Goldwater. Rep.  
Corman, on learning of her  
intention, handed her a letter  
stating that unless she with-  
drew her candidacy, he would  
seek to end their marriage...

Ms. Corman said that the  
letter left her no choice but to  
file for divorce.

Little White Lie

The Phillips Petroleum Com-  
pany is under fire from  
environmentalists protesting  
the scheduled airing of a  
television advertisement  
which they maintain is mis-  
leading. The ad shows a deer,  
two cougars and a golden  
eagle apparently thriving in an  
environment dotted with oil  
wells pumping petroleum in  
the northern Utah oilfields.  
But as soon as the company  
finished filming the commer-  
cial, the deer, the two tame  
cougars and the golden eagle  
were placed in crates and  
shipped back to the California  
farm from which they had  
been rented. Phillips insists  
that the commercial is not  
misleading, claiming that  
there is nothing in the ad that  
states the animals are wild.

Slaves Revolt

In the Islamic region of  
Yugoslavia, wives are still sold  
for an average of $4,000, and  
are expected to be complete  
slaves to their husbands.  
Zihriaja Hussein, rebel leader  
of women’s liberationists in  
the area, is training girls to  
take as much as they can from  
their husbands in gifts and  
bridal fees, and then to run  
away and “remarket” them-  
selves. “We old-timers were  
taught to be guerillas in World  
War II, and can train guerillas  
again,” she said.

Abortion Update

Minors can obtain abortions  
without their parents’ consent  
in 25 states and the District of  
Columbia, according to Family  
Planning Perspectives, a jour-  
nal published by Planned  
Parenthood. In addition,  
twenty-six states and the  
District of Columbia now  
permit minors to obtain con-  
traceptive services without  
their parents’ permission.

Adds Life?

Vowing a “hard-line crack-  
down” on processors of con-  
taminated food, Los Angeles  
City Attorney Burt Pines  
recently showed news report-  
ers a dozen soft drink bottles  
containing broken pieces of  
glass, dead insects and pieces  
of metal. Pines said the  
bottles were only a sample of  
items turned in by enraged  
consumers in recent months.

The state of California re-  
ceives 50 contaminated food  
complaints a day from con-  
sumers, according to Pines,  
but has refused to crack down  
on food processors. The state  
has chosen instead to follow  
federal Food and Drug Ad-  
ministration guidelines which  
tolerate a certain level of  
insect and rodent presence.

Raymond Freed

Jill Raymond was released  
from a Kentucky county jail  
May 4 after having been  
imprisoned nearly 14 months  
for refusing to testify before a  
federal grand jury. The grand  
jury was allegedly investi-  
gating the harboring of fugi-  
tives Susan Saxe and  
Katherine Power in the wo-  
men’s and gay communities of  
Lexington, Kentucky.

Lasting Effects

Virtually any food additive  
which prolongs “shelf-life”  
has the opposite effect on your  
life. More than a billion  
pounds of additives were put  
in food last year, enough for  
five pounds per person in the  
country.

New American Movement

Hookers’ Jamboree

For information about the  
June 21 press conference on  
the First World Meeting of  
Prostitutes, the Hookers’ Film  
Festival, and the formation of  
the Hookers' Lobby, to be held  
in Washington DC, contact  
Margo St. James, Coyote, Box  
26354, San Francisco, CA  
94126.  
Media Report to Women,  
Washington DC

Women Take Over

Seventy young Thai women  
workers have been holding  
and running a blue-jeans  
factory in Bangkok for over five  
months. The workers locked  
the factory bosses out after  
unsuccessful protests over  
wages and working condi-  
tions. They raised wages by  
150% and, with the elim-  
ination of profits, are selling  
the jeans for one-third of their  
former price. Many workers  
are living in the plant to  
prevent a move by the former  
owners to take it back. They  
have withstood attacks from  
hired thugs and police. Before  
the takeover, starvation wages  
had forced them to fight each  
other for piece work materials.  
The women say that they are  
willing to wage a militant  
struggle to retain the factory.

The Guardian

Black Feminists Unite

The National Alliance of  
Black Feminists is a  
non-profit, non-partisan or-  
ganization formed in the sum-  
mer of 1975 to promote the  
social, political and economic  
welfare of black women.  
Headquartered in Chicago,  
the NABF offers its members  
various programs and ser-  
vices, and is engaged in  
setting up chapters across the  
country. For more infor-  
mation, write them at Suite  
1024, 202 South State St.,  
Chicago, IL 60604.

Cancers Avoidable

Five thousand breast cancer  
deaths—one out of every six—  
could be prevented if Amer-  
ican women would eat less  
animal fats, according to a  
National Cancer Institute sci-  
entist. Dr. Marvin Schneid-  
erman also says that expan-  
ding the use of the Pap smear  
to detect cervical and uterine  
cancer would save 3,000 lives  
a year.

FDA Wakes Up

The Food and Drug Admin-  
istration has recommended  
that doctors prescribe the  
lowest effective dosages of  
estrogen for the shortest pos-  
sible time to their women  
patients, since the drug is  
suspected of increasing the  
risk of cancer of the endome-  
trium, or lining of the uterus.

Saxe Charged

Susan Saxe and two other  
inmates of the Worcester  
County Jail have been served  
with a lawsuit claiming  
$500,000 in damages for  
Kathleen Duesberg, a cor-  
rectional officer at the jail.  
Ms. Duesberg claims that the  
three women “have partici-  
pated...in a longstanding con-  
spiracy to abuse, discredit and  
vilify” her. The claim is  
based on a letter published in  
the Worcester Telegram and  
Gazette last December, alle-  
ging “brutal and inhumane”  
conditions at the jail, and  
claiming that Ms. Duesberg  
“has a serious drinking pro-  
blem...and has repeatedly  
verbally abused and even  
assaulted inmates.”

New Times

@ continuing forum

The BMR Collective

A year ago whoever would have thought that “lesbian feminist  
sado-masochism” would one day become an issue causing  
heated debate in a feminist community? We certainly didn’t!  
But we were obviously wrong.

When a feminist publication came out with an article on “A  
Preliminary Investigation into the Nature of S-M (Hera,  
December, 1975) we were, to say the least, somewhat  
surprised. The article sparked limited debate in the Denver  
community, and BMR briefly considered publishing a reply, but  
we dismissed it all as a nonissue. Since that time, however, the  
debate has been rekindled. We now feel compelled to  
contribute our analysis to the dialogue.

Proponents of “lesbian feminist sado-masochism” go to great  
lengths to explain that it is not what one usually thinks of if and  
when one thinks of sado-masochism. (We are purposely using  
the term sado-masochism throughout, rather than the  
abbreviation S-M. We believe it is important that we remember  
exactly what it is that we are talking about.) Indeed, in what we  
have heard and read about the form, it would seem that there is  
little if any sadism involved. What “lesbian feminist  
sado-masochism” seems to come down to is a celebration of  
masochism—a flirtation with pain and, by extension, with  
death.

This is not to say that there are not two roles present in the  
“lesbian feminist sado-masochistic” scene. But the sadist is  
present merely to satisfy the masochist’s desires and  
fantasies. As Lipschutz states in Hera, “The S (sadist), in  
binding and beating the M (masochist), treats her with the  
utmost kindness and solicitation...” (parens ours). In other  
words, the masochist runs the show. Therefore, it would seem  
that the excuse given that the situation enables women to feel  
dominance and power is ridiculous. Only the “masochist” feels  
these things in that she feels their oppressiveness. What the  
“sadist” feels is a false sense of power, the kind of unreal  
power that makes oppressed people feel their oppression a little  
less—and so makes them less desperate to struggle against it.  
This is the same psychology which is evident in the fascination  
with Wonder Woman and her like. She makes us feel somehow  
powerful, though the power is not real, but this feeling of power  
makes our real powerlessness hurt less.

And what of the masochist? The central question here is: Why  
do some women need or want to be tied up or beaten in order to  
experience sexual pleasure? Many proponents of “lesbian  
feminist sado-masochism” argue that these whys are  
unimportant. They imply that feminists should not make  
judgments on the basis of why someone does something, but  
should judge only on the basis of whether someone enjoys  
something or consents to it. To say that reasons and causes are  
not important is an unwillingness to struggle with the issues. A  
very basic example of a situation in which the reason for a  
seemingly harmless act makes that act oppressive is the case of  
men who hold doors for “ladies”, give up their seats on buses,  
etc. All of these things seem nice harmless gestures—no one is  
seemingly being hurt; and if anyone is being oppressed, it  
would seem to be the man. Feminists, however, know these  
acts to be oppressive to women because of the attitudes and  
assumptions which inspire them.

Whys are always important. Part of the definition of “radical”  
is getting to the root of the whys. The masochist, like all other  
women, has been raised in a culture which has taught her that  
“nice girls” don’t get turned on. We all internalize this precept  
to a different degree—for some of us it doesn’t get in the way of  
free, honest sexual responses. For others of us it results in guilt  
that gets in the way of our ever letting ourselves go.

For a woman tormented by this guilt, the solution is often to  
not be responsible for her own sexual responses. And who  
could be less responsible for what she is feeling than the woman  
who is tied down, unable to move? Where the pain comes in is  
that this woman knows that she is really not a prisoner, though  
she is pretending to be. Some guilt still seeps through, guilt  
which demands punishment.

All women are to some degree masochists. We have been  
socialized to expect pain, to accept it as our due, even to want it.  
It is indeed, as Germaine Greer states, a male invention,  
designed to keep the man on top—for he can only stay there as  
long as we accept the pain that he metes out.

“The Point is the Scenario” —Lipschutz

Many proponents of “lesbian feminist sado-masochism”  
excuse it by saying that it's “just a game”, and a “playful” one.  
To see sex as a game is to detach oneself totally from it.  
It is to make sex analytical. It is a patriarchal model for  
relationships. The people do not relate to each other, they  
relate to whatever happens to be their role in the “game”.  
While it is usually true that a certain amount of games-playing  
is present in any relationship, should our focus as feminists not  
be to eliminate these games? What is to be served by  
institutionalizing dishonesty?

To dismiss something as harmless by calling it a game is in  
itself dishonest. Many games are far from harmless, for  
example children’s war games. Games of this sort serve to  
socialize competitiveness, get people used to an unpleasant  
status quo, and reinforce the idea that the status quo is  
immutable.

Sado-masochistic games involve two sides, one who is playing  
the sadist or winner, the other who is playing the masochist or  
loser. It makes no difference if both “win” the game in that they  
are both satisfied. They are taking sides. Sex is regarded as a  
conflict—perhaps as a battle. The competitiveness demands  
that both parties perform—that they strive to be good at the role  
they are playing. The emphasis is not on satisfying your partner  
by being sensitive, or loving, or caring; but on satisfying your  
partner by playing your role well. The whole focus is on the  
orgasm. This end is seen to justify whatever means.

Such goal-oriented sex is totally male-defined. Who the