letters home to mama

Lesbian Locked Up

Comrades,

I am writing you from Purdy "Treatment" Center, in Washington State. At present, I am in the Maximum Security Unit due to a past escape. I have been in this unit for over a year.

Over one year ago I turned myself in off of an escape and was placed in Maximum Security. During this past year, I have remained infraction free and have excelled at all levels of scholastic achievements, as well as managed to retain a pretty positive attitude regarding my present situation. Although I do have the support of the Maximum Security Unit staff, in that they have been pushing for my release to general population, I was recently denied a custody change when I went before the committee. I was denied for another 6 months.

I am writing today because I would like to raise the question to you, whether I am actually being held because I am considered a security risk or whether my lesbianism and the fact that I have a lover who awaits my return to population plays a part in their decision. I have come to honestly believe that my sexual persuasion is the actual threat to the closed, Nazi-minded people that call themselves running this institution.

Upon my initial meeting when I came to this prison, one of the first statements made to me was, “I see here that you are a homosexual, I want you to know that this type of behavior will not be tolerated.”

This was said to me by the acting Superintendent, Dikka Brett. I believe that these types of statements set the tone and attitude for the rest of my stay here. When I went before the parole board, I went prepared to speak on my "supposed" crime. My crime was not discussed, yet my sexuality was. I was asked questions such as, "Do you play butch or femme..." "Tell us the sexual aspects of your relationships with other women..." etc. When I go to any type of meeting, whether it be a custody change meeting or a minor disciplinary meeting or whatever...I am consistently questioned and probed about my relationship with my woman who is out in population. Although my woman is allowed to come into Maximum Security to assist others in Disciplinary actions and appeals, etc., she is not allowed to do this for me. She is denied by the Administration with no cause listed. Within the past month or so, our correspondence has been denied or rejected and/or tampered with. At one point, I received a letter from her that was missing several pages. A few months back, she passed around a petition requesting my release, and having the population sign it, but this was stopped due to threats of Major Infractions issued to all those that signed.

Although I have specifically requested not only a time limit or time frame to be given to me, stating how much time I have to do in the Maximum Security Unit, as well as what more I can do to ensure my release someday in the near future, I am denied this information, and left unknowing of how many more months or years I have to do in here.

This struggle that I am now facing is not an isolated incident, as there have been other lesbians who have had to endure similar situations. The Administration entertains the belief that lesbian relationships are negative and sick, therefore constituting a threat to the smooth operation of their prison system.

I am writing you in hopes that you will print this along with my request for letters of support. What constitutes my eligibility for release? What is my time frame? The fact that I turned myself in off of escape, with no additional crimes, that I have remained infraction free for a period of a year, that I have the support of the very people who work closely with me (their own people).

Thank you for your support and concern.

Mykki Balduff #642683  
P.O. Box 17  
Gig Harbor, WA 98335  

Letters can be sent to:  
Sue E. Clark,  
P.O. Box 17  
Gig Harbor, WA 98335  

Superintendent  

and  

Board of Prison Terms and Paroles  

805 Capital Center Building  

Olympia, WA 98504  

What's Out There?

Dear Women:

I am a prisoner in the California Institute for Women. I understand that your publication can be sent free to prisoners with no funds -- I'm not too happy to say that I fit into that category perfectly. If possible, I would very much like to receive your magazine.

We are also trying to find the names and addresses of groups working on alternatives to prison programs. If you know the prison system, I expect you know the chances we have of getting any help on this project from the prison administration -- all we need are starting names and addresses so that we can begin to track the groups down and see what is happening out there, so if you can send us anything on this, we'd really appreciate it.

Thank You.

Sincerely,

Joy Gault  

17335 Latham 219  
California Institute for Women  
Frontera, California 91720  

Jewish Lesbians Mourn

The High Holy Days usher in the Jewish New Year, beginning with Rosh Hashanah and ending with Yom Kippur. During this time, Jewish people the world over confront and make peace with the old year to begin anew. It is a time of introspection and reconciliation; a time to ask forgiveness and to forgive others. We mourn and honor the dead and remember the sanctity of life.

As Jewish lesbians we ask: why is this Yom Kippur different from all others? This year, the 10th day of Tishri also marks the 1 year anniversary of the massacres of 3,000 unarmed Palestinian people in the Lebanese refugee camps of Sabra and Chatilla. It was during the Israeli invasion and occupation of Lebanon that they were murdered by the Lebanese Phalange with the complete complicity of the Israeli government.

As Jews we mourn:

- the victims of these massacres;  
- Israel's continuing occupation of Lebanon and the imprisonment of 10,000 Lebanese and Palestinian people;  
- Israel's and U.S.'s refusal to negotiate with the PLO, and the continued exile of the Palestinian people from their homeland;  
- Israel's role as a major supplier of arms to repressive dictatorships in Central and South America, and in Africa;  
- that the Israeli State has chosen to link its survival with this role of oppressor. We mourn the effect of that role on the soul of the Jewish people;  
- our failure as American Jews to criticize Israeli policies and American policies supporting Israeli militarism;  
- last, and yet the beginning of it all, worldwide anti-Semitism; that for thousands of years Jews have been subjected to exiles, pogroms, persecution, and most recently the Holocaust.

The experience of the Holocaust has taught us once again that anti-Semitism can erupt at any time to any of us. But the suffering of the Holocaust does not make right the oppression of other peoples. It is the vigilant fight against anti-Semitism, not the Palestinians, that will ensure our survival.

If you are a non-Jew reading this letter and you are saying to yourself, "Yes, Israel is the most oppressive country," we urge you to look inside yourself a little deeper and check out your own anti-Semitism, even if you think you've already dealt with it. Anti-Semitism is everywhere; in the right wing and in the left.

We feel our connection to all Jews and therefore offer

MORE ON PAGE 18  
Mama Rag, October, 1983 - Page 3