letters cont.

(Continued from page 2)

are angry that you published it without consulting them. If the latter is correct then I find it inappropriate and inexcusable for you to use your access to the press to apologize to your collective members. If the former is correct I find it unbelievable and inexcusable for you to disclaim support for the article on the grounds that you didn't know what you were doing. 

Now Ladies...are you atoning for an internal mistake or are you pleading ignorance? Either way, you have, in effect, withdrawn support from, and therefore denied responsibility for publishing the article. Granted the article presents an alarming threat to many women in controlling the direction and image of the movement.

It is precisely for this reason that you should be proud that you have published it. There are few women's papers left, which means that it is getting harder for women to get unpopular and critical articles published. As one of the few remaining papers you have a responsibility to make press space available for articles such as Franchild's.

Yours in struggle,  
Emma Goldfields  
New York City  
{Editor's Note: Neither. editorial on page 4.)

See BMR

Corrections

Dear Deirdre and Sisters at BMR:

In reading your Vol. 6 No. 6 issue, BMR Community Meeting, we saw an incorrect reference to our collective. We are a closed collective (ten women now) but have "friends" who help each layout. The "friends" are women who want to help out - some are in the process of deciding about joining the collective; some are visiting from out of town, and some want to keep their commitment to our collective looser than being a collective member. Our publication usually runs 28-32 pages so we could not each take responsibility for one page. Sometimes a woman has responsibility for as many as 5 or 6 pages. But the page system idea is what we use. We are in the process of writing an article about our collective/process for Heresies. It's likely we'll also print this article. So you'll be seeing more about what all goes into our publication.

In sisterhood,  
Terri Poppe for Our Backs  
Washington, D.C.

P.S. I like BMR a lot!

Dear Sisters,

When I opened up the recent issue of BMR (6:6), it was the second time this month I discovered a feminist publication to have lifted a graphic from Quest: a feminist quarterly without permission and without credit to either the artist or Quest.

The graphic you used on page 3 accompanying the article, Genital Mutilation of Somali Women, was taken from our current Quest issue, Intersectional Feminism. The graphic was part of a series of illustrations by Leslie Montgomery done specifically for the article, "Women, Economic Development and the U.N."

Using the graphic out of the original context totally distorts its meaning.

Secondly, you have shown incredible disregard and disrespect for women's work by not crediting the artist and Quest.

Thirdly, while I am sympathetic to the pressures of publishing deadlines (I have been responsible for Quest production since its inception 5 years ago), it is irresponsible to simply clip and use already published work. This is especially true when the same audience (essentially) is being reached. There are many women artists who are eager to do work and be published in the feminist press. We who are involved in publishing have a responsibility to grant the same considerations in getting our art as we do our copy.

I want you to know that we appreciate the support you have shown Quest generally and especially in our current financial crisis. My criticism is meant to be constructive. It is a mutual process that will keep the feminist press alive and thriving.

Sincerely,  
Alexa Freeman  
Washington, D.C.

(Editor's note: Our apologies to Leslie Montgomery and to Quest for not crediting the beautiful graphic on page 3, BMR Vol. 6 No. 6. However, BMR has accepted the policy verbatim from the Women in Print Conference in Nebraska in August, 1976. That policy is that feminist publications would cross-use graphics provided that artist and publication credit is given.)

Woman Rising Folds

Dear Readers,

It is with regret that I am writing to inform you there will be no further issues of Woman Rising. The primary reason for this is financial, which is explained in detail below. In the financial report, we lacked for material, visual, nor subscribers and distribution points. But the lack of a core group interested in selling advertising has always been a serious problem; one or two people cannot do the job adequately.

Six months ago, WR was seriously in debt. With the very generous support and trust of the women's community in making loans, donations, at two benefits, and in buying ad space, the debts have been paid. There is too great a risk of this situation reversing itself to continue printing. Those of us who have worked on WR are most grateful to the community for your continued support.

Articles, poetry, and artwork WR has received in the last few months will be forwarded to the Women's Center Newsletter. Back issues of WR will be available at Womansplace Bookstore free of charge, while they last. If anyone is interested in starting another feminist publication I and other former collective members will be glad to share whatever information we have.

Thanks again to all the women who have helped WR maintain this long.

Patti Patton  
Woman Rising  
Phoenix, Arizona

The financial report is both written and filed at the BMR office, 1724 Gaylord.

Rich Praise

Dear Judy Barlow,

I want first of all to thank you for your excellent article on Sterilization of Native American Women, published in the May BMR. I read it on the plane en route to the Columbus, Ohio Conference on The Future of Mothering and was able to incorporate some of the material into my speech there. In the event that the speech is published I will of course cite your article, but I would also be grateful if you could give me some of your sources, particularly for the quotes from Ravenholt and Connie Uri, and the percentages of women sterilized. Could you do so?

I would also appreciate it if you'd pass the enclosed check and subscription form on to the subscription department. I feel like a long-overdue subscriber, since I've been reading the paper for years.

Best to you all, in sisterhood and struggle,

Adrienne Rich  
New York, New York

Hazard, Kentucky

Dear BMR:

A little while ago, while on a writing assignment in Eastern Kentucky, I met a woman from Hazard, Kentucky. To my surprise, she asked me how the defense was going in my child custody case. She was very supportive. I asked her where in the world she had heard about the case and she replied, "All the women in Hazard read Big Mama Rag." (Thought you’d like to know.)

I want to thank your readers who have helped support the defense efforts. And thanks again to you all; Big Mama's loving arms sure do reach far and wide.

With Love,

Kathy Kahn

(Editor's Note: Kathy's case will probably go to trial in North Carolina this summer. Her lawyer, Jerry Ke, is prepared to show evidence in her case. For the full story see BMR Vol. 2 No. 7, July, 1977.)

Quest Needs Help

Dear Reader,

We have the next issue of Quest, a feminist quarterly, ready to print, but to do that we need to ask your help. Right now we simply don't have the money.

Many people think that we have plenty of money, perhaps because of our own high standards for how the publication should look and read. In fact, we are primarily a volunteer organization. Only two members of our staff are paid.

MORE ON PAGE 18