bmr on culture

DYNAMITE DAMSELS

Roberta Gregory

Theresa Schook

Those delinquent women who read comic books must always answer the criticisms that low literature forms engender. Reading and writing comic books is a form of escape. This is not true of women's comics, however. Women's comics are more than pictures with conversation bubbles; they are an art form with the potential to become revolutionary.

Why then, are women's comics so heavily criticized? They have been called everything from frivolous to woman-hating; the criticism is justified. There is no point in telling R. Crumb or Stan Lee that Red Sonya has too many curves for a person who lives by the power of her blade. The Man will print what the Man will sell to men. So we are left with the women's comics to give us women who are real and will stand alone in a literary mode that will reach the masses.

Women's comics fall short of the mark, however. Often their stories are about women who "just gotta have a man," who see other women as a threat, who treat other women shabbily. One particular story has a lesbian messed over by another woman, a thrill-seeker; the story ends with the lesbian carving a bit of artwork on the other woman's body. The art in this story is spectacular. There is no doubt as to the author's capabilities—why, then is she writing about women destroying other women? Moving along into the topic of this review, Dynamite Damsels. Roberta Gregory has an extremely distinctive style. Her use of line is fluid, loose, and accomplished. There are three stories in the book; two are pure make-believe with no pretense at reality and the other, the main story, is "true life experiences.” Beginning with the first story, "Superdyke," the artwork, as was mentioned before, is very clear with a true sense of action. The story itself is about your basic "faster than a speeding bullet” type. In three pages, she manages to save an elderly woman whose purse had been stolen, helps a woman change a tire by holding up the car, stops some would-be fag beaters and assists a woman to nab a man who had just raped her. Superdyke has a busy day indeed.

The second story, told in a series of short vignettes, is about one woman's journey into feminism and lesbianism. The story begins with a consciousness-raising group in a women's center, moves through Frieda's burgeoning awareness of her lesbianism, and ends with her turning away from her straight friends and joining a lesbian group.

The last story is a history lesson, "The Story of Liberatia." This is a women's space founded sometime after 1980, a place for women to retreat after the fall of the ERA. Liberatia is a sort of utopia. However, all the women are gunned down one day by an army of men. The story does have a happy ending, since the massacre sparks a women's revolution that overthrows the patriarchy by the year 2000.

The book has its share of flaws. There is an appalling emphasis on looks. Each story has a woman deciding that another woman is "good lookin'" or "foxy" or "fat-ugly." It is unfortunate that even in a book with feminist pretensions, there is still that preoccupation with physical appearance.

A great deal of space is devoted to women not trusting each other. One woman states "women are more critical of other women" during a coming out sequence. Because she is fat, one woman feels that she will never be intimate with another woman; "What's the use?" Lesson one in feminism is “watch your terminology around feminists."

This is better than most women's comics, but it has a long way to go. Not everybody can be Star Buckwheat. We have quite a ways to travel before those of us who make this living art realize our full political potential.

Amelia Earhart Wings It Through Life

Theresa Ducato

When her plane disappeared over the mid-Pacific on July 2, 1937, it touched off the largest sea search in the history of the US Navy. The mystery of her disappearance has never been solved, and from the day the news flashed around the world, it gave rise to many bizarre speculations. After almost forty years, Amelia Earhart's spirit continues to haunt the public's imagination.

She was born in Atchison, Kansas, on July 24, 1898. When she and her sister were growing up, their father moved his family to Des Moines, Iowa. He was employed in the Claims Department of the Rock Island Railroad and was on the way to establishing himself in a promising career, when it started to disintegrate. Never a drinker, he discovered alcohol.

It was only the beginning; the family's financial problems impelled them to move from place to place. Her father continued to lose jobs because of his drinking, and the family temporarily broke up. Mrs. Earhart took her daughters to Chicago to live with friends. Later, when someone would say to Amelia, "I'm from your hometown," she would reply, "Which one?"

She first became interested in aviation when she visited her sister in Toronto in 1917. They made friends with a pilot in the Royal Flying Corps who took them to watch the training activities at the airfield. It was an experience she would never forget.

Although she later entered Columbia University, her father took her to an air show in Long Beach. This time she was inspired to do more than watch the planes from the ground. She promptly signed up for flying lessons.

From the beginning Amelia was a "natural." Those hours in the air were exhilarating and a relief from her problems on the ground. In her Kinner Canary she soared to 4,000 feet and set a new women's altitude record. Weeks later that record was broken by Ruth Nichols, and Amelia rashly attempted to top it. She didn't make it but by this time, her competitive instinct was well developed.

When her parents' long-floundering marriage finally collapsed, she temporarily gave up flying and dutifully returned to Boston with her mother and sister. For several years, she continued to fly on weekends, drifting back and forth between schools and jobs. At the same time, she eased herself out of an unofficial engagement. She wasn't ready for marriage and couldn't bear the idea of giving up her independence. Her dedication to flying was as strong as ever.

She was working in a settlement house when one day she received a telephone call. A male voice on the other end introduced himself as Capt. Hilton Railey. “Would you like to fly the Atlantic?" he asked. Never for a minute thinking it might be a practical joke, Amelia quickly said yes. "Who could refuse such a chance like that?" she asked. It was April 1928, eleven months after Charles Lindbergh had flown the Atlantic.

Amelia was twenty-nine years old; she had 500 hours in the air; she had not learned to fly with instruments, and she had never flown a plane with more than one engine. Her only reward from this adventure would be fame and perhaps a chance at the controls. Nevertheless, she accepted the conditions, so great was her desire to make the flight.

The "Friendship" took off from Newfoundland on the morning of June 17. Once airborne over the choppy seas, Amelia crouched in the cabin, from time to time making entries in her log book. "We are 1096 miles out....The view is too vast and lovely for words," she wrote. Flying into fog and mist, she dashed off: "Going down fast. It takes a lot to make my ears hurt. 5000 feet now. Awfully wet. Water dripping in window. Port motor coughing..." After 20 hours and 40 minutes with barely enough fuel to make their destination, the pontoon landed in the harbor at Burry Port in Wales. Amelia was an instant celebrity!

She wasn't prepared for fame. When Railey greeted her from a dory, he shouted, "How does it feel to be the first woman to fly the Atlantic? Aren't you excited?" "No," she replied, "It was a grand experience, but all I did was lie on my tummy and take pictures of the clouds...Bill did all the flying—had to. I was just baggage."

On her return, the enthusiastic welcome she received in New York, Boston, and Chicago was a let-down for her. Even the $50,000 she received from different sources didn't make her feel better. "I'm a false heroine," she confided in Railey, “The only way I can live with myself in future is to fly the Atlantic alone."

She couldn't have felt good about the London Evening Standard's comment on her sudden fame: "Her presence added no more to the achievement than if the passenger had been a sheep." Perhaps in preparation for a solo flight, she flew from the Atlantic to the Pacific and back alone, the first woman to do so. She wrote articles, joined Transcontinental Air Transport as an adviser, worked tirelessly to improve her piloting experience and became George Putnam's (of Putnam & Sons Publishing) wife. He had proposed to her six times. Amelia retained her freedom, and Putnam accepted that with alacrity. Among others, she consulted Bernt Balchin, an experienced aircraft engineer. In his autobiography, Come North With Me, he described her arrival at the airfield on that momentous day in Newfoundland: "She arrived at the field in jodhpurs and leather flying jacket, her close-cropped blond hair tousled, quiet and unobtrusive as a young Lindbergh. She looked at me with a small lonely smile and said, 'Do you think I can make it?' and I grinned back, ‘You bet.'"

In her Lockheed Vega monoplane, equipped with wheels rather than floats, she took off from Harbor Grace on May 20, 1932. She had been assured of favorable flying conditions over the Atlantic, but when she climbed and leveled off at 12,000 feet, the weather changed with savage quickness. An hour-long storm buffeted her plane, but she dared not climb above it for fear of ice collecting on the wings.

Tense and exhausted, her luck held and she landed in a pasture in Londonderry 15 hours and 18 minutes after takeoff—more than five hours faster than the "Friendship" flight. When a farmer first saw her in the cockpit, she waved and announced, "I've come from America!"

If Amelia was soft-spoken and shy, she could be blunt and outspoken about feminism. "I do think," she said, “American men are outstanding in their keen responsibility as providers. Now if they would only adopt the idea of getting into the kitchen once in a while, too, it would be a great help."

More on Page 18

Tomato Publications  
70 Barrow Street  
New York, NY 10014  

We are looking for graphic and written contributions.  

We pay for all work that we print. Write for details.  

FALL '76: Making a Backpack © Mouth C.  
Alice Austen @ Name Change © Coming Out © Giving Up Kids © Plus: analysis, letters, reviews, humor  

WINTER '76-'77: Beautiful 4 color poster and magazinelette  

FUTURE ISSUES SPRING '77 Ethnic Dykes, copy deadline Feb. 1st SUMMER '77 Animals, copy deadline May 13.