Technology

an

Judy Barlow

How do I start talking about technology? The area is so large and formid-
able that it is difficult if not impossible to approach. I could talk about
cloning and "test-tube" babies and the implications that this type of tech-
nology has for women and feminists. Or, I could start with an attack on the
capitalist system and how those with money determine which areas of techno-
logy will be developed and how they are applied, usually without regard for
the welfare of the people. I could talk about how I as a consumer financially
support technology that is damaging to me as a woman and as a feminist. I
could throw up my arms in despair and move to a "back-to-earth" community
and pride myself on living outside the system, but there is no guarantee that
the environment there will be untouched by the by-products of modern techno-
logy (radiation and pollution) or will not perish in the event of nuclear
warfare. I could talk about how technology has been taken away from the peo-
ple and used to hold us down and divide us. Or, I could talk about how mod-
ern technology has helped get women out of their homes and given them time for
more important things—how it has freed us while it has enslaved us. But
perhaps the best place to begin is with what is happening now and what impli-
cations current technologies have for our future.

“If new life forms were not pat-
entable, there would be little
incentive for corporations to
conduct research in the field.”

Genetics

Of all areas of biological research, the field of genetics offers some of
the most exciting and frightening prospects. There have already been succ-
essful cases of fertilization outside of the human body and nearly a quarter
of a million births have been the result of artificial insemination. Animal
fetuses have been kept alive in laboratories for extended periods of time.

The straight media extols the benefits of this technology while downplaying
the implications of the current research and where it all seems to be leading.

Scientists predict that within the next twenty years human fetuses will be
fertilized and kept alive until “birth” in fluid baths of artificial "wombs"
within the laboratory. The implications are incredible. One might foresee a
future where women lose their usefulness to men (making babies) and become
extinct. The technology involved in determining a fetus’ sex before birth is
already 90% effective. This information would allow those in charge to deter-
mine how many of each sex of children are "born." The female (or the male)
sex could conceivably be eliminated. But more on that later.

On March 29 of this year, General Electric (GE) and Upjohn were issued pat-
ents on microorganisms created in their research laboratories. General Elect-
ric received the patent on a bacteria that "eats" petroleum and Upjohn became
the "proud corporate parent" of a bacteria that produces the antibiotic linco-
mycin. The U.S. Court of Customs and Patent Appeals ruled 4 to 1 in favor of
GE and Upjohn and essentially said that they did not see any reason not to
issue patents on an invention "merely because it is alive."

The Court's ruling will certainly have an effect on the future of genetic
research. Fortune Magazine predicts that genetic engineering will soon be-
come a “multi-billion dollar enterprise." Many large corporations including
Standard Oil, Monsanto, Searle, Dupont, Eli Lilly, Miles Laboratories, and
numerous others are already involved in recombinant DNA research. The Court
of Customs and Patent Appeals has given those who have the money to fund gen-
etic research enormous financial incentives (the prospect of major profits)
by allowing ownership of life forms. How long will it take before Standard
Oil or another major corporation patents human life and offers it for sale to
the highest bidder in the marketplace?

Medicine

Current research in the field of medicine ranges from cryogenics (hiberna-
tion) to mood control through altering the chemical balance of the brain.
It is suggested that by intermittent slowing of the body processes, man (male
pronoun used intentionally) might live as much as 20 times longer. There is
no reason to believe that this technology will be used for the good of the
people. Probably only those who already have money and power will benefit.

Biochemical research into mood control by altering the biochemical balance
of the brain is not new. For years drug companies have marketed drugs such
as Lithium and Ritalin which actually alter the biochemical balance of the
brain. The government itself has used drugs along with indoctrination or
"brainwashing" techniques to force individuals suspected of large crimes
against the system to confess their crimes as well as to eliminate classified
or dangerous information from the minds of those who might use it against the
system's best interest. Scientists predict that by the year 2000 "chemicals
may be used to alter or eliminate specific memories” or possibly to transmit
certain kinds of knowledge. Just as the major drug companies have jumped on
the genetic engineering market, so is their interest in the marketability and
profits from the manufacture and sale of drugs which induce chemical intell-
igence or eliminate intelligence.

Contamination

What about the by-products of modern technology?—air, water, and soil con-
taminated by radiation, pesticides, or industrial wastes? Many people have
already died as a result of exposure to the hazardous by-products of modern
technology. People living in housing developments built over disposal sites
of Hooker Chemical Company in upstate New York and their subsequent increased
rates of chemical-induced illnesses have been in the news recently. Many homes
in Denver have recently been found to have been built over old uranium pilings.
Woman to Woman Bookcenter is only yards away from old radioactive uranium pil-
ings. People living in Utah and Nevada during atomic weapons testing from
1950 on have shown a dramatic increase in the rate of contraction of leukemia
and other cancers. Just as coal miners suffer black lung disease, so do many
workers in the fields of technology suffer from job-induced illnesses which
range from infertility to mental illness to specific forms of cancer. But
it does not stop here. Potentially toxic chemicals and other industrial
wastes have been dumped throughout the world. Hardly a day passes without
the local and national news media directing our attention to yet another case
of numerous deaths and/or illnesses directly related to chemical wastes.

But chemical wastes, for the most part, eventually break down or become inert,
although it may take centuries to do so, but this is not the case with nuclear
contamination. Still, nuclear wastes are "stored" throughout the world, many
of them near large cities and unsuspecting people. Even in the wake of Three
Mile Island American manufacturers of nuclear reactors are promoting sales of
their reactors abroad. One of their major sales incentives is to promise the
purchasers that all contaminated wastes may be returned to the United States
for disposal. It may take several generations before the total effect that
even low-level irradiation has on life forms.

Although the Environmental Protection Agency has set microwave leakage limits
(1-5 milliwatts per cm²) on microwave ovens sold in this country, our envir-
onment is already bombarded by excessive microwave radiation. Sources of
microwave contamination include the sun, television stations, factories,
electronic garage door openers, CB radios, police radios, televisions, and
many others too numerous to mention. Although the American consumer has been
made aware of the dangers of microwaves generated by microwave ovens, little
is said in public media about the other sources of microwaves in our envir-
onment. The media talks of radio frequency (R-F) or high frequency waves
when they actually mean microwave radiation as a means of not alarming the
public.

We are not even safe from modern technology in the food that we eat. Almost
all processed foods have potentially dangerous chemical ingredients. Even
fresh fruits and vegetables are likely to be coated with pesticides. Our
meat and poultry are likely to contain toxic chemicals and high levels of
hormones. Even the food that we grow ourselves is subject to environmental
pollution. We, ourselves, are totally vulnerable to the pollutants in our
environments. How many of us will die from diseases caused by contaminants
in the air we breathe, the water we drink, the food we eat, or the land we
live on? How many have already died never knowing that their deaths were
induced by pollutants in their environments?

Dumping Unsafe Technology

Each year thousands of products ranging from food and drugs to machinery
and hardware are forcibly removed from the U.S. market after they have been
proven dangerous. What happens when a product of modern technology is banned
from sale in this country? A corporation that has invested money in the re-
search and development, marketing, advertising, and manufacturing will not
voluntarily destroy a product because it is found unsafe for sale in this
country. Instead, they seek out markets overseas (Third World nations) and
with the aid of U.S. government agencies dump their products on unsuspecting
peoples. Others just move their entire factories to Third World countries
where there is also the bonus of a cheap labor force as well as lenient safety
standards.

In the November, 1979 issue of Mother Jones a series of feature articles on
dumping of dangerous U.S. products on Third World nations was published. The
following information on dumping is condensed from Mother Jones.