Women in Print: Spreading the Word  
Bookstores Discuss Skills, $$, Community Responsibility  

Fifteen of 85 feminist bookstores  
in the country were present at the  
Women in Print conference. In spite  
of the small number present, the  
stores represented a number of differ-  
ent geographical, structural and phil-  
osophical perspectives.  

* Geographically, all sectors of the  
country were represented, except for  
the Southeast.  

Most of the stores agreed that their  
primary goal is to make women's  
books available to women. The major-  
ity of the stores limit their stock  
to books by and about women. One  
store emphasizes books that are ori-  
ented towards lesbians. Three  

stores carry a significant selection  
of alternative and left movement  
books in addition to women's stock,  
and one store is a general bookstore  
with a strong feminist emphasis.  

All of the stores except one are  
open to both women and men customers,  
although many have specific areas  
"for women only."  

Location is also a factor in who  
the stores are trying to reach. Some  
stores are located in university com-  
munities and have a heavy emphasis on  
students. At least one store is lo-  
cated in a suburban community where  
many of its customers are middle-aged  
housewives. Four stores are located  
in inner city areas where there is a  

heavy concentration of poor and  
Third World women.  

Almost all the stores have some  
non-book related community outreach  
programs. These include community  
bulletin boards, community telephone  
lines, feminist classes, literature  
tables, speaker's bureaus, libraries,  
or meeting space for other feminist  
groups. At least two stores have  
special provisions for daycare. The  
degree to which their outreach pro-  
grams are developed and integrated  
into the stores varies greatly. Some  
places see themselves primarily as a  
bookstore—others see themselves as  
a community center.  

Five of the stores have been in  
operation for four or more years;  
three stores have been in operation  
less than a year. Financially,  
stores range in gross intake from  
$110,000 per year (two stores) to  
$10,000, with the higher gross in-  
comes from stores in large metropoli-  
tan areas on the East and West Coast.  

About half of the stores are run  
by fairly large, mostly open collec-  
tives. These stores have anywhere  
from six to twenty-five women in-  
volved in the day-to-day operations.  
The remaining stores are operated by  
small closed collectives (3-4 women)  
or co-partnerships.  

The majority of the stores felt  
some sort of payment to women work-  
ing in the project is important. The  
extent to which payment is possible  
depends on the size and political  
climate of the community in which the  
store is located, the political phil-  
osophy regarding salaries, and the  
size of the collective (how many  
women need to be paid.) Some stores  
have operated on a non-paying basis  

for several years or have only re-  
cently begun to pay workers.  

When money is paid, payments range  
from $50 a month to $100 a week.  
Small closed collectives or co-part-  
nerships are more likely to pay more.  
In most larger collectives the de-  
cision is to pay one or two of the  
women if payments are to be made. A-  
bout half of the stores are currently  
paying some form of compensation to  
at least some of the women who work  
in the store.  

The diversity among the stores cre-  
ated a number of different emphases  
in the workshops. Stores with large  
open collectives felt a greater need  
to discuss interstaff structures than  
small tight collectives where inter-  
communications are not as much of a  
problem. Stores with less capital  
worried more about what books they  
should and shouldn't buy since they  
have less money to work with.  

One thing all the stores have in  
common is the day-to-day necessity  
of maintaining their business opera-  
tions and doing so as efficiently as  
possible. Skill sharing workshops on  
book ordering, bookkeeping and bill  
paying were consequently among the  
most important.  

One of the main areas of political  
discussion centered around censor-  
ship. As feminist stores we are all  
put in the position of determining  
what is feminist. Who determines  
this and how? Should we sell any-  
thing women in the community request  
or do the women who work in the store  
make the decisions? Are we there to  
serve or educate? How are we ac-  
countable to our community? In spe-  
cial areas such as literature on  
Third World women and lesbians there  

Printers & Presses: Owning the Means of Production  

Approximately eleven feminist  
presses were represented at the print  
ers workshops. Focuses of the dif-  
ferent groups varied widely from  
publishing to printing commercial  
work for women, and combinations in-  
between.  

The oldest women's press in the  
country, Oakland Women's Press Col-  
lective, prints and publishes origi-  
nal work that wouldn't be printed  
elsewhere. They finance each new  
book with the profits from the last.  
Although the Press has been in opera-  
tion consistently for the past seven  
years, it still struggles to stay a-  
live financially.  

Success is not measured only in  
financial terms for this Press. It  
has struggled to remain true to a  
collective structural form and pays  
minimal wages most of the time. It  
is slowly but surely expanding its  
capacity with new equipment. The  
work it puts out is pleasurably sim-  
ple, good quality printing, low pric-  
ed and well distributed.  

Diana Publishing also prints and  
publishes. Although it is newer, it  
has recently hired workers, and can  
print books much more economically  
than the rest of the presses at this  
point because it has a larger press.  
It also has equipment to perfect bind  
large books and offers that service  
to other feminist printers at a re-  
duced rate which, including shipping,  
is very competitive to any local  
binders. Diana's financial success  
can best be explained by its emphasis  
on the business aspects of printing  
and its policy of turning the capi-  
talist game to its own benefit.  

Tower Press in New York also has a  
large press and has started doing the  
printing for Dyke magazine. New York  
City provides a different atmosphere  
for its work than what most of the  
other feminist print shops experience.  
The Tower women claim to have a 40  
to 60% mark-up on their work to pay  
for labor and new equipment.  

The printing industry in New York  
is so huge that they don't even try  
to compete with the big shops. Still,  
they are the only shop that can keep  
two telephones busy all the time with  
incoming orders.  

Other advantages of working in the  
City are that equipment is easily  
available and can be bought cheaply.  
Amazingly enough, paper is about  
half as expensive in New York as in  
Oregon where it is made.  

In contrast to the 40% mark up,  
Tiamut Press in Austin, Texas charges  
little or nothing for labor for  
groups it feels a need to support po-  
litically. It can't afford to pay  
workers yet, but the women say it is  
more important to them to grow poli-  
tically and as a business at the  
same time even if it means that they  
grow slower.  

The newest presses are Charlotte  
Lesbian Press in North Carolina,  
which is still trying to get its an-  
cient multilith to run, and Denver's  
very own Emerging Woman Press (see  
article this issue). One of the most  

impressive print shops represented  
was Iowa City Women's Press, which  
facilitated most of the technical  
workshops. The women brought examples  
of some beautiful work done on a small  
multilith which were more than is  
usually expected of such a machine.  

The major issue of concern among  
the printers was the feeling that  
printing per se is not valued as an  
integral and inherently political  
part of the process by women who work  
as writers, publishers, in bookstores  
etc. In reality, freedom of the press  
belongs to those who own the press, so  
it is very important for women to own  
the means of production in the even-  

tuality that the "male press" is made  
unavailable to us. The printing in-  
dustry is also an ideal place for wo-  
men to learn non-traditional skills  
and at the same time contribute to the  
growth of the movement and work in a  
supportive environment.  

Printers expressed that in their ex-  
perience most women distrust the abi-  
lity of feminist print shops to do a  
consistently good job. They tend to  
expect more in the way of service and  
to pay less than they would a male  
printer. Unfortunately, printing is  
a field where technical sophistication  
(read: expensive equipment) is di-  
rectly related to ability to do quali-  
ty work inexpensively. No feminist  
press at this time can afford the  
half-million-dollar press necessary  
to print long press runs of books like  
those published by Daughters, Inc.  

(Daughters publishes books, which  
means it does everything except the  
actual printing, which is contracted  
out.)  

Even smaller demands are difficult  
to meet on the antiquated equipment  
on which most feminist shops work  
miracles. The point was made that the  
capacity of each press must be fully  
utilized by the women in that area if  
it is ever expected to expand enough  
to serve all of women's printing  
needs.  

The printers present made a verbal  
agreement to work cooperatively ra-  
ther than competitively. Rather than  
bid on jobs against each other they  
plan to refer women to the geographi-  
cally closest shop capable of doing  
the work needed. To facilitate this  
agreement they plan to print a month-  
ly inter-shop newsletter with news,  
technical information, ideas for  
training and apprenticeship programs,  
personnel exchanges, and whatever  
else comes up.  

As a whole, the printers felt good  
about the conference, got a lot out  
of it, and liked each other. They  
got a good sense of where they stood  
with the rest of the women-in-print  
community and the areas where they  
were collectively strong and what  
they need to work towards.  

The technical information shared  
and examples of possible directions  
available were especially inspira-  
tional to the new presses.  

There are few books available and even few-  
er places which distribute the ma-  
terial. Consequently, in these areas  
more flexible criteria were suggested.  
At the same time participants fre-  
quently found themselves more judge-  
mental of material that specifically  
described itself as feminist or les-  
bian feminist because such material  
is seen as the voice of our move-  
ment.  

There did seem to be a general  
feeling that a responsibility exists  
to discuss any evaluation of speci-  
fically feminist materials with the  
writers and, if the works are pub-  
lished by a feminist publisher, with  
that publisher. Two publishers who  
put out materials that are particu-  
larly controversial—one publishes a  
lesbian separatist periodical, the  
other publishes material that some  
stores felt was heterosexist—were  
invited to a bookstore workshop to  
discuss their publications.  

The degree to which a feminist busi-  
ness is compatible with a political  
project was another issue raised in  
the workshops. For example, how will  
potential profits and salaries affect  
the political goals and structure of  
the project? (i.e., is it easier to run  
a business and pay better salaries  
with a small closed collective in-  
stead of a large community-based col-  
lective? If a large collective  
chooses to pay one or two of its mem-  
bers, how does it deal with the po-  
tential power hierarchy? Do we  
choose to pay salaries to project  
workers rather than providing mater-  
ials at cost, to women who could not  
afford them? Should we try to become  
a big enough business to pay adequate  
rather than subsistence wages?)  

Most women seemed to feel that a  
sufficient business base that pro-  
vides even minimal salaries eliminates  
the "volunteer" ethic and provides the  
project with stability, greater effi-  
ciency and less burnout. It was also  
suggested that providing wages would  
enable more poor women (many of whom  
are also Third World) to take part in  
the project. The majority of the  
stores which paid salaries said they  
would continue their projects even if  
they could not afford to pay them-  
selves.  

During the week, most of us felt  
that we got to know more about each  
other and each other's projects. As  
a whole, we felt the exchange of in-  
formation was valuable and foresee  
a lot of increased interaction be-  
tween feminist bookstores in the fu-  
ture. Two specific group projects  
resulted from the conference. The  
first is a group letter to be sent  
to Penguin protesting the anti-woman  
cover designs on Edna O'Brien books.  
The second is a skills newsletter  
which was established between the  
stores to provide ongoing communica-  
tion during the coming year. For  
feminist bookstores who didn't attend  
the conference but would like to re-  
ceive the newsletter, please contact  
C.S. in care of A Woman's Place,  
Oakland, California.  

News, analysis, interviews & poetry  
$5.00 yr. ($10.00 inst/overseas)  
$1.00 single issue  
THE TIDE COLLECTIVE, 1006 Ocean Ave.  
#8, Santa Monica, Calif. 90403  
(213) 839-7254