Martha’s FEN Article Appalis Olivia

Jennifer Woodul  
for the Olivia collective  

Shortly after we began printing  
the Martha Shelley FEN series, we re-  
ceived the following paper from  
Olivia. After an hour-long telephone  
conversation with Olivia to clarify  
certain of their points, we decided  
to edit the original article for  
length only. The editorial on page  
4 gives our position in this FEN  
debate we have printed.  

At the end of January, along with  
many other women and women's organ-  
izations around the country, we women  
at Olivia Records received a docu-  
ment called "What is FEN," written  
by Martha Shelley. Presumably,  
feelings of feminist responsibility  
prompted Martha to compile this re-  
port—we are aware of and respectful  
of the work she's done in the past.  
However, my sisters at Olivia and I  
were astounded to read such a sloppy  
piece of research, supported by evi-  
dence and logic more sensational than  
substantive, and accompanied by a  
political analysis which is start-  
lingly facile and utterly non-produc-  

tive.  

We feel it's important for us to  
issue a response since Olivia was  
mentioned twice in the report. This  
is not meant to be our last word on  
the subject of a feminist economic  
network. My purpose here is limited.  
We have some areas of immediate con-  
cern with regard to the Martha  
Shelley report: The portrayal of  
Olivia Records and other women as  
"victims." The unprincipled "re-  
search" methods used by Martha  
Shelley to support her opinions. The  
use of capitalist and patriarchal  
values to discredit the women of FEN,  
and the trashing tactic of calling  
"fascism." And finally, we want to  
let feminists know directly from the  
women of Olivia Records what our re-  
lationship is to the idea and the  
women of FEN.  

The tone of Martha Shelley's arti-  
cle implies a certain powerlessness,  
passivity, and general wimpiness on  
the part of most of the women who  
have been in contact with OFWHC or  
FEN. We object to this character-  
ization; frankly, it's a bit hard to  
believe. But leaving aside for the  
moment women that we don't know, we  
do know that Olivia Records is no  
victim about to be swallowed by any  
monster. Olivia Records is function-  
ing and flourishing collectively just  
as we have for the last four years.  

We are appalled by Martha's meth-  
ods. Early on she makes the claim  
that she has attempted to write a  
responsible "report" through thorough  
"research" and "analysis of the data."  
Yet many of her basic assertions are  
unsubstantiated. In a discussion of  
violence (See BMR's April issue—Ed.)  
Martha says: "I would like to in-  
clude two further instances of FEN's  
use of violence..." She goes on to  
describe an incident in which Nancy  
Stockwell's (a former member of Plex-  
us) car was damaged—the conclusion  
of which is that Nancy "is reluctant  
to blame the women of FEN" since  
there are no clear indications that  
they had anything to do with it. Is  
this the proof that allows Martha  
Shelley to attribute the incident to  
FEN?  

As research, there is a glaring  
absence of effort to control the  
researcher's bias in the fact that  
scarcely any testimony is included  
from the women currently working at  
the OFWHC, or from the women who  
were the principals of FEN.  

Martha Shelley declares the OFWHC  
to be "structurally" racist (See  

BMR's March issue—Ed.) In fact,  
what Martha described is exactly the  
opposite of "structural" racism. I  
challenge any woman who works in the  
movement to point out the difference  
between Martha's description of the  
OFWHC and the movement as a whole  
with regard to racism. Few white  
women in this movement have yet made  
racism a priority necessitating im-  
mediate and concrete change. No one  
is excused for this state of affairs,  
but I object to OFWHC taking the rap  
for most white women in the movement.  

Furthermore, if the OFWHC were  
"structurally" racist, it's hard to  
understand why Nancy Eng "now feels  
she was in favor because she was  
Asian...They promoted her to director  
in 3 months..." (BMR March issue) Are  
we to believe that the value audit  
has a checkpoint for "racial compo-  
sition" at every level in order to  
systematically ensure that the com-  
position is white only? Especially  
in view of Nancy Eng's feelings about  
her favored status, it stretches cre-  
dibility, and the contradictions  
chafe.  

Martha Shelley deals with political  
differences, particularly those in-  
volving support or non-support of men  
on the level of personal insensitiv-  
ity. We all have many choices to  
make and how we make them is of for-  
midable political significance. When  
one woman's politics are juxtaposed  
with another's, the result may not be  
"comfortable." But to attribute  
these differences to personal cruelty  
is to misrepresent the conflict.  

There is an attitude of sensation-  
alism in Martha Shelley's report.  

One of the first things she has to  
say is that she "was warned that my  
investigation might result in acts  

of violence against me." She doesn't  
say where these warnings came from.  
Are we to infer that they came from  
the women of FEN? When? And what  
was the nature of these threats?  

In the section on violence in the  
building in Detroit (April BMR), we  
are informed that there were security  
guards with guns and clubs. In the  
ensuing fracas, the individual guards  
take different sides. Ultimately,  
"no one blew it by using guns or  
clubs." Then why, in view of these  
events, are we to be so concerned  
about guns and clubs? And what in-  
sanity would require Martha Shelley  
to state that "the other woman is in  

the hospital" being treated for blood  
clots which may kill her," although  
"Belita says they are unrelated to  
the assault." I'm not complaining  
that Martha's report lacks objectiv-  
ity. We have enough liberalism to  
contend with without proposing that  
we aim to achieve it. I complain  
about irresponsibility and I'm shock-  
ed at how rampant it runs through  
this paper.  

The physical violence which did  
occur at the building in Detroit was  
apparently contributed to by both  
sides. Actions which are physically  
violent should be looked at in the  
context of the violence, psychologi-  
cal and political, that surround them.  
There is surely a class-related bias  
inherent in attitudes towards physi-  
cal violence which reflect a double  
standard when compared to psycholog-  
ical violence. For example, Martha  
Shelley dismissed the possibility  
that women of FEN felt attacked,  
since she saw "no evidence of proper-  
ty damage, nobody tried to break  
windows or set fire to the furniture."  
From my vantage point in Los Angeles,  
reading the press coverage of FEN, I  
could've sworn they were being at-  
tacked.  

Martha Shelley seems ambivalent at  
best—certainly confused—regarding  
her discovery of certain legal struc-  
tures and arrangements set up to com-  
ply with the Man's law. For example,  
"the 'matriarchal vision' boils down  
to a giant holding company...don't  
cry 'holding companies are illegal'...the  
FEN women will dismiss you by  
saying 'that's patriarchal law. What  
does it have to do with us?'...but  
law or no law, the only purpose of  

holding companies and interlocking  
directorates is to consolidate power  
in the hands of a few. It is not as  
the FEN women claim, to put power in  
the hands of all women."  

You can bet that Olivia Records  
tried to set up a non-profit corpor-  
ation which could receive funds from  
a profit-making project. (By this,  
we don't mean personal profit, but  
profit for the women's movement.)  

IRS categories of non-profit and pro-  
fit should not be construed to re-  
present ideological perspectives, as  
does Martha Shelley. Being profit  
or non-profit determines how much  
you pay in taxes, how you can spend  
your money, and who owns your corpor-  
ation. It has nothing to do with how  
much salaries are, or whether you're  
charging more for your goods and ser-  
vices than they cost you.  

There are many purposes for holding  
companies—one of the most relevant  
of which is the elimination of waste-  
ful duplication of facilities with  
a consequent lowering of costs. As  
feminists, especially those of us who  
think that competition among our-  
selves is irrelevant and inappropri-  
ate to feminist goals, we might con-  
sider the holding company as a struc-  
ture from the Man's world that we  
could use to facilitate our sharing  
of resources. Holding companies are  
not illegal, as implied.  

We talk a lot about money,  
feminism, structure, resource  

sharing, and visions.  

It would seem to be a true misdir-  
ection of our energy to run around  
exposing feminist enterprises for  
their compliance with or attempts to  
circumvent the Man's law. In order  
for Olivia Records to address its  
goals, it's basic that we create an  
external structure to comply with the  
law. This doesn't affect the fact  
that we operate internally as a fem-  
inist collective. Criticism is more  
appropriately addressed to the inter-  
nal—not the external—operational  
structure. We don't run this endea-  
vor like an open meeting either.  

Like any other group, a feminist bus-  
iness must be run by women who share  
common politics and a trust that  
comes from working together around  
them.  

A few words about the value-audit.  
Martha says, "Read this. Study it.  
Think: Who would want such informa-  
tion about your group? Its legiti-  
mate and illegitimate activities...?"  
As a group of women working hard to  
build a movement, we at Olivia would  
like to say "we would!" In the day  
to day struggle, any woman or group  
of women may lose sight of the rela-  
tionship of current operations, pro-  
cess, and dynamics to her long-range  
goals. Concrete methods of evalua-  

tion are helpful and revealing. An  
underlying assumption would be that  
no group would participate in a val-  
ue-audit, or any organization which  
promoted value-audits, against its  
own will.  

My exhaustion and disgust reached  
its limit when I arrived at the last  
section, Fascism. Martha Shelley's  
pains and research lead her to de-  
cide that the women of FEN are fas-  
cist. The hearts of feminist women  
around the country must be downright  
heavy if and when they make it to  
this vapid conclusion—a well-worn  
substitute for responsible analysis.  

Neither you nor I can probably bear  
further comment on this disappoint-  
ment.  

Martha ends with a list of ques-  
tions for feminists’ consideration.  
I've no quarrel with the questions.  
It's a shame she decided not to ad-  
dress them or relate them coherently  
to her report. For example, where  
are these "fortunes" and these "fav-  
ored few?" Martha tells us that one  
woman with a fortune is "going to  
purchase" the building in Detroit.  
Is that an improvement?—a more ac-  
ceptable process?—a more accessible  
structure?  

Olivia Records is no victim about  
to be swallowed by any monster.  

Meanwhile, back at Olivia, just  
what is our relationship to FEN—  
the idea? —the women? When we  
first heard about the idea, we wanted  
to be in on discussions of it. We  
became interested in a feminist econ-  
omic network because it represented  
a logical next step for us and for  
feminists doing similar work.  

We began to study the possibilities.  
We wrote FEN—saying what the hell is  
going on? We read everything the  
feminist press reported and we be-  
came confused. We decided to go to  
the principals involved for informa-  
tion whenever we could—and we have  
done so—on both "sides." We are  
not in a position now—or probably  
ever—to speak to the "who did what's  
when" aspects of either OFWHC or FEN.  
We have developed respect for the  
idea of feminists sharing resources  
and developing them for women—for  
power for women, for political work,  
not for substituting women for men  
on the IBM board of directors. We  
have respect for the women we've be-  
come acquainted with: women from  
OFWHC, FEN, and Diana Press. Through  
our discussions and contact, we've  
developed respect for their hard  
work and their ideas and their fem-  
inist commitment and intention.  

The relationship that we currently  
enjoy with the above women is that  
we talk a lot about money, feminism,  
structure, resource sharing, and  
visions. We don't necessarily agree  
on everything. But we have agreed  
with them that we should further ex-  
plore these areas. We're hopeful  
that our combined experiences will  
benefit ourselves and other women  
who are vitally interested in the  
subjects.  

We intend to publish 6 issues of a  
political newspaper together so we  
can publicize this process and make  
it accessible to the women's move-  
ment at large. Pentacles by name, a  
newspaper only because the format is  
cheap, will be financed by Olivia,  
Diana Press and OFWHC. There will  
be no news, just political analysis  
and discussion of what we do with  
what we got. Any woman who's inter-  
ested in what Olivia or anyone else  
is or is not doing with (what was)  
FEN will then have a productive al-  
ternative.  

It is basic to our politics to  
expect that women will offer each  
other responsible criticism and feed-  
back. We are very concerned about  
the reactions of politically respon-  
sible women to the issues involving  
FEN, OFWHC, and Diana Press. It is  
not our purpose to jump to the de-  
fense of these women; we feel that  
they can and ought to speak for them-  
selves. We do feel that when charges  
are made in an irresponsible manner,  
the political community must react  
to such methods. We are not asking  
people to be uncritical; criticism  
must be done for a constructive end,  
not to create fear and suspicion as  
its main effect.  

Anyone worried about Olivia, the  
Woman's Building, Chrysalis, or any-  
one else should communicate directly  
with them—certainly not through  
Martha Shelley. We at Olivia will  
be glad to update the movement on  
any major changes in our direction  
or alliance.