hot briefs

New Date For Saxe Trial

January 10, is the new trial date for Susan Saxe, whose first trial - on charges of armed robbery and murder ended Oct. 13, with a hung jury mistrial. (See November 26)

The case has been assigned to Superior Court Judge James Roy in Boston. Chief Justice Walter McLaughlin, who tried the first case, will be retiring in January. Both sides were given until December 1, to file motions concerning the trial.

FEN Folds

The Feminist Economic Network (FEN), which had received heavy criticism from the feminist community for its operating methods, dissolved on September 2.

FEN had occupied the Women's City Club in Detroit since April, 1976, but turned it over to the Detroit Feminist Federal Credit Union as payment for a $250,000 loan.

FEN has since filed bankruptcy and the Credit Union has put the Women's City Club up for sale. A new group of women is leasing the club until a buyer can be found.

Land Returned to Owners

Puyallup Indians left their week-long armed occupation of a Washington state juvenile facility November 1, after getting a promise the 33-acre facility would be turned over to the tribe.

Tribal leader Ramona Bennett signed an agreement with the government minutes before a court-ordered deadline to remove the occupants.

"This was our last resort to get our land back," said Roleen Hargrove, tribal spokeswoman, "If we hadn't come to the occupation, it probably would have been years before we would have gotten anything."

Woman Wins VD Suit

A Washington D.C. woman was recently awarded $1.3 million in damages from the man who infected her with gonorrhea. The infection left her sterile and subject to frequent pain.

The suit, fought in Wyoming, is believed to be the first of its kind in the country.

The case was brought by Margaret Housen against tobacco heir Angier St. George Biddle Duke, who argued that he had been cured of VD before he met Housen.

Housen's attorney hailed the decision as a victory against the "suffering of women everywhere." However, the decision still faces motions for dismissal and mistrial and then an appeal to the Wyoming Supreme Court.

Gay Community News

A First For Second Sex

Author Simone De Beauvoir has asked British Broadcasting Company film director Mai Zetterling to co-produce a seven-hour TV documentary based on De Beauvoir's book, The Second Sex. Zetterling has formed a group called the Women's Film Association to seek funds for the project, which will be filmed in several countries.

High Times Magazine

International Feminism

A group of women who met at a lesbian-feminist conference last year are planning to produce an international feminist newsletter, aimed at sharing information and building theory.

The group, which calls itself the International Feminist Network, contends that internationalism is a political and tactical necessity for any revolutionary movement.

IFN urges women to send project ideas, contact suggestions or news of ongoing work in this area to: Denia Rollo, 35-22 146th St., Flushing, N.Y. 11354

Majority Report

Stewardesses Beat TWA

A federal judge ruled that TWA discriminated against stewardesses whom the airline laid off due to pregnancy, and then refused to re-hire. A similar ruling was brought last spring against American Airlines.

Although damages have not been set, TWA and American Airlines might have to pay up to $19 million to stewardesses who lost their jobs because of pregnancy discrimination.

Earth News

Pregnant Students Lose

Six schools for pregnant students in New York City will close in February because of budget cutbacks.

The closings, which are strongly opposed by community groups, affect 2,000 young women who will lose the supportive services they now have when they are forced to return to regular classes. Many are expected to drop out.

There is widespread feeling that these schools—which are located in low-income areas where other social services have already been slashed—were an easy target.

ENS

Mustn’t Talk Back

A newspaper is like a woman, Daily Mail editor David English recently told a conference of newspaper people. “It is a living thing with a personality. It must be interesting, amusing, provocative, and most of all, it must be a friend.”

And furthermore, it mustn't talk back.

Women's Report

Marriage at Twelve

In India a bill has been introduced which would give child brides the right to repudiate their marriages once they reach the age of eighteen. Most Indian women are married as young as ten or twelve. The bill will also make divorce easier for Hindus, who constitute 80% of the population. Until twenty years ago divorce was unknown in Hindu society.

Women's Report

Crimes in Argentina

Crimes against women continue to increase in Argentina, where harsher laws and treatment accorded political prisoners have reached intolerable levels.

The New York-based Argentine Information and Solidarity Committee urges people to write letters of protest.

Reports of torture have included such atrocities as handcuffing women during the last few minutes of labor, dismembering live bodies and refusing even minimal health care to women and children.

Write to: Ambassador Musich, Argentine Embassy, Washington, D.C. or General Jorge Videla, President of the Republic, Casa Rosada, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Majority Report

Forcing the Union to Pay

The United Garment Workers have finally agreed to pay for the translation and copying of its contract into Chinese. While approximately 60% of Seattle's garment workers are Asian, with 40% Chinese, previously no translators were allowed at union meetings.

Though 80% of the Chinese garment workers do not understand English at all.

Northwest Passage

The contract was only available in English.

Costly Degree

It took persistence, but Princess Rima, 18-year-old daughter of Prince Talal of Saudi Arabia has won the right to a college education.

Beginning this year, Princess Rima will study at home through a unique course of study arranged by the University of Houston's Open University Program. Her planned B.A. degree in psychology is expected to cost hundreds of thousands of dollars.

Houston University educators believe the precedent might make a long-run difference in the education of Saudi Arabian women.

The Saudi government's five-year improvement plan calls for more education for women, but so far that's merely a paper promise, even for the rich.

Few women enter high school and only a relative handful have gone further. In contrast, more than 6,000 Saudi Arabian men attend college in the US alone. For women, the "temptations" of campus life are forbidden.

All Saudi schools are sex-segregated. Until two years ago, women's photos were not allowed on that country's passports.

A Nun’s Right

A few months ago a bank in Bologna, Italy bought an institution where several nuns had worked for years. The sisters then found themselves out on the street. Seventeen applied for unemployment compensation.

Bank lawyers argued the nuns were ineligible for benefits because their work was purely humanitarian. The court ruled, however, that nuns, like all Italian workers, deserve the benefits.

In Italy approximately 150,000 nuns are employed in nursing and child care facilities.

Baby Selling

Four attorneys, including one who helped write New Jersey's adoption law, were indicted recently on charges of selling out-of-state babies for as much as $9,000. The indictments deal with ten adoptions since 1972 in which the parents paid for children from Michigan, Illinois, and California.

In many instances, the attorneys made a deal with the natural mother before the infant was born.

The indictments did not say how much the attorneys kept and how much money went to the mothers.

Housework Still Doesn’t Pay

A nationwide drive opened in November to enforce the extension of federal minimum wage laws to 1.5 million maids, cooks and other domestic workers. The campaign is coordinated by the National Committee on Household Employment, which won federal minimum wage coverage of $2.20 an hour for household workers in 1974, after a 10-year struggle. Since then, enforcement of that law has been almost non-existent.

Household workers have a median yearly income of only $2,700 per year: 97 percent of them are women, 54 percent are Black and the median age is 50.

A Little Cancer Won’t Hurt

Outgoing US Food and Drug Administrator Alexander Schmidt is worried that the government may end up "banning things right and left" unless it is allowed to let some possible cancer-causing substances remain in our food, air and water.

"Society may have to weigh the risks from some substances which might cause cancer against their benefits in the future," Schmidt told United Press International last month.

He did not say, however, just exactly who might receive the benefits, and who would bear the risks.

Drugs and the Third World

Britain and the Third World—"Who Needs the Drug Companies," is a carefully documented study of the drug business, particularly as it affects Third World women. Written by four women, the booklet is available for 50 pence from Third World Publications, 138 Stratford Road, Birmingham B11 1AG, England.

(Note: We too were wondering and 50 pence or its American equivalent through the mail. )

Sole Survivor in Chile

In the women's political prison in Santiago, Chile, Gladys Perez is the only one left alive of all the women she was arrested with following the military coup.

Other women in the camp have reported rape and electric torture, allegations which the Secretary General of the Organization of American States has ignored.

He described the condition of the 50 women prisoners as “acceptable.”

The International Herald Tribune

Abortion Illegal in Portugal

Women lawyers working through the Democratic Women's Rights Movement in Portugal have completed their list of feminist demands. Although the new Portuguese constitution guarantees equal pay and insists that working women should be paid their full salary before and after childbirth, the guarantees have only recently gone into effect.

The constitution does not mention abortion, and therefore, under the law of the previous regime, abortion is still illegal. Hundreds of the more than 150,000 abortions performed in Portugal each year are fatal due to unsafe conditions.

Women's Report (Britain)

Holland Abortion Crack-down

For the second time in two years an attempt has been made to close down the Bloemenhove Abortion Clinic, the only one in the Netherlands which will terminate pregnancies over 12 weeks.

Over a thousand people, mostly women, protested at the closure, breaking into wards locked by bailiffs. At present, abortion clinics are technically illegal, though they are tolerated by authorities while abortion law reform is being debated.

Women's Report

WOMAN'S NEWS

Vast Amity Street
New York, N.Y. 10001