Celebration of International Women’s Day

Susanna

The celebration of International  
Women's Day was held on Saturday,  
April 15, having been postponed from  
March 4 because of threats of bad  
weather. Approximately 100 women  
turned out for the march from Mestizo  
Park to the state capitol, despite  
cloudy skies. The march was spirited,  
with singing, chanting and shouting,  
“Power to the women, power to the  
working class." Colorful banners, with  
slogans such as, "Stop all violence  
against women," "Support national lib-  
eration," "Organize the unorganized,"  
were carried by many marchers.

The march culminated in a rally on  
the steps of the state capitol.  
Speeches were given on the six major  
demands of the day.

Diane Scheeler, a welfare mother,  
spoke on the way the welfare system  
attempts to control those who need it.  
Persons on welfare are made to feel  
guilty, as though they are getting  
something for nothing, whereas they  
are really a surplus labor pool and  
made to work at degrading tasks for  
no pay in order to receive their wel-  
fare checks.

Irene Gutierrez, a Chicana, brought  
up particular issues of the undocu-  
mented woman worker. All undocument-  
ed workers are made to feel as  
though they are stealing from this  
country, when actually they are ful-  
filling a need for someone to do the  
dirty work, the lowest paying, worst  
jobs in this country. There is a par-  
ticular demand for women as domestics.

Undocumented women workers are under  
continual threats of deportation and  
humiliation, which often includes  
sexual harassment and rape, she said.

Lori Bradford, Judy Barlow, Eileen  
Bresnahan and Bobbe Ross all gave  
examples of the way all women are  
brutalized and humiliated throughout  
their lives - in school, home and the  
workplace. They gave ways that women  
of all ages and walks of life are  
fighting back, and they encourage  
women to organize collectively to  
fight back against violence against  
women.

Kim Womantree spoke on the common  
interests of lesbians and heterosex-  
ual women - they are both united as  
women and as being oppressed at the  
workplace. She also said that in a  
relationship, whether lesbian or het-  

erosexual, it is feminism that deter-  
mines the quality of it. Lesbians  
have to be blatant, she stated, in  
order for people to recognize that  
they do have choices.

A member of the Eritrean Student  
Association in North America, Colorado  
Chapter, Tsehai Habte-Mariam, talked  
about the double exploitation of wo-  
men in a colonial situation, both by  
the colonizing government and by the  
feudal patriarchal system. Women are  
participating in large numbers in the  
Eritrean People's Liberation Front,  
she said, and women's emancipation  
can only be realized under a social-  
ist system.

Beki Pastor, a nursing student,  
spoke on the historical roots of  
women in the workforce, and in unions.

Women’s Employment Service

Virginia Neal

Constance Perenyi

On April 11, two representatives,  
Sarah Falion and Jeffi Garcia, from  
the Virginia Neal Blue Resource Center  
held a community meeting to explain  
the workings of the Denver Job Develop-  
ment Project. Funded through Denver  
Manpower with a CETA grant that ter-  
minates in May, the center is staffed  
by women whose aim is to improve em-  
ployment and training opportunities  
available to Denver-area women. Vir-  
ginia Neal Blue develops jobs for women  
by contacting employers for possible  
employment openings, as well as provid-  
ing free job counseling. Career/voca-  
tional planning, resume writing, filing  
applications, and interview preparation  
are some of the workshops offered by  
the center.

Falion and Garcia expressed special  
concern for reaching minority women  
through their Action Center locations  
and cited specific needs such as trans-  
portation and childcare which are real  
obstacles for many women they see.

Blue Center

Throughout the meeting, both women  
talked about their roles as job devel-  
opers, emphasizing that job discrimin-  
ation continues to thrive despite  
changing statistics. They see them-  
selves as educators, who, by providing  
a free recruiting service for local  
businesses, are in a position to dis-  
courage stereotypes and promote the  
idea of non-traditional jobs for women.  
And because of much subtle discrimina-  
tion by employers they meet, this facet  
is the greatest challenge for the Vir-  
ginia Neal Blue Center.

Many of the services offered by Vir-  
ginia Neal Blue will be lost when their  
grant expires this month. While some  
of the women will continue with the  
center on a volunteer basis, the pro-  
ject will be curtailed and unable to  
reach as many women and employers,  
until other funding is arranged. More  
information can be obtained through  
contacting the Virginia Neal Blue Cen-  
ter, 1800 Pontiac, Denver, every week-  
day between 9 and 5.

and how the "right-to-work” laws neg-  
atively affect unions and women try-  
ing to organize themselves into un-  
ions. She talked of the need for  
women to organize themselves and get  
their needs, such as childcare, no  
forced overtime and higher pay, met  
in unions.

It rained for a short time at the  
rally, but the sun eventually came  
through and warmed everyone. Singing,  
led by Andrea Gabriel, Angie Denov,  
Kim Womantree and Diane Scheeler,  
helped keep us warm and together.  
Phyllis Kadison did an excellent job  
as M.C.

The rally took somewhat longer than  
anticipated and the workshops, held  
at the University of Colorado at Den-  
ver, started an hour late. This also  
gave those who were hungry (by then,  
everyone!) a chance to taste the  
chili and cornbread cooked by the  
male members of the Radical Informa-  
tion Project bookstore.

The workshops were well planned  
and future actions are to come out of  
many of them. Many women who hadn't  
come to either the march or the rally  
participated in workshops.

The workshop on violence against  
women discussed different actions  
that could be taken by women to fight  
back against that, and 10 women are  
planning to start a chapter of Women  
Against Violence Against Women here  
in Denver as a result of the work-  
shop. Contact Judy or Lori, 388-8678,  
for more information.

In the workshop on workplace organ-  
izing, discussion centered around the  
“right-to-work" laws, and specific  
women's needs in their own unions, or  
their need to form a union. Several  
women are forming a group to work on  
these needs. Contact Angie, 322-3183,  
if you want to be part of this group.

The problems of undocumented workers,  
such as harassment, low pay and con-  
stant threat of deportation, were  
raised in a workshop on deportation.  
To do actions around these issues  
some people are organizing. To help,  
call 356-0753, or 356-9951 (Greeley).  
Women in the workshop on welfare  
discussed their specific problems,  
such as lack of daycare, harassment  
by the system that is supposed to help.  
MORE ON PAGE 10

Woman to Woman Holds  
Community Meeting

Sue Goding

On Tuesday, March 28, Woman to  
Woman held a community meeting to  
discuss the various parts of the  
Bookcenter, what they are doing now,  
how it has changed, and their future  
plans.

The Center is defined as “woman's  
space". This means that only women  
are allowed in the basement and in  
the seating areas. Recently the  
inside has been remodeled to make it  
more comfortable, such as taking  
down the partition that divided the  
rear seating area and stereo from  
the rest of the store. Free coffee  
and tea is available.

Woman to Woman stocks books on  
feminist theory, biography and auto-  
biography, health, lesbianism,  
poetry, and political theory as well  
as records, pins, t-shirts, and  
posters. A 20% discount is given to  
women on welfare, social security  
or food stamps.

The store, besides supporting the  
library, the switchboard, and other  
nonincome producing parts of the  
Bookcenter, gives donations to other  
feminist projects. The latest dona-  
tions went to the Auraria Women's  
Fair, the Big Mama Rag auction, and  
the Lesbian Follies.

Woman to Woman has a base expense  
each month of $401 for rent, loan  
payment, utilities, and Orkin exter-  
minators. In January Woman to Woman's  
income was $1626.18, its expenses  
were $1733.62. In February, its  
income was $1602.02, its expenses  
$1602.02. Expenses for March were  
$785.11. All monies beyond the base  
expenses are spent for restocking,  
maintenance, supporting other parts  
of the center and donations.

Most books are reviewed before be-  
ing stocked at Woman to Woman. Paula  
Sperry explained that when a new title  
is found, either through a staffer  
seeing it advertised or reviewed in a  
periodical or someone coming in and  
requesting it, a copy is purchased,  
reviewed, and then ordered in bulk to  
be sold in the store. Because of this  
process it can be as much as 2 months  
after a book is first ordered until it  
is in stock.

Titles from feminist presses are  
kept in stock as much as possible.

The book files have been redone so  
that it is now possible to call and  
ask if a certain book is in stock and  
receive an accurate answer.

The library at Woman to Woman was  
started to make books available to  
women who can’t afford to buy them and  
to women for research. The library  
tries to carry as much feminist liter-  
ature as possible, and when a new  
title is stocked in the store a copy  
is cataloged into the library. Period-  

icals and pamphlets are currently be-  
ing added to the library. There are  
800 books now cataloged, 180 of which  
are overdue.

In an effort to make their services  
known and therefore more available,  
Woman to Woman does publicity through  
public service announcements on radio  
stations, leafletting, newspaper ads,  
lit. tables at various events, inter-  
views, speaking engagements and word  
of mouth. Social events, such as  
films, theater, and a coffeehouse are  
held at the center where women can  
come and meet the collective members  
and learn about the services offered.

The switchboard at Woman to Woman  
is a referral service with information  
about topics such as abortion, housing  
legal aid, etc. Although it is not a  
counseling line, staffers talk to and  
try to help women in crisis situations.  
This month a workshop is being held  
for staffers on crisis intervention  
so that they will be better able to  
handle these calls.

The topic of each call is tallied  
so that the files can be expanded and  
updated to cover new services needed.  
At some future time Woman to Woman  
plans to have a 24-hour tape record-  
ing that will list other services wo-  
men in trouble can go to when the  
Bookcenter is not open.

The Woman School has been started  
again. This quarter, 22 classes are  
offered in such areas as mental and  
physical health, political awareness,  
fun and games and survival skills. The  
purpose of the school is to have  
classes taught by women to women and  

MORE ON PAGE 10