By Laura Barrett

Because her mouth was so cut up, Evelyn had trouble making herself understood. She was calling the police to report that her husband had violated the Restraining Order (R.O.) she had gotten from the court. He had entered the house and beaten her with a baseball bat until she was unconscious.

The officer asked if he was still there. She said he was not. The officer said that he was sorry, but there was nothing he could do because he couldn’t arrest her husband for probable cause of a misdemeanor. (Both assault and battery and contempt of court for violating the R.O. were civil misdemeanors in Massachusetts until August 16.)

The officer then asked her what she had done to make her husband attack her.

Evelyn hung up in disgust. She had barely enough energy to drag around the house, locking the doors and windows, and wouldn’t return.

*_* *

Evelyn is just one of countless women who are twice victimized first by an abusive man, and second by an unresponsive system.

But in recent years domestic violence against women is at last coming out of the bedroom and into the media and legislature. Two major improvements in Massachusetts are the passage of an important new Abuse Prevention Law, which will be fully in effect on Oct. 16, and an increase in the number and quality of refuges and supportive services for battered women.

Abuse is Common

It’s hard to know how common woman battering is, because, like rape, it is frequently unreported, and when it is reported the records are often too vague to be of much use. Nonetheless, a few statistics are revealing:

There are an estimated 28 million battered wives in the U.S. — more than half of all married women in the country.

70% of the assault victims seen in the emergency room of Boston City Hospital are women who have been attacked in their homes.

FBI statistics indicate that an incident of wife abuse occurs every 18 seconds in this country.

Police receive the same number of wife abuse calls in Norwalk, Connecticut, a city of 85,000 covering a wide socio-economic range, as they do in Harlem, an area of comparable size.

Society Accepts Abuse

What is unique to our times is not the magnitude of the problem, but the fact that woman battering is recognized as a problem at all. In nearly all patriarchal societies throughout history some form of wife beating has been considered a husband’s prerogative, and has been supported by the laws as well as social mores. For example, the expression “rule of thumb” is derived from an early American law that allowed the husband “the right to whip his wife, provided that he uses a switch no bigger than his thumb.”

Today woman beating is still a socially acceptable way for a man to keep order in the family. “Society says it’s okay, because the man is supposed to keep his wife and kids in line. It is society that is sick,” said Betsy, a 30-year-old woman who escaped from a brutal relationship with her husband 18 months ago. Betsy was willing to discuss her painful experiences because she is anxious for other women to know that they are not alone in their misery.

“They don’t think they are doing anything wrong,” added Sharon, Betsy’s soft-spoken 24-year-old roommate who lived with a violent man for four years. “They believe that all she’ll understand is a whack in the mouth.”

Even though many people have come to reject such institutionalized abuse, it’s easier to look the other way and claim that whatever goes on behind the closed doors of a home should remain a private matter.

Another popular prejudice that helps maintain the status quo is the belief that a battered woman generally “asks for it.” This argument dates from Freud who claimed that women were innately masochistic and neatly places the burden of guilt on the shoulders of the victim.

Even people who reject the theory that women actually want to be beaten, maimed, and killed often don’t understand why a woman stays with an abusing man after her first beating.

Why Stay?

The most obvious but often overlooked reason for staying with a violent man is that, if his outbursts of abuse are intermittent, between times he may demonstrate the qualities that attracted her to him in the first place. In short, she may still love him despite his “Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde” personality transformations — transformations that are often associated with, but not necessarily caused by, alcohol.

But love doesn’t flourish indefinitely in an abusive home; it’s almost invariably replaced by fear, insecurity, and a loss of self-esteem.

A woman who is beaten and insulted by the person who claimed or still claims to love her invariably suffers a tremendous loss of self-esteem. She often comes to believe that she deserves the beatings, no matter how minor the incident that triggers them.

“He'd hit me for not emptying the ash tray enough or for talking too much — things like that,” Sharon said. “I know of one woman who was hit for putting the peanut butter on the second shelf instead of the third. The more perfect you are, the more trivial the excuses for beating you.”

A battered woman rarely gets the external support she needs to make up her mind to leave. For one thing, society still considers divorce a failure, and there is a lot of family and peer pressure to stay married. For another, she is generally very isolated.

Equal Times September 11, 1978

Insecure themselves, abusive men are often highly jealous people who keep their women on a tight leash. Sharon said, “Often he won’t let you see your friends, or you’re embarrassed to have anyone over because you don’t know how he’ll behave. He’ll make horrible cracks about your parents, too. You’re really cut off. You forget who you are. His interpretation of you becomes your interpretation of yourself. For instance, if he tells you you’re fat, you believe it after a while, even if you aren’t.”

And again, society’s values seem to conspire with him to keep the victim indoors. Betsy told of staying at the library until closing time and taking night courses just so she could have an excuse to get out of the house at night. Her husband never needed an excuse; he went “drinking with the guys” or stayed late at work whenever he felt like it.

Low in self-esteem, fearful of the unknown, supported by neither family nor society — no wonder battered women have a hard time breaking the cycle. The decision to leave often comes when they realize that they could be killed or permanently maimed, or when he starts to beat the children.

However, once a woman makes the decision to leave, a long and rocky road, fraught with legal and financial potholes, lies between her imprisonment and her freedom.

Financial Stress

Often, women who want to leave their abusive partners are stopped by their own complete financial dependence. When children are involved, the problems multiply. Many battered women are ill-equipped to work because they lack experience, are saddled with child-rearing responsibilities, or are emotionally unstable. For the poorer mothers, the only answer is welfare, which provides too little too late.

Then, finding an apartment isn’t easy. In general, landlords have little sympathy for unmarried welfare recipients with children.