Constructive Destruction

Beyond Boycott: Strategies For Action

by Sabo Tage

Boycott is an obvious and necessary
weapon of resistance under capitalism;
by boycotting, the consumer refuses to
consume. Both the consumption of
goods and services and the instilling
of the virtue of consumption in her
children are primary roles of women
under patriarchal capitalism. To re-
fuse these roles is particularly sat-
isfying to those of us who are opposed
to capitalism and sex-role stereotyping.

Various organizations in the gay
community have called for a boycott of
Florida citrus products as a protest
against Anita Bryant's homophobic cru-
sade. Boycotts are only effective if
the boycotting population is great en-
ough. If all gay people honored the
citrus boycott (and the day that will
happen does not seem very near) it
would only affect sales by about 19%
(based on Kinsey's figures). Gay
Guerrillas, in their “Smash Tropicana”
flier, have called on the gay community
to move beyond boycott to sabotage:
they suggest that gay people go into
supermarkets with three-inch nails (or
similar objects) and puncture the tops
of Tropicana frozen orange juice cans.
Tropicana is a primary funder of Bryant
and, by extension, her anti-gay camp-
aign. Gay Guerrillas then suggest a
further escalation—taking the frozen
can over to the bags of white sugar,
and after ripping open the bag, punct-
uring the can there. There are plenty
of reasons to be opposed to the white
sugar industry—imperialism and agri-
business are the most obvious. Then
there is the harm white sugar itself
does to your body.

Once you get into the idea of sab-
otage in the supermarket, the possib-
ilities are endless. How about cooking
up a mess with coffee, dog food con-
taining whale meat, cigarettes, Gallo
wine, goose liver pâté, diet colas and
vaginal sprays?

The word sabotage comes from the
French word "sabot," a wooden shoe.

At the beginning of the French revol-
ution, factory workers threw their
sabots into the machinery, fucking up
the works as an act of resistance, and
these people were called "saboteurs."
Sabotage and boycotts are both examples
of direct action. Boycotting is, in a
sense, taking direct action by refusing
to act. A similar philosophy is invol-
ved in non-violent resistance. After
taking an initial stand (or more often,
seat), the non-violent resister refuses
to move of her/his own volition. This
is, essentially, appealing to the con-
science of others by offering oneself
as an example. In some cases, it is
more like offering oneself up as a
sacrificial lamb. It can be a good
action to take if there are cameras
filming the confrontation. The politic-
ally inspired fast is perhaps the ult-
imate in refusing to act. Obviously it
must be publicized in order to be eff-
ective.

While boycott is a kind of passive
resistance (refusing to do something),
sabotage is active resistance (doing
something). That is why sabotage is so
much more exciting, especially for
people who usually feel powerless.

The following are some contemporary
examples of sabotage and similar direct
actions: In California, a group of gay
men were offended by the heterosexism
of a billboard for Air Tahiti which ad-
vertised a straight couple, bikini-clad
walking on a beach hand-in-hand. They
tried to alter it at night but were

the Juice
That freezes
Gay Rights

stopped by the police, so they decided
that, rather than sneak around, they
would take a more direct approach. The
next day they simply appeared in paint-
ers' clothes and climbed a ladder to the
sign and changed the figure of the
woman into a man. No one made any at-
tempt to stop them.

The sign was left in its gay version
for quite some time. Finally some
"real" sign painters came and painted
over the altered figure, making it once
again a woman. (By this time the figure
was somewhat the worse for wear.) A
crowd formed while the sign was being
changed the second time and booed as
the couple was changed from gay to
straight. Now, to complete the cycle,
the figure of the man needs to be chan-
ged into a woman so that the billboard
will portray two lesbians walking hand-
in-hand.

A PRETTY FACE
ISN'T SAFE
IN THIS CITY.

LNS- Graphics
This was a direct action, not against
a product itself, but rather against
the advertising of the product.

While it's a fine thing that gay men
attacked this heterosexist billboard,
it should be pointed out that it was
their male privilege, as well as their
audacity, which permitted them to get
away with changing the sign in a crow-
ded place in the middle of the day; if
it had been a couple of women painters
they probably would have been challen-
ged.

Billboards have been defaced in a
number of ways. Sometimes the message
is changed, sometimes the offensive
image is just blocked out; in the case
of the latter, it is important to make
it clear why the billboard was offen-
sive. Altering a billboard is an act
of propaganda; the property damage is
minimal.

In one city in the Midwest, an
anarchist group called the Three
Stooges Revolutionary Brigade changed
an "I Found It" billboard to "I Found
Shit." All over the country women have
attacked the "A Pretty Face Isn't Safe
In This City" billboards, obliterating
them or changing them in various ways
so that they became truly messages ad-
vocating self-defense, instead of the
insidious and insulting rip-offs they
were originally.

Some Los Angeles women defaced a
billboard which showed a woman saying:
"I'm black and blue from the Rolling
Stones and I love it." The pictured
woman was bruised and her clothes were
torn. Women Against Violence Against
Women has called a boycott of Warner-
Electra-Atlantic because of their use
of record jackets showing women being
brutalized.

A parallel to the sabotage mentioned
above (nailing Tropicana) would be to
cause property damage to the records
inside the offensive jackets—a thumb

tack can quickly and easily be pushed
through the record and the jacket both.
An added touch would be to put a
sticker on the jacket which says "This
Insults Women" or something similar.
This way the records are damaged and
the reason why is understood. The
point of the Tropicana action is to
make it inconvenient for the supermark-
et to carry Tropicana; if the record
store keeps finding damaged records in-
side the offensive jackets, it may be
financially disadvantageous for them to
stock those records.

A lot of people get nervous at the
idea of property damage. Much of middle
class morality revolves around the san-
ctity of property. Respect for the
property of the rich is one of the
cornerstones of Amerikan justice. The
Man may not care about the welfare of
other people, but he definitely cares
about his property. This is precisely
why attacking it, or threatening to,
can be so effective. If you're unable
to appeal to his soul, try appealing to
his billfold. They're probably one and
the same.

There are still other forms of dir-
ect action; one of them is letter writ-
ing.

A man who was angered by the threat
posed by nuclear proliferation sent off
some very hot letters. Leigh Hauter
sent hundreds of envelopes containing a
teaspoon of low-grade uranium waste to
Amerika's power elite: the President,
congressmen, business executives, gov-
ernors, etc. The letter is worth quo-
ting in full:

"If it is a secretary opening this, I
would advise caution. Not because you
are in any immediate danger: you are in
no more of that than normal, but be-
cause of the dirt-like substance at the
bottom of this envelope.

Note the substance. It is radioact-
ive waste. If you have access to a
geiger counter, test it; you will see
it is radioactive.

Now I doubt that I have to remind
you of the hazards pertaining to nuc-
lear waste. These dangers have been
documented thousands of times.

Look what I have just done. This is
nuclear waste. You have just come in
contact with radiation. There is no
practical means for limiting access to
this material...it is a necessary by-
product of the entire nuclear industry,
an industry that is producing more and
more. What will happen when there are
tons and tons of this material, all of
it thousands of times more radioactive
than what you have just received? This
however, has not even touched upon the
issue of arms proliferation and use.

All of these are serious questions
that have not, unfortunately, been re-
alistically considered. Look at what
has just happened to you.”

Hauter told interviews (all inform-
ation from The Village Voice, Nov. 7,
1977) that he “just picked up" the rad-
ioactive waste. He has since dropped
out of view, and although the FBI is
looking for him, he has not been caught.

Direct action is affirming and in-
creasing your power.

One of the frustrating things about
being an Amerikan revolutionary is the
fact that, for the most part, the power
elite—the super rich—are hidden away.

Only in rare cases, like the Rock-
efellers, are the ruling class visible
targets. However, direct actions against
the ruling class and their property
are only one kind. Direct actions are
also done to inspire others. This is
called, in classical anarchist theory,
propaganda by the deed. This has been
the purpose of this article, to capture
and spark your imagination. I hope
that I have inspired readers to con-
sider and criticize the ideas presented
here. More than that, I hope you will
use your own creativity to go further.

Organization

~i MS

Fe Aerie)

ion. One hundred representatives will
be selected according to regional
quotas. The region will send 15 rep-
resentatives to Los Angeles from Denver,
Boulder, Phoenix, Tucson, and Albuquer-
que. NLO organizers require that del-
egates "should meet the following crtt-
eria: a) Lesbian-Feminists b) be vis-
ibly active in the lesbian movement
c) support the concept and intend to
work for a national lesbian organiza-
tion d) represent organizational diver-
sity e) send in a registration coupon
and check ($5.00) and receive an off -
icial confirmation letter.

Anyone wishing to be considered as a
representative to the NLO convention,
or to send ideas or support, write to:
Ad Hoc Committee to Form a National
Lesbian Organization, 8706 Cadillac Ave,
Los Angeles, California 90034. Linda
Fowler, Regional Coordinator can be
contacted at 1800 Gaylord Apt #1,
Denver, Colorado 80206.