Black Feminist Group Organizes

For the past three months, 25 black
women from all parts of the city have
been meeting to form the Denver Chap-
ter of the National Alliance of Black
Feminists. The Denver chapter will
be the second official chapter of the
NABF in the country.

The local chapter has already adopt-
ed the national's bill of rights,
holds regular meetings twice a month
and has applied for membership in the
Feminist Federal Credit Union. They
have also established one ongoing
consciousness-raising group and a
group to study the history of black
women and the black and women's move-
ments. Future plans include task
forces designed to implement the is-
sues in the Black Women's Bill of
Rights (reprinted below) and the de-
velopment of educational materials, a
speaker's bureau, a women's center,
peer counseling and speakouts.

Membership in the NABF is limited
to black women; however, orientation
sessions for women interested in be-
coming members will be open to all o-
ther groups and individuals who agree
with the goals of the NABF and are in-
terested in becoming affiliate mem-
bers. Black women who live in an area
which does not have a chapter can be-
come affiliate members. For women
who are interested in starting a chap-
ter in their area, both the Denver and
Chicago locals will be happy to send
speakers to that area to get things
going.

Why A NABF?

Mert Vaughn, one of the women active
in the local chapter, was also one of
the founders of the National Alliance.
When the women's movement first began
to receive some attention, she decid-
ed to see what was in it for her. She
attended several meetings of a women's
group where the great majority of the
women were white. She also partici-
pated in the Colorado Caucus of Black
Women, but felt that it only met li-
mited needs. In the summer of 1975
she met with a number of women who
had had similar experiences and they
decided to form the National Alliance
of Black Feminists. Mert feels that
the credit does not go to just a few
women, but that the Alliance grew out
of years of talking among many women
of the need for such an organization.
The NABF formed because it seemed to
be the right time to coalesce.

The NABF hopes to meet the specific
needs of black women that are not
dealt with in other alliances. "Black
women have always been on the bottom
of the totem pole--we still are. We
have to build some awareness and se-
curity in ourselves and others."

Mert Vaughn and Diane Fowler (a
secretary at the High Street Communi-
ty Center who happened in on the in-
terview) discussed a couple of the
problems they see as specific to
black women. At this point, the
black woman is not even a pawn of man-
ufacturers and advertisers. They
have yet to acknowledge her very exis-
tence. Beginning with the very sim-
ple, but real problem of trying to
get clothes and cosmetics, if you go
into any drugstore, you will find
hundreds of products to meet the “spe-
cial needs" of various hair and skin
types, but few if any of these pro-
ducts meet the needs of black women.
Mert pointed out that black women
have many different types of hair tex-
tures and skin tones, yet stocking
manufacturers seem to think that
black women all have one skin tone--
cinnamon.

Both Vaughn and Fowler were angered
by the stereotype of the black matri-
arch or earth mother. While the
stereotype of the strong, independent
black matriarch may seem glamorous

—

a

a

a

Peg Hickox

For black women who have faced dis-
criminatory housing, discriminatory
adoption regulations, and discrimina-
tory social service agencies like the
"welfare" system, the question is not
one of being "trapped" in the home,
but of the right to a stable home
life whether that "home" is comprised
of the woman alone, herself and her
mate, the single-parent family or any
other family unit most viable for her
and her loved ones. Diane explained
how the concept of family differs in
the black community and that she was

Mert Vaughn is a single mother with four children between the ages of 11

and 14.

She works part-time as an assistant director for the High Street

Community Center and part-time for the Vita program at United Way. She
is currently working on a bachelor's degree in sociology.

or appealing to her frequently "pe-
destalled" white counterpart, it is
not appealing to the woman who is
supposed to be "strong" enough to take
all the discrimination society can
dish out to her (i.e., to work full-time
outside the home only to return to her
own home to work a second full-time
shift; to manage on less income than
is paid to white males, black males,
or white females; to spend more hours
working in the white woman’s home and
caring for white children than she
spends in her own home caring for her
own children).

Women’s Press Starts Run

Emerging Woman Press is a collec-
tive of six feminist printers whose
intentions are to further radical
politics and women's culture by es-
tablishing the first feminist print
shop to serve the Denver political
community. They see themselves as
an example of how women can strength-
en both themselves and the movement
by learning and applying new skills.

One of their main objectives is
community outreach. By printing
pamphlets and booklets on political
analysis and research, they hope to
use the printing medium as a tool to
help build a stronger consciousness
of political issues. They also hope
to reach women by providing oppor-
tunities to learn printing skills
useful to feminist groups and on the
job market. Special workshops will
be offered to women on self-publish-
ing, preparing camera-ready copy for
the printer and silkscreening to
raise funds for more equipment.

As a political feminist project,
the group hopes to serve a variety
of political groups. Emerging Woman
Press sees this as a phase of out-
reach. Thus it will offer to serve
groups who endorse feminism and gay
rights in addition to their own re-
volutionary focus. The Press feels
it is important to show that femi-
nists are concerned with others'
struggles. The collective sees
Denver as being open to creating a
network of communication and support
between similarly oriented political
groups and hopes to be part of that.
The organizers do not intend to work
with groups who they define as being
against their self-interest, how-
ever.

In the past few months of meeting,
Emerging Woman Press has formed its
collective and begun discussion a-
round its structural process. The
women are also working on defining
their self-interest and exploring

not talking about a typical nuclear
family or institutionalized marriage.
“Most black women are not subject to
the economic dominance of their hus-
bands. There is none of the waiting
for him to come home and discipline
the children. The relationship is
more one of mutual support because
both parties have to face many of
the same struggles."

One question which is frequently
asked is whether or not a black femi-
nist movement will divide the black
community. As the NABF points out,
from the inception of the organiza-

their political perspectives. An
issue that they are particularly con-
cerned with, and that was discussed
at the Women In Print Conference, is
the difficulty of surviving as a
business while practicing political
beliefs.

Mailings have been sent to femi-
nist presses in other states to ga-
ther information on how presses got
started and how they survive. So
far results are encouraging. A lo-
cal flyer was also sent out announc-
ing Emerging Woman Press’ imminent
arrival and to try to determine the
printing needs of the community it
hopes to serve.

One of the questions was whether
groups would be willing to pay a lit-
tle more than commercial prices to
support an alternative press. At
that time most groups were not will-
ing to make that commitment. The
organizers hope that with the reali-
ty of the press and a little con-
sciousness-raising, attitudes will

tion there have been many black men
working with the Alliance to gain
total freedom for all blacks. Al-
though membership is limited to black
women, the NABF does include black
men as affiliates. The NABF defines
feminism as a dimension of humanism,
and, as such, encourages men as well
as women to examine sexism in soci-
ety.

The NABF also sees itself as
strengthening, rather than duplicat-
ing efforts in the general women's
movement. Since the NABF began, more
black women than ever before have
joined the ranks of the general fe-
minist movement. The point is that
it's difficult for anyone to identi-
fy with a movement which doesn't
closely affect her/him. As a result
of the NABF's growing membership,
more black women now join forces with
white sisters whenever general femi-
nist issues arise. The NABF encour-
ages all minority women to join them
and hopes to establish close working
relationships with other minority
women's groups. Vaughn also pointed
out that membership in the NABF does
not exclude membership in other fe-
minist organizations.

NABF members come from many back-
grounds. They include minors to
senior citizens; women with grade
school educations and post-doctoral
degrees; single, married, divorced,
and widowed women; women from the
poverty level to “modestly” affluent.

The NABF believes in full access
to participation in the private en-
terprise system. Vaughn feels that
a black woman should have the same
right to pursue her goals and ob-
jectives as anyone else in this so-
ciety. She added, however, that
this should be with the additional
dimension of humanism which is
basic to the NABF philosophy. "I'm
simply saying that if I were to be-
come president of Coors, things
would be different. For one thing,
more minorities would be hired. Be-
sides, the only way I'm going to
move on those people (big business)
is to compete with them on their
level, and I have to know how to do
that."

The following Black Women’s Bill
of Rights outlines the specific
goals of the NABF. Black women in-
terested in becoming members, or any
person or group interested in becom-
ing affiliate members should come
to the next orientation meeting on
October 13th, 8 p.m., at the High
Street Community Center, 3401 High,
Denver, or contact the NABF office
at 1425 Larimer, Denver 80202 (534-
3308).

BLACK WOMEN'S BILL OF RIGHTS

1. Accurate Media Portrayal. The
right to a non-racist, non-sexist me-
dia image in films, television, radio,
newspapers, magazines, books, liter-
ature, advertising, and other areas
of the mass media—to media coverage
proportionate to her number in the
population.

2. Quality Health Care. The right
to access to knowledge of and control
of her own body—to quality health

More on Page 14

care, and to be treated with dignity
and respect in all health care
settings.

3. Economic Justice. The right to
equal pay for equal work, to equal
employment opportunities, and to
economic independence.

4. Education. The right to a quality
education that is free from racism
and sexism, and to have her history
and contributions recognized in the
curriculum.

5. Housing. The right to safe, de-
cent, and affordable housing, and to
be free from discrimination in housing
and lending practices.

6. Political Representation. The right
to participate fully in the political
process, to have her voice heard, and
to have her interests represented.

7. Safety. The right to be free from
violence and harassment, and to live
in a safe environment.

8. Reproductive Rights. The right to
make decisions about her own body,
including the right to access to
family planning and reproductive
health services.

9. Cultural Recognition. The right
to have her culture and identity
recognized and respected.

10. Support Services. The right to
access support services that meet
her specific needs as a black woman.

During the past month, the Press
helped to produce the Third Annual
Women's Festival. Emerging Woman
Press was responsible for all the
printing work done for the Festival.
In addition to the exposure for its
work, the Press will receive a per-
centage of the profits from the
Festival. The collective intends to
invest in a small press with which
pamphlets, flyers and newsletters
can be printed.

At this point, Emerging Woman Press
is depending on donations to buy the
rest of the equipment necessary to
really get started.

If you are interested in having
Emerging Woman Press do your print-
ing, getting information on how you
can make a tax-free donation, or
would like to be on their mailing
list, write to: Emerging Woman
Press, PO Box 18236, Denver, CO
80209. Clare Strawn