IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Therapy Cont. From pg. 8

So why did I go? I was convinced something was wrong with me. I had spent
years having the message reinforced by parents, school, and therapist. Although
I had some idea that what was going on was wrong for me, I didn't have a con-
crete picture of why. I had a lot of reinforcement to stay in therapy and no
support to get out. Besides, I was intrigued by body/mind healing (and still
am); unfortunately, what I encountered didn't have much to do with healing.

Insanity and Control - A Class Trap

New Age therapies are also classist. This is well expressed by Alice Quinn
in an article “Insanity and Control: a class trap":

"Classism is not limited to traditional psychotherapy. The values
of the 'alienated' middle class are utilized and expounded in current
humanistic and feminist therapies. In the Age of Total Awareness,
they are into freeing the tensions of their bodies, exploring the re-
cesses of their minds, crushing their psyches in the false emotional-
ism of the Encounter Group, screaming their lungs out in Primal
Therapy, or regressing into childhood through Intense Feeling Therapy.

These alternatives focus on middle class personal and interpersonal
issues and ignore sexism and realities of lower and working-class
life. Dropping out, turning on, or maintaining one's own counterculture
within an individual context does not end women's oppression."(10)

Psychotherapy is generally for women of the middle and upper class. Like
much of middle class experience, it is more subtle than "treatments" given to
working and lower class women, such as institutionalization in state mental
hospitals, electroshock treatment, and psychosurgery. Psychotherapy tries to
get women to fulfill middle class values. This is damaging enough for a middle
class woman, who is exposed to those values daily. It must be devastating for
lower and working class women, as it totally denies their experience and needs.

Psychotherapy is an appropriate device for trying to get middle class women
to conform. Using "niceness," a quality valued by the middle class, psychotherapy
attempts to teach women the lessons they failed to learn during socialization.
Working and lower class women learn the same lesson in a harsher way.
The lesson is “conform or be punished."

Therapy, traditional and counter-cultural, share similar drawbacks. To some
extent the powerful/powerless relationship is maintained whenever there is a
therapist and client situation. Therapists of both groups claim to be non-
judgmental. No matter what techniques are used, the client is asked to look
inside herself to find the source of her discontent. And finally, therapies are
still based on the values of white, middle class, heterosexual males, which
are not healthy values for people who cannot be defined that way (and proba-
bly not healthy for people who can).

Body Work

Nina McIntosh is in private prac-
tice as a massage therapist in Denver.

Nina McIntosh

If you're like most women, you have
some part of your body that you don't
like at all--you think it's too fat
or too skinny or too something. What
I would invite you to do is look at
that area, not as “ugly” or bad, but
as a place where good energy is
trapped, where you have power that
you're not using. I invite you to
make friends with that part of you and
see that it's potentially very useful
to you.

Working with women's bodies, I see
two general patterns in those “dis-
liked" areas: one is numbness and
the other is tightness or constriction. The way I identify numb areas is
that they look paler than the rest of
the body and may feel colder to the
touch. They also tend to collect
extra fat. (Part of the numbing pro-
cess is poor circulation, which means
not enough oxygen and blood are get-
ting to the area. Fat is attracted to
that kind of inactivity.) Favorite
“numb” places on women are the upper
thighs and hips.

In my work, I'm interested in not
just what's happening physically but
also in what the physical may tell you
about the person emotionally. I work
with the basic assumption that the
physical, emotional, and psychological
aspects of a person are inseparable
so that if you make a significant
change in one aspect, it will reflect
in another. As a simple example of
this, most of us know someone who has
had a major weight change that was
either preceded or followed by a major
change in personality.

In line with this, I think that
physical numbness reflects an emotion-
al numbness on some level. My guess
about why this symptom is so prevalent
in women is that culturally there are
many things that women aren't "sup-
posed" to feel--like angry or sexual
feelings or even feelings of being
strong and adequate. So I think many
women get unconscious or literally
numb about what emotions may be locked
up inside and how much energy they
really do have. As you might expect,
a numb area in the body will often be
an area that is associated with the
expression of strong emotion or move-
ment, such as upper thighs and hips.

The other pattern that I frequently
see in women is tightness or con-
striction, such as shoulders that are
drawn in. This may be connected to
the fact that as they were growing up,
most women learned that our culture
values smallness in women. This
“smallness” seems to be both physical
and psychological. Physically, the
cultural ideal is often a woman who is
little--little feet, little waist, not
too tall, etc.--and on a psychological
level, women are often taught not to
be too “big,” too important, not to
take up too much space in the world.

I think much of the tightness in a
woman's body may be an attempt to be
smaller, to not be seen. It results
in good energy being blocked and tied
up. Both of these patterns--being numb
and being tight--will keep a woman out
of touch with her feelings and con-
sequently, her power.

There seem to be a number of ways
for women to become more aware of
themselves through their bodies. I'm
happy to see that more and more women
are experiencing their bodies from the
inside (do I feel good?) rather than
the outside (do I look good?). For
instance, women are getting tired of
tight clothes that restrict movement
and women’s clothes are becoming more
comfortable.

Also, more and more women are active
in sports or in some kind of physical
activity that helps them explore the
limits of their bodies. Just some
simple enjoyable exercise seems to
help many women get in contact with
their strength and also helps them
slough off emotional tensions.

Many women are seeing massage or
body work as a way to get in touch
with and bring more aliveness to their
bodies. Massage can be a good way to
experience the connection between
body and feelings. Often the body
work will bring up buried emotions and
allow a woman a chance to release tied
up energy.

Whatever way you do it, I think it's
important that women are starting to
find out how alive they can be and
how "big" they can be in the world.
I'm excited that women are beginning
to re-possess their bodies.

FEMINIST PUBLICATION
ON ART AND POLITICS

A collectively edited, idea-oriented journal devoted to the exami-
nation of art and politics from a feminist perspective—includes
research, theoretical articles, analysis, fiction, poetry, visual art.

Traditional Women's Arts—The Politics of
Aesthetics

The Great Goddess Women's Spirituality
Women and Violence

Working Together—True Confessions

Issue No. 4

Issue No. 5
Issue No. 6
Issue No. 7

SUBSCRIBE NOW

—one-year subscription/4 issues $11.

BACK ISSUES $3.00 each plus 50¢ handling: No. 2, Patterns of
Com and Space Among Women; No. 3, Lesbian Art
and Artists. 
Collectively designed Heresies fan poster $5.00

Heresies - Box 766 - Canal St. Station - N.Y. N.Y. 10013

Footnotes:

1. Findlay, Barbara "Shrink! Shrank! Shriek!" in Women Look at Psychiatry,
edited by Dorothy E. Smith and Sara J. David, Vancouver, B.C.: Press Gana
Publishers, 1975 p.62.

2. Douglass, Carol Anne “How Feminist is Therapy?" Our Backs; Vol. VI,
No. 6, September, 1976.

3. Chamberlain, Judy “Women's Oppression and Psychiatric Oppression” in Women
Look at Psychiatry. 
4. Saralinda "Saralinda" Madness Network News Vol. 4, No. 3, Summer 1977.
5. Chesler, Phyllis, Women and Madness, New York: Avon Books, 1973, p.193
6. Ibid p.255.

7. “Women's Oppression and Psychiatric Oppression" p.39.

8. Monty, Barbara “New Age, Old Misogyny", Madness Network News,

9. Ibid.

10. Quinn, Alice "Insanity and Control: A Class Trap", Quest, Vol. 1 No.2,
Money, Fame and Power.

Now to state some of my perspective. I am a white, middle class, women-
identified woman who has seen lots of therapists. I started a support group
for Wimmin Against Psychiatric Assault in the Boulder/Denver area. I have
recently completed studies at the Boulder School of Massage Therapy and real-
ize I may become some form of therapist. (Oh, the contradictions of life).