bmr: where we're at

Bobbe, Sue, Lori, and Liz

In October we mailed letters to all our subscribers asking
for money and ideas on how to get more money, where to ad-
vertise and comments on the paper itself. Thanks to every-
one who responded, we did get some money that was really
needed, and the ideas and comments were good and helpful.
The praise we received did our hearts good; we received
criticism too that was helpful. One of the things women com-
mented on was that our sub rate should be raised, something
we had discussed in September and had decided against.

At our first meeting after December's production and mail-
in we settled down to talk about finances, that aspect of
the paper that no one likes to deal with. Somehow we had
enough money in the bank to pay for the printing and the
mailing with about $100 left at the end of the month. For us,
that is good. We produced 16 pages in December because we
knew anything more would be too costly. Out of that $100 we
were able to pay October, 1981's rent - $65.

We did a breakdown of our expenses - our monies coming in,
etc. and as a result we decided our subscribers were right,
we should raise our rates, not only on subs but also our
classies and display ads. For a detailed breakdown, see box
on this page. The new rates will be in effect as of April 1,
1982. If any of our present subscribers want to extend their
subs at the old rate, they can do so up to April 1.

We sat back after those momentous decisions and realized
we had given ourselves a dateline of March to find out if
BMR was going to be around or go out of existence. As much
as we need money - always - we need women in the collective and
as supporters. Every collective of every feminist project
says the same thing, because it's true. There is more work
to do than there are women who are willing to do it.

We will be holding a community meeting on Saturday, March 13
at Woman to Woman, 11 a.m. We will also be holding our

RATES AS OF APRIL 1

includes mailing
All monies in US currency

Individual sub
Overseas and plain
wrapper
University and
Institutional
- $7.50 Individual copy at
Bookstores and
display boxes
$1.25 Sample or back issue

CLASSIES - $2.00 first 10
words;
- 15 per word
thereafter
DISPLAY ADS - write for ad
sheet to BMR

Poem by Chrystos: reprinted from This Bridge
Called My Back, Persephone Press

cover:
collective:

Bobbe Ross, Sue Goding, Liz Lewis, Lori Bradford

supporters:

Susanna Smith, Deb Luger, Judy Barlow, Wendy Highby,

Kim Womantree
Kathy Riley, Alberta Gallardo

contributors: Blair Northwood, Patty Abrisz,

Uschi Winterscheid, Chris Mondak, Candy McCullough

Big Mama Rag is a feminist periodical published monthly by
Big Mama Rag, Inc., a non-profit corporation. Manuscripts
and artwork (please!) may be submitted to 1724 Gaylord St.
Denver, CO 80206. Deadline for material submission will be
announced each month in "Where We're At" - it's generally
the 15th of the month preceding. Please enclose a stamped
self-addressed envelope with all manuscripts. No responsi-
bility is accepted for unsolicited material. We reserve the
right to edit all material for length. Subscription rates
are $6/year (11 issues) for individuals in the U.S., $12

Page 2 - Big Mama Rag, February 1982

breath, "will other women join us - who will show up - what crit-
icisms will we get and give?" We feel overworked and hectic
but that's a hell of a lot better than not being active and
seeing feminist projects die.

After deciding to change over to a more mechanized system
of addressing our papers we re-decided to stay with the old
system - BMR is still in the stone age. Someone recently sug-
gested we go to computerized labels; we are fascinated by all
that suggests: soft hardware, computer banks, labels and
finances done by a machine - but alas alack, that isn't for
us right now. The Columbus Free Press offered us an Address-
ograph - Multigraph and we thank them; we just don't have the
woman labor to get a system started and maintained.

We have had several inquiries about our tax suit, groups
wanting to know about the legalese of the case. We don't
know how to share that with anyone. There are pages and pages
and pages of printed word and none of us worked on it so we
don't know how to break it down into our words. To Xerox
everything would be extremely costly and reading it would be
a task. We are working on it. We did win the case, but it
took forever (8 years). However, winning a federal tax ex-
empt number doesn't give you exemption for federal excise
tax and you still have to get a state tax exempt status.

We planned to have this issue on religion and spirituality
and as you can see, the issue is not a theme issue. When we
first decided on the theme we had lots of ideas but somehow
the copy didn't come in. We are asking for more articles;
our deadline is February 18. We are planning to have it next
month but we need your input.

In the meantime, we have received more mail dealing with
anti-Semitism and how it affects women and the ongoing strug-
gle over Zionism and racism continues and we didn't want to
interrupt the flow. The flow hopefully will continue. We
find the paper more interesting when our readers write the
articles.

OoPs!

The photograph of the
Pentagon action we used last
issue was taken by Batya
Weinbaum, not Julie Nichol.

Roe v. Wade, which gave wo-
men the right to privacy
in abortion; #2, Rosie,
the woman from Texas who
was the first to die from
an illegal abortion after
the Hyde amendment was

In the calendar, there
were two errors on the Jan-
uary 22 item. #1, Jan 22 is
the anniversary of the 1973
Supreme Court decision,
passed, was named Rosie
Jimenez, not Morales as
we said.

inside BMR:

Where We’re At

Struggle

Anti-Semitism..........6 & 7

Zionism & Racism.......8

National...............16, 17, 18
Feminist Funding....12, 13, 14

Voices

Invisible Prisons....14 & 15
America Held Hostage......16
MOVE

Classies & Ads.........22 & 23

outside the U.S. or for plain brown wrapper, and $18 to
all institutions.

BMR is free to all women incarcerated in
prisons or mental institutions. BMR is on file at the New
Alexandria Library for Lesbian Women in Florence, MA, and
is available on microfilm (Oct. 1972, Vol. 1 through
May 1980) directly from Big Mama Rag for $75. BMR is indexed
by the Alternative Press Center, P.O. Box 7229, Baltimore,
MD 21218. Our phone number is (303) 322-2010; we have a phone
message machine.