national

150 Demonstrators

Jenny Miller

On Tuesday, March 15, nineteen people were arrested for blocking the entrances to the administration building of Berkeley's Herrick Hospital in a protest against the resumption of electroshock treatment at Herrick. An additional 150 demonstrators formed a picket line and acted as legal observers while the civil disobedience action was in progress. Electroshock in Berkeley had been banned by Measure T, a ballot initiative passed by Berkeley voters last November. Several psychiatric associations subsequently filed suit against the ordinance. In January a Superior Court judge issued an injunction permitting the continued use of electroshock until the legality of the ordinance can be determined.

Thorne G. Auchter, plan to revoke priorities

While Reagan is stumping for support before the National Association of Evangelicals saying US struggle with the USSR is between right & wrong, good & evil, Falwell, his apostle is mouthing peace through strength; both pushing the politics of better dead than red, something the rest of us in this world should have some say. The head of OSHA denied there was ever a plan to have a priority list for OSHA to intensify its monitoring at a future hearing. Massive media coverage of the March 15 demonstration alerted many Berkeley voters who were not aware that electroshock had been resumed. The ballot initiative campaign and the civil disobedience protest were organized by the Coalition to Stop Electroshock.

The ten women and nine men who were arrested at the demonstration were held in jail for about 7 hours and then released on their own recognizance. Several women were strip-searched while in jail. The blockaders were arraigned the following day in Berkeley Municipal Court before Judge Julie Conger. Since the Berkeley Court is not wheelchair accessible, and one of the arrestees, CeCe Weeks, was in a wheelchair and refused to be carried into the courtroom, the group demanded that they all be arraigned in the downstairs hallway along with Weeks. Blockader Barbara Quigley announced the group's

suspected carcinogens in the work- Does that make any sense? Another plan that makes you stop and think is Reagan's determination to resurrect, give birth, make definite plans for the MX system: no one wants it, no one knows what to do with it but it's the war boys' baby. US hush-hush National Security Agency (NSA) (Who heads it?) (Don't know, it's national security) wants to build a $27,000,000 plant to manufacture teeny tiny computer chips that would be so top, top secret that private industries couldn't be trusted. NSA does nasty things like intercept computerized data, telephone & telegraph communications & hoard lots of files. It's believed that NSA is trying to develop small communication devices permitting US spies in foreign countries to use satellites to contact other spies throughout the world.

It's a bird—no it's Watts soaring over in his high-altitude plane spotting grass growing on public land. Try it James, it will help your attitude.

Alice Walker became the first Black woman to win the Pulitzer Prize, you & your many Sisters deserved it sooner & more often. Happy May Day, TOBA p euUa.

Suddenly I don't feel like dancing.

Page 4 - Big

eo Rh ELDAR G

Mama Rag, May, 1983

decision to Conger, who responded by transferring the arraignment to the accessible city council chambers in a nearby building. Berkeley mayor Gus Newport and school board member Barbara Lubin, both supporters of Measure T, attended the arraignment. The charges against most of the blockaders were reduced from a misdemeanor to an infraction with a sentence of "time served" (the previous day in jail), in exchange for pleas of "no contest." Several arrestees chose to be sentenced for the original misdemeanor charge and also received a sentence of "time served." Two blockaders, Trudy Rogers and Maureen Bei, pled not guilty to the misdemeanor, and requested a jury trial. The date of their trial is not yet scheduled and they are looking for attorneys willing to represent them at no cost.

Following the sentencing, Judge Conger permitted the demonstrators to make brief statements of their reasons for getting arrested. One said her mother had died of a cerebral hemorrhage following shock treatment, one said that a close relative had committed suicide following shock, one said that someone he grew up with is currently receiving shock at Herrick, one said that she had been damaged by shock treatment herself. Several stated that the shock doctors were the real criminals.

According to the Department of Mental Health, two-thirds of all people receiving shock in California are women and two-thirds are over 45 years of age. The rate now being charged for each shock treatment is about $110. (There are between 6 and 25 shock treatments in a series.) Although most psychiatric inmates in California have the right to refuse shock treatment, a nurse who formerly worked at Herrick Hospital (who was one of those arrested at the March 15 action) stated that inmates are not informed of the likelihood of permanent brain damage and memory loss. According to hospital reports, a small percentage of those receiving shock have not consented to it because a judge has ruled that they were incapable of giving consent.

Protest Electroshock

-Snowflake

One of the blockaders, Trudy Rogers, who described herself as a former mental patient, explained that she pled not guilty because "I did nothing wrong. Electroshock is not a treatment. It is barbaric, like rape. There are people in Herrick who don't have a voice. We are their voice."

For more information about electroshock, the Measure T Campaign, and the international anti-psychiatry movement, send $1 to Madness Network News, 2054 University, Room 405, Berkeley, CA 94704, with a request for the Spring issue. To get involved in the Coalition to Stop Electroshock call 644-1899 or come to Coalition meetings on the first and third Thursday of every month at 2100 Grove Street (Berkeley) at 7:30, preceded by a potluck dinner at 6 pm. If you or anyone you know has been incarcerated at Herrick or received shock treatment there, and you are willing to testify about your experiences in court in defense of Measure T, please call 548-2980 or 644-1899. Testimony from former Herrick workers is also needed, as is testimony from anyone who has recently received shock in the Bay Area. Let's put the real criminals on trial!