page 18

Letters  
from the  

Mountain  

Filly  

Even in the midst of city chaos, we can make the revolution happen,  
but first we gotta get jungle smart. We need the use of our full potentials  
as Earth Goddess beings to out-jive and survive the killer ape male egos.  
That means perfecting ourselves for combat through some flexible dis-  
cipline. In these letters to you, woman of the jungle, we will give a step-  
by-step procedure for getting woman self together so that instant con-  
sciousness raising and expansion can happen to you, right now today.  

This is the self-therapy/brain self-control as taught at Adventure  
Trails Survival School through the Women’s Survival Program. This  
knowledge, which is power, is the fuse that can set off the woman brain  
bomb revolution.  

Yes, brain is another word you've been taught to ignore in its full  
meaning. Egotoid male ‘experts’ and teachers have bored you out of  
search for knowledge on how this device which controls all life actions  
works, and by keeping you in the dark they have robbed you, again, of  
your rights to know/control this incredible 90% dormant potential  
reservoir. From our mountain perch, the brain woman coven sends the  
call to city slave/woman child. We want to give you all these know-  
ledges/powers: the way of self-therapy and brain self-control NO more  
big daddy therapist/teacher. We will slowly whisper in this column all  
the goodies denied you for yourself and yours, woman, until you,  
Goddess being, are collups (broken up to simplicity) as nature intended.  

So now prepare your brain’s neurons to compute the flood tides of  
data bits which will be sent through &/g Mama Rag. Open the cobwebbed  
matrixes that have been sleeping, ready for your use in self-  
discovery through these scientific facts: Brain is 90% dormant potential  
… this potential can be released through brain self-control.  

Even now as I write this in my preconscious (creative produc-  
tion/morning power) funsie-emotions dancing pirouettes on my  
thalamus (emotion-center) and laughing, sweethearts, (AUTHORS  
NOTE: excuse me, I am having a love affair with womankind) such  
voluptuous joy-meaning awaits you, well… I feel like it’s Christmas and  
I can’t wait till you all open your presents! … LOVE, FILLY  

Women &  
History —  

Anne Hutchinson  

Anne Hutchinson was born in England on July 28, 1590. In 1634, she  
came to Boston to find religious freedom in the New World. She was a  
wife/mother of fifteen children and a midwife. Most significantly, she  
was a ‘preacher’ of a new interpretation of Christianity. She believed in  
a “Covenant of Grace,” by which she meant the spirit of God was in  
everyone and inward revelations of the spirit and conscious judgment  
of the mind were more important than blind submission to church doc-  
trine and authority. She raised the question of equal status for women  
in the eyes of God and threatened the powerful Puritan theocracy that  
ruled the Massachusetts Bay Colony at that time. She held Sunday  
after-church meetings in her home attended by 40-100 people, mostly  
women, that encouraged open discussion and questioning of the es-  
tablished clergy’s teachings.  

One of her enemies, the Governor of Massachusetts Bay Colony,  
John Winthrop, described her as ‘a woman of haughty and fierce  
carriage, of nimble wit, and active spirit, and a very voluble tongue,  
more bold than a man.” This threat to the power of the state was too  
strong to go unchallenged, so in October 1637, Anne Hutchinson was  
charged with heresy. Her trial was civil, judicial, and ecclesiastical. It  
lasted for two days, during which she was made to stand, though preg-  
nant and ill. She was found guilty and excommunicated. In March,  
1638, she was banished and went to Rhode Island with 35 families of  
her faithful followers (Hutchinsonians). She later moved again to what  
is now the Pelham Bay area where she died in an Indian raid in 1643.  
The Hutchinson River and the Parkway are named after her.  

Anne Hutchinson challenged church and state on behalf of new ideas  
of tolerance and religious freedom: as a woman she went further,  
questioning for the first time on this continent, the validity of the place  
assigned to women. She was one of the first Founding Mothers of  
America.  

Big Mama Rag Vol. 3, No. 6  

Survival School Explores Nirvana  

On Laughing Coyote Mountain  
near Blackhawk, Colorado  
women are discovering  
themselves through the “nir-  
vana” experience while study-  
ing at the Women’s Survival  
School located there.  
Nirvana happens through an  
“understanding of your brain  
and of your Self and how they  
should interact naturally.”  

The Women’s Survival School  
is a part of the Adventure Trails  
Survival School that was started  
in 1957 so that young people  
could get away from the city and  
learn to survive in the moun-  
tains; half of its participants paid  
and half attended free. Eventual-  
ly, the school evolved into a  
training program to discover and  
utilize the entire human brain —  
90% of which, the school  
believes, is dormant potential.  
This is done through backward  
self-therapy and learning to self-  
circuit into the 3/8 bulk of dor-  
mant frontal lobes — experien-  
cing nirvana.  

“The program is not a spiritual  
trip where you put down your  
money and get saved,” says Fil-  
ly, a student at the school. The  
philosophy of the Women’s Sur-  
vival Program is that women will  

“The program is not a  
spiritual trip where you  
put down your money  
and get saved.”  

lead the way towards survival for  
everyone. “The locus of man’s  
killer ape instinct is identified in  
the old root stem at the base of  
the skull; the locus of the ego.  
Children, with the help of  
parents can be guided to evolve  
normally beyond this  
genetic/cultural block… into  
whole brain power.  

“Women have proven to be  
the easiest to understand the life  

BMR To Open  

Linda Fowler  

Big Mama Rag has an oppor-  
tunity to begin the first women’s  
library in Denver. This will be a  
library that should eventually in-  
clude almost all publications by,  
for, and about women and  
Feminism. Offering books,  
anthologies, periodicals and  
newsletters, a library of this kind  
would fill the tremendous gap  
which now exists in Denver.  

Realizing that the majority of  
feminist publications are usually  
unavailable to area women  
because of either lack of access  
or price, Roberta Karsh of the  
Footnote Bookstore has offered  
to donate the first group of books  
to get the project off the ground.  
She will also offer a discount in  
price to anyone who would like  
to contribute books to the library.  

BMRA will be able to supply a  
good many periodicals, available  
through our exchange mailings.  

There is a lot of work which  
must be done to make this dream  
a reality. We must locate space  
for a library, organize lists of  
works we need to include, set up  
a cataloging and record keeping  
system, etc. At this time our  
thinking is to charge a small fee  
for the use of books and  
publications. This will go toward  
upkeep and stocking of the  
library.  

Before any of this can actually  
happen, we must find a coor-  
dinator: Someone to take on the  
job of organization, of perhaps  
forming groups or committees to  
look into the various aspects of  
such an endeavor, and to  
assume general responsibility.  

sensitivity pre-requisite to the  
nirvana breakthrough, and  
therefore must dominate men  
until the latter transcend their  
two-million year old  
aggressive/violent behaviors.”  

The Survival School offers  
courses year round. More infor-  
mation can be obtained by  
writing to either Glaeshia Lily  
O'Rourke or Rainbow Cox, the  
coordinators of the Women’s  
Survival Program at the Adven-  
ture Trails Survival School,  
Laughing Coyote Mountain,  
Black Hawk, Colorado 80422.  

Library  

for the doing of things. Some ex-  
perience in working with  
libraries would be good but not  
essential. What is needed most  
is someone who can start with  
nothing and make it happen.  
Action can begin on this after  
the first of the year, so get in  
touch now about any plans,  
thoughts, or ideas you have. Or if  

Karsh will offer a dis-  
count in price to  
anyone who would like  
to contribute books to  
the library.  

you think you can take on this  
job.  

And do seriously consider  
donating a book to the library.  
You can buy it at a discount,  
remember. If we get behind this  
we will all have available one of  
the best collections of women’s  
writings and literature  
anywhere in the west.