Women Workers Strike Over Safety

A four-day wildcat strike against  
Pacific Northwest Bell (PNB) began  
Wednesday, February 20, in Renton,  
Washington and most of the rest of  
Washington and Oregon. The strike was  
precipitated by the refusal of a cable  
splicer, Diane Grace, to work alone in  
a manhole until the Washington State  
Health Administration (WSHA) ruled on  
the safety of this work practice. The  
issue has not been resolved.

The Renton union local has been ob-  
jecting to working alone in manholes  
for a couple of months now. The  
local has been filing grievances about  
it since 1968. In Seattle, in con-  
trast, there is a tradition of two  
workers to a hole.

When, on the 20th, Grace refused to  
go into the manhole alone, she was sus-  
pended. Neither her supervisor nor his  
supervisor had ever worked in a man-  
hole. She was not the first to re-  
fuse such a job, but the first woman  
to do so and the first worker suspen-  
ded for it. The wildcat strike start-  
ed soon after Grace's suspension.

Madelyn Elder, another cable spli-  
cer, says that, "Water and gas lines  
can break in a flash. A truck can run  
over an open hole and any kind of  
stuff could fall in." The federal ag-  
ency, OSHA (Office of Safety and He-  
alth Administration), seemingly agrees  
to the danger, by requiring that there  
be a first-aid trained observer on any  
potentially dangerous job. But WSHA  
is "wishy-washy."

The aims of the strikers were to  
force Bell to agree to a moratorium  
on one worker to a hole, to revoke  
Grace's suspension, and to grant an  
amnesty to strikers.

Jim Feathers, who wires frames in  
Seattle, says, "The strikers wanted to  
show the company that no decision re-  
garding safety could be established  
arbitrarily by the company."

The Renton strikers sent delegations  
and pickets to several cities. Feath-  
ers estimates that 1700 struck in  
Portland and 2060 in Washington.

Despite earlier erroneous news re-  
ports of an injunction against the  
strike, the workers stayed out until  
1:30 PM Saturday, when in a conference  
call initiated by PNB, the strikers  
agreed to try to settle matters with  
the company and end the strike.

An actual injunction finally reach-  
ed the Seattle strike committee mo-  
ments before the vote to end the strike  
was called.

Elder feels that the key to the ra-  
pid settlement was the cooperation of  
hundreds of telephone operators and  
clerical workers who crossed trade  
lines and struck over the safety issue  
which didn't directly affect them.

These operators are Bell's main con-  
tact with the public. The consumers'  
dollar becomes Bell's through the op-  
erators--so that's where the company  
misses it first.

Peggy McEligott, a service evalua-  
tor and night senior steward for a  
large group of directory assistance  
operators, feels that part of the rea-  
son for the operators' willingness to  
walk out was that a safety issue of  
their own had come before Seattle  
directory assistance operators just  
last year. It took PNB quite some  
time to repair a ceiling which was  
falling on the operators' heads.

PNB has a motto on every truck, in  
every crew room, and in every work  
room that reads: “No job is so im-  
portant and no service is so urgent,  
that we cannot take the time to do our  
job safely." But PNB has second  
thoughts about taking the money to do  
some things safely.

Elder feels that PNB has been able  
to partially ignore safety due to an  
underlying macho tendency of some men  
to "face" danger. The newer women wo-  
men workers in out-of-plant jobs (cer-  
tainly less than 20% of that work for-  
ce) do not feel as compelled to take  
on unnecessary risks. Elder feels  
that the safety issue which brought out  
the in-plant workers (operators and  
clericals) in turn brought PNB to the  
negotiating table so quickly.

Elder feels the operators' walkout  
not only demonstrated the women's  
concern for the union, but also that  
they will take the lead. As Elder  
says, "Sexism has divided us. Fem-  
inism will unite us." She credits the  
men, too. The men, in Renton espec-  
ially, overcame macho tendencies to  
see safety as their issue and to back  
it up with action.

McEligott and Elder agree that the  
most important aspect of the strike  
was that the operators, mostly women,  
struck over an out-of-plant griev-  
ance. Now the out-of-plant workers  
owe in-plant workers a favor and know  
of the in-plant workers' economic  
strength. This is important as in-  
plant workers have been slighted by  
both the company and the union in the  
past.

McEligott feels the strike will have  
a great effect on the contract which  
comes up for renewal in August--that  
it was a good experience as a "trial  
run." The union knows where to work  
on its strike system and has found  
that PNB is vulnerable through the  
operators. But they also are aware  
that the company was not prepared for  
the wildcat and didn't have scabs  
ready to fill in.

McEligott also feels that some of  
the success of the wildcat was due to  
an opening-up of communications in-  
side the Seattle local of the Commun-  
ication Workers of America (CWA)  
which was encouraged by new leader-  
ship. For instance, there is now an  
Interdepartmental Committee to keep  
various sectors of the union informed  
of each other's concerns.

Insurance: One Woman’s Struggle  
With The Medical Establishment

Recently I was turned down for hea-  
lth insurance. Investigating the  
cause and some of the issues surround-  
ing health insurance had proven inter-  
esting and has raised several feminist  
issues. Eight years ago I was labeled  
“depressed” by a mental health system  
which is quick to diagnose individual  
women without looking at the larger  
questions of our lives. That stigma  
travels with me. Lacking a feminist  
perspective on health and society, I  
was treated by Freudians (never again)  
and now have a permanent, computerized  
record which is preventing me from be-  
ing able to obtain the kind of health  
insurance which fits my present needs.  
There are computerized records on me  
because I tried to obtain reimburse-  
ment for the treatment I received. It  
was denied, but the record remains. I  
welcome both suggestions and further  
analysis.

As a freelance part-time worker  
I have to provide my own health insur-  
ance. Previously I had purchased cov-  
erage from a health maintenance organ-  
ization (Comprecare) which reimbursed  
physicians on a fee-for-service basis.  
Under that plan I found that I was  
overtreated ("you'll need to keep com-  
ing back for more tests") and over-  
medicated (prescribing percodan after  
reporting some cramps and a tranquil-  
izer when I said I was nervous and  
overate). When Comprecare raised the  
cost of insurance to $50 a month, I  
withdrew and wrote about my complaints.  
There was no response. The Kaiser-  
type pre-paid health maintenance or-  
ganization which maintains facilities  
and pays salaries to health workers is  
supposed to provide for fewer abuses  
than a system which rewards being ser-  
viced.

All of this is ironic because I had  
written a grant proposal to research  
what people need to know in order to  
make an intelligent purchase of health  
insurance. I therefore knew something  
about the varieties of health insur-  
ance available as well as some of the  
issues pertinent to women.

Many women workers receive no or  
few benefits. Many of us are hired  
part-time which provides no benefits  
or security. In wage negotiations  
many workers will opt for lower sal-  
aries in order to keep or increase  
benefits. Prolonged illness can take  
all of the savings of those with no  
insurance.

In considering my own needs, I de-  
cided that being 34, healthy and armed  
with a deep mistrust of doctors, the  
only kind of coverage likely to bene-  
fit me would cover catastrophic illness.  
I am able to maintain my own health  
without recourse to doctors. Should  
I need treatment or testing a variety  
of clinics are available which cost me  
much less than most insurance policies  
I can buy. I did want coverage for  
prolonged hospitalization since that  
is where the high costs were likely to  
occur.

Working with an insurance agent, I  
decided that I wanted major medical in-  
surance with a high deductible. This  
meant that the monthly fee was likely  
to be lower than other coverage and  
that I would have to cover the initial  
expenses to a predetermined limit my-  
self. The agent found what she be-  
lieved to be the best and least expen-  
sive policy through Washington Nation-  
al Insurance Company. We filled out  
the forms and I paid the first month's  
charges of $24.43. For 2 months I  
heard nothing although I called the  
agent several times. She then called  
to tell me that I had been turned  
down and that my check would be re-  
turned to me. I got a form letter  
from Nick Cosmas of the Health Insur-  
ance Underwriting Division saying "we  
are indeed sorry...” but no reason.  
When the check finally came it was  
attached to a form which said, “De-  
pression ‘72--'73."

Thinking back to 72-73 I realized  
that I had, in fact, been depressed  
and had sought treatment. At the time  
I was working in a city hospital doing  
my work and the work of the assistant  
director, a man being paid almost  
twice my wages. When the assistant  
director left, I applied for his pos-  
ition and was told by my boss that he  
would only give the position to a man,  
even though he knew that I had been  
doing the work. I sought help for my  
depression. My Freudian analyst, a  
man, treated me for depression, even  
sending me to a psychiatrist who  
prescribed mood elevators. I don't  
like taking medication and the pills  
had very unpleasant side effects.

When I complained to the psychiatrist,  
he told me to trust him, that the side-  
effects would wear off when I got used  
to the pills. The side effects contin-  
ued and my mood wasn't elevating so I  
stopped taking the pills and going to  
the psychiatrist. Neither the analyst  
nor the psychiatrist ever pointed out  
that I had reason to be depressed over  
my working conditions. Significantly,  

You +RI60  
I was HE  
GEHING USvAL  

-Nichole Hollander, from Ma, Can I Be A  
Feminist And Still Like Men?/ St. Martin's Press

Today Diane Grace is back on the  
job, but her suspension remains in  
question. Amnesty for the strike has  
more or less been granted, but many  
workers feel that their action will  
be held against them. And OSHA has  
told WSHA and the union to get to-  
gether and figure out the safety  
issue. In the meantime, the Renton  
Management continues to send lone  
workers down manholes.

(Reprinted, with minor changes, from  
Northwest Passage.

When I decided to file a sex discrimin-  
ation suit against my employer, and  
seek another job, my depression lift-  
ed. I stopped seeing the analyst, got  
another job, and settled out of court  
for $700 damages when I had originally  
asked for $400. The process of filing  
suit against my employer was painful.  
At the same time, taking action in my  
own behalf and dealing with my legit-  
imate anger greatly improved my mood  
and sense of self-esteem.

I regret that I had no feminist  
frame of reference at that time for  
analyzing what was happening in my  
life. Certainly Freudian analysis is  
harmful to women. I do not mean to  
put down the seeking of help, however,  
that help must take into account both  
the conditions of the woman's life  
and her "problems." We know that the-  
rapists label women as depressives and  
treat us when it is society that is un-  
healthy. We know that women are med-  
icated to mitigate legitimate anger. A  
quick reading of Phyllis Chesler's  
Women and Madness reveals that the  
kinds of behavior that are labeled  
"mentally ill" are sex-typed and each  
sex is conditioned accordingly. De-  
pression is supposed to be a character-  
istic psychiatric symptom for the  

female role. Since manhood is synon-  
ymous with adulthood and mental health,  
women are by patriarchal definition  
deviants. It is safer for women to be  
come depressed than to be physically  
or verbally hostile. Once we allow  
ourselves to be labeled and judged  
within male models we open ourselves  
to misunderstanding, maltreatment and  
stigma.

Checking with the Colorado Commis-  
sioner of Insurance's office I found  
that if I can get the doctor to change  
his diagnosis, I can protest the ac-  
tions of the insurance company.

How likely do you think it is that  
either a Freudian analyst or a psych-  
iatrist whose patient refused to con-  
tinue taking medication will change  
the diagnosis? I would be interested  
in suggestions on what to do next. It  
is important to stop feelings of being  
a victim by taking action. In addi-  
tion, we all need more information on  
what insurance can and cannot do for us  
as well as knowledge about what records  
are kept on us.

I wish to remain anonymous in writ-  
ing this article. I am still trying  
to obtain insurance.