CR for Rapists

A Seattle judge has been
sentencing rapists to make
contributions to Rape Relief,
an organization which aids
rape victims, along with their
prison sentences. Judge
Donald Horowitz feels that the
offenses are ‘‘political acts
against women and a product
of institutionalized sexism.
The contributions will, he
hopes, serve to ‘“‘raise the
rapists’ consciousness."’

Pandora, Seattle.

Market Disrupted
The Miss Canada Pageant
was disrupted as ten women
from the Radical Lesbian
Feminists and the Toronto
Women Anarchists stormed
the stage denouncing the
pageant as a ‘‘meat market’’.
Police and security guards
wrestled the women off stage.
A security guard suffered
two broken ribs. No charges
were brought against the
women.
Lesbian Connection,
E. Lansing.

ERA Umbrella

On Wednesday, February 26,
more than 100 people packed
an office in downtown Wash-
ington and formed a new ERA
umbrella organization called
ERAmerica. Abandoning what
they called the ‘‘spit curls and
white gloves’’ approach, they
pledged a political battle to
win ratification in the four
states needed to add the
provision to the Constitution.
ERAmerica was described as
“‘an all-out bipartisan, highly
political campaign—not for a
person but for an issue.’’

ERAmerica intends to do
political studies of the 16
holdout state legislatures to
determine the best prospects
for approval in the next two
years.
Women, Lenox, Mass.

Lesbian Archives
The Lesbian Herstory Ar-
chives has been open to the
community for four months
now, serving women in all
areas of lesbian research.
Material includes books,
newsletters, newspapers, bib-
liographies, tapes, and photo-
graphs. The Archives need
someone who will translate
German lesbian material, wo-
men who will record lesbian
events, and back issues of the
Lesbian Tide (contact them to
find out which ones). Lesbian
Herstory Archives, P.O. Box
1258, New York 10001.

Installers Sue
Mountain States Telephone
and Telegraph was charged in
March with sex discrimination
in Federal District Court. The
suit is a class action brought
by several women who were
hired as installers in 1974.
They were subsequently tran-
sferred to lower paying cleri-
cal jobs, and were eventually
laid off. The plaintiffs feel
that Mountain Bell had merely
used them to fill their 1974
Equal Employment Opport-
unity Commission requirem-
ent, and was not making a
sincere effort to train and
promote women in craft posi-
tions.
Into the Fire
NBC recently reported that
“Tris,” the flame retardant
used on all children’s sleep-
wear, has carcinogenic ag-
ents. Manufacturers may
warn you to wash three times
before wearing.
Feminist Communications

News.

FBI Director Clarence Kelley
told reporters in San Diego
that the bureau will continue
to use informers to disrupt
organizations it deems sub-
versive. He added, ‘‘I can’t
say that under no circum-
stances will they (informers)
avoid acting as provocateurs.’’

The Militant

Academic Sexism

Sharon Johnson, assistant
professor of biochemistry, has
brought suit against the Uni-
versity of Pittsburgh for sex
discrimination. The University
has declined to give her tenure
after five years of employ-
ment, despite impressive cre-
dentials and an outstanding
work record. Two male
professors in her department,
both with lesser qualifications,
were given tenure at the same
time she was refused. Dr.
Johnson is being supported in
her suit by the N.O.W. Legal
Defense and Education Fund,
which is soliciting contribu-
tions for the case. Send to
them at 9 West 57th St., New
York, NY 10019.

Cris Williamson Tour
Cris Williamson, feminist
musician whose album, ‘‘The
Changer and the Changed”,
was recently released by Oliv-
ia Records, is currently on a
national tour. Her May dates
are in Durham, NC on the 7th;
Hollins College, Roanoke, VA
on the 8th; Columbia, SC on
the 11th; Atlanta, GA on the
14th; Athens, OH the 20th;
Columbus, OH the 21st; Clev-
eland the 22nd; Ann Arbor,
MI the 24th and Glenwood
Springs, CO on June 4th.

Lesbian Conference

A conference, ‘‘Building a
Lesbian Nation’’, is to be held
in Bloomington, Indiana July
2-5. Scheduled workshops
include Alcoholism and Che-
mical Dependence, Child
Custody and Legal Issues,
Revolutionary Strategy, Econ-
omic Dependence, and Spirit-
uality. Registration is $5.50 in
advance (send for a pre-regi-
stration form and get it to
them by June 18), $7.00 at the
door. The organizers expect
over 1,000 participants. The
conference is strictly for les-
bians only. Write to National
Lesbian Feminist Organizing
Conference, c/o Lesbian
Feminist Union, P.O. Box
3764, Louisville, KY 40201.

Roman Women Angry

Over 100,000 women march-
ed in the streets of Rome last
month to demand that abor-
tion be made legal and free in
Italy. The women denounced
the Vatican and the Christian
Democratic Party for their
anti-abortion stand. All traffic
came to a halt, and armed
police guarded the Christian
Democratic headquarters.
Men were barred from parti-
cipating in the march.

Very Original
The National Drinks Bottling
Company of Los Angeles (Dr.
Pepper, Squirt, Orange Crush)
was found to be peddling
beverages that included card-
board particles, glass frag-
ments, mold, and dead in-
sects. One diabetic became ill
on a ‘‘sugar free’’ drink that
wasn’t. The company was
fined a fast $20,000 and told
not to do it any more.
The Militant

Feminist Ed

A special summer workshop
called ‘‘Feminist Education:
Methods and Techniques’’
will be held in Los Angeles
June 21-30. Judy Chicago,
Sheila de Bretteville, Ruth
Iskin and Arlene Raven, will
pass on techniques and meth-
ods of feminist education to
break through the constraints
of women’s socialization.
Write to Ruth Iskin, Women’s
Building, 1727 N. Spring
Street, Los Angeles, CA
90012.

FFCU Thrives
The California Feminist Fed-
eral Credit Union, based in
San Diego, marked its first
anniversary by paying its
fourth 5% Quarterly divi-
dend. The feminist credit
union was the first chartered
in California by the National
Credit Union Administration.
It is one of fourteen feminist
credit unions in the United
States and Canada. Since it
opened in March, 1975, nearly
1,000 members have deposi-
ted $180,000 in shares, nearly
all of which has been invested
in loans to members.

Women Oppose Violence
Women Against Violence
against Women (WAVAW) is a
Los Angeles group which
successfully stopped local
theaters from showing the
porn movie, ‘‘Snuff’’. WA-
VAW-LA (there is a similar
group in Washington DC)
plans to remain a functioning
group, and because of its
proximity to the industry,
feels a particular responsi-
bility to continue action ag-
ainst media violence against
women. The group is inter-
ested in knowing more about
the ways the film was promo-
ted in various cities, knowing
more about the corporations
which have had a part in
“‘Snuff’’, and in theories
about why the film has been
promoted in such a way.
Leads on actual underground
snuff films are also being
sought. In addition, the group
will render information and
assistance to other women
working against media viol-
ence against women. Write to
them c/o FWHC, 1112 Cren-
shaw Blvd., Los Angeles, CA
90019.

CU Opening Postponed

The Colorado Federal Fem-
inist Credit Union will not
open on schedule, because the
National Credit Union Admin-
istration needs more informa-
tion on its membership before
granting a charter. Members
expect it to start operating
early this summer.

Arts Festival

The Sixth Annual Women’s
Festival of the Arts will take
place from April 23 to May 16
at the Center for Women's
Studies and Services in San
Diego. Featured will be an
overture, mime, dance, music,
poetry and exhibits. Write
CWSS, 908 ‘‘F’’ St., San
Diego, CA 92101.

Employers Liable

The U.S. Court of Appeals
has ruled that the employers
of a rapist were legally liable
for the rape, which occurred
while their employee, 19-year-
old Michael Carey, was mak-
ing a delivery. Pep Line
Trucking Co. was ordered to
pay $33,000 in damages to the
victim, a Southeast Washing-
ton D.C. woman.

Struggle

a continuing forum
Terra

In my personal struggle with how to live out my sexual being in
accordance with my political beliefs some basic questions arose: is
sexual preference a matter of choice, urge, or mandate? (Sexual
preference meaning which individual one becomes sexually
involved with.)

On what basis does a radical feminist make sexual choices?
What political/personal strategy best fits my anarcha-feminist
goals which include abolishing definition of all relationships and
people on the basis of sex, and redistribution of political power and
erotic sensuality, as well as economic wealth and control?

Choice, Urge, or Mandate

One of the basic tenets of the fight against exploitive, sexist
authority is rejection of definitions which limit our life-choices by
social mandate. Such a mandate defines sexual relations to fit the
needs of an exploitive social structure: as reproductive when more
workers/consumers are needed, as fun (diversion) when over-
population increases revolutionary potential. We must not allow
ourselves to be sexually defined any longer!

Thus for sexual preference to be part of radical liberation it
must evolve from personal responsibility and choice, not from the
uncritical acceptance of urges (which in many cases may be the
sum of several internalized mandates), nor from total acceptance
of external standards of behavior, be they from the political right
or left.

Within the present cultural framework our option to choose
has often been closed off in our minds by categorizing some
behaviors as ‘‘God’s will’’ or ‘‘natural’’ and therefore un-
changeable. Sex has previously been limited to reproduction, thus
heterosexual with vaginal/penile contact.

Masturbation as a form of sexual release (and pleasure) is
condemned as substandard, if not wicked, when it involves only
one person, but mutual masturbation is more easily termed
exciting. Celibacy is often devalued as a conscious choice for
people.

The possibilities of sexual struggle explored and shared in a
radical feminist framework appear to be also somewhat limited.
Trying to find out how other straight and bisexual women are
working on their sexual/emotional relationships with men along
with their collective political work against sexism is practically
fruitless (a notable exception being Country Women, April 1975).

Is this part of the personal not political enough to share? Is it
too painful, too hopeless to speak about? Or is it, as Redstockings
suggested in Feminist Revolution, that feminists have a case of
‘heterosexual guilt’’ and don’t want to admit they really are still
fucking with men, even loving them?

Lesbian feminists gladly tell how wonderful and liberating it
can be to make love only to women. As a tactic for personal/
political strength and identity there is much to be gained by
women coming together to share energy and make love. However,
the attitude that lesbians are, by definition, more liberated than
straight feminists because they relate to men as little as possible,
divides the movement and stifles the energy that may come from
women of different sexual orientations working together.

The establishment strategy of cooptation is already working
on countering the potential of lesbianism as a radical strategy by
promoting a Playboy image of lesbianism and bisexuality to join its
exploitive heterosexual model. Through liberal tolerance of non-
hetero relationships the Amerikan machine is absorbing gays by
telling us it’s ok to sleep with anyone we want — as long as we
accept exploitation and are like heteros in every other way.

Also, by categorically eliminating all men (or all women, or all
heterosexual women) from our lives and our love it is much easier
to be lax in our analysis of the sexual/emotional relationships we
do have.

Exploitation Through Sexuality

Although sexual relationships are in the personal realm, their
political importance is basic to a struggle not only against sexism,
but also against the general alienation and exploitation of the
people. Sexuality has been used as yet another way to reinforce the
values of the consumer society.

Possession/Promiscuity

Emphasis on completely possessing someone (stereotypical
feminine) is related to the need created in our consumer
economy to define oneself by what one owns. This value is
important for stable monogamous units which provide for a
stable consumer/work force. Promiscuity (stereotypical
masculine) encourages the consumption of sexual relation-
ships (people?) at a voracious pace, alienating sexuality from
the rest of the person, and reducing the chance of emotional
ties and personal responsibility.

Sex Roles
Sex roles are limiting to individual potential, as well as to women
as a class, since it means assuming what people are like rather
than learning and exploring new possibilities of interaction.
Traditional male/female roles in sexuality have helped
support the exploitive labor system by allowing men who are
bossed all day to run the sexual show when they get home and
“feel like a man.’’
Performance
When sex was more secretive people didn’t have such expecta-
tions about what should come out of sexual relations. Instead
of spontaneous physical interaction, honest and pleasurable,
orgasm has become the goal to be faked, if not experienced.
Anxiety and dishonesty are likely outcomes of fitting expecta-
tions and reactions to performance programs set by Playboy,
Cosmo, or Masters and Johnson.
Standardized Attraction
Basing our sexual attractions on the standards of the mass
media is just one more way for Business to sell more clothes,
toothpaste, and makeup. It encourages us to see only
someone's appearance, to be ageist, and to hate ourselves
when we don't look like the standards that have been set.

More on page 14