local

Sage Productions:

Tea Schook

When Sage Productions was formed, the original goal of her members was to produce women's concerts for women, with both local and national performers. In the past year, as Sage has evolved, grown, and changed, so also has the Sage goal: Sage is a promoter of women's culture, an instrument for cultural design, and an opportunity for women to learn production skills.

It is the responsibility and goal of Sage to be a financially solvent project, responsibly handling our money so that we can survive and continue producing women's cultural events. Our solvency also means that we can support other women's projects directly by giving away some of our funds. For example, we donated $100 to the fund to bring a Black speaker to the conference on violence against women last September, and we gave another $100 to the fund to send local women to the Black Lesbian conference in San Francisco.

Sage is a collective of eight women, which means that there exists the same sort of imbalance of power and "hidden" hierarchy based on knowledge and assumption of responsibility that exists in every collective. There have been many collective discussions about power and hierarchy within the group; there will be many more. The issue is always present in any given group.

Sage women have learned how to work with one another on concerts and have much more to learn. The process for producing concerts has evolved through the years. Each event has the same basic areas of responsibility: Stage Manager, Hall Manager, Lighting Designer, Sound Technician, Publicity Coordinator, Childcare Coordinator, Work Exchange Coordinator, Ticket/Box Office Coordinator, and Production Coordinator.

Most of these jobs are self-explanatory, except the Production Coordinator. As all jobs are loosely rotated, so is this job. The Production Coordinator (PC) oversees all aspects of the production, working for months, assigning tasks to other members, and finalizing details. The coordinator for Meg Christian was Tea Schook; for Alix Dobkin, Barbara Jabaily; for Therese Edell, Carolyn; for Kay Gardner, Dee Calloway. Jackye Dunn coordinated the Sergi benefit and the Lesbian Follies.

The ideal toward which Sage aims is for all members to have a working knowledge and understanding of all aspects of concert production. We therefore rotate job responsibilities. The rotation of jobs for each concert is not mandatory since some areas require greater experience to reach full understanding.

Once the collective decides to produce a performer, a member of the group will volunteer for the position of PC. The remaining jobs are then filled by the other collective members. The woman volunteering for an area has total responsibility for that area and reports on progress to the PC at each weekly collective meeting. The PC, meanwhile, does all negotiating with performers’ representatives for contract terms, securing a hall for the performance, and housing for the performer and her road manager, should she have one. All decisions as to hall, ticket price, housing, and any extraordinary expenses are reached through consensus.

Several factors are considered in making the decision to produce a performer: cost, collective desire, and community support. The performer’s fee is not usually very prohibitive. For example, the fee for Sweet Honey in the Rock (SHIR) was $2000 for five performers. The expense that is overwhelming is travel for the performer and her road manager. Using SHIR again, travel expenses would be round-trip air fare for six women from Washington D.C. to Denver, at whatever rate the boys have currently fixed, probably close to, if not exceeding $4000.

If at least one member truly desires to produce a performer and conveys her enthusiasm to the others, some way will be found to produce that concert. Again for SHIR, the collective was unanimous in desiring to produce their concert.

The question then arises, “Will the women's community support this event?" (Will women buy tickets and attend the concert?). In the case of Sweet Honey in the Rock, a Black political a cappella group, it is doubtful. Chris Williamson, Meg Christian, and Holly Near are guaranteed sell-outs. Theresa Trull also has a large following. Alix Dobkin's concert was attended by approximately 230 women. Mary Watkins, a gifted Black musician, drew a similar crowd.

There is a pattern here.

It is not an accident. It is ugly.

The women's community in Denver and the surrounding towns is comprised of white middle-class women for the most part. These women, the Sage audience, want to listen to performers like themselves: White Girls. They are not particularly interested in politics; they've “been through that trip."

Will they pay to listen to a radical Jew who sings about hating men, anti-Semitism, and rape? Obviously, they didn't. Will they pay to listen to a Black composer/pianist perform beautiful jazz pieces? Paradox Productions discovered, to their great financial loss, that the women's community would not.

Acknowledging racism in the community is all well and good, but how do we confront it practically? Talk without action is meaningless. We compromise. We do the money-makers, the performers the women's community will support, and we use the money over expenses to bring performers of color and/or with strong politics whom the community will not support.

For example, producing Alix Dobkin was a risk we could afford to take due to the success of previous productions. We should not have had to consider so fine, important, and experienced a performer as a risk.

Additionally, Sage has instituted a fund into which a percentage of any profits from a concert are placed. When that fund reaches one half of the projected budget for SHIR, then Sage can produce them without going under and leaving Denver without women's cultural events for another year or two.

A second mechanism operating is the "too political syndrome." Alix Dobkin is "too political" (read "too boring"). Nonsense. Her concert was warm and humorous, her ideas and songs stimulating. So many women attended the Chris Williamson concerts and complained afterward that she wasn't political enough. Most of them did not attend Alix Dobkin's concert.

Final Budgets

Alix Dobkin Concert March 7, 1981

Expenses:

Performer's fee
Transportation
Hall rental fees
Publicity
Paid Advertising
Sound rental
Sound accessories
Childcare
Interpreter for hearing impaired
Tickets
Work exchange
Lighting accessories
Office expenses
Misc. expenses
Producer's fee

$300.00
392.00
333.43
186.89
27.50
200.00
22.00
25.00
25.00
30.00
45.00
20.00
50.00
75.00
300.00

TOTAL EXPENSES 2,081.82
TOTAL RECEIPTS 1,347.00

TOTAL LOSS + 734.82

Leaping Lesbian Follies February 14, 1981

Expenses:

Performers fees
Producer fee
Printing:
Publicity
Program
Hall rental
Sound rental
Light rental
Telephone
Supplies
Set expense
Food
Office expense:
Rent, postage, etc.
Prizes
Work exchange

$111.95
18.05
135.00
85.65
60.00
1.00
27.38
20.00
24.79
40.00
36.00
50.00

TOTAL EXPENSES 609.82
TOTAL RECEIPTS 1,230.00
TOTAL LEFT OVER $620.18

local

Problems Of Production

We are not self-righteous. We are not More Politically Correct Than Thou. We are not talking about faceless masses; we are talking about our friends. We are talking about ourselves. Racism is ugly. The false division of Political/Apolitical is ugly. This does not and cannot excuse us, however. Sage has been criticized for not producing women of color in the past, a charge with an all-too obvious base of truth. Is it racist for us to assume that the community will not attend a concert by a woman of color and therefore not take that risk? Yes. We, like most politically active women in Denver, have been discussing our racism as a group. We have ignored the fine performers in the national women's music circuit who are women of color. We are actively taking steps in planning our second year of production to rectify this.

Speaking of ugly boring political things, let's talk about money. Let's talk about ticket prices.

Are Sage ticket prices too high? Our response is too high for whom, and compared to what? Each woman must make her decision as to her priorities in spending her money. It is, however, difficult to understand choosing to give Barry Fey $10-$15 per ticket to attend a Joni Mitchell concert and begrudging $6 to attend a concert produced by women with a performer who supports other women. Or choosing to spend $3 just to get into the local disco, let alone the cost of drinking once in, rather than listening to a $6 concert by Therese Edell.

In determining ticket prices, Sage does not try to make megabucks. The first thing is a budget. This first budget is the ceiling budget, the absolute highest that everything -- equipment rental, hall rental, publicity, and other expenses listed in the attached budgets -- can possibly be. Those costs are totaled.

Sage has what is referred to as the "Hard Core 300," which is the lowest number of women we can reasonably expect to attend an event. This 300 is divided into the total ceiling budget. The result is usually between $7 and $8. After panicking that no one would pay so high a ticket price (we're no different from anyone else), the costs are cut in a revised budget. This generally brings the ticket prices down to the $6-$7 range.

One item in the budget that may raise questions is the "producer fee." This is the Sage fee for producing a concert. It pays for office rental, telephone, stationery, postage, and front money for future performers. This fee (usually half the performer’s fee) ensures that Sage can continue to pay her bills. It is the last item in the budget to be paid; only when the producer fee can be paid do we consider a concert “breaking even."

Any money received after breaking even is also used as front money for future productions.

Look at the two budgets carefully. Notice that after all expenses were paid, we made $620.00 on the Follies. We were expecting perhaps 200 women for that event, since that was the number who attended our other local production, the benefit for Janet Sergi. Imagine our surprise when over 300 women showed for the Follies.

Now, take note; we took a bath on Alix Dobkin, obliterating all the extra from the Follies and then some. Even after cutting costs to bare minimum, ticket prices were still around $7.50. So, we cut the price to $6 and prayed to the Goddess for a sell-out to break even (without a producer's fee). She did not.

MORE ON PAGE 22

Pro-Choice Rally In Colorado Springs

Kim Womantree In agreement with TERRA

On Saturday, June 13, at 1 p.m., about 200 women and men marched and rallied to show support for a woman's right to choose abortion. The marchers were almost all white, cheerful and loud as they enlivened downtown Colorado Springs, a military/tourist/college town. The marchers chanted:

Keep Your Laws Off our Bodies;

Not the Church, Not the State, WOMEN will control our fate;

Raise your voice for pro-choice;

All we are saying is give us a choice.

A handful of "Right-to-Lifers" tagged along behind, but soon got discouraged and rejoined the demonstration as a larger handful at the rally site, where they paraded with their portfolios of famous fetuses.

Meanwhile the crowd settled back to hear many speakers. About half the speakers were women in the "helping professions": counselors, doctors, social workers, health technicians, who work with women who need and get, or don't get, abortions.

Of the rest of the speeches, some were personal experiences; women spoke horror stories of illegal abortions, of giving up babies for adoption and wondering about or regretting it years later. Other speeches were by a few supportive men and independent feminists or spokespeople for activist groups.

Some statistics were brought out that seemed especially important to me:

1. Only 5 or 6 states (Colorado is one) still fund Medicaid abortions--which has clear implications for poor and Third World women.

2. Women federal employees, including those in the military and the Peace Corps have to pay for their own abortions when every other pregnancy-related expense is covered by employers' insurance.

3. One out of 10 female children are sexually assaulted by the age of 18. If this results in pregnancy, in order to obtain a state-funded abortion, the victim would have to file a report of rape or incest within 24-48 hours after occurrence. The speaker, who worked with young people, pointed out that victims of such crimes are not going to report promptly to follow that or any other arbitrary deadline.

4. Teenage abortion statistics: One-third of all abortions are obtained by teenagers (age 15-19). The United States has the highest teenage pregnancy rate of any industrialized country. Teenage mothers who give birth are 15-19 times more likely to die as a result of the pregnancy or a miscarriage. If the mother survives, her baby is 2-3 times more likely to die early from complications or be stillborn. Of teenage mothers who become pregnant, 79% of the 15-19 year olds will not finish high school. If they marry, their marriages are three times as likely to end in divorce. Of high school health programs, 6 out of 10 include no birth control information, a situation which Moral Majority influence may aggravate unless PTAs get on the ball to make sure teenagers are informed about methods of birth control. 80% of teenagers are heterosexually active by the age of 19; 10% of these result in pregnancy.

Health problems are more common with 2nd trimester abortions. One quarter of all 2nd (after 3 months) abortions are gotten by teenagers. The picture we get from these statistics is of a population that in general gets poorer health care, because teenagers wait longer to go in for care, have little money and little information about the health care system, and usually need parental consent.

5. Health risks of childbirth are greater than those of abortion for teenagers, women over 30, and all non-white women.

6. 22 states don't give AFDC basic support to a pregnant woman until AFTER the

MORE ON PAGE 18

Big Mama Rag, July, 1981 - Page 7