Free Programs at

The Denver Women’s Resource Center is sponsoring a series of free, lunchtime mini-workshops and evening legal seminars for women during November and December.

Workshops will be held from 11 A.M. to 1:30 P.M. on Wednesdays and will include group discussions, speakers, and films. On November 13, “Uterine & Breast Cancer” will be the topic with the Denver Unit of American Cancer Society co-sponsoring the discussion. As part of the workshop, participants will have the opportunity to make a doctor’s appointment for a free pap test. Another workshop of note will include a slide presentation designed to show how children’s books are still stereotyped and to explain the need for supplementing a child’s reading with non-sexist literature. The presentation, “Sex-Role Stereotyping in Children’s Books” will be followed by a discussion led by members of the American Association of University Women of Boulder. In addition, a book display will be set up offering alternative suggestions for children's reading materials.

On November 19 through 22, the Resource Center will offer “On Job Direction,” a four-day employment workshop that focuses on improving job-hunting skills and techniques. It offers each woman a chance to assess her personal goals, strengths, and weaknesses through individual and group counseling and gives her practical experience in writing a resume and interviewing. Free child care will be available.

A legal seminar, to be held on November 12, will feature a panel of lawyers who will discuss “Finding a Good Lawyer.” The panel will cover such questions as whether you need an attorney for your grievance, how to choose a good lawyer, and what essential questions to ask your lawyer. Other topics to be discussed are qualifying for free legal services and filing grievances. Free child care is also available for these seminars. © The complete list of the Resource Center’s program is listed in the Feminist Calendar of Events on the back cover of this newspaper.

Big Mama Rag would like to extend our most heartfelt thanks and appreciation to the women of Raw Honey who helped make the paper's second benefit at the Oxford Hotel a success. Your fine vocal and musical talent was certainly enjoyed by everyone who attended the benefit. Members of the band are: (from left to right) Christy Guio, Judy Blair, Chris Schmeltzer, Susan Nichols, and Bean Hollander. Seated in front are Lorrie Baum and the band’s mascot, Boo. For booking contact the Nova Talent Agency in Boulder at (303) 825-7221. Big Mama’s next benefit will be a birthday party celebrating our two years of publishing to be held at The Oxford, Nov. 16 at 8 p.m. (See ad this issue.)

Becky Morgenstern is now playing with Raw Honey.

Page 7

Inexpensive Contraceptives Women's Resource Center Available for Women, Men

Sherilyn Brandenstein

Although numerous folks in Colorado will at some time in their reproductive years use the services of a family planning agency, most of them are not aware of just how extensive those services are. In our state, there are three primary sources of family planning assistance: Denver Health & Hospitals, the State Department of Health, and Rocky Mountain Planned Parenthood (RMPP).

The most well-known service of Planned Parenthood is that of providing contraceptives. A woman, teen or adult, may obtain the contraceptive of her choice by making an appointment at a Planned Parenthood clinic. There, the doctor will examine her and give her a Pap smear before prescribing the method of birth control she has chosen. After the initial exam, she is expected to return once a year for a Pap smear and breast examination. The fee for these services is charged according to the income of the woman and/or her family. In other words, each woman is asked to pay as much as she can afford. For a patient unable to pay any fee, some limited funds are available to cover her services until she has an adequate income.

If a woman thinks she may be pregnant and is not sure what to do about it, RMPP offers both pregnancy testing (by urine test and pelvic examination) and problem pregnancy counseling. Both require appointments and modest fees. If she seriously decides to discontinue her pregnancy, a woman can be referred to a private doctor, a public hospital, or the Planned Parenthood Central Denver clinic for an abortion.

A contraceptive patient at almost any RMPP clinic can usually obtain other services there as well. These include testing and treatment for venereal disease and vaginal infections. She can also receive a breast exam and learn how to do her own self-exam at home. If she is contemplating a tubal ligation (female sterilization), the Planned Parenthood staff can provide counseling and referral to a doctor for such a procedure.

What about the man who decides to take some responsibility in the area of controlling reproduction? Of course, condoms are available at all RMPP clinics. But for the man who has determined that he no longer wants the potential to reproduce at all, Planned Parenthood offers vasectomy counseling, as well as referral either to a private urologist or to the RMPP Central Denver vasectomy clinic.

So, it would seem that Rocky Mountain Planned Parenthood provides services primarily to individuals and families. However, the agency also reaches out to the community with more generalized programs. One of the fastest-growing segments of RMPP is the training department. Working out of the central office in Denver, the

More on Page 18

Feminist Health Service in Colorado Springs

The Women’s Health Service of Colorado Springs (WHSCS) started about two and a half years ago with its original purpose being to provide educational opportunities and material to women about their bodies through self-health classes or “clinics.”

The women spoke with many other women and doctors all over the state, put out literature about health care and prevention, and some members went to the Feminist Clinic in Los Angeles to see how that clinic operated. The health service provides self-health clinics in informal gatherings and for large, formal presentations.

According to a pamphlet of the service, “self-health revolves around the ‘well woman’ concept, teaching body awareness through reading, audio-visual aids, discussion, and gynecological self-examination. By practicing preventive medicine, women neither diagnose nor prescribe, but gain knowledge and confidence about their bodies and reduce their ignorance and fears about common concerns such as burning, itching, discharges, late periods, breast or cervical cancer, birth control, pregnancy, and menopause. At the first unusual sign, women can seek professional help and take whatever action necessary before a problem becomes uncomfortable or even fatal.”

Since the health service began receiving frequent inquiries about the local doctors and the quality of medical care, it has interviewed local gynecologists and other doctors. “We found that there are no women gynecologists in Colorado Springs,” says Susan Keating, a founder of the group. “Some doctors would not cooperate at all, but we managed to compile a directory of services, fees, and attitudes of some of the doctors here.”

The health service also wanted to go into examination rooms, with the permission of the patient, and see just how women were treated. Again, many doctors were very threatened by this. But there were those doctors who were open and were very cooperative and helpful. The service wanted to provide advocacy for women who were often misinformed, confused, or unaware of their rights as patients.

Continues Susan, “When I went to the Feminist Clinic in Los Angeles, the doctor there was very open and explained everything. I’m sure they have things to improve on (at the clinic) but it's the best health care I’ve seen for women.”

The Women’s Health Service found out that women who were in a pregnancy dilemma had no place to go to receive any counseling. Now counseling is provided through the health service. No particular solution to the problem of an unwanted pregnancy is pushed at the counseling service. A woman is provided with an explanation of her alternatives in a supportive, non-judgmental atmosphere.

If a woman chooses to terminate her pregnancy, she soon discovers that in Colorado Springs no office procedures are available because all the doctors who will perform abortions will do so only in hospitals. Thus the financial relationship between the hospital and the doctor is strengthened, at the expense of a woman who does not have the money to pay for a hospital stay.

However, even women who can pay the cost do not receive good adequate medical care. Some doctors use unnecessary anesthesia and large equipment that just increases a woman's trauma. So many Colorado Springs women go outside their community to have abortions. The health service provides an advocacy/companionship service to any woman who wants to go to Denver to have an abortion. All the details can be handled through the service.

The Department of Public Health, Planned Parenthood, Colorado General Hospital, and crisis lines are a few of the agencies that recognize, emotionally support, and refer women to the service.

However, since women are at the bottom of the financial ladder in this country and have little money of their own, the groups that they create and maintain often suffer financial insecurity. The WHSCS is no exception. The service is financially supported solely by its unsalaried organizers and donations. The group has sought and is seeking funding to keep its services available for women. Future plans include the establishment of a free pre-natal clinic, a full-fledged women’s clinic, having some members trained as nurse-clinicians, and publishing the second edition of the service's handbook Circle One.

The handbook was to be available this fall, but printing problems have delayed its entry into the world of feminist health care. The group hopes that the printer will resolve their problems (financial ones, we're told) because “back orders are piling up!”

Circle One was published to help consolidate all the material the service had been printing. It was the first self-health handbook and is used all over the country.

The health service can be reached at 730 N. Tejon St., Colorado Springs, Colorado 80902. (303) 471-7717. Or contact Suzanne Keating, 831 E. Monument, Colorado Springs, Colorado 80903, (303) 473-8700.