letters home to mama

Let’s Be Fair

Re: Column on Lilith in the Resource listing

Dear BMR:

Whoever edited our questionnaire must have been very tired - there are a number of errors that seriously misrepresent Lilith.

Work exchange is not to find womyn jobs, but to facilitate an exchange of skills without money being involved, i.e.: I’ll build you a cabinet if you fix my car.

Emily did not write the statement of politics alone - Cindy and I did it together. It was not fair to the other staffers as it only reflected our personal politics; normally it would have been filled out all together at a staff meeting, but we received our form late and there wasn't time to do it collectively. Apparently another womyn's group was also not given enough time to fill out the questionnaire collectively and perhaps we both deserve acknowledgment of the time crunch by BMR in BMR.

Emily and Cindy do not make all the decisions at Lilith. At the time we filled out the questionnaire we wrote that we made all the "financial decisions" - which is no longer the case. It is undeniably true that our living at Lilith and everything being in my name sets up an unequal power structure between us and the other staffers. It is something we, the entire group, are struggling with and a rearrangement of "finances" is not unlikely if other women want to take that much responsibility for Lilith.

INSIDE BMR

Houston Conference........... 1  
LPULENS is ace dekees ied whan  
Now and the SWP........e.ee0e 3  

DERNGUIM E iicaike dss dev ee  

Deb Taylor  
Local News  

Clair Kaplan  
Kathy Riley  

Kathy Riley  
Mary Wadding  

Advertising  
Kathy Riley  

Clair Kaplan  

CONTRIBUTORS  

edit all material. Subscriptions. This publication is on  

_ noon,  
drop by at 322-2010.  

National /International News  

Cover/Features  

(phone 837-8405)  

Pandora Eileen Bresnahan Romey Rainwater  
Laurie Wehman Kate Sharp Colo. Spgs. Women's  
Rocky Fuller Romey Rainwater Health Services  
Vicki Piotter Dan Melland Clinic  

Andrea Chessman Bev Renick Beki Pastor  

Kathy Kahn Kathy Fine Linda Rechtor  

Big Mama Rag is a feminist periodical published monthly for women by  
Big Mama Rag, Inc., a non-profit corporation.  
Submissions may be submitted to 1724 Gaylord, Denver, Colorado 80206.  
The deadline for the receipt of material is the fifteenth of each month.  
Please enclose a stamped self-addressed envelope with all manuscripts.  
No responsibility is accepted for unsolicited material.  
Subscription rates are $6.00 for subscriptions in the U.S., $8.00 in Canada, $10.00 overseas, and $12.00 to institutions. BMR is free to women in prison and in mental institutions.  
BMR is available on microfilm through Bell and Howell.  
Office hours are Monday through Friday, and some afternoons.  
All materials are copyright 1977 by Big Mama Rag.  

No one is paid. The only monetary benefit I get for the work I do is a roof over my head. We do not legally have non-profit status yet, but we function as such because of our beliefs.

"Emily is financially responsible for a mortgage on the building they are buying" is a peculiarly uninformative sentence. Due to the obscene cost of renting in Boulder it was cheaper to make a down-payment on a house and live with Lilith. "Buying a building" is a cold phrase that is in no way evocative of what Lilith is trying to be - a comfortable space for womyn where they are safe to explore and express themselves.

Lilith's was not the only column that was sloppily edited in such a way as to make us appear somewhat unattractive, discouraging women from using our services. While I am sure it was not consciously done, it seems to me that we are all womyn and although our politics are not exactly the same we should be fair to our sisters while pushing each other to change.

-Emily

Sorry for the misunderstanding. We printed what information was on the questionnaire you returned.

You did not say on the questionnaire that you and Cindy had filled it out together, nor did you say other staffers were on the collective.

Lesbian Mamas

AN OPEN LETTER TO BIG MAMA RAG

Dear Sisters,  
This is to keep you in touch with the process of the Rachele Yaseen Defense Fund.

IN THE EVENT THERE IS NO ANSWER WHEN CALLING THE BMR NUMBER, A MESSAGE MAY BE LEFT FOR US AT THE WOMAN TO WOMAN BOOKSTORE. THEIR NUMBER IS 837-0781 AND THEY ARE OPEN 10am-5pm.

Graphics of BMR's collective are by none other than her own--team.

Office  
Clair Kaplan  
Mary Wadding  

Culture  
Tea Schook  
Finances  
Deb Taylor  
Tea Schook  

Photography  
Deb Taylor  

Margo  

Manuscripts and artwork  
The deadline is the fifteenth of each month.  
Please enclose a stamped self-addressed envelope with all manuscripts.  
No responsibility is accepted for unsolicited material.  
We reserve the right to edit all material.  

BMR is also available on microfilm through Bell and Howell.  
Office hours are 10 am to 5 pm.  
Call us before you drop by at 322-2010.

Fund, which hasn't been especially visible during the few months since our case was won. We're aware that those of you who have followed and supported our struggle will want to know the status of events.

As you must know, the court ruled in April that Ginny would retain full custody of Rachele. The defense fund took a break at this point while members recovered from the intensive fundraising effort which preceded the court victory. About $4,000 remained owing after the case ended.

Meanwhile another Denver lesbian mother, Donna Levy, won full custody of her lover's daughter in the summer. A group of women formed a victory fund, the Denver Area Lesbian Mothers' Defense Fund, to raise money for legal costs in this case. In August, the RYDF and some gay men organized a dance at the Oxford Hotel to benefit both lesbian mother defense funds.

The two funds have elected to work separately, each to clear its own debt. We plan to cooperate where we can, but to maintain separate identities, since we have different financial and political goals, and have discovered that we can work more efficiently as two independent groups.

Big Mama Rag published a letter last month from a woman who was disappointed and angry because, being under 21, she wasn't allowed into the Oxford dance. We agree that it is inconsistent with the spirit of a feminist event to exclude people on the basis of their age. Every other event we have organized has been open to all women. When we learned that IDs would be checked at the Oxford we discussed the issue at some length with the hotel management, who, though sympathetic, remained firm. We chose to go ahead because we felt it would make no sense to withdraw the event from the entire community, especially as the dance had already been publicized.

In organizing future benefits, we will consider such factors earlier — and thus strive to make better informed choices. We would not choose to deliberately exclude any women from events we organize, and we are open to dialogue around the conflicts involved in raising money.

Julie, Jackie,  
Ginny, Wood - the women of the RYDF.

Diana’s Grove

AN OPEN LETTER TO DENVER SISTERS

We feel there are several statements which appeared in the last issue of BMR concerning Diana's Grove which are incorrect, and may be misleading. We do not view ourselves as an alternative to the bars, Olivia concerts, Woman to Woman, or anything else available to women in Denver. Rather we see our objectives to be an enhancement and worthwhile addition to the existing services for women. We would also like to emphasize that all women are encouraged to participate in our activities. To quote from our Statement of Purpose:

The womyn's community as defined by Diana's Grove includes all womyn of any race, creed, sexual preference, religious orientation, class, age or marital status. Diana's Grove is working to develop a forum for the divergent feminist political philosophies which exist within the womyn's movement. We emphasize politics and programs which focus on ending womyn's oppression. We seek to encourage an appreciation of independent womynhood, elevate the condition of womyn and offer alternatives that provide womyn with means of control over our own bodies and our own lives.  
Anyone interested in obtaining further information about Diana's Grove or a copy of our statement of purpose may write to: Diana's Grove, PO Box 3024, Denver, CO 80201.  
In Struggle,  
Diana's Grove Collective

Big Mama Rag Vol. 5 No. 8

Kathy Kahn

Dear Sisters and Comrades,

In your last issue, you printed an interview with me around the child custody struggle my children and I are going through. I would like to thank you for giving us your support and for doing a sympathetic interview. But there are a couple of points I'd like to clean up.

The interview was done to my understanding, for three purposes: 1) to show your readers a case where class discrimination and red-baiting is used against a mother and her children. 2) To support a struggle for justice where a small victory might set a precedent for more victories, 3) To support the effort to have criminal frame-up charges dropped and help keep me out of prison.

But the implication of your introduction to the interview (and the areas you concentrated on in the interview) was that it was meant to "expose" some people, namely Si and Charlotte Kahn.

I do not see them as the main enemy in this struggle - they're just the leading actors on a stage set by the State - a stage which is loaded with props and facades, and where victims are chosen and attacked according to the latest script.

As the defendant in this act, I would like to let your readers know that my enemy is the same as yours, and it's a whole lot bigger and more powerful than those two people who are acting for the prosecution.

I hope this error can be cleaned up in your next issue and thank you for your love and support. This is one struggle that will be won - the children are the revolution.

In Unity,

Kathy Kahn

Ed response: I agree with your criticism.

Some papers had the bottom cut off too short, so that the phone number for the defense fund that is being organized was left out. It is 837-0781.

Kathy has been charged with trespassing on the alleged property of the head of Coons’ security while on a Coons picket line. Her court date is Oct. 28 at 9 am at Golden Municipal Court Building, 911 10th St., Golden. Supporters are encouraged to attend. Other court cases are coming up and need your support also. Anyone interested in doing any work to help the strike and boycott are urged to call the union hall at 279-3656.

Love Letter

BIG MAMA RAG  
you are  

all there is  
Has been  

so  
what you are  
Has become  

and  
shall be  

is  
through your love  
what I am  

Big Mama Rag.  
Keep up the good work.

Spankie Lowery

Women's Correctional Institute  
1034 Bragg St.  

Raleigh, NC  

letters continued on page 4