IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Trouble With Bars

together. I realized early in the
game that I was not in this business
to make money. This was my political
statement! Yet, here in this isol-
ated spot, women's cars were fre-
quently vandalized and/or burglar-
ized. Two women were beaten up.

Our windows were broken, we were
robbed twice. I personally prevent-
ed a woman from being beaten and a 16
year old girl from being raped and
God knows what more. Many nights I
risked a gun or a knife in my gut by
threatened angry men who couldn't
get in. I was also arrested and
spent a couple of hours in jail for
working to a locked door. Two and
one half years later, only after

2 women had been robbed at gunpoint
the "Middle of the Road" closed. I
could no longer bear the anxiety I
felt for the safety of the women I
loved, my customers. When I closed
I had $200 to my name. But I had
something much more precious, much
more valuable. I had the knowledge
that I had for many years provided

a place for women to get together.
May I say without humility that

if women who met their present close
friends and lovers in a place I ran,
decided to give a party for me, they
would have to hire the largest hall
in St. Louis if they all attended.

I deserve a party, by the way.
Well, at least I deserve more than I
got at the last place I opened.
Because I always felt “we deserved
something better" and because my
credit was good I moved uptown!
Parking was excellent. The place
was large and furnished beautifully.
The neighborhood was supposedly ex-
cellent. We deserved this place!
Opening night was a tremendous succ-
ess. Over 200 women had been reach-
ed by the terrific St. Louis grape-
vine. Within one month of opening
women were coming from everywhere,
including many, many closets. It was
the place to go. But also within one
month a barrage of miseries had be-
fallen us. Our $1100 windows were
broken. (We couldn't afford the
exorbitant cost of window insurance.)
The broken windows were also shot at.
We had a very frightening bomb scare.
(The police response was laughable,
they later in the newspapers denied
we ever had a bomb threat, even
though it is on tape at police head-
quarters.) Men flashed at both our
front and back doors. Four men
frequently harassed women on the
streets and in their cars--when I
went to the police to complain about
their poor surveillance and through
much perseverance on my part we
discovered that 3 of the 4 men were
in the police academy about to grad-
uate and become St. Louis’ finest.
We were hassled at our front door
nightly by men. We had various ways
of getting rid of them. And then
the neighborhood circulated a peti-
tion to have us closed. The laws of
St. Louis allow anyone the right to
circulate a petition and if they
gain 51% of the neighborhood signat-
ures a bar is closed. They do not

have to give a reason for the peti-

tion. Justice--hah! They got their
51% through intimidation, lies, and
coercion, and we lost our license.
Because our $1.00 cover charge at the

From page 2

door had allowed me to put some money
away I was able to afford an attorney.
We fought and won a restraining order:
This order forced the liquor commis-
sioner to issue us a new license. We
were never closed. Our next court
date would have been October 11, and

I am confident we would have won here
too. But on September 11 "Mor or Les"
was firebombed. Who--who did this?
Not the faggots who were unhappy when
we invaded their domain, not the
Blacks who were unhappy when we in-
vaded their domain. Oh yes, it was
the wonderful white middle class,
hypocritical, bigoted America who
burned "Mor or Les" down, and posi-
tively the culprits were not women.

I was blamed and arrested. I was
jailed for 7 hours before they could
decide they had no evidence to keep
me jailed, and the backlash of angry
caring women must have scared the hell
out of the powers that be in St. Louis.
The media persecuted me for 5 days.
The burned out bar and the suggestion
that I was the culprit was front page
sensationalism. They tried and con-
victed me in the media. What pained
me more than this adversity was the
fact that many in the gay community
believed the media. I believe that
most of the faggots wanted to believe
I did it, and I guess the women that
believed (and there were many) are
among the many ostriches in this
country that believe anything the ly-
ing media has to say. I feel very
deeply saddened by this. Not because
they thought me guilty, but because
they are so politically naive they
are not aware of the shit that is com-
ing down all over this country. I
pray that they wake up before it is
too late. Those miserable closets
get mighty stuffy. After I was re-
leased from jail I was threatened
anonymously a number of times. I was
threatened that if I didn't shut up I
would be jailed again and not come
out of jail alive. And I have to say
honestly that for the first time in
my life I was frightened. I hope you
realize that I was in a state of shock
I could not function. I could not cry.
I ached. I had lost my best friend
and I had been accused of killing her.
I was asked to move from my house--I
felt I had no place to go. People
stared at me on the streets and they
whispered, at least I thought all of
this happened. I'm sure it did, but
somehow I feel not too sure of any-
thing. As time went on I felt more
and more isolated--deserted. Where
were my friends the day 2 months later
that the media said the case was
closed and I had theoretically been
exonerated? I did not receive one
phone call in the 48 hours after the
media reported this exoneration. I
am broke--lawyers took care of that--
and I feel very much alone, and still
very scared when I realize the power
the media wields.

You ask "what's the trouble with
women's bars?" Chocolate, since you
decided to complain, and now possibly
have “the other side of the story"
maybe you can answer this question!

Most sincerely,
Mac McCann

Women Against Pornography

From page 7

The public outrage demonstrated at this march will help create a political
climate ripe for the introduction and enforcement of legislation against

"immorality" sought by right-wing groups.

Already Morality in Media, a right

wing group, has sent literature and petitions to feminist organizations in
New York City soliciting support in their campaign and probably will be

circulating these petitions today.

According to them the "ideology of porn-

ography" is "sex anytime, anywhere, with anyone of any sex."
As lesbians under direct attack from such right wing campaigns, we feel WAP's

virtual silence on lesbian issues contributes to our oppression.

For example, when we know large numbers of lesbians are working in WAP and are always
part of every feminist street action, why have we been so noticeably excluded

from the list of groups that their flyer summons to the march?

Silence on

lesbianism contributes to the prevailing notion that lesbians are deviant and
shameful and perpetuates the invisibility of this important political and

personal choice for women.

We raise these issues in a spirit of sisterhood, valuing the work of all the
women who are struggling to end the violence in our lives.
Our struggle for a better understanding of our oppression is a slow, frust-

rating, painful process.

We welcome criticism of the issues we've raised and

hope to initiate dialogue among all concerned women.

Majory Ackerman
Quinn Bevan
Cathy Cockrell

Eileen Kane
Doris Lunden
Marty Pottenger

Dessie Woods

It was a whole line of people, all
either European or North American,
all white people, and they went
through the line fluently until they
got to me and "Who are you?" And they
held me there for at least 15 min-
utes, then they went and got one of
the immigration officials to take me
into a sound-proof room and sit me

on one side of a table and she sat on
the other side of the table and con-
tinued to harass me and some of the
questions, “Who is the African Peo-
ple's Socialist Party?" I told her
"It's the African People's Socialist
Party." "What does this African organ-
ization do?" "Organize." ..... It was
questions like this that they con-
tinued to ask me, continued to har-
ass me around, until I had to tell
them, “Look, I can't answer no more
questions. The only thing you can do
is let me through or whatever you're
going to do, but you need to make a
decision."

So they decided, because they did not
want to expose their own selves and they
realized the hell the U.S. was catching
around the Dessie Woods case and the
human rights campaign, they did not
want to expose their selves, so it
was necessary for them to make a tac-
tical decision to allow me in, but
not without being watched and not with-
out being harassed. And the African
People's Socialist Party has been under
serious harassment ever since. So the
tour had great significance, and I
cannot overstate and I cannot explain
at this particular time the depth of
that significance.

But I'll tell you one thing, when
Dessie Woods is free, we'll all see
the significance, because there is no
question in my mind, and there should
be no question in anyone's mind who
actually supports Dessie Woods, that
Dessie Woods will be free, because
the power of the people has shown
clearly, historically, that the people
do have the power to free Dessie Woods,
and I believe we have that power and
that's why I work around the case of
Dessie Woods because I know we can
free her.

Would you tell us about the African
National Prison Organization?

The National Committee to Defend
Dessie Woods was organized under the
leadership of the African People's
Socialist Party. Not only are we in-
volved in the struggle to free Dessie
Woods, we're also involved in building
the African National Prison Organiza-
tion (ANPO), because we know that one
out of every four black men will go to
prison in his lifetime, that a govern-
ment statistic, that's a known fact,
that one out of every four black men,
whether they commit a crime or not,
will go to prison in their lifetime.
That 80% of the women in prison are
black women, that 58% of the people on
death row are black people. And we
understand that that's why we see a
concrete need to build ANPO.

Big Mama Rag Vol.8 No.1

From page 6

But not only to build ANPO, but to
support the just struggles of all
oppressed peoples, nationally and
internationally. So on Sunday (Nov.
25th) the African People's Socialist
Party (APSP) made a call for a demon-
stration that was going to be held in
Gainesville, Florida in support of the
just Iranian struggles and the demands
that they were raising.

We assembled in the African commun-
ity, where we chanted down the street,
"If you want to set the hostages free,
Send the Shah to Khomeini.", etc.

The entire police department, I be-
lieve, or 99% of the police department
marched with that rally, as we rallied
through the black community. Once we
got downtown, we were no longer in the
black community, and when we turned
the corner, it was a mob of white
people, there ready and waiting to
attack us. We continued the demonstra-
tion because we were supposed to have
speakers and we were going to proceed
and try to get the speaking done, but
we were confronted. These people were
supposed to be anti-Iranian and pro-
American, but they weren't talking
about no Iranians, they were talking
about, "Niggers, niggers, niggers."

And that was one time we realized that
first hand, nothing about the Shah,
nothing about Iran was raised. It was
"Nigger" "Go home, Niggers" and all
kinds of slogans like that that they
were raising.

This is what we were confronted
with. We had women and children and
this mob attacked us and we were out-
numbered like 20 to 1 and in the con-
frontation - a very militant and phys-
ical confrontation with this white mob,
the police disappeared. The police
disappeared until they saw us strik-
ing back....this is when the police
reappeared and took one of the bro-
thers that was in the demonstration
and beat him and put him in a police
car and arrested him..... the mob took
the red, black and green flag and
tore it to shreds. And so we clearly
understand that the just demands of
the Iranian people,....we have unity
and solidarity - we're united with
that struggle. Because we understand
that the Shah is guilty of killing
thousands and thousands of Iranian
people, just like the U.S. government
is guilty of killing thousands and
thousands of African people in this
country. As revolutionaries, we have
a responsibility to be out there.

And progressive people, especially
white people, you got to understand
clearly whose side you are on, be-
cause U.S. imperialism is dying, the
U.S. is getting into ass kicking, and
you can be on the side of the ass kick-
ing or you can unite with the just
liberation struggles of the African
people and other oppressed peoples
because African people gonna win,
that’s a known fact. I know we're
going to win.

Phone or telegram President Carter
and Georgia Governor Busbee and de-

mand the immediate release of Dessie
Woods. These calls are being coordin-

ated internationally so that Carter
and Busbee will constantly be put on

notice. Each area will be making
calls during a certain week of each
month. Be creative, call person to person
and ask for Dessie Woods. We cannot
let the pressure down until Dessie is free.
The chart is as follows:

Make Calls During
Week Starting

West Coast
Northwest
East Coast, South

Europe, Midwest

James Earl Carter

1st Sunday of each month
2nd Sunday of each month
3rd Sunday of each month

4th Sunday of each month

202-456-1414

executive office 202-395-3000

Governor Busbee (GA)

404-261-1776 home

capitol bldg. 404-656-1776
K. Tinahan, warden of Georgia's Insti-
tute of Corrections 912-453-5218