Local Nurses  
Issue Demands  

Judy Barlow  

Denver area nurses, as if following  
the example of nurses from the west  
coast and northeastern cities, are  
demanding better working conditions  
and higher pay. A “sick-out” and  
rally held on June 26th was attended by  
more than 700 supporters from 36  
area hospitals and clinics.  

The average hourly wage for a reg-  
istered nurse in Denver is slightly  
more than $6 per hour. Because of the  
relatively low pay and poor working  
conditions (see related article on  
page 10), many nurses have chosen not  
to work in the nursing profession.  
This has caused a nursing shortage.  
Many area hospitals have had to close  
down some of their patient care units  
because of their inability to find  
enough nurses to staff all units.  
Hospitals have become more dependent  
on private nursing pools for temporary  
help.  

Nurse activists, who are working  
to form a coalition for collective  
bargaining, believe that more nurses  
would return to work if the wages  
were increased and the working condi-  
tions were improved. These nurses are  
working to form a Denver nurses’  
coalition as a means for using collect-  
ive bargaining to force hospital  
administrators to agree to changes in  
working conditions and pay.  

Ninety-eight percent of all nurses  
are women. One local nurse said that  
there are more and more single women  
with families to support leaving the  
nursing profession because they can get  
both better pay and better working con-  
ditions in some unskilled jobs such as  
checking groceries. "Many grocery  
clerks have unions," she said, "but  
there is no union for nurses here in  
Denver."  

Judy Barlow  

Ms. K.T. Pantzer, a Denver feminist,  
and her attorney Patricia Price are  
currently preparing for a hearing  
with the City of Denver. In her suit  
Ms. Pantzer contends that the Denver  
Public Library (DPL) is guilty of  
breach of contract, sex discrimination  
and sexual harassment in their  
dealings with her while she was  
employed there.  

Ms. Pantzer was hired by DPL in  
August, 1976 and became a clerk IV  
for the shelving department several  
months later. Over a period of time  
her duties grew to include jobs that  
did not fit her actual job descript-  
ion including attending department  
head meetings, conducting performance  
interviews with employees of the  
shelving department, hiring and firing  
employees in her department, doing  
payroll for the department, filling  
out job requisitions and budget  
allocations, turning in monthly,  
quarterly, and annual reports and  
many other duties usually reserved  
for department heads. Although she  
assumed these responsibilities, she  
continued to receive the significantly  
lower pay of a clerk IV.  

When Ms. Pantzer complained to the  
personnel officer about the discrepancy  
between her duties and her pay and  
asked to be reclassified to a position  
commensurate with her duties, she was  
told that there were to be no reclass-  
ifications without further study.  
While she was awaiting a decision she  
learned that two male library employ-  
ees had already been reclassified to  
higher positions.  

Ms. Pantzer said that her trouble  
with library administrators had started  
earlier when she had contacted the  
Occupational Safety and Health Admin-  
istration (OSHA) about possible safe-  
ty and health hazards in the base-  
ment shelving area of the ODPL main  
branch at 13th and Broadway. She  
cited that the lack of adequate  
ventilation and possible spread of  
disease from inhalation of dust may  

be hazardous to workers' health.  

When she returned from vacation  

in December, 1978 she was criticized  
for all phases of her work. A man  

was now assigned as head of the  
shelving department and she was  

told to return to the duties of  

“clerk IV for which she was being paid.  
She was told to accept the change or  
quit. The new head of shelving sug-  

"I love my job,” another nurse said.  
“But, that love doesn't mean much when  
it comes to feeding and clothing my  

two children. Also, the hours are bad  
in that there is last minute notice of  
overtime and a lot of weekend work and  
my kids are not old enough to be left  
alone."  

Besides forcing hospitals to close  
down some patient care units, the  
nursing shortage has caused problems  
in other areas. With more and more  
dependence placed on temporary person-  
nel, the quality of patient care is  
sometimes questionable. This is not  
to say that nurses who work through  
temporary labor pools are inferior,  
but many are unfamiliar with procedures  
that differ from one hospital to the  
next and there is also the question  
of continuity of patient care.  

Working through private personnel  
pools has been the answer for a grow-  
ing number of nurses. The number of  
nursing pools in the Denver area has  
increased from 4 to 24 in the last  
few years. Working through personnel  
pools allows a nurse to choose work  
hours that are most convenient for  
her as well as the right to refuse jobs  
in areas where she does not want to  
work. Personnel pools generally offer  
wages that are similar to those paid by  
area hospitals, but offer no benefit  
plans.  

Although many nurses have become  
involved in organizing the beginnings  
of a Denver nurses’ coalition, many  
other nurses have been reluctant to  
participate or voice their complaints  
for fear that it will cause problems  
with their supervisors. Nurses working  
to organize the coalition are currently  
working to recruit those nurses who  
are not yet active in fighting for high-  
er wages and better working conditions.  
Hospital administrators who are concerned  
about the prospect of having to deal  
seriously with an organized collective  
bargaining unit are trying to find ways  
to meet some of the nurses' demands  
hoping to satisfy enough of the nurses  
to get them to stop organizing.  

Katherine Davenport  

The first weekend in July a planning  
conference for the National March on  
Washington for Lesbian and Gay Rights  
was held at the University of Houston  
in Houston, Texas. Each state was asked  
to send four delegates, the makeup  
of each delegation was to be cosexual  
and at least 20% Third World.  
Jackie St. Joan, Kerr McManus, Jim  
Newton and Katherine Davenport were  
the delegates from Colorado. Out of a  
total of 126 delegates in attendance  
64 were men, 62 were women and 36 were  
Third World. Many alternates and ob-  
servers attended the conference  
bringing the total number present at  
the conference to over 200.  

The key decisions made in Houston  
were these:  

- that the date of the March remain  
October 14th; this date coincides with  
the National Third World Lesbian and  
Gay Conference which will be held in  
Washington October 12-15. Anyone  
wanting more information about this  
conference can write to: NCBG/Confer-  
ence, P.O. Box 548, Columbia, MD 21045  
phone (301) 596-5865. Further, on  
October 13th the National Gay Athletic  
Union will sponsor a sports exposition  
and Monday October 15th has been  
designated Lesbian and Gay Constituency  
Day and will be devoted to meetings  
with congressional representatives to  
discuss the March demands.  

- that the original statement of purpose  
and five demands will remain unchanged  
the vote to keep them was 86 to 31 in  
favor. The statement of purpose reads:  
“An end to all social, economic,  
judicial and legal oppression of Les-  
bian and Gay people.” The five demands  
are:  

Denver Feminist Sues Library  

- Repeal all anti-lesbian/gay laws.  

- Pass a comprehensive lesbian/gay  
rights bill in Congress.  

- Issue a presidential executive order  
banning discrimination based on sexual  
orientation in the Federal Government,  
the military and federally-contracted  
private employment.  

- End discrimination in lesbian mother  
and gay father custody cases.  

- Protect lesbian and gay youth from  
any laws which are used to discrimi-  
nate against, oppress and/or harass  
them in their homes, schools, jobs  
and social environments.  

- that people attending the March be  
encouraged to support the ERA boycott  
of Virginia by not spending money  
inside that state while in the area.  

- that speakers at the rally address  
only lesbian and gay issues, and that  
the immigration policy issue specifi-  
cally be dealt with by one of the  
speakers (an effort is also being made  
to include a speaker on lesbians and  
gays in prisons and other institutions)  
Spanish bilingual speakers and sign  
language interpreters for the deaf  
are to be present. All speakers and  
entertainment are to be non-sexist and  
non-racist in nature.  

- a non-discriminatory policy toward  
lesbian and gay-identified transpeople  
was adopted and all future literature  
on the March is to include a statement  
to this effect. (*Transpeople is an  
all-inclusive term denoting transsex-  
uals, transvestites and transgenderists  
regardless of their sexual identity.)  

- a policy of non-violence for the  
March and rally was adopted.  

- the women's caucus introduced a pro-  
posal to use 10% of all funds raised  
to provide free transportation for  
financially disadvantaged lesbians.  

Both Patricia Price and K.T. Pant-  
zer feel that the case is important  
for a number of reasons. "Eighty-  
seven percent of all library person-  
nel are women," Ms. Pantzer said.  

"But only 1-2% of the administration  
are women.” "There is only one  
black in a professional position.  
All other minorities work in low-paid,  
unskilled areas."  

"The case seems clear-cut," Ms.  
Price said. “K.T. was burdened with  
more duties than she was being paid  
for. But, actually the case is much  
more difficult to prove than one  
might expect." Ms. Price said that  
the problem of proving sex discrimin-  
ation is similar to that experienced  
by women in the nursing profession.  
“It is difficult to prove sex discrimin-  
ation or violation of the Equal Pay  
Act in an area that is predominately  
women. There is no basis for compar-  
ison." Ms. Price cited a recent  
Supreme Court case in which a woman  
had claimed sex discrimination as a  
result of being refused health insur-  
ance coverage by her employer for  
pregnancy. The Supreme Court dismis-  
sed the case claiming that it did  
not discriminate against women, but  
rather against “pregnant persons."  

Ms. Pantzer said that library work-  
ers are, for the most part, “dedicated  
and overworked women." "They put  
up with low pay, poor and sometimes  
hazardous working conditions, ineffect-  
ive representation and arbitration  
with administration, insufficient  
compliance with affirmative action,  
and blatant sex discrimination because  
there is no real productive way of  
fighting back. Those who file griev-  
ances are not promoted and are subject-  
ed to intimidation by supervisors and  
the administration." "Some are intim-  
idated into quitting," she said.  

Ms. Pantzer said that other library  
employees have given her support  
but were unwilling to testify in her  
behalf for fear of repercussions.  
“There is a sense of hopelessness,”  
she said, "If you don't complain,  
nothing happens; if you do complain,  
you are labelled a ‘trouble-maker’."  

"I feel real good about following  
upon this," Ms. Pantzer said. “There  
are so many women who, for their own  
reasons, can't afford to give up the  
time and energy and job security to  
do what I am doing. I recognize that  
my white, middle-class, college-educated  
privilege makes it possible for  
me to follow through with this."  

National March Planned  

and the men's caucus came up with a  
similar proposal for gay men; both  
were adopted.  

It was also decided to set up a re-  
gional office for the March in Denver,  
the mailing address is: March on  
Washington, P.O. Box 9664, Denver, CO  
80209; phone (303) 861-1163. We will  
be doing outreach to other states in  
the Rocky Mountain region, specifically  
Nevada, Arizona, New Mexico, Utah,  
Wyoming, Montana and Idaho. We need  
energy and funds to build a progres-  
sive grassroots lesbian and gay  
movement: Call us if you have input  
or questions regarding the March and  
rally.  

Save the  

Women’s  
Festival  

The 5th Annual Women's Festival  
will not happen this year unless  
women come forward now to organize  
the event. Money has been saved from  
the proceeds of last year's festival  
to be used as seed money for this  
year's event.  

In the past, several area women’s  
groups have worked together to plan  
the festival. The proceeds from the  
festival have been distributed to  
these groups who have worked on the  
festival.  

Any women or organizations interested  
in working to make this year's  
festival happen should either drop a  
card to Big Mama Rag, 1724 Gaylord,  
Denver 80218 or call 388-8678 and  
leave your name and phone number.