struggle

Lesbianism . . . No Solution For

[Reprinted from Women Organizing
"Women Of Color", Summer '83; a journal
published by the Feminist Commission
of the Democratic Socialists of America.]

Rhonda K. Craven

When I first entered the Chicago
womyn's community in late 1978, I
naively assumed that most of the white
lesbians I was meeting were not racists.
I imagined that most lesbians were sen-
sitive to the pain of ostracism, rejec-
tion, and irrational hatred, and there-
fore they would not oppress me, a black

confrontation

lesbian. Instead, I found (and still
find) that white lesbians are just as
prejudiced as the people I meet outside
the womyn's community I live, work, and
play in. The pain I feel with that real-
ization is that much deeper because as
womyn, we're all oppressed by the pat-
riarchal society, and I hate it when I
experience or observe some womyn fur-
ther oppressing lesbians of color.

I was interviewed in the local gay
newspaper last fall when it decided to
focus on "the subculture's subculture"
(as they called the special section on
minorities). They asked me if I felt
more discriminated against for being
black, a womon, or a lesbian. I said
my blackness seemed to have the most
influence because I thought people saw
my skin before anything else.

Although I don't experience a lot of
blatant racism, the many covert actions
take their toll. Example: I'm conversing
with a white dyke one on one, and ano-
ther white womon comes along. Suddenly,
I'm excluded from the conversation by
their lack of eye contact with me. Ex-
ample: I've been pretty visible in the
community from my work on the collec-
tives for Chicago's lesbian center,
womyn's coffeehouse, and lesbian news-
paper, but all some womyn can talk to
me about is dancing ('cause y'all know
us black folks got rhythm!). Example:
an ex-lover of mine told me when we
first got involved that she really
liked black womyn - she was white.
on and on and on, ad nauseam.

I have been very disappointed to see
how the womyn whose business it is to
record and sell our herstory as les-
bians often exclude the words and ima-
ges of womyn of color until someone
tells them they have to include some
to validate their work. Then they have
to find a womon of color (or two if
they are really liberal) to do the
work, and they may find it hard to find
a colored womon who will trust her
words in the hands of a white womon.
And we can always count on the annual
"special issue" (with a guest editor)
that lesbian and/or feminist journals
do to assuage the guilt of not includ-

And

ing our work on a regular basis.

Last summer, I attended the Midwest
Women in Print Conference in the Chicago
area. Out of 65 womyn who represented
the various bookstores, presses, and
publications in the Midwest, only two
were womyn of color. We were both from
Chicago, both work for the feminist
bookstores (and I also work for Sister -
Source, the lesbian newspaper). When I
volunteered to co-lead a workshop on
meeting the needs of womyn of color in
these Midwest businesses, I had hoped
there would be a white womon who wanted
to do the same. However, there was dis-
comfort around the issue of racism, and
I heard that one womon on the (all-
white) conference planning committee -
an acquaintance of mine - said, in
essence, that she did not want to deal
with racism during this conference; she
wanted to learn practical ways to make
her business better. The Latina from
Chicago and I ended up co-facilitating
the workshop. Then, she had to leave a
few hours later, and I felt very alone -
afraid of being rejected or snubbed by
the white faces around me. Although
things ended up feeling not as badly
as I thought they would, I realized
that I had no (or little) faith in
white womyn's willingness to be there
for me.

In the first issue of SisterSource,

I wrote an article similar to this, out-
lining some of what I perceived to be
racist incidents in my lesbian life.
Another collective member, on hearing
that I was going to write the piece,
said, "Oh, that's good, but don't make
it too heavy - no one will want to read
it." I immediately reassured her that I
wouldn't. After reflecting on the inci-
dent, however, I got angry about her
assumption and decided to include the
exchange in the essay. When she saw it,
she was all apologetic. Why is it that
I, as a black womon, must be the one to
point out the wrongs of white womyn?

It has been encouraging to see the
anti-racist movement among white les-
bians. Finally, I said, I might be able
to count on a growing number of womyn
to call others on their racism, instead
of my having to go through my struggle
to decide whether to confront someone
or steep in my anger. However, it seems
that the energy fizzles out fast once
white womyn realize that they have to
work at being anti-racist. My Goddess,
the whole society is set up to keep
people of color down in general, and
by the time you add on being a member
of the "second sex" and being queer,

I don't stand a chance!

I think about Elly Bulkin's article
in Sinister Wisdom on racism in writing.
In it, she gave examples of "the sin of
omission" in various heralded feminist
works, and she gave guidelines for white
womyn to use to critique their own writ-
ing. For the next three issues of the

Big Mama Rag, August/September, 1983 - Page 5

Racism

journal, she got some scathing and vi-
cious responses from white womyn who
seemed to be largely reacting to Bul-
kin's choice of Mary Daly's Gyn/Ecology
as one of her examples. When Bulkin
responded, she pointed out the fact
that when black lesbian poet Audre
Lorde made similar observations in an
open letter to Daly which was published
in SW, there was no visible response to
suggest that Lorde was out of line. It
made me think: it's "politically in-
correct" to criticize a black dyke who
calls a white womon on her racism, but
as soon as a white dyke does it, her
"sisters" feel betrayed. How much of
that anger could be directed at me for
just existing as a black womon?

Seldom does a day go by in which I
don't experience racism on some level.
If I mention to some white womon that I
perceive an incident as racism, I am
usually invalidated by statements such
as, "Oh, you're just being paranoid,"
or "That happens to me all the time,"
or, "She's just rude." If I make a pub-
lic declaration, I hear, "That really
needed to be said," or “That was really
brave of you to say/do." Well, I'm
tired of being brave - sick of taking
the risk of alienating womyn I am so
afraid will go away from me because I'm
getting to be "too heavy" to be around
because all I may want to talk about
sometimes is my experience being black -
the good, the bad, and the ugly. Some-

MORE ON PAGE 18