NOW Strategy  
Debate:  

1d decad The  
mber of NOW  
s Party.)  

by  
worker  

By Elsa Blum  

The discussion of resolutions on  
Sunday was important for several rea-  
sons. The significance probably lies  
not so much in the "be it resolveds",  
as in the directions set for NOW.  

By the time discussion began, 77  
resolutions had been submitted. Only  
four hours had been allotted for  

their discussion, and by 3 p.m. Sunday  

--two hours after discussion began--  
women began leaving for home.  
The resolutions were “prioritized”  

into several categories and given time  

limits. The first resolution passed  

reaffirmed NOW's support of homemakers  

and displaced homemakers legislation.  
Two resolutions pertaining to ERA  

strategy and backed by the NOW nation-  

al leadership were passed: The NOW  
National ERA strike force, a small  
committee appointed and headed up by  
the NOW president, is charged with  
planning overall strategy at all lev-  
els of the organization to win the  
ERA. The political action committee  
will be formed to collect contribu-  

tions and to deliver them to the cand-  

idates of NOW's choice.  

Also approved was a resolution  
establishing a permanent national  
committee of minority women. It had  

been submitted by the minority women's  

caucus.  
I had a few criticisms of the con-  
ference, principally of the resolu-  
tions discussion and a general atmos-  
phere of tension and anxiety.  
The state of the women's movement  
places a great deal of pressure on  

Big Mama Rag Vol. 5 No. 4  

Would The ERA Campaign Aim To Bring Millions  
Of Women Into The Streets, Or Would It Buy  

Elections With Cocktails And ‘Quiet Talk’...  

NOW as the largest body of organized  
feminists to take the lead in defend-  
ing and extending the rights of women.  
The political stress was especially  
evident in workshops and resolutions  
on the ERA. Although feminists have  
witnessed setbacks in many areas--  
from the Hyde amendment to the Supreme  
Court ruling against pregnancy disa-  
bility benefits--the defeat of the  
ERA in one state legislature after  
another (with the exception of Indiana)  
has been the most disorienting for  
many women.  

Equal Rights  

The Georgia senate, for example,  
had "promised" to ratify if the pro-  
ERA movement kept a "low profile".  

The Nevada assembly voted down the ERA  
when 11 Democrats who had accepted  
campaign contributions and support as  
pro-ERA candidates switched their  
votes. Florida pro-ERA lobbyists had  
been certain of passage in the Florida  
Senate. North Carolina failed to rat-  

ify despite Jimmy Carter's personal  

phone calls. The March, 1979, dead-  

line for three more states to ratify  
increased the urgency that many NOW  

members expressed in seeking to de-  
velop a winning strategy.  

As a signer, along with several  
other members of the Colorado delega-  
tion, of the "Defending Women's Rights  
in the Second Decade" resolution, I  
was disappointed that it did not reach  
the floor.  

The resolution embodied one of the  
two main strategies for establishing  
action and membership priorities. It  
called for NOW to launch a drive--  
independent of Democratic and Repub-  
lican campaigns, candidates and poli-  
ticians--to counter attacks on women's  
rights with a massive educational and  
action campaign. It also called for  
special emphasis on building NOW's  
membership of minority and working  
women.  

The "Defending Women's Rights” res-  
olution was widely circulated for  
several months before the conference.  
Opponents of the resolution--especially  
those committed to the "lobbying only"  
ERA strategy--termed it “the SWP  
resolution", because the two initiators  
and a small number of the hundreds  
of signers are members of the Social-  
ist Workers party. The caucus formed  
around the resolution at the confer-  
ence numbered between 250 and 300  
women; they cooperated with the minor-  
ity women's caucus, which had endorsed  
the resolution.  

Early in the conference, partici-  
pants were greeted with free copies  
of the Los Angeles NOW Times, which  
included a special insert for the  
conference on "The SWP: A Study in  
Political Parasitism". This was part  
of a well-orchestrated red-baiting  
campaign. I'm convinced that its  
sponsors were unable to divert the  
attention of NOW members who wanted  
to evaluate what really would succeed  
in ratifying the ERA. Would it be a  
campaign to bring millions of women  
into the streets in the next 23 months  
demanding ratification; or would it  
be a campaign to coddle spineless  
legislators with a million dollars  

Fired Nurse Sues Presbyterian  

Patricia Lampe, a nurse fired by  

Presbyterian Medical Center, has filed  

a $2.27 million damage suit against  
the hospital.  

The suit charges that hospital of-  

ficials deliberately lied in setting  
forth the reasons for her dismissal.  

Lampe, former head nurse in the inten-  

sive care unit, was fired in January  
along with Priscilla Olmstead, asso-  
ciate head nurse.  

The hospital said that the two had  

approved unauthorized overtime, and  

that the intensive care unit had been  
characterized by chaos, confusion and  

low morale.  

In her suit, Lampe argues that in  
fact, morale was low when she took  
over as head nurse. She claims that  
under her direction, morale improved  

considerably and resignations declined.  
Both have reversed direction since the  

firings. After Lampe and Olmstead were  
dismissed, three staff nurses resigned  
immediately in protest. Dissatisfaction  
has since resulted in a turnover of  
perhaps half the staff.  

Patricia Olmstead has since settled  
out of court for an undisclosed amount  
of money and a clean record.  

The second of the charges against  
the nurses--approving unauthorized over-  
time--is complex and political; but it  
boils down to the fact that the nurses  
were fired for doing a good job. Two  
factors are involved, both connected  
to money.  

The first factor is that most, if  
not all hospitals, refuse to recognize  
intensive care nurses as nurse-special-  
ists. They claim that any nurse should  
be able to do the job. This is simply  
not true due to the specialized mach-  
inery and other equipment used in inten-  
sive care, most of which nurses in  
other areas never see. But the hospitals  
don't particularly care if that's the  
case because the classification issue  
affects overtime.  

In a unit such as coronary care  
which employs nurse-specialists, only  
nurse specialists may substitute for  
those who are sick or on vacation.  

The result is increased overtime at  
time-and-a-half pay.  

The second factor stems from the  
hospital's new “cyclic scheduling," in  
which work schedules are determined  
six weeks ahead of time.  

In a unit such as intensive care,  
where the patient census fluctuates  
radically from week to week, such  
scheduling is impractical. The result  
is often too few nurses working on any  
given day. Lampe and Olmstead auth-  
orized overtime to provide more  
specially-trained intensive care nurses  
for times when the unit was busy;  

thus, they say, providing better pa-  
tient care.  

This caused the hospital to have to  
pay overtime to these nurses, when  
administrators would have preferred  
to use "float" help--nurses pulled  
from other areas that are not busy  
or from the "float" pool. However,  
that doesn't work well in intensive  
care because float nurses are usually  
not familiar with the sophisticated  
machinery, the fast pace, and the  
high pressure atmosphere of an inten-  
sive care unit. Because of these fac-  
tors, intensive care nurses have al-  
ways argued that the quality of care  
suffers when they don't have their  
own staff.  

The hospital administration disa-  
grees, claiming that intensive care  
isn't all that different. But the  
administration's real objection turns  
on overtime; if an intensive care  
nurse works an extra shift, she must  
be paid time-and-a-half; a "float"  
nurse is paid at regular time.  

When the hospital began cyclic  
scheduling in November, it met re-  
sistance from almost all hospital em-  
ployees. Individual objections focused  
on the inconvenience of requesting  
special time off 12 weeks in advance.  
However, the intensive care staff  
went a step further; they filed a  
grievance signed by all but one nurse  
in the unit. The grievance said that  
intensive care would cover its own  
time off if exempted from cyclic  
scheduling. The administration summar-  
ily denied the grievance, saying that  
according to the personnel manual,  
employees may not grieve about hos-  
pital policies and procedures.  

The intensive care nurses knew  
that the grievance was a risk. Pres-  
byterian is notorious for its oppres-  

The Greasy Thumb  
Automechanics Manual  
for Women  

Written by Barb Wyatt  

spent on election campaigns, cocktails,  
telephone calls and quiet discussion?  

This debate is bound to continue  
through the coming months, and I don't  
think that the name-calling will be  
able to cut it off. My feeling about  
the “Defending Women's Rights" resolu-  
tion has always been that the serious  
discussion it could generate was more  
important than the results of a vote.  
Nevertheless, the conference agenda,  
which placed seven resolutions in the  
"ERA strategy" category and allowed  
30 minutes for all of them, provided  
an educational experience for all of  
us. The NOW leadership's resolution  
placed first, and the "Defending  
Women's Rights" resolution, seventh.  

A final resolution, passed after  
the Colorado delegation and many other  
women had left, accused the Socialist  
Workers party of exploiting NOW and  
the feminist movement. Women who  
tried to speak against the resolution  
were ruled out of order. At the nation-  
al board meeting following adjournment  
of the conference, several board  
members tried to rescind it, but their  
motion failed.  

The NOW national conference was  
billed as a "unity conference". On  
the first day, outgoing president  
Karen DeCrow told reporters about the  
unity in NOW around political action.  
I was impressed by the seriousness  
and loyalty of most women at the con-  
ference to building NOW and to involv-  
ing more minority and working women.  

I think many NOW women are undecided  
over the political course of action  
NOW should take; I think they resent  
being considered disruptive or "used"  
by the SWP when they wanted to  

raise questions. I was also very im-  
pressed by the minority women who  
attended the conference and the battle  
they led to orient NOW towards our  
minority sisters and the issues that  
particularly affect them.  

New NOW president Eleanor Smeal  
told us that in fighting for the ERA  
and other issues, NOW would be “highly  
visible and militant". The East  
Denver chapter plans to start right  
away. A rally was planned for May 7  
at the State Capitol.  

Medical  

sive handling of disputes with em-  
ployees. The hospital was then in-  
volved in the midst of a bitter union  
battle, the second in as many years.  
Last year the hospital successfully  
withstood an attempt by a professional  
union supported by the Colorado  
Nurses Association to be designated  
the official bargaining unit. This  
year Retail Clerks was attempting to  
organize.  

The hospital has allegedly fired  
and reassigned employees in retalia-  
tion for union activities and has  
forbidden employees from distributing  
union materials or from visiting  
other areas of the hospital to talk  
about the union. It has also refused  
to allow the union to post a notice  
of intention to organize.  

As a result, the National Labor  
Relations Board accused the hospital  
of unfair labor practices, and the  
union announced its intention to sue.  
The hospital has since posted a no-  
tice that it will not interfere in  
union activities or organizing, nor  
will it question employees about  
their union sentiments.  

Because intensive care has long  
had a reputation for being the  
center of pro-union sentiment, and  

More on page 14  

SKILLS MANUALS BY & FOR WOMEN  

Against The Grain: A  
Carpentry Manual  
for Women  

Written and Illustrated by  
Dale McCormick  

Price: $5.50  

Illustrated by Julie Zoiot  

Order from the Iowa City Women’s Press  
116% E. Benton St.  
Iowa City, Iowa 52240  
or from your local bookstore