calendar

July 3 Robin Flower Band in concert at the Cherry Creek Gal-
lery. Call Swallow Hill Music Assoc. for time and tic-
ket info.

July 9 A meeting of ex-"mental patients"/psychiatric inmates

at Herizons 3242 E. Colfax, Denver, 7:00 p.m.; to or-
ganize a demonstration against electro-shock torture
here in Denver. Our demo will be organized in conjunc-
tion with other demonstrations nationally and inter-
nationally—to be held on the same day—focusing on
building an international Ban against Shock—the date
has not been set—but will happen in the fall. We also
are coming together to support each other as ex-in-
mates, and talk about how to continue and build that
support after the demonstration is over. For info call
Linda, 321-1737; Lori, 393-7026; or Sue, 377-6681.

On-going Groups

Sunday Motherlode is a non-profit group providing emotional

support and information for mothers living apart
from their children, for any reason. Meetings are
held the first Sunday of each month at 7 p.m. at the
Glendale Firehouse community room, 999 S. Clermont.
For info call 692-8746 or 329-8304.

Tuesday Lesbian Support Group. Open to all Lesbians, positive
support for personal struggle. 7:00-9:00 p.m. Call 861-

5052 or 832-1129 for info.

Still Ain't Satisfied Feminist Singers.

revolutionary and feminist material.
832-4553.

Wednesday Everywomen's Coming Out and Support Group—an
open community group for Lesbians. Different topics.
7:30-9:00 p.m. Gay and Lesbian Community Center
1436 Lafayette, Denver. For info call 831-6268.

Performing
For info call

Pink Triangle Radio: Gay and Lesbian programming,
local and national. 5:00 p.m. KGNU 88.5 FM

Saturday

Denver Feminist Library is now open at 126 Fox St.,
Denver, on Tues. from 4:30-7:30 p.m.; Thur. from 4:30
to 7:30 p.m. and Sat. from 1-5 p.m. Call 722-4967.

Housing Emergency Law Project holds free workshops for
low income tenants each workday at 2:30 p.m. in room
206 of the Denver University Law Center, 200 W. 14th
Ave. Info includes legal rights on evictions, assist-
ance programs. Please bring your lease, and notices
from landlord. For info call legal aid 837-1313.

W.A.R.N. (Women Of All Red Nations) is organizing on a
massive scale. They are in need of funds to print informat-
ion, to travel, and pay for legal litigations they are in-
volved in. As women we must stand together in the struggle.
All donations are greatly appreciated.
Also available—T-shirts!!! These T-shirts are beautiful!

"A nation is not conquered until the hearts of its wo-
men are on the ground.”

The T-shirts, 100% cotton, are yellow & come in sizes small,
medium, large and extra-large. The cost is $8.00 plus $2.00
mailing fee. Send donations. Send requests for further inf-
ormation and T-shirt orders to: Stephanie Autumn - W.A.R.N.
8953 Keystone Rt., Rapid City, South Dakota,

screened with the W.A.R.N. Woman on the front, and the say-

Fishman. from Sia 16

Ragan refused to read or
consider any letters or peti-
tions in support of Tina. He
also criticized Tina's sup-
porters in the courtroom,
saying, "You people question
authority. You don't like the
police. You don't like the
courts. You sit in the back
of the court snickering and
acting out of order."

All pretense of courtroom
order was lost when Virginia
Cholesterol and Mrs. Banks of
Ladies Against Women came in
with placards reading "Better
Ted Than Red" (Ted is Tina's
ex-husband) and "Father Knows
Best," but they never got to
use the ditty they had writ-

ten for the occasion, "Mommies,
mommies don't be commies/Stay
at home and fold pajammies/
Or they'll take your kids
away/To live with daddies

who build bombies."

Political work to aid Tina
in regaining child custody,
including legal action in
California and Illinois,
continues. Legal fees and
support work have cost
$15,000 to date. Contribu-
tions may be sent to The
Committee Against the Kid-
napping of Tina Fishman's
Daughter, 17 Brenham Place,
San Francisco, CA 94108.
Make checks out to Capp
Street Foundation.

Measure T from page 9

Washburn seemed to feel that
since the city council had
not written the ordinance
themselves, they should not
be held responsible for de-
fending it. She suggested
that the Coalition raise any
additional money required by
the city to defend it. Cha-
basinski indicated that
whatever fund-raising capa-
bility the Coalition had
would be absorbed by the
Coalition's own legal pro-
jects, and it was the city's
obligation to defend its own
law. Another speaker, Barbara
Quigley, expressed similar
sentiments: "To not defend

Measure T to the fullest
extent possible, you must

be forgetting why electro-
shock was banned in the
first place...To prohibit
running electricity through
a human being's brain is an
obvious and very basic step
in ensuring human rights. I
would also like to point out
that in November more people
voted for Measure T than
voted for any of you. Yet
the city of Berkeley has all
of you and we should have
Measure T also. It's your
responsibility to see that
Measure T will be enforced."

Protest from page

were escorted out of the coun-
try by heavily armed military
men, with dogs; the ‘carabinieri' dressed in plain
clothes appearing to be pass-
engers, some with little

suitcases by their sides,

and finally in the list, sup-
posed translators, with re-
volvers at their belts.

It is very difficult in a
brief statement to attempt to
describe the importance of
this week of action taken by
women. The preparation of the
base for the purpose of hous-
ing 112 cruise missiles is
escalating ahead at a fren-
zied pace and this is why wo-
men need to grow in numbers
and strength, to act as quick-
ly as possible to stop the
construction of genocide in

its making. International
exposure of the disguised in-
tentions of the Italian State,
the U.S. government and other
‘concerned' parties, and the
fascist laws and procedures
being used to repress opposi-
tion, is desperately needed.

We ask women to support and
act with Sicilian women in
our struggle NOW.

We are asking for money to
buy a piece of land in Comiso,
to be able to set up an Inter-
national women's peace camp
and to help pay the lawyer
fighting to revoke the expul-
sion order.

Donations can be sent to The
Eleven Women, c/o Sarah Booker,
22 Mile End Place, London,
England.

Big Mama Rag, July, 1983 - Page 17