The Decision to be Child—Free

Fran Day

In this society there are intense  
pressures that lead women to believe  
that our ultimate fulfillment as wo-  
men is through motherhood. Our par-  
ents, our institutions, the media and  
advertising attempt to persuade us  
that because we have the special bio-  
logical ability to bear children, that  
is what we should do. Many of the  
mechanisms by which our society co-  
erces us to become mothers date back  
to a time when population growth was  
desirable. Pro-motherhood influences  
are still strong even though popula-  
tion growth is no longer needed. Wo-  
men are used in the home as free do-  
mestic labor; we are discouraged from  
expressing ourselves outside of moth-  
erhood and marriage.

However, some of us have decided  
not to have children; in fact, more  
and more women are resisting the  
pressures to be mothers. I talked  
with five other women who had made  
the decision to be child-free. Three  
of these women are heterosexual,  
three are lesbians. Two of the  
straight women are married. We range  
in age from 25 to 36. We talked a-  
bout why we chose not to have chil-  
dren, what support and opposition we  
had received around our decision and  
whether or not we have chosen to be  
sterilized.

Our reasons for deciding to be  
child-free are numerous, complex and  
intertwined. Many center around our  
view of what we see as our priorities  
in life. As Alice said, "The kinds  
of things I want to do with my life  
don't have to do with being settled  
and having children." Janell added,  
"I never felt that I was cut out for  
the motherhood/homemaker role." In  
this society with little or no help  
from husbands or institutions such  
as day care, balancing a job with  
motherhood is extremely demanding.

Several of the women feel that  
their own childhoods did not provide  
models for how to be caring, nurtur-  
ing mothers. One woman (a feminist  
psychologist who asked that her name  
be withheld because her husband is  
not yet totally comfortable with her  
decision to be child-free) feels that  
she was never a child— as an only  
child she spent most of her time with  
adults or alone. Consequently, she  
never has felt comfortable around  
children. Alice, abused as a child  
by her father, felt even then that it  
must be very difficult to be a parent.  
"The thing that really scares me is  
violence. I know that I have hit the  
dog; I didn't hurt her but it really  
scared me. I don't know how to dis-  
cipline in a way that is loving, con-  
sistent and nonviolent. I don't want  
to subject a child to that." Crystal  
watched her mother struggle to pro-  
vide for two unplanned-for children.  
As an unmarried mother, the pressures  
were even more severe on her. "She  
spent years groveling and working  
her fingers to the bone. She never  
explained who or where my father was.  
I would never put a child or myself  
through that."

For these women the decision to  
reject motherhood came early (one  
decided as young as 10) and possibly  
with less conflict. For others, the  
decision was a long, difficult one,  
fraught with turmoil and anxiety.  
Several of us were very aware of so-  
cietal pressures—pushing us toward  
motherhood. Only one woman reported  
having internalized these pressures  
to any significant degree, however.  
As a result her decision appears to  
have been the most agonizing—she  
struggled with it periodically for  
years. At 36, she has been absolute-  
ly clear for only four years; at 30  
she still thought she might adopt a  
child as a single parent. Earlier  
as a married woman, she often felt  
deprived because she had no children.  
However, now she has no regrets and  
is in fact, greatly relieved that  
one of her pro-motherhood stages has  
not saddled her with an unwanted  
child. All the women agreed that  
18 years is a very long commitment,  
of total responsibility.

At varying ages, we all became a-  
ware, in the words of the psycholo-  
gist, “That I didn't have to have  
kids to be a real person—to be a  
real woman. I can be a real woman  
unto myself." We realized that it  
would be unfair to ourselves and to  
our children to have them just to  
give us a sense of ourselves, to  
provide us with an identity and to  
give us immortality.

Two of the women listed health  
problems as influencing their deci-  
sions. Crystal takes medication for  
a blood clot disorder that would  
likely result in hemorrhaging in  
childbirth. She is also concerned  
that the disease might be hereditary.  
Janell has a tipped uterus that would  
necessitate a caesarean section. She  
was horrified to learn that her  
mother had five children by this meth-  
od. She knew at 18 that she would  
never have children this way.

Shirley Ardener/Defining Females

Janell is the only one of us who  
has been sterilized; she had a tubal  
ligation when she was 22. She was  
heterosexual at the time and had been  
on the pill. Aware of the problems  
of putting dangerous chemicals in her  
body and of the problems of some of  
her friends who were using IUDs, she  
began considering the tubal ligation  
three years earlier. She feels that  
she was lucky to find a doctor who  
would perform the operation on a  
young, single woman with no children.  
"Doctors usually try to push their own  
values; they often require that the  
woman be over 25, have her husband's  
signature, and have three children."  
Alice has rejected sterilization. She  
says, "It is important to me that my  
body be healthy. So I have never con-  
sidered voluntarily having any kind of  
surgery. I wouldn't let a doctor near  
my body unless I was in dire need. I  
didn't even have my cat spayed until  
she was seven.” The psychologist, who  
uses an IUD, says, “Part of my reason  
is—Why have surgery when something  
mechanical works just fine? Also, my  
husband is not quite ready for the  
finality of sterilization." The les-  
bians know that there is the possibi-  
lity of pregnancy from rape but would  
have an abortion if this happened.

We talked about the mother-child  
relationship in this society. Some  
of us feel that it is difficult, even  
impossible for this relationship to  
be a healthy one. We are well aware  
of how painful, even destructive, the  
mother-child relationship can be. We  
have watched our mothers, sisters and  
friends put aside their own needs and  
priorities in order to cope with the  
demands of motherhood. We know that  
mothers get blamed for everything  
that goes wrong in this society. As  
the psychologist described it, chil-  
dren are extremely demanding and de-  
pendent when they are young. In ad-  
olescence they become ‘rebellious and  
alienated. Later they may alternate  
between dependency and rejection.  
This latching on/pushing away cycle  
is inevitably very painful for the  
mother. "Where are the rewards for  
being a mother in terms of inter-  
action with the child?" wondered  
several of the women. Numerous  
studies reveal that many parents,  
given a second chance, would choose  
not to have children. The pain seems  
greater than the joy. Being a  
mother is tremendously expensive in  
terms of time, energy and resources.

Another concern voiced by most of  
the women was expressed by Crystal,  
"I wouldn't want to bring a child  
into the world at this time. I  
wouldn't want to subject a child to  
the oppression of sexism, racism and  
classism or to the environmental  
problems such as pollution and radia-  
tion.

As child-free women, we have re-  
ceived varying degrees of pressure  
from other people, usually relatives.  
The most common complaint comes from  
parents, hoping for grandchildren.  
Janell's mother tried to talk her  
out of the tubal ligation up until  
the last minute. She still warns  
her, "You'll regret it when you are  
28." Several parents refuse to deal  
with it directly. Alice's mother  
tells her, “Your father is getting  
old, he loves children and needs  
grandchildren." Alice knows how  
much he loves children! The psy-  
chologist says that her father is a  
little disappointed but also a lit-  
tle relieved that he is not going to  
have to be a grandfather. Most of  
the pressure we have experienced  
has been subtle; little digs imply-  
ing that we are selfish or deviant  
are common.

Significant others warn us of a  
lonely old age. "What will you do  
when you are 65 and have no family?"  
We are confident that at 65, as now,  
we will be able to provide ourselves  
with meaningful activities, fine  
companionship and a full life. We  
also know that having children is  
no guarantee that they will be with  
us in our old age. In fact, this  
expectation, unfulfilled could lead  
to further pain and disappointment.

We have received some support  
in our decision to be child-free,  
mostly from feminists. When Janell  
had her tubal ligation, she received  
a congratulatory card from a friend.  
However, most of the support has  
come indirectly through reading.  
Other support has come from close  
friends who are also child-free and  
from the feminist community. This  
support is extremely important. The  
psychologist felt abandoned when one  
of her child-free friends became  
pregnant. There are so few straight  
child-free women, that when one  
changes her mind, the others feel  
threatened. Lesbians may feel less  
pressure from their peer group;  
however, society's doubt about their  
femaleness may spur some to seek  
motherhood. Lesbian mothers certainly  
face more potential problems  
with the threat of their children  
being taken away.

We have no desire to negate the  
values of women who have chosen to  
be mothers. We feel that the best  
mothers are undoubtedly those that  
have made the choice freely after  
thinking it through carefully. Sev-  
eral of us choose to spend time with  
children. Alice “borrows” children  
and takes them to the zoo or circus.  
She does this for herself not for  
the child or mother. She keeps  
these outings on a short-term basis  
and on her terms. Other women do  
not like children and are fi-  
nally feeling okay about saying so.  
They report that people are horri-  
fied but they feel that it is im-  
portant to be honest.

Support in the decision to be  
child-free (we chose this term over  
childless which implies that we are  
less than whole) is crucial. Women  
who are struggling with the decision  
need the support of their sisters.  
And it is in this spirit that this  
article was written.

For us the decision to be child-free  
meant choosing to be free, indepen-  
dent, whole women on our own. It  
meant choosing to go against social  
expectations. It is an unpopular,  
difficult decision. It takes the  
ability to be the ultimate judge of  
one's own behavior. And it is  
right for us.

Edith Allard