classifieds

BEYOND THE TAROT, THE AQUAZON DECK

is a female visionary tool used by
women all over the country to clarify
thoughts, dreams and plans. Mail
order $8. Signed $11. Checks payable:
Aquazon Enterprises, 4748 Edgewater
Road, San Diego, CA 93116.

THE WOMEN'S LINE is a telephone
helping service staffed by women

for women of all ages in the Denver-
Boulder area. For help, information,
sharing, call 492-8910 from 10 a.m.
to 12 midnight daily.

DEMANDS OF WOMEN POSTER (see page 18
of this month's BMR) is now avail-
able. It is 12" by 16", black ink on
yellow, white, green, red, or orange
paper for $1.75/each (postage inclu-
ded). Also "DON'T AGONIZE, ORGANIZE"
and "YOU CAN'T RAPE A 38" stickers
for $1/each. Order from Big Mama
Rag, 1724 Gaylord Street, Denver,
CO 80206.

FAVORITE WOMEN PERFORMERS PHOTOS!
Chris, Holly, Lily, more... For free
list: P.O. Box 925, Hollywood, CA 90028.

RIDE NEEDED TO MICHIGAN WOMEN'S

Music Festival in August. Rocky Moun-
tain woman seeks ride or hitching
partner. Will share expenses and
company. Contact: Heather, 1110
Flint, Laramie, WY or (307) 742-7684
by August 1.

THE VIRGINIA NEAL BLUE CENTER is
offering a Mobile Career Information
Service to aid women in making career
decisions - available at no charge

to any women's groups or individual
women in the city and county of
Denver. For information on scheduling
a workshop, call 399-8303.

OUTREACH FOR BATTERED WOMEN - sponsor-
ed by Safe House. A support group for
battered women who are currently

being battered emotionally or phy-
sically, or who have left the rela-
tionship and need ongoing support
from women in similar situations.

Call 388-4268 for more information. Completely, input needed now.

Women’s Chorus Seeks
Members

We'd like to introduce ourselves to
the feminist community. We are a
group of women who like to sing and
want to bring more political music to
the Denver community. The idea for a
chorus began last year when some of
us got together to sing anti-Christ-
mas carols for a women's coffeehouse
and in the streets. In March of '80
some of the original group and sever-
al other women sang feminist and
anti-draft songs for the Internation-
al Women's Day Stop the Draft Rally.

After this event we sat down to
talk about continuing the chorus. We
felt with regular rehearsals and en-
thusiasm we could become a strong
feminist chorus, offering a great
deal to the feminist, lesbian and
left communities. We believe polit-
ical music adds a much needed cultu-
ral dimension to our movements. It
also allows us to reach audiences not
otherwise exposed to our politics.

We continued rehearsing regularly
and when we heard Izquierda was com-
ing to perform in May, we asked to
sing with them, feeling we could ben-
efit from more musically experienced
women. They agreed to rehearse with
us before the concert, and we per-
formed "New York City Song" with
them on stage.

We learned a great deal from work-
ing with Izquierda. Having a direc-
tor (Naomi Littlebear) helped us to
better blend our voices and identify
areas of strength and needed improve-
ment. Our work and public perfor-
mance with Izquierda built up our
confidence and our enthusiasm to con-
tinue.

Since the Izquierda concert we have
more carefully defined our politics
and our goals. We see ourselves as
an ongoing group that sings predomi-
nantly feminist and other political
music with a high degree of musical
skill. We want to sing at rallies,

CLASSIFIED AD RATES IN BIG MAMA RAG
are a mere $1 for the first 15 words
and 15¢ per word thereafter. Send to
BMR, 1724 Gaylord Street, Denver, CO
80206. Display ads are $4 per column
inch with a 10% discount for ads run
three months or longer.

DENVER-BOULDER MEN'S CHILDCARE NETWORK
needs men to do childcare for feminist
events. Call 388-3850.

FREE LIST OF RED HOT, RADICAL BOOKS
about the struggle for peace and
justice around the world. Send 15¢
postage to RECON, P.O. Box 14602,
Philadelphia, PA 19134.

WOMAN TO WOMAN FEMINIST CENTER is
available for meetings of women's
groups. Contact them ahead of time
at 320-5972.

CONCERNED ABOUT LACK OF FEMINISM AT
the Gay Community Center of Colo-
rado? Call 831-6282.

SCIENCE FICTION: WINDHAVEN is a mat-
riarchal magazine offering a forum
for feminist expression in this male
dominated field. $6/4 issues.
Ikesdatter Press, 600-E North 39th,
Seattle, WA 98103. Ikesdatter will
donate 50¢ to BMR for each subscriber
mentioning this ad.

IN ALBUQUERQUE visit New Mexico's
only feminist bookstore, Full Circle
Books, 2205 Silver SE 87106. Send
SASE for mail-order catalogue.

NO MORE CAGES, a bi-monthly women's
prison newsletter. $1.50 per issue,
$6 a year. Free to prisoners. From:
Women Free Women in Prison, P.O. Box
282, West Nyack, NY 10994.

ANYONE INTERESTED IN WORKING ON,
organizing, having a booth or per-
forming in this year's Colorado Women's
Festival contact June Summers at P.O.
Box 4001, Denver, CO 80204 or 722-6646.

demonstrations, marches, women's
events, in institutions and in the
streets so as to bring feminist, les-
bian and other left politics and
issues to as wide a range of people
as possible. We also want to sing
songs in languages other than Eng-
lish, write some of our own songs and
use a variety of instruments in our
music.

We have a commitment to and have
already started sharing skills such
as reading music, arranging songs,
selecting music, conducting, organiz-
ing rehearsals and organizing perfor-
mances. We rehearse once a week and
expect members to be committed to
attending regularly. As a result of
our work with Izquierda, we have
decided to look for a musical direc-
tor who will actually conduct, but
all decisions such as policies, music
selection, where we will sing etc.
will be made by the entire group.

Out of a workshop at the National
Women's Music Festival in Champaign
this year, there developed a network
of women's choruses around the coun-
try and we are a part of that network.
We will be exchanging music, arrange-
ments, ideas etc. with other groups
nationally.

We encourage any woman who likes to
sing and supports the politics and
goals we've discussed to join us. No
prior musical experience is necessary,

but is certainly welcome. At present,
the experience in the group ranges
from very little or no previous musi-
cal experience to many years of formal
music training. We do provide child-
care and transportation as needed.

We are also looking for a conductor,
someone with directing experience,
choral or otherwise. We'd also appre-
ciate any suggestions for the chorus
from women in the community. For more
information and for rehearsal dates
and locations call Deb at 322-2465 or
Kathy or Susanna at 722-1032. P.S.

We also have a lot of fun together.

POPS PSS SSSSSSS SSOP SCOCSS SHEP OSSSSESSSS SSS SPS SESS PSS OSSS SOS SCOPES Di a a Sl cn

July 4
for more information.

July 7

July 9

July 9
Feminist Bookcenter. 7 p.m.

July 14

July 17

July 23

July 27
more information.

dates/details.

center.

Bring out your own book
RS was made for you
Storytellers poets artists printers
teachers songwriters diarists
6 PAGES BXI1,14 1 illus.
YOUR ORDER FROM
GODIVA, PO BOX 42305
PORTLAND, O. 97242 DEPT BR
Zu \_6°° +50 POSTAGE

FEMINIST ATTORNEY
RUTH A. BUECHLER
Legal Services in the areas of:
Bankruptcy

Domestic Relations
Lesbian and Women's Rights

and General Practice

at reasonable rates.

1764 Gilpin Street
Denver, Colorado 80218

Call 321-6413 for appointment

and rates

(Reduced fees available for people
with low income)

Wonder Bread Five

campaign was the result of her sub-
mitting a request for more office
help. The other women, all long time
employees, except for Thomas, charged
that they were being overworked but
received reprimands for errors that
were less serious than accounting

mistakes made by men, none of whom re-

ceived reprimands.

In addition to receiving reprimands
the women said in court that they
were harassed by male managers who
yelled at them, refused to speak to
them, changed their work duties, add-
ed and subtracted responsibilities
from their job assignments, monitored
their phone calls and directed
sexual assaults and comments at them,

creating an uncomfortable and oppres-

sive atmosphere.

The Federal Equal Employment Oppor-
tunity Commission unsuccessfully
tried to negotiate an out of court
settlement; later the charges were
dismissed by a federal court judge.

--------Calendar

Lesbians Colorado Picnic, Mesa Trail
Artist Marisol Escobar at Loretto Heights College. Public lec-
ture and slide show. Call 936-8441 for more information.

Lesbians Colorado Second Conference planning meeting at the
First Unitarian Church, 1400 Lafayette Street, Denver. 7:30 p.m.

Regular meeting of the Feminist Action Group at Woman to Woman

Open review of July issue of Big Mama Rag, 1724 Gaylord Street,
Denver. 8 p.m. All women welcome.

Woman to Woman Community Meeting, 2023 East Colfax. 7:30 p.m.

July 17-19 Women's Outdoor Club mountain climb. Call 831-6268 for details.

Second regular monthly meeting of the Feminist Action Group
at Woman to Woman Feminist Bookcenter. 7 p.m.

Gay Community Center Benefit at 3:15 p.m. Call 831-6268 for

more information.

All summer Chautauqua Summer Series, 1980 in Boulder. Films and live
entertainment all season. Call 442-3282.

All summer Women in the Arts series at Arapahoe Community College, 5900
S. Santa Fe Drive, Littleton, CO. Films, workshops, lectures, and
special exhibits. Call Community Gallery of Art at 794-1550 for

details.

Every second and fourth Wednesday of the month, the Feminist Action Group
meets at Woman to Woman Feminist Bookcenter.

Every Thursday, Woman to Woman meetings at Woman to Woman Feminist Book-

center.

Every Tuesday, LUNA, a feminist support group for lesbian alcoholics and
their friends/supporters meets weekly. For more information, call
Woman to Woman Feminist Bookcenter, 320-5972. New women welcome.

subscriptions - individual $5/15 issues
institutions $10/15 issues

9 East 48th Street
New York, N.Y. 10017

From Page 3

However, a recently released Dept. of
Labor report supports a number of

the Wonder Bread Five's charges,
based on a three month investigation
of the facility. The summary report
concluded that ITT Continental Baking
Company was in violation of more

than 20 provisions of Labor Department
regulations.

A conciliation "by informal means" 
is supposed to be taking place at this
time between Labor Department offic-
ials and representatives from Wonder
Bread. So the women are still in
limbo as far as getting results.

"If there's one thing I've learned
from all this," said Jean Serser,
"it's that when a woman reaches 40,
they don't want you around anymore.
I'm really despondent in thinking
that I've reached this age in my life
and have not been able to accomplish
more because of so many obstacles
thrown in my way."