Responsibility and the Feminist Media

Since our 2-page coverage of Sagaris 1st session (see July issue), the collective has been inundated with statements, letters and articles, pertaining largely to the 2nd session split. Many of these have been accompanied by instructions to publish immediately, in full, or to consult with the author (often 2000 miles away) before editing. Little of the material received was constructively aimed at untangling the political knots of the Sagaris experience; and a great deal of it was no more than self-serving rhetoric. Who, we asked ourselves, beyond the 200 women involved, is actually interested enough to read all or any of this?

It must be obvious that we simply can’t print everything we receive. We don’t have the time, or the space, or the energy. In short, we don’t have the money. So we're forced to reject a good deal of material, and to edit what we do print.

This process raises immediate, crucial questions. On what basis do we accept some material and reject others? How do we decide what issues deserve coverage and which, therefore, must go unpublicized?

To what extent do we, as feminist media, create the issues on which the movement focuses at any given time?

Our function as reporters is essentially passive: we receive and disseminate news. Our function as political women, contributing to the growth of our movement, determines just how we go about doing that. In this context, we see ourselves functioning to inspire, initiate and focus dialogue amongst feminists.

Feminist journalists, like feminists in general, are a haphazard group. We are women who are involved in an unprecedented process: that of applying feminist criteria to our function as journalists. We have chosen to express our commitment to feminism by producing a newspaper. This doesn't make us automatically right on, politically sound, or possessed of perfect understanding or endless energy. We need feedback as every feminist needs feedback, in order to truly answer to our responsibility, and in order to grow.

Some questions we need to consider and to hear from you about:

On what basis should the feminist press decide what to print and how much of it?

How can we develop a system of feedback which will educate us as to what women want us to print?

How can we educate women about the scope and limitations of feminist newspapers so that we don’t get letters saying: ‘Enclosed is my 12-page statement — please publish as soon as possible, in full’?

Being in control of a newspaper is a position of power. It is a position from which, by choosing our emphases, we shape the direction of feminist dialogue. In order to legitimize that power, we must be a part of that dialogue. We need criticisms, suggestions, responses from you.

We're thinking of setting aside a page in every issue for dialogue: an open space for any woman to state her views on any subject and for other women to respond. Whether we do or not will depend on whether you want us to. Let us hear about it.

— Attica News/LNS

Yes, keep your eyes on the hands, let the voice go buzzing. Economy is the bone, politics is the flesh, watch who they beat and who they eat, watch who they relieve themselves on, watch who they own. The rest is decoration.

— Marge Piercy, In the Men’s Room(s), from To Be of Use

Aurora Police Department

Discrimination Charges Cause Fund

Tea Schook

The Federal government has refused a $100,000 crime prevention grant to the Aurora police department because of a sex-discrimination suit before the State Civil Rights Commission.

Actual charges of sex discrimination were made in January 1974, when Pamela Cool and Arla Norwood, both clerical workers at the Aurora Police Department, attempted to become the first female officers on the force. Both women passed the written exam, but failed the physical, which included a minimum 6% foot broad jump and six chin-ups from an eight-foot bar.

Having failed the physical, which also requires a minimum height of 5'7” and weight of 140 pounds, Cool sent a letter of protest to L.C. Richard, Chairperson of the City Civil Service Commission. Richard and his commission did nothing. Upset by the lack of action, Cool filed suit with the Civil Rights Commission.

After passing the written exam in May 1974, two women, Vickie Lovato and Eileen Elhard, joined Pam Cool in pressing charges against the Aurora police when they, too, failed the physical. The women feel the chin-up requirement should be dropped. They mention that the Lakewood police department, the Boulder and Arapahoe County Sheriff's Departments, the Denver Civil Service Commission, and the FBI have no such requirement.

The sex discrimination suit was brought to the attention of the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration (LEAA), a branch of the Justice Department. The Federal government funds various law enforcement agencies through the LEAA in an effort to encourage citizen and police cooperation in combating crime. This agency funds storefront projects throughout Denver.

Working under the authority of Executive Order #11246, which calls for the withholding of federal funds and contracts where sex discrimination is practiced, LEAA cut the grant to the Aurora department. It has rejected subsequent requests for money. The money would have funded workshops in crime prevention for the people of Aurora.

In light of the economic pressure placed upon Aurora’s finest, the Civil Service Commission did the decent thing and revised the physical.

The revised test was given to 100 women in high school physical education classes. According to City Manager Robert Semple, the “majority” passed. Cool, Lovato, and Elhard also took the revised test and could not pass it. Semple said that the fact that the three women failed the test does not mean that the test is discriminatory.

The Justice Department still feels that the physical agility tests administered were discriminatory to women. Also, Aurora does not have an equal employment opportunity program that meets federal guidelines. The hearing before the State Civil Rights Commission is set for the end of October.

Big Mama Rag Vol. 3-A, No. 11

Media Charged With Bias

Tea Schook and Ann Daniel

Women from both Denver and Boulder joined together Saturday, October 18th in a protest demonstration that began at the capitol building in Denver and ended at the offices of the Denver Post:

The demonstration was planned and organized by the Women’s Liberation Coalition, a University of Colorado affiliate. The women were protesting articles printed in the Denver Post which had shown a definite sex-bias and lack of thorough reporting and research.

The articles in question were written by Art Branscombe, the Post Education editor, concerning the results of National Assessment achievement tests given by the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP). Within the article, Branscombe twists interpretations of the basic facts given by Roy Forbes, director of NAEP. Essentially, the test results state that pre-school boys and girls achieve equally in all subject areas, this trend remaining steady until about age 9, when girls' achievement progress declines.

Branscombe, using basic value judgment, attempts to say that females are innately less intelligent than males. “Only an insensitive lout would say out loud that boys and men seem to get smarter as they get older, faster in most cases than girls and women . . . Yet that’s what achievement test results .. . Say.” He crows over his interpretation, which ignores all existing sociological and psychological studies to the contrary. He takes tremendous liberties and makes a mockery of the tests with his twisting of statistics; “It sounds chauvinistic, but test results show. . .” Anyone in education, except perhaps education editors, knows that value judgments can never be applied to statistical test results. Forbes himself obviously refrained from so doing.

Interpretation of Why These Discrepancies Occur

“The differential treatment of the female is designed to foster dependency and attachment, and to create guilt and a high level of anxiety over achievement and aggression.

Before grade school, the degree of analytical thought (the ability to focus on salient aspects) and intuitive thought (response to the total situation, not any one part), in male and female children is equal. However, because of the social pressures on female children, they are encouraged to be more socially oriented (i.e., use intuitive thought). Male children are oriented towards analytical thought through “male” toys etc. and general discouragement to be “good” and “nice” and people-oriented.

Both female and male children perceive the early school environment as female. Female children receive more contact with the teacher (which fosters dependency) and males receive more attention for negative behavior, which is sex-typical male behavior.

In the early years the differences are slight and it isn’t much of a problem. However, in adolescence the female shows a significant decrease in intellectual ability. The reasons are obvious; with the physical developments of puberty the sex role expectations are more clearly defined, and are expected to be more rigidly adhered to. Female self-concept falls down significantly lower than males. This continues on into college and adulthood. Also the fact that now there are more male teachers for males to identify with, and the main thrust of high school is to prepare for a career, this results in the higher achievement of males. Where does this leave the female?

Success involves competition, which means aggression, which in turn is not feminine. As a result, the female is given the message that in order to be a successful female (the one role open to her) she must remain childlike and dependent. If she does succeed, she may suffer social rejection and a loss of femininity. The devalued sex role leads to devaluation of self and a failure to achieve. The self-concept of the female is directly related to the degree of adherence to the female sex role; the more adherence, the more self-devaluation.” (Rindy, Bartholomew, Periman)

Gathering at Noon

People began gathering at noon and the protest began about 12:30. A statement was read by JoHanna Reilly from the Coalition. Reilly cited reasons given by sociologists and psychologists for the discrepancies in male and female achievement. “Increased IQ is directly related to high achievement. Lower IQ is directly related to dependency and passive response to failure (which females are reinforced for and males are not). Underachievement begins to be prevalent because of the identification with the devalued sex role.

Females score equally with males when there is a high degree of cross-sex identification (when females are more masculine and aggressive). Cross-sex identification is also related to autonomy and independence. If children are raised in an environment where independence is encouraged, female and male children show increased IQ. Females show increased IQ with more cross-sex identification and more tomboy behavior. Achievement levels of males and females remain the same when:

— females have a lowered sex role identification

— when females show less anxiety about aggression

— when females show less interest in social acceptance

— when mothers encourage independence

The articles were called “a feeble attack on the ERA.” Her message ended with a statement from the Women’s Studies Department at the University, giving full support to the protest.

More on Page 13

Denial

City Manager Robert Semple stated that the majority of women in high school physical education classes passed the revised test. Cool, Lovato, and Elhard also took the revised test and could not pass it. Semple said that the fact that the three women failed the test does not mean that the test is discriminatory.

The Justice Department still feels that the physical agility tests administered were discriminatory to women. Also, Aurora does not have an equal employment opportunity program that meets federal guidelines. The hearing before the State Civil Rights Commission is set for the end of October.