AFTER WOMEN’S “LIB

Maria Troy is a would-be college teacher with an MA in English from the University of Colorado who can't find a job. Don't get me wrong. I am just like you. But when a society has become dehumanized, treating the symptoms just aggravates the disease. Want an easy outlet for frustrations? Blame it on the men. Blame it on the society that is run by men. But who has raised all the children and taught them the values of that society? That's more than half of the dirty work, right there. Men and women today are victims of a society we have been stupid enough to acquiesce to for too long. And now, do you think the truly vital business of the world is carried on in office buildings? Are we seeking equality so that we, too, can struggle with the avarice and the ulcers that plague Seventeenth Street? 

You say you used to be an oppressed sex object? But you gave all your frilly dresses to the Salvation Army? You burned your bra and now you scorn any woman who wears one? When an MCP whistles at you in the park you flip him the bird? You're long ashamed of having been Snowflake Queen in high school? When somebody calls you "Miss Smith," you snap to attention, stick out your chin and thunder, "That's MS Smith, buddy!"? 

You've come the wrong way. Ultimately, the issue is not a sexual one, nor is it a political one. It's a human one. We can win equality in the courts, but we can't legislate the human spirit. Where do we start? Not by pointing fingers there and there, but by recognizing our dignity and responsibilities as human beings. 

What about you? Are you your own oppressor? Do you blame your parents for the way you turned out? Do you blame society? Men? When are you going to start taking responsibility for the way you are? Have you got a chip on your shoulder? Will you be angry with me for saying that Women's Lib is a white, Baby.

It's all together crazy now

How much we've played the fools

The time we've spent “prettying up" 
With silks and furs and jewels.

Faces plastered head to chin

And hands that squish of lanolin 
Tresses golden now are raven 
Appendages are glossily shaven. 

Sultry eyes of Maybelline 
FDS shouts "I am clean" 
Underarms are sprayed and dry 
Certs stops bad breath when I sigh. 

Diet pills or skipping meals 
No matter how the stomach feels 
Ought to mean a dress size eight 
For Friday's party looking great. 

Perfume's essence from Paris France 
Could make the difference at a dance 
Even if your zits won't heal 
Use Ultra Brite with sex appeal. 

If your body is aching, groaning 
While the other YOU is angrily moaning. 
"Something here, it's just not right” 
Is this really ME going out tonight? 

It's nice to be the way you are 
And not the one from out of a jar 
Zits and bulges, mouse brown hair 
Expensive clothing that you wear 
Doesn't make you more aware 
Doesn't make your "loved one” care. 

Since You Won't Know Any Other Way, Mister

I'm going to drill a screw through your temples 
Just so there's enough air for your brains to 
slide around in uncomfortably 

I'm going to drive a spike at the top of your head 
Just so there's hole enough for all the beautiful women 
of the world to stuff rags into 

It only stifles the inner glow 
So stand back sister, let it grow 

You'll like the feeling when you WANT TO JOIN A CONSCIOUSNESS- 
RAISING GROUP??? 

Enough I hope that you will share 
The knowledge that the “gimmick” is done 
And the magnificent YOU has finally won 

SELF DEFENSE CLASSES IN BOULDER 
Humans Against Rape and 
Molestation (HARM) is offering 
self-defense classes for women 
beginning in March. Cost is 
$15 per month. For more info, 
contact Ren Paget at 447-1301. 

SELF-HEALTH CLASSES 
Anyone interested in taking 
some of the worry out of her 
body by learning self-examination 
procedures, call Women In Transition 
at 255-2435.