Foundation Researching & Proposal Writing

How to Compete in the Funding Game

Kate Sharp and Eileen Bresnahan

In October of 1975, two BMR collective members attended a workshop on fundraising sponsored by the United Methodist Voluntary Services, which was led by Stella Alvo and Sue Angus. The following is from notes taken at that workshop. Due to lack of space, we include simply sections on researching foundations and writing proposals, although other topics were discussed at the workshop.

When a group is considering approaching a foundation for funds, there are some very basic things which must be kept in mind. The first of these is that most foundations have certain “absolute pitfalls,” that is, arbitrary criteria which will make some groups ineligible to receive their grant money. For example, some foundations love to fund daycare projects but would never consider funding a media project. Make sure your project is appropriate to the foundations to which you are applying. This can be done by writing a letter requesting the foundation's criteria or guidelines. Be sure to make clear that it is only a request for criteria and not a request for funds.

Secondly, the awarding of foundation monies often borders on capriciousness. Even though a group has met all criteria, it might not be funded simply because it does not satisfy the foundation's “pet” ideas of what is needed.

Credibility

Thirdly, it is imperative that a group establish credibility with the foundation. Foundations fear being ripped off. They only want to fund “solid,” “responsible” projects. In addition, foundations will deliberately throw obstacles in the way of the group applying. It is wise for a group to be prepared for this, so that they will be neither discouraged nor surprised when this happens. This process is the foundation's way of weeding out the determined from the less determined.

Lastly, besides being credible, the group must be able to impress the foundation with its effectiveness. They must show that they are not only the best people to do the job but that they are the only people to do the job right. In other words, no matter how un-feminist that concept is, the reality of the “grants game” is that foundations like to feel that the project they're funding is the “best one for the job.”

Research

With these things firmly in mind, the group should begin researching to find a likely foundation or foundations. When researching, you need to find out: 1) who the foundation makes grants to (i.e., what kind of projects they “like to fund” and/or what kind of projects they absolutely will not fund), 2) in what part of the country grants are usually made (some foundations will only fund projects in certain cities, states, or regions. For example, if the X Foundation has never, in its history, funded a project outside of Cincinnati, it is extremely unlikely that it will fund a Health Care Center in San Diego), 3) what the usual grant size is. Match the foundation to the amount of money you need. Some foundations give only very large grants while others give only small grants. Beware of this fact when you research. 4) What past grants have been made for. Some foundations will only fund operation costs, others fund salaries, still others fund building costs. Many foundations are only willing to give “seed” monies (monies to start new projects). Find out before you apply.

It is helpful to know something about how the foundation to which you are applying operates. There are two general types of foundations: the professional and the non-professional. The professional foundation has a paid staff. This means that the person you will be dealing with is an employee who will present your proposal to the foundation’s board of trustees.

Woman To Woman Bookstore Collective

Many feminist projects have considered all the problems of how to obtain funding. Few, however, have stopped to consider whether funding, itself, might be a problem.

Very rarely is a funding foundation (governmental, corporate, or private) willing to subsidize a project without maintaining some sort of control. All too often there are specific requirements and strings attached to institutionalized money handouts which end up co-opting the goals of the project. Once a project has received a grant, the project's priorities often change to where the first priority becomes making sure there are no threats to the continuation of the incoming money, even if it means cutting back on political standpoints.

A federal program many cities in the country used to “keep radicals off the streets and put them to work for the community” is one example of how grants co-opt. The PST program offers $150 a month, plus food stamps, to individuals (ages 18-25) who contract to work forty hours a week on community projects of their choice, IF the individual agrees to be fingerprinted, informs PSI of the project's nature, and agrees to make no public political statements. At one point, the Lesbian Feminist Radio Collective in Seattle had 3 of its 6 members in the program; whenever a political action or statement was deemed necessary (a public support action for Inez Garcia, for instance), discussion would arise around whether individual participation in the action would endanger PSI income.

Grant requirements that are not overtly political may also hamper a group. In 1974, The Other Woman, a collectively run Canadian feminist newspaper, received a one-year grant from the government. One of the grant’s stipulations was that the paper increase its publication to once a month, rather than remain at 6 issues a year. On this, a collective member commented, “I would prefer to see us produce 5 or 6 well-planned, well-thought-out issues in a year than 12 slap-dash affairs put together to meet government deadlines.”

Feast or Famine

Another big problem with grants is that they rarely provide enough money to salary all the women working on the project. Most grants stipulate the number of salaried positions and the amount to be paid for each one. This is particularly hard for radical feminist projects that have grown out of the philosophy of collectivism. Deciding who gets the money, or who DOESN'T get the money challenges the collectivism of the group. Although we know of some groups that have gotten around this by putting up with the legal issues, and then shared salary money under the table, that process doesn't come very easy for others. The Other Woman's grant caused problems in this area, too. One woman reflected, “OFY (their particular funding agency) means hurt feelings between the money-making few and their sister volunteers. It means the volunteers get angry and don’t come to meetings anymore. It means the paper suffers from too little help and too few decision-makers, plus lots of extra paperwork and ridiculous petty details.” During the year of grant funding, the paper's staff dwindled to only those paid. At the end of the year when the grant ran out, the paid staffers left, causing a sudden and serious energy and skill shortage for the project.

To cite another example: A couple of years ago, two different projects operating out of the Sacramento Women's Center received salary grants. One group, predominantly radical feminist, received a $10,000 grant from the city for a rape project. The other group, which was staffed by women with a more liberal feminist orientation, received $30,000 in salary money for their mother’s hotline project. The women working on the rape project had started the Women’s Center, had worked for two years with little or no remuneration, and had been instrumental in working on the grant application for the mother’s hotline. But when the money started coming in, most of the women on the mother’s hotline, who were new to the center, took the philosophy that what was given to us is ours, and what was given to you is yours. Shortly following the grant funding, the radical feminist group left the women’s center in a rather dramatic split. Although the distribution of grant money was not the only issue, it added to the antagonisms between the two groups.

Strange Bedfellows and Bedsisters

Government agencies and corporations provide funding for feminist projects for two basic reasons: one, they don’t consider the work of the project to be politically threatening and giving money away to “worthy causes” is good public relations; or two, they DO consider the work to be politically threatening and grant monies have a history of being disruptive and co-optive for feminist projects.

The Ford Foundation recently granted the Feminist Press $200,000 along with the Carnegie Corp, which gave $140,000, to help prepare non-sexist text materials for high schools. These grants were the result of a two-year study financed by the Rockefeller family. While doing a non-sexist high school curriculum is certainly a good reform, the Feminist Press's work has been predefined for the period of the grant, and limits the possibilities of printing and distributing more radical feminist literature. By accepting the grants, the Feminist Press has accepted the implications of the Ford, Carnegie, Rockefeller connection, and has accepted, in some sense, the politics of the three powerful conglomerations.

Sometimes the co-optation takes on a more indirect form. In the three years since its inception, MS Magazine, INC., has been heralded by many as the “voice of the women's movement.” In fact, MS represents a small group of women with limited feminist politics. It is heavily subsidized by Warner Communications, and it is only through the financial investment of Warner's that MS is able to put together the kind of magazine and advertising campaign that has given it such prominence. MS Magazine has been used to channel women into conservative, and sometimes reactionary, feminist philosophies. At the same time, it channels women away from the many grassroots feminist journals which are available, but do not have the financial resources to make themselves as visible as MS.

Anything For A Buck?

Of course, it takes more than good intentions to build politically active, radical feminist projects. While some have been able to support themselves, few are free of the possibility of facing financial hard times. However, when a feminist group finds itself in monetary troubles, it should think twice before assuming grants are the solution. For groups whose goals are reformist-oriented, the question of grants will probably be no question at all. However, for feminist groups with a radical approach, the imperative question is “How much are we gaining - and at what price?” For those who have not considered this question, the price has often been the taking of “radical” out of “radical feminist.”