Bay Area Women  
Against Rape  
From page 3.  

Women requested several community  
groups to help pressure the faction  
left in power into negotiations. Some  
groups refused to involve themselves  
at all; the letters and phone calls  
from others were not successful in  
changing the position of the women  
now comprising BAWAR. Both factions  
say that their lawyer tried many times  
to contact the other faction's lawyer  
without success. In March 1979, the  
suit against BAWAR was filed, with the  
nine expelled women as plaintiffs.  

The lawsuit asks for $70,000 in  
actual and punitive damages. Included  
are claims for loss of wages and  
future earnings by the CETA workers,  
incursion of medical costs which  
would otherwise have been covered  
by BAWAR's health plan, “emotional  
distress" and "shame and humiliation"  
suffered by the expelled women, and  
violations of the state civil rights  
law.  

The suit also seeks dissolution  
of BAWAR as an organization. Luke  
Ellis, lawyer for the plaintiffs,  
has stated that BAWAR's corporate  
assets would, upon dissolution, go  
to another similar community group -  
which might be, according to Labriola,  
a new group incorporated by the  

current BAWAR people, a group suggested  
by the plaintiffs, or the plain-  
tiffs themselves. Labriola says the  
expelled women have been doing rape  
advocacy on a small scale for callers  
referred to them by other community  
organizations at times when BAWAR has  
not been available. However, she  
explains that they have not formed  

a separate corporation because they  
still consider themselves to be  
legally BAWAR members and, as such,  
entitled to BAWAR funds.  

Nobody really wants a drawn-out  
and costly court fight over events  
of more than a year ago. But the  
expelled group want an accounting  
for the wrongs they feel. And the  
current BAWAR workers still feel  
that those expelled are an untrust-  
worthy and destructive group with  
whom they can never negotiate.  

So, in the absence of a feminist  
tribunal, the dispute seems inevit-  
ably headed for settlement by a duly  
appointed judge of the Alameda  
County Superior Court - doubtless to  
neither party's satisfaction.  

(By Jesse Meredith, reprinted from  
Plexus, Bay Area Women's Newspaper)  

Struggle From page 8  

Killings this year and there has been a complete “white-out"  
media about this. Feminists might also  

Slick Playboy type magazine aimed at Black men called PLAY.  
Feminist publication which I consider  

Women's Issue of Conditions which I co-  

The other thing on my mind dovetails  

Alix Dobkin  
From page 2  

For a number of years I have want-  
ed to change the cover of LAVENDER  
JANE and many months ago I started  
that process in motion. Liza Diamond  
Cowan designed the new one which I  
feel is not only beautiful but also  
carries the theme I established with  
my old design. The decision to have  
a new cover was made long before I  
decided to sell in overground stores  
but I feel that it is a happy coinci-  
dence that they are making their ap-  
pearance just when my new policy is  
taking effect.  

I make this change in my life with  
some sense of loss, but mostly with  
a great sense of freedom and excite-  
ment. I expect to keep in touch  
with you when I go on the road on  
concert and promotional tours. I am  
still singing for women-only audi-  
ences and am still dedicated to the  
creation of all-women's space. I am  
still committed to Lesbian and wom-  
en's culture.  

In case you don't know about it,  
ALIX DOBKIN'S ADVENTURES IN WOMEN'S  
MUSIC has recently been published by  
TOMATO PUBLICATIONS. It is a book  
containing many songs, photos, draw-  
ings, comics and extensive commentary  
and background on my music and life.  

Thank you for your support and  
cooperation during these past six  
years. I appreciate it and I appre-  
ciate you!  

Take care, stay in business, and  
remember, we ain't got it easy, but  
we sure got it!  

Alix Dobkin  

Migrant Farmworkers  
From page 8  

And illiterate.  

Underlying all their concerns was  
the nagging fear that their lives  
had no positive direction - that they  
were lacking security and goals in  
their lives - that the future did  
not seem to hold promise of a better  
life. It is that basic premise that  
seems to be what eventually causes  
some people to leave the migrant  
worker stream and head for the city -  
in search of a different life - the  
extreme desire, or desperation, to  
change, to improve their lives.  

These women are determined, hard  
workers, who are tired of working  
for nothing. It is this determination  
that drives these women to the cities  
to school to learn English so they  
can get jobs. Many of them come with  
their young children, leaving their  
husbands in the fields, ready to  
risk the chances of a hostile society  
just for the hope of a better life.  

In all types of  
be interested to know that there is a  
(A pro-Black  
to be "must" reading is the Black  
edited with Lorraine Bethel.)  

With encouraging white women who are  

actively anti-racist to read Black publications to find out what's happening  
and this is my frustration that white women in general do not grasp that the  
Black feminist movement is in a very different period historically than the  

white feminist movement,  

even though the participants in these movements  

are each other's contemporaries. I have been constantly aware of this "time-  
lag" during my seven years of involvement in Black feminist politics. If mea-  
sured by the closedness of the Black community to feminism, the still rela-  

tively small number of Black women who  

identify themselves as feminists and  

the lack of Black feminist institutions Black women have, our movement is  

still in its early stages.  

Merely by comprehending this, the lack of support  
that Black feminists have for being Black feminists,  

white women might be  

able to give at least psychic and preferably practical support to Black women  
who they know and not assume that it means the same thing for us to be femin-  

ists and Lesbians as it does for them to be feminists  

know if my point is clear, but  

and Lesbians. I don't  

just think about the last time you went into a  

Black/Third World women's bookstore, restaurant, or women's center or read a  

Black/Third World feminist newspaper or magazine  

or a book printed by a  

Black/Third World women's press.  
Think about whether you've even heard of  
these things existing.  

I am optimistic. I see our movement growing, the Black feminist movement in  

particular and the women's movement generally.  

I know things will change. But  

in the meantime Black feminists don't have a lot of alternatives, particular-  

ly alternative institutions,  

and we are also up against a very resistant  

Black community which is, given racism, particularly racism in the women's  

movement, a community  
where we need to fight racism,  

feel at home. White feminists not only  

but to familiarize themselves with the substance of our  

lives and struggle. Reading some of the things I've suggested and everything  

you can find about Black women is one way  

to do this.  

Boulder Lesbian Network Dance From page 2  

To put it mildly, the bands were  
not a hit. I feel there's a need to  
clarify some of what went on prior  
to and during the dance, as well as  
to talk about the bands and the mu-  
sic.  

I have several criticisms of my-  
self and the committee that organ-  
ized the celebration. I feel that  
some wimmin had ideas of what kinds  
of things they wanted to see happen  
without carefully considering our  
limitations in terms of wimmin, ener-  
gy and money--that they counted on  
time/energy/expertise commitments  
that weren't necessarily there spon-  
taneously--that people had to be re-  
cruited. A lot of overcommitment  
and burnout resulted, and a lot of  
tasks were not given the time and  
thought needed.  

I was the main person responsible  
for hiring the two bands. I should  
not have allowed myself to be so  
drastically overburdened with my in-  
volvement with arrangements for the  
day's activities. This meant that  
I had too little time to devote to  
crucial decision making. I had no  
time to arrange for auditions of the  
bands with other committee members.  
I attended one practice session of  
one band. They seemed to be dance-  
able, fairly womon-identified in  
terms of lyrics, and though not to-  
tally together musically, they as-  
sured me that they would be by the  
night of the dance, which they were.  

I also criticize myself for be-  
lieving I was capable of judging a-  
lone what kind of music wimmin at  
the dance would like to hear. I  
was not enthusiastic about taking  
sole responsibility for bookings,  
but was willing to do so. My musi-  
cal bias is toward wimmin's and po-  
litically relevant music, generally  
acoustic. Anything other than that,  
especially dance music, I regard as  
a compromise tolerable under certain  
circumstances. Apparently I have  
different ideas of to what degree  
any given music is a compromise. I  
also, apparently incorrectly, made  
the judgment that wimmin would pre-  
fer breaking up the evening with two  
short (half-hour) sets of live music  
rather than three straight hours of  
disco.  

Also I criticize the attitudes of  
various BLN members toward each other  
and the bands after they started  
playing. Several people began de-  
manding angrily that the band stop,  
threatening to pull the plugs, not  
pay them, etc. This was an extreme-  
ly tense situation and several peo-  
ple were asking for their money  
back. I think all of us will learn  
from this how to better deal with  
stressful situations. I felt a re-  
sponsibility to do what the commit-  
tee felt necessary, but was having  
a hard time ascertaining what that  
was. At the same time, I didn't  
feel the band was intentionally try-  
ing to ruin the dance or alienate  
people. They were into their music  
and into exposing us to it. From  
their point of view their artistic  
integrity was being violated. The  
confrontiveness and hostility on the  
part of some BLN members was not on-  
ly inappropriate but probably made  
the bands more resistant to stopping.  
We had an agreement with them, and  
while this was "OUR" dance, breaking  

the agreement by not letting them  

play was a drastic step, calling for  

as much communication as possible.  

I would also like to comment on  
the bands and punk/new wave music in  
general. Both bands were fairly re-  
cently formed and had short reper-  
toires, but were willing to play for  
the small amount we offered. (They  
were not intended for the major en-  
tertainment of the evening, nor were  
they advertised as such, but the ad-  
vertising should have been more ex-  
plicit.) The first band, who call  
themselves the "Profalactics", did  
some original material whose lyrics  
(if one had been able to hear them)  
showed a certain feminist/political  
awareness, albeit sarcastic. They  
were enthused about performing for  
us, and worked hard in preparing for  
the dance. The second band, recom-  
mended by the wimmin in the Profalac-  
tics, was more experienced and more  
together musically but apparently  
apolitical. Their interest in per-  
forming was exposure, but they ap-  
parently had no particular interest  
in an all wimmin audience. (The  
guitarist called us “all just a  
bunch of dykes" right before we  
turned off the mikes.) As different  
as these bands seem to be, they are  
both basically punk rock or new wave  
bands. They express an alienation  
and insolence toward everything, and  
Saturday night the audience felt  
like the object of that. Their mu-  
sical style is angry and violent and  
seems to evoke hostility in the lis-  
tener. It's an irrational anger, as  
opposed to what one feels when listen-  
ing to, for instance, the Berkeley  
Women's Music Collective sing "The  
Furies" or “Thorazine". That anger  
grows out of an understanding facili-  
tated by the song. The guitarist in  
the first band told me that their  
music is intended to make you angry  
at your oppressor, not at each other  
or the band. In order for that to  
happen I think some kind of bond  
needs to be established between band  
and audience.  

Some feminists have made the point  
that punk rock is inherently sexist  
and sadistic. I think that elements  
of it (e.g. lyrics, as was the case  
with the first band) can be nonsexist  
and even anti-sexist. But the musi-  
cal style, at least that exhibited  
by these two bands, has a driving,  
hyper beat, repetitive simple melo-  
dies, and is very loud and aggressive.  
I would define it as very male. Also  
the anger that people already feel as  
a result of their oppression is like-  
ly to be channeled into an undirected  
destructive hostility as a result of  
the music, rather than into under-  
standing and trying to change our  
oppression.  

As for a wimmin's celebration, it  
should be a joyous, positive, uniting  
experience, giving us strength to  
continue to live, work, and struggle  
for change in our surroundings. To  
the extent that that happened on Sat-  
urday, and for the most part it did,  
the planning committee should be  
thanked and congratulated. To the  
extent that it did not happen at the  
dance, I offer my apology and I think  
and hope we've all grown from the ex-  
perience,  

Louise Knapp  

Feminist Cultural Politics From page 2  

Case, there are few feminist maga-  
zines or papers now left where the  
issues of privilege among "public"  
feminists can even be broached.  
Please continue this questioning.  

I'm enclosing six dollars for a  
subscription--as a tiny way to sup-  
port this questioning. I really  
wish my finances made it possible for  
me to be a sustainer right now, but  
they don't, alas.  

Other work on politics of culture  
I've related to? As a feminist poet  
who self-published a book of poems  
(Let the Circle Be Unbroken) in late  
1976, I really got into Kady Van  
Deurs' brief article about the frus-  
trations of pushing her book. Be-  
cause you've printed so much on the  
politics of culture before, I'm  
really excited that you're doing a  
"Women and Art" issue. Are you going  
to at all explore the political/econ-  
omic contradictions women artists  
face?  

I am currently working on an anal-  
ysis of how the collective women's  
culture has been transformed into a  
"market". This article focuses on  
the role commercial publishers have  

played in this process. It tries to  
find answers to the question: have  
commercial publishers crowded femin-  
ist presses out of this market? It  
describes how the sales/need of com-  
mercial publishers has led them to  
create feminist "stars" in both the  
feminist community and the outside  
culture, and it discusses the effect  
such star/need/creation has had on  
this community. I feel strongly that  
these are issues which should be  
brought up more in the feminist move-  
ment, issues which can be brought up  
without trashing individuals.  

Would you be at all interested in  
seeing this article?  

Best of luck with the fall  
issues (the technology one sounds  
challenging and necessary also), and  
thanks for your time. And your sur-  
vival.  

In sisterhood,  
Alison Colbert  
New York City  

Editor's Note: yes! We are inter-  
ested in seeing this article and  

we encourage other women to submit  
articles.