banr:

where we're at

We start off production this grey, rainy month anxiously
and fearfully wondering whether there will be a next...for
Big Mama Rag-feminist newsjournal. :

The BMR community meeting here in Denver will take place
this Sunday April 8th, at 1 pm, at R.I.P Bookstore. We will
use the time to explain the need for more women to join the
collective and answer any questions that women have about
the paper. It has been over a year since the last community
meeting with many changes during that time.

The latest change being that the collective
...Susanna, Deb and Joan.

Lori Bradford has now left the collective. She has been
with the paper for many years. Throughout the years, Lori
has brought much energy and challenging politics to the pa-
per and the Denver community. Her "coming out" as an ex-
psychiatric inmate has pushed us all to deal with the op-
pression of psychiatry as a political tool, and our atti-
tudes of “madness.” But this has been a very painful pro-
cess for Lori...it has not been an easy progression for any
of us...and has now led Lori to leave the collective.

As the paper is shaped by the collective members, we think
of how much Lori has shaped the paper and how much will be
lost.

It has only been through Lori's involvement as an ex-
psychiatric inmate with anti-psychiatric politics that BMR
has become one of the few feminist journals to cover this
perspective. BMR has become a feminist journal read by and
supported by many psychiatric (and ex) inmates. We are
scared that Lori's leaving the paper might change this...
that without her constant pushing and explaining of the im-
pact of this psychiatrized society we will slide back into
either misunderstanding or denial of its importance.

This has also made it a very difficult decision for Lori
to leave BMR. She too fears that anti-psychiatric politics
will disappear from the feminist press and from feminist
politics.

If nothing else, from all the months and years of strug-
gle around this issue, we have learned what a powerful,
oppressive and invasive force psychiatry is in our lives.
We have seen how the methods used by the psychiatric sys-
tem (for example, Electro-Shock, drugs and incarceration),
are designed to torture and control us into submission and
passivity, along with imperialist use of cops and prisons.
And these are only the obvious methods. Alternative thera-
pies (including "feminist" therapy) are also used to make us
controllable and “acceptable" and accepting of everyone's
oppression within this society.

We have not learned enough through all of this. Not
learned enough—how to support each other in our daily
lives...issues of "madness," ageism, anti-semitism, lesbians
having children, classism, racism, ad infinitum...The con-
frontations and repeated misunderstandings between Bobbe
and Lori, the lack of understanding from all of us on the
collective and the hostility from the Denver "feminist
community” at large has created a situation that leaves
Lori no options but to leave the project.

For the next few months Lori will be working on organiz-
ing the 12th Annual International Conference for Human
Rights and Against Psychiatric Oppression, held this year
in Pueblo, Colorado, June 1 - 5.

We will miss her enormous input and knowledge and exper-
ience on the paper!

is now three

ac ©
c@ver: The collage of graphics on the cover is from
Women Against Imperialism, 3543 18th St., #14, San Francis-
co, California 94110.

collective: Lori Bradford, Susanna Smith,

Deb Luger, Joan Pettijohn

Supporters: Sue Goding, Kay Young, Claire
Ellington, Bobbe Ross, Liz Lewis, Rozz Lieght,
Kathy Riley, Barbara Wish, Linda Lane, Dee Berman

contributors: Vickie Barriga, Patzicia Silva,

Rose

BIG MAMA RAG is a feminist periodical published monthly
by BIG MAMA RAG, Inc., a non-profit corporation. Man-

uscripts and artwork (please!) may be submitted to 1724
Gaylord St., Denver, CO 80206. Deadline for material sub-
mission will generally fall between the 15th and 18th of
the preceding month. Please enclose a stamped, self-add-
ressed envelope with all manuscripts. No responsibility is
accepted for unsolicited material. We reserve the right to
edit all material for length with the input of the author.
subscription rates are $9/year; (11 issues) for individuals

Where We're At.....sseeceeed

Local
At The Foot Of The Mountain

Performances- Denver: . ...., 94 i_S ee Beaeeaanon Ajowa Ifateyo..
Women In Cages ee ons) as ws
Native American Women In Pri~. Palestinian Women's Prison
son: Paula Three Stars and Septic... . o>. -oteeess ~ SS eae
* Doris Raven Darkwing Foster-5 America Held Hostage. 2. <.15
hep tembael eS. « a's) sab opi ow sn «+++ 6&7 poetry

Book Review
Sitt Marie Rose by Etel Adnan

As a three-member collective, we cannot continue! Our
struggles and coverage over anti-psychiatric issues and
Palestine/Zionist politics are especially overwhelming. We
see Big Mama Rag as a paper unique - covering issues that
most feminist journals consider too revolutionary, and most
revolutionary journals won't consider at all. Feminism -
racism - classism - imperialism - anti-semitism - national
liberation movements - psychiatric oppression are among the
many issues covered regularly in BMR in both theoretical
and highly personal ways.

There is also, of course, an enormous amount of busywork,
and correspondence to keep the paper going...and we need to
grow to continue the project.

There are many supporters of the paper locally, working
on production, fundraising, mailing, etc. And now there is
even a fundraiser happening in San Francisco, CA organized
by Rose. "Living Our Madness"~ a reading by ex-psychiatric
inmates, poetry and verse will take place on April 25th.
(See page 3 for more details). Perhaps our supporters don't
even realize how essential they are to the continuance of
BMR. We thank you for it all!

But we need more! More collective members and more sup-
porters...now...or the paper will fold! More local distri-
bution and support or the paper will fold! More political
and emotional support and criticism or the paper will fold!

As for future issues...we still make plans...hoping that
women in the Denver community will come forward with new
energy and challenging politics to keep the paper going.

Our next issue (May) will tentatively cover Zionist and
Palestinian history and analysis. This month we planned on
having the history in print, but after reading Bobbe's
writings on Zionism and Susanna's on Palestine, we realized
we need more and less. More analysis of the history and
present-day events, and less direct account of male power
struggles as is presented in our history books. Also less
duplication of the histories. The hard work and many hours
that Bobbe and Susanna have put into their research and
writing is really valuable, but we felt that more struggle
is needed within the collective to get the writing to a point
that it be something we can all learn from and more than
a dry account of events.

In November '83, BMR published a flyer written and dis-
tributed by Ajowa Ifateyo—a member of the African Women's
Committee for Community Education (and a former member of the
African People's Socialist Party). This was a criticism and
charge of Omali Yeshitela (Joseph Waller), his "brutal ex-
ploitation of black women" and a “call on women and men to
break the silence and speak out against the oppression of
women in the black movement." Chairman Omali is in a posi-
tion of leadership in the African People's Socialist Party.

We later received criticism from the Committee in Solidar-
ity with African Independence for publishing the flyer,
which they considered "slanderous allegations about the
leadership and organization of the African People's Social-
ist Party."

In this issue we have published articles and explanations
from both groups on this struggle within the black libera-
tion movement (See pages 10 thru 14). After reading this
literature, we acknowledge the serious effect this has had
within the APSP. We want to say that while we acknowledge

MORE ON PAGE. 16

Struggle

APSP Conflict Addressed

Response from Comm. In. Solidarity With African Independence

inside BMR:

Letters, Home To Mama.......

‘Breathing Walking Late At
Night “by Rose's. oa. Sea 3s ell

wee =~ poe apie ages oA Ge POT Ie lent. Cave o a-aalp 96 whey,

in the US, $15 for Canada, Mexico and plain brown wrapper,
$18 overseas, $22-US institutions, $24-Mexico, Canada and
$26 overseas. Free to all US women incarcerated in prisons
or psychiatric institutions. BMR is on file at the New
Alexandria Library for Lesbian Women in Florence, MA and is
available on microfilm (Vol.1/#1 Oct. *72 through July '79)
directly from BMR for $75. BMR is indexed by the Alternat-
ive Press Center, P.O. Box 7229, Baltimore, MD 21218. Our
phone # is 303-322-2010.