culture. ..

15

te se 425

Ain't I A Woman

Theater Collective Caught in the Act

Tea Schook

“Ain't I A Woman" theater collective
has been performing at benefits and
coffeehouses for the past two years.
The group, comprised of Paula Speary,
Ronna Keil, Jane Severance, and Sandy
Cummins, has a repertoire that in-
cludes skits about alcoholism, mental
health, role playing in the lesbian
community, and other areas of women's
lives.

There are now approximately 50 fem-
inist theater groups in this country.
Denver is fortunate to have one of
their own. The following is an inter-
view with “Ain't I A Woman" in which
they discuss their politics, process,
and dreams.

The four of us got together after
that show and discussed what had gone
wrong there and talked about how well
the four of us worked together and
how necessary it was that our working
together and our patterns stay con-
sistent for us to get the kind of pro-
gress we wanted. We talked about it
at length; the third reason we chose
to close it was because of Jane's
paranoia, her lack of experience, her
confidence in working with us -- she
trusted us with her inexperience and
she trusted that we would value the
things she did well. She doesn't have
theater experience, but she does have
an incredible imagination. She
comes up with marvelous concepts and
ideas that, with the combination of

Tea: The first question that I want
to ask you all is to talk about your
history -- the history of the group;
how you formed; from what you started.
Where you get your seeds, so to speak.
Sandy: As I heard it, the group start-
ed with Paula, Judy, and Ronna getting
together one night and deciding that
since you can't play football when
it's hot out, that they gotta do
theater instead. And since there was

a Woman to Woman Coffeehouse coming

up and all the guitar players had
broken their bones, they decided they
were going to perform guerilla thea-
ter. They had gone to the zoo one day,
and Ronna knew how to walk like a mon-
key.

They started as a theater, as a one
shot deal, and then they ran into me.
The show I was supposed to be in had
just gone down the tubes because of
lack of money. "We're looking for
people to be in our theater." So I
got into "Ain't I A Woman”.

So we went through a whole summer
and then we found Jane. Jane put us
in our place. Jane gave us ideas.

Jane gave us purpose, strength,
inspiration. And we carried on from
September 1978 to the present, sharing
our ideas, our strengths, and our
weaknesses.

Tea: Are you a closed collective
or open? How did you make that deci-
sion? How did you make the decision to
be just the four of you or are you
open to other people coming in and
doing theater with you?

Ronna: Yes, we are a closed collec-
tive. We came to that decision short-
ly after the phase where we were the
most open, where we advertised for
anybody and everybody who wanted to do
theater to come to a meeting, and we
got just an incredible response of
about 20 women. A good portion of them
hadn't had any experience or had very
little experience. It was an incredi-
ble mixture of experience, and an
incredible mixture of desires, and we were
working from a place of no directors --
it came from within. When you had
20 strangers there, and they were
trying to come up with a piece that's
coming from within, it was chaos.

It was real difficult, and it was
real frustrating. We put on a show
that way.

-photos by Linda Lane

All our experience and attitude to-
ward theater can be put into theater.
So, Jane trusted that situation and
didn't want to rock that. I guess

all of us trusted that situation and
had gotten close.

One thing that I feel about it is
that you can work for the community,
you can do something for the women's
community by giving them a place
where they can learn theater, where
they can explore theater, all of them
individually, or you can work for
the women's community by performing
good theater for them. I think one
of the decisions we made was to be
a performance group rather than a
training group where women could
learn theater and get in contact with
theater.

Tea: Your theater and Jane's ideas
I assume that the rest of you had
ideas too, all sort of fit together
to make the skits that you perform now
and that leads me into my next ques-
tion which is how do you develop your
ideas? How do the ideas and the thea-
ter come together to make those skits
that you perform? What kinds of things
get you going? For example, in "Alco-
holism A & B" where you have two sep-
arate skits that you performed by the
different people in your group with
each time approximately the same story
about lesbian alcoholics, yet they're
two entirely different skits and you
always perform them together -- how
did that skit happen?

Paula: The skits themselves grew out
of an idea that Jane had. It wasn't
simply an idea that she had, it was an
experience that she had and an idea
that she wanted to carry forth. I
think the best things we do incorpo-
rate a story that one of us has lived
through or has heard someone else live
through and an idea about how we are
in the world as women.

What happened with the “Alcoholics A
& B“ was that Jane came in with an
idea and a story and we all listened
to it and started to improvise around
it. I had two things that I wanted to
start happening with the theater:
first, and we started doing it with
this piece, I wanted the improvisation
to be more open-ended. I don't want
everything we do to be scripted; by
scripted I don't necessarily mean
written down. I didn't want everything
to have a real definite conclusion.

I wanted it to be open-ended so that
the people on stage determined the
end of the scene. The second thing that
I wanted to happen -- and everyone
wants this to happen -- I want us to
all be writers and actors and directors.
We're real committed to everyone doing
everything.

So, what we did with this was we
left the ending open on all the scenes.
We would take a situation, say for
example, "you are an alcoholic and you
’ve been sober for six months; your
lover returns into your life and she
is drinking: Go with it." So two people
would get up and immediately start
acting out the scene. We would stop it
and shift something in the scene,
either one of the characters or the
situation, and then we would do it
again. We must have done it for hours.
We kept shifting directors and writers
and we'd come up with new ideas. As
we perform them now, we never know how
they will end. We have a beginning
situation for both scenes and we know
who will act in each scene, but we
have no idea how it will end.

Tea: You've talked about being com-
mitted to certain kinds of processes,
and the fact that you call yourselves
a collective makes me want to ask
some questions about politics -- that
sticky question, politics. How do you
reconcile having some kind of diversity
in the group -- knowing all of you, I
know that there's a tremendous range
of political feelings among you, so
I'm just going to throw this one
right out and talk about your politics.
Are you doing political theater?

Sandy: First of all, I don't think
the word collective should be used be-
cause we get more work done than that.
Second of all, as far as the range of
our politics, I cover three octaves. I
think that's more than enough to be
said for me. Besides, I've never had
one woman even offer to talk politics
with me.

Ronna: For me, on a more serious note,
I would say that anything you do in
front of other people, be it performing,
be it walking down the street, be it
talking to somebody on the bus, it's
political. Each person in the world has
a completely different definition for
the word politics to them. For me, I
just space it out. I do theater; I
don't do politics.

I happen to do theater that deals
with a lot of subjects that are very
current, very pressing, and that the
rest of the world deals with as politi-
cal. As far as women dealing with men,
as far as lesbians dealing with men,
definitely the women's community sees
that as being a political statement. I
see it as a wonderful opportunity to
do theater, marvelous characters to
explore; characters that have not
been explored, and a really exciting
place to explore my creativity and
work with people that I care for.

Jane: I see theater as being just
as viable a political statement as
Holly Near getting up and singing her
songs, as any politician getting up
and speaking, as a newspaper writing
an editorial. Through theater we can
reach women who might not listen to a
song, who might not look at a leaflet,
who might not stay for a speech. We
can reach them because they're there,
or we're doing something funny.

I see everything we do as being a
political statement, whether we're
making a statement about alcoholism or
lesbianism or whatever, because every
time we show two women together as
a viable lifestyle, that is a state-
ment. Whenever we choose to show two
lesbians rather than two heterosexual
women, that's a political statement.
We obviously do other stuff that is
more political than that. When we do a
skit on mental health, if we get one
woman thinking twice about committing
herself, or thinking about alcoholism
or about battered women, or about any-
thing else like that, it's a political
statement.

Just the fact that we are trying to
create a space where we can perform
for women. If any money changes hands,
it goes through women back to women,
it doesn’t go to Warner Bros. or Kiss
or anything like that, it goes back
to women; it is women’s money, women-
energy, it goes back.
Paula: I think Ronna and I stand at
opposite poles in this, and we always
have -- Ronna is very performance
oriented. The thing that I think of
is that I want to see us do more ser-
ious theater. I want to see us back
off the theater that I've seen us do,
which isn't easy, but it's easier
than the serious things. I think the
serious things carry through more of
the points that I want to see us make.
I think the things we do around men-
tal health, alcoholism, and the pro-
jected things around battered women
and roles are the kinds of theater I
want us to do.

Tea: What kinds of response do you
get from people after you perform? Do
you get people coming up to you and
telling you that your politics suck?
Do you get people coming up to you and
telling you just what wonderful per-
formers you are? What kinds of feed-
back do you get?

Paula: Well, Jane and I become invis-
ible after a performance. No one ever
comes up to us and talks to us after
a performance. We're going to get
name tags, large neon name tags, to
wear after a performance.

Jane: Goddamn looksist feminists.
Sandy: When people talk to me, they
never ask me about the show; they say
"Is that lady up there really your
lover? Are you really monogamous like
you say in all those skits? Do you
bleach

Ain't I A Woman Theater Group
1} to r: Paula Speary, Sandy Cummins,
Jane Severance, Ronna Keil

The serious stuff we do always seems
to get powerful comments about it.
When we do something that is serious,
we're real honest about it and it hits
something in people and they hear it.
We've had men and women in our audi-
ences crying in response to our Ward 81
skit about mental health. I do think
our serious stuff is what gets the
largest response.
Paula: One thing that we've been get-
ting more and more of lately is -- I
don't know the word for it, they're
not hecklers -- they're commenters.
Ronna: Yeah, like during a scene
where someone is being strong, someone
from the audience will yell “right on
honey".

There was one time that Paula did
this reading and in it she played
this character of a young girl who had
fallen in love with her aunt. She was
from Texas, so she had a real strong
accent and in this reading was des-
cribing her mother. She was talking
about how her mother was able to make
anyone tell what was on their mind.
And the way she described that was by
saying, "Well, my mother could make
Indians speak French". Afterwards, we
got a woman who came up and was pretty
adamant about the fact that that was
a real racist thing to say. She didn't

MORE ON PAGE 18