BMR Feature

Pornography Exposed As Case of Exploitation, Not Civil Rights

Carol Lease

The argument over obscenity legislation in Colorado has been long and heated since the state supreme court struck down Colorado’s anti-obscenity statutes last January. Legislators in both houses have since then butted back and forth at least two major bills with the principal disagreement being whether adults as well as minors should be legally protected from obscenity. At the last minute a compromise control bill squeaked through the state house leaving Colorado with a law protecting all of its citizens and their morals from the dangers of dirty books and bottomless dancers. Meanwhile, the liberal community has begun its challenges of the law as an infringement on the first amendment protection of freedom of speech.

Those opposed to any laws concerning obscenity see themselves as protectors of the rights of the individual to say, see, write, print and sell whatever they want to. Those in favor of any law regulating obscenity see themselves as protecting the morals and values of the individual in a society that is becoming increasingly immoral, changes too fast, and is losing respect for legal, religious values and traditions. Neither point of view seems to be interested in protecting the rights, the values, the image and therefore the lives of that part of society that is directly affected by obscenity and pornography—women.

The Common Stereotypes

Some commonly accepted stereotypes of people who want to control or get rid of obscenity are that they are opposed to freedom of speech, are prudes, believe in God, have conservative, reactionary politics, are against sex education and make love in the dark. On the other hand, those opposed to any controls are allegedly in favor of the rights of the individual, have culturally progressive tastes, espouse politically enlightened opinions, are atheistic, educated, urban-dwellers who are concerned with civil rights and the rights of oppressed minorities.

But the compulsive moralism espoused by one side and the laissez-faire pornography condoned by the other are opposite sides of the same coin. Neither has any understanding of the politics of pornography and the power over women's bodies and lives that pornography legitimizes. Both define sexuality in terms of male controlled power. The former wants us to join them as guardians of the guilt, the latter urges us to celebrate the sexual revolution and intellectual freedom. The pro-legislation moralists don’t realize that making something illegal is often more effective in legitimizing it than actually legalizing it. The tired example of this is the prohibition amendment to the Constitution which made alcohol illegal. The manufacture, selling and consumption of alcohol went underground and organized crime moved in. Related criminal activities such as protection rackets, prostitution, the numbers operations, gambling flourished. Pornography and all its tinsel operations, like “shoe-shine” parlors, massage “sexual communication” sessions, after-hours champagne bars, and suck and fuck three dollar movies are no exception. Although the report issued by the Commission of Obscenity and Pornography in 1970 said there was no direct evidence linking organized crime with the pornography industry, law enforcement agencies all over the country think otherwise.

The commission, which spent three years on the study, couldn’t place any figure on profits from the pornography business, but concluded that it made “hundreds of millions” of dollars a year. In 1976, with the appearance of slick porn movies such as S.O.S., Emmanuelle, The Story of O, Exhibition and the preponderance of four dollar paperbacks with ten-cent themes, income from pornography has undoubtedly skyrocketed.

So while making pornography illegal could actually artificially inflate the demand for it and therefore its prevalence, defending and/or promoting pornography as “sexual freedom” could ultimately be as insidious a demand. Because as the liberal attitude vocalizes its agreement with equal rights for women, its support for pornography, in theory and practice, is actually reinforcing sexist, stereotypical power relationships by using a very powerful medium in this society—sexuality.

We had all kinds of problems with the lawyers’ phones. We could not reach— I, at least, on my phone, could not reach Veronica at any of the numbers in Alamosa directly. I dialed directly and I’d get things saying, “Oh, well, you must have misdialed, check your number and dial again,” or, you know, “that number is not a working number, check your number and dial again,” and I did this like four times finally having to go through the operator to even get hold of her. (There were) times when there was just no answer at all, nothing connected, dead silence. And then it started even within the city (Denver). I'd call up other attorneys who were working on the case, in particular Rudolph Suerer, I’d call his number, and a male voice would come on the line and say, “What number did you dial?” and I’d tell him what number I’d dialed, and he’d say, “That’s a working number, try it again.” It was just total insanity. And all of the attorneys started having those kinds of problems. Everything that could possibly go wrong with the phones, all went wrong, with all of our phones, simultaneously. So we filed affidavits on illegal electronic surveillance. The court, however, decided that there was nothing more than the normal problems that everybody has with their phones—couldn’t see that there was anything more. When Veronica was asked some questions—the first day that she was asked questions—it became very apparent to her that some of them must be from illegal bugging of her phone, or the person’s that she was talking to. We again filed an affidavit—the court just ignored it. (The judge said that it was nothing but problems that everybody has with their phone in the daily experience of the phone customer of Mountain Bell.) Another of the very definite issues was husband-wife privilege. Veronica did have a common-law relationship with a guy who had been called before the grand jury before, which made it look like he was, in some sense, a suspect. Veronica raised common-law privilege, husband-wife privilege in relationship to this common-law marriage, and the district court judge completely misunderstood that and decided that only the husband could ask for the marital privilege—that the wife couldn't—which was obviously an incorrect ruling. When it got to the Tenth Circuit (Court), they decided that, yes, it was obviously an incorrect ruling, but the whole issue of husband-wife wasn't raised soon enough. And, so, they didn't have to mess with it.

There were questions in regard to immunity. Now, she was granted immunity. There are two kinds of immunity: transactional immunity and use immunity. Transactional immunity means that if someone testifies about an incident, there is nothing connected to that whole incident or transaction that they can ever be prosecuted for. Use immunity means that if somebody testifies about an incident, you can't take her particular testimony and use it against her, but if you can find any kind of independent evidence, you can still get her for everything that she testified about. Veronica was given use immunity—that’s the only kind of immunity that the Federal government is giving now, the state government is still giving transactional immunity. There are real questions about that because you never know what's independent evidence and what isn’t. We asked for protective orders, for one protective order which would require the government to show the judge what they had—not to show us—but to show the judge what they had, so that if they did decide to prosecute her two years from now, we could go back and find a record of what they showed the judge, and say, “Okay, this is what they had before she testified, and this is what they suddenly had after she testified—it isn’t so independent.”

We also asked that the transcript, whatever she would testify to, would be kept in strict confidence. That instead of just being given to every FBI agent that might want it; or every Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms (agent); or every US Attorney;

More on page 6