hot briefs

Fanning The Flames

Linda Eaton was suspended tempor-
arily from her job in January as
a city firefighter for nursing her
baby while on duty at the station.
Ms. Eaton was told to return to
work later in the week, but was
warned she could be fired if she
continues to nurse her child at
the firehouse. Ms. Eaton said she
is determined to continue nursing
her 34-month-old son on her person-
al time at work. NOW has estab-
lished a legal defense fund for
Iowa City's only woman firefighter.
A spokeswoman for NOW said Ms.
Eaton “isn't asking for anything
that isn't her right."

-Rocky Mountain News

Clubbed Again

Naomi James recently became the
swiftest lone sailor, of either sex,
to sail around the world in a con-
ventional yacht. She covered 30,009
miles in 272 days, yet she is not
eligible to join the international
Circumnavigators Club because she
cannot comply with the club rules
as “a man of good stature".

-Women's Report

Beautiful Blindness:

A Phoenix woman has sued Maybelline
for $6 million, charging that their
mascara, which she used for 24 years,
caused her to go blind in her right
eye. The woman's experience is not an
isolated fluke. Dr. Louise Wilson and
Dr. Arnold Ahearn, who have studied
mascara-linked eye problems for 12
years, published a study last year
detailing seven cases of blindness
attributable to mascara.

Until the mascara industry, which
generated $60 million last year, re-
sponds to the pressure of losing $6
million damage suits, there is little
reason to believe mascara formulas
or mascara usage will change.

-Majority Report

and layout from a couple of women.

be provided.

port group

is thinking about joining the paper.

and helping out wherever she can.

BMR: WHERE WE'RE AT

Well, folks, BMR is once again in a crisis situation. This time, however,
it has little to do with money. Right now, there are 3 women
on the collective, Connie is leaving after the April issue, Sue after the
May issue and that will leave Lisa alone except for the help with articles.

Big Mama Rag needs 3 (three) more women in order to survive. You who are
reading this are 1/3 the number of women we need. Three is so few, if you're
out there, please come to the next meeting, Thursday night at 6:30 at 1724
Gaylord St., and be ready to start right in. Bring a friend...
call Sue at 333-7656 if you can help out in any capacity. The hours are not
that many, but they are regular, there are deadlines to meet and the stress
is great, if interested, why not give it a try.

Another way to help us would be to come to the community meeting. Monday,
March 19th we will be having a meeting at Woman to Woman at 7:30. Come and
tell us what you think of the paper. All women are welcome. Childcare will

As you probably noticed, there was no February issue. Again, not for lack
of money, but for lack of time, energy and articles.

The April issue will emphasize women's health. Articles will cover a sup-
port group for women who have had hysterectomies. LUNA (the lesbian alcohol-
ics group) will have an article and there will be an article about health
hazards to women working in hospitals.

Watch for the newspaper display boxes, they will be on the street soon.
Dona Calacone wrote the grant that got us the money to buy them. She is
also making a new silk screen that will read Big Mama Rag, a feminist news
journal, to print on the boxes and new t-shirts.

Bobbi Ross, a former collective member, has been making sure everybody
received their issue of BMR by doing the subscriptions for a year. Bobbi
is leaving this job and Susanna Smith is taking over. We can hardly thank
them enough for doing this endless and much-needed work.

Except for Susanna and Vicki Piotter this issue would have been a mere
8 pages. They are both former collective members who came through with ar-
ticles and laid out some pages. Vicki will be doing the Hot Briefs pages
regularly and be joining the collective again in April.

Two new women have started or are thinking about starting to work on the
paper. Kay Young has taken over finances, keeping the checkbook balanced
and making sure the bills are paid on time. Bev, newly arrived from Chicago

Maggie Newton is hanging in, giving the paper what time she can spare.

No Place Like Home

Doctors released a report in Lane
County, Oregon revealing that house-
wives had a death rate from cancer
55% higher than either white or blue
collar working women. It was suggested
that the home environment is made
the most dangerous workplace by deo-
dorizers, detergents, waxes and other
cleaning products.

-Resourceful Woman

Demanding Job

The Kansas Supreme Court has pub-
licly censored a district judge for
firing women court employees who re-
fused to have sexual relations with
him. The court found that District
Judge Harold Hammond had relations
with one of his women employees in
his chambers, and that he had made
demands for relations with another,
and then fired both women when they
refused further demands.

-New Women's Times

Sterilization Appeal

Lawyers are now planning to appeal
the case in which ten Chicanas were
denied $2 million in compensation for
being forcibly sterilized at the Los
Angeles Medical Center during the
period of 1971 to 1974. Federal Judge
Jesse Curtis ruled against Dolores
Madrigal and nine other women, three
of whom were sterilized without hav-
ing signed consent forms, while the
other seven were coerced into signing
while under anesthesia during labor.

-Pandora

Hard Facts

50% of wives who are killed by
their husbands made 5 or more calls
to the police during prior episodes
of violence in which the police refused
to intervene.

85% of wives killed by their hus-
bands made at least one call to the
police without receiving protection.

-Ann Arbor NOW Study
-Off Our Backs

or two. Or

He’s Asking For It

A man speaking in a weekly news-
paper for GPs called "Doctor":
“Talking of battered wives, I wonder
if providing refuge is the most econ-
omical way of helping them. There
must be a reason why they are battered...but could it be that a majority
jolly well ask for it?

Wouldn't it be cheaper and more
effective to provide a refuge for
nagged husbands, including those who
haven't reached the battering stage
and those who never will, and leave
the wives at home with nobody to nag
except their children and neighbors?"

-Spare Rib

Divorce, Chinese Style

What causes marriages in China to
break up? Two therapists on a recent
visit to China said they learned that
the answer is not money or sex prob-
lems, but male chauvinism.

Eleanor and Sam Katzman said they
were told by a people's court judge
in China that the incidence of div-
orce is very low, but that when it
occurs, it is usually because of the
husband's failure to help at home or
to treat his wife as an equal.

-New Women's Times

Blondes Have More Fun

Women over 50 who have been dyeing
their hair for 10 years or more face
a higher risk of breast cancer than
women who do not, according to an
NYU study. "Hair dyes made from aro-
matic amines, once thought to be
safe, are now known to increase the
risk of cancer," said Walter Troll,
an NYU biochemist. The chemicals in
the dyes are absorbed through the
hair follicles and scalp.

-Majority Report

Baby Machines And...

The Greek government's recent ap-
proval of a Bill making abortions
legal has been greeted with cries
of self-righteous anguish from the
Greek Orthodox Church. The declining
birth rate, it seems, is causing the
church a lot of worry, particularly
as Turkey is producing more babies,
revealing again its customary posi-
tion on the role of women—ultimately
as child-bearing units whose sole
function is to supply the country
with human fodder in times of nation-
al stress.

-Women's Report

Killing Machines

1509 Greek women enlisted in the
military last month over the stri-
dent objection of women's liberation
groups. The women were the start of
Greece's first ever female volun-
teer army. The inclusion of women
is designed to beef up the 150,000
strong armed forces, now outnumbered
three to one by Turkey, Greece's
political rival. Women's groups
throughout Greece oppose women's
military service because they say
it continues to allow further ex-
ploitation of women in a traditionally
male dominated society.

-Hersay

No Alimony

A St. Paul, Minnesota judge has
ruled that a man does not have to
pay alimony to his ex-wife if she is
a lesbian. According to a 1972 di-
vorce agreement, the man was to pay
a "lifetime" alimony of $130 per
month, but the judge ruled that “the
defendant's lesbianism is a material
change in circumstances which justi-
fies terminating alimony."

-Lesbian Tide

Big Mama Rag Vol. 7 no. 2

Pennyroyal Danger

One woman died and another was hos-
pitalized in Colorado last month
when they consumed Pennyroyal oil
after reading of its abortive effects.
The Rocky Mountain Poison Center said
the dead woman had drunk an ounce of
the oil. Pennyroyal is sold in most
natural food stores. Both women said
they had used Pennyroyal tea, which
is listed as a panacea for a variety
of ills in herbology books.

-Feminist Bulletin

Changes in Food Consumption

Change in consumption

Food (per person)
Apples, fresh 1910-76 — 70%
Beef 1910-76 +72%
1950-76 + 90%
Butter 1910-76 —76%
Cabbage, fresh 1920-76 — 65%
Candy 1968-76 = 18%
Chicken 1910-76 +179%
Coffee 1910-76 +22%
1946-76 - 44%
Corn Syrup 1960-76 +224%
Fish, fresh and frozen 1960-76 +41%
Food Colors (certified dyes) 1940-77 + 995%
Fruit, fresh 1910-76 +33%
Grapefruit, fresh 1910-76 + 800%
Margarine 1910-76 + 681%
Potatoes, fresh 1910-76 -74%
Potatoes, frozen 1960-76 + 465%
Soft Drinks 1960-76 + 157%
Sugar and other caloric sweeteners 1909-76 +33%
Tuna, canned 1926-76 + 1,300%
Turkey 1910-76 + 820%
Vegetables, frozen 1960-76 +48%
Wheat (flour including flour
used in bread, spaghetti, etc.) 1910-76 = 48%

Gay Seniors

The Michigan legislature has passed
an unprecedented law protecting gay
senior citizens. The new bill pro-
vides that nursing homes must adopt
policies regarding the rights of res-
idents and that “appropriate care"
for such cannot be denied on the
basis of sexual preference.

Other provisions include the right
to confidentiality, unopened mail,
privacy and freedom to associate with
persons of one's choice.

-Lesbian Tide

Secret Of Long Life

An Austrian woman who recently
celebrated her 107th birthday, attri-
butes her longevity to remaining a
spinster and working until she was
90.

-Women's Report

Bedford Hills

A US District Court Judge has ruled
that male guards at New York State
Prison for Women in Bedford Hills
must stop watching female inmates
shower and sleep. Ten women filed a
complaint last year after the state
allowed, for the first time, the
presence of male guards in the living
and sleeping quarters of the prison.

The judge ruled that the women's
privacy was being invaded in some
cases and that the state had to "re-
concile the right to privacy with
the right of a man to equal job
opportunity."

-New Women's Times

Porno Model Says

Views of a former pornography
model: "Yes, there's been a big
change in pornography. The hating
way in which women are portrayed has
escalated so fast. They used to be
afraid to portray it all, but now
you see everything—women being
skewered, women being killed. When I
was modeling, I never saw any of what
is now called Hardcore. It may have
been around somewhere, but it was
definitely underground. Back then,
hardcore meant simply out-front sex.
Now it means violence, brutality,
sadomasochism. The people have harder
looking, subhuman faces."

Heliotrope