Refuges Open For Battered Women

Ann Henderson

I have everything except a life without fear. It usually happens at night when there's no place to go. I would cover my head with my hands and crouch in the corner... I used to take the baby carriage out at night and walk the streets to get away."

Anonymous woman in Del Martin's Battered Wives.

On August 1, a new refuge or safe home for battered women will open in Jefferson County capable of housing a minimum of ten women and their children. Sponsored by the Women's Opportunity Workshop in Evergreen, the Women-in-Crisis Center has recently been given a grant for $106,000 from CETA (Comprehensive Education and Training Administration) to hire unemployed and underemployed workers. With additional help from the Red Cross (food), various churches and the Piton Foundation, the new center will offer a comprehensive program of education, marital counseling and emergency housing.

Most importantly, the Women-in-Crisis refuge will offer safety and support. Any woman in Colorado is eligible. There will be a sliding scale and no one will be turned away because of lack of money. There will be a 24-hour hot line. Right now the number to call is 674-5504 for counseling. The number will change in August when the refuge home opens.

Another resource for women in Denver County is the York Street Center which has a 24-hour hot-line (333-6626). They provide counseling and a limited amount of housing for women who are victims of crimes—including battering, rape, assault and robbery.

Brandon House, a United Way agency, is the only emergency housing facility currently capable of housing women with children in Denver. They recently received funds for additional staff so that in addition to providing housing for families in transition, additional space could be made available specifically for battered women. They will open a safe house this fall. Currently, Brandon provides housing on a short-term basis (1-2 weeks) and can be contacted at 832-7826. You can live anywhere in Colorado to apply.

Current studies show that physical and/or mental abuse may exist in as many as one out of two marriages. (Lenore Walker, family therapist.) Until the introduction of refuges or safe houses (where angry husbands cannot penetrate), there were few alternatives for battered women. Because of the dynamics of the battering relationship, many women lose the support of family and friends.

Traditional police and social service intervention policies and programs are inadequate in meeting the special needs of safety, support and counseling of the battered woman. Police statistics and the research done by family therapists indicate that during the critical battering phase, the woman is not safe at home. Neither is someone trying to intervene. More police are killed trying to intervene when a husband is beating his wife than in any other area of crime. Typically, a woman comes for shelter not only battered physically, but also emotionally beaten. She is often too drained to take care of her own or her children's needs. The refuge atmosphere provides a supportive community for her and her children while counseling and social services work to alleviate her situation on a long-term basis. Also, in sharing her experiences with other women and beginning to take responsibility for herself in the protected environment of the refuge, the woman can begin to rebuild her sense of self-worth. In a battering relationship, where her weakness and inability to defend herself becomes a metaphor for her inability to cope with the world at large, the safe-house concept provides a viable opportunity for escape and growth.

Women’s Clinic Planned

Denver Health Collective Forms

Sue Goding, Romy Rainwater, Clair Kaplan

The Denver women's community has a new feminist health project. The Denver Woman's Feminist Health Collective was started in March with a handful of women.

An eventual goal of the collective is to open a clinic offering a range of services now being done at gynecological clinics, including pre-natal care, nutrition, gynecological exams, and treatment of vaginal infections, etc., as well as offering workshops, promoting self-help groups, informing women about the options provided by natural healing methods, and promoting alternative ways of becoming involved in health care other than in the traditionally passive health-worker/patient relationship.

They see themselves as different from other clinics in that they hope to involve the patient in the entire health process. Patients will be informed about what is occurring with their bodies, and informed of different options available for their health care needs. They will then take an active role in determining which options are most suitable. The collective also intends to act as patient advocates for women who are utilizing existing health care institutions, to assure that quality health care is provided to those women and maintained in those institutions. They do not see their clinic as an end goal; they feel that that goal can only be changing the entire health care system.

The health system has always been inadequate for poor and minority peoples; it has been especially inadequate for women. The health collective does not see itself as a service agency that will fill in these gaps left by the present system. They feel that although women cannot get adequate gynecological care or information, it is not appropriate to expect that feminist clinics will take care of these needs. Instead, they see themselves as an action group that will apply pressure on the health system to address these needs. They feel that there is no way the health collective could set up a health care system that could provide the amount and quality of care that Denver General or Colorado General, for example, could and should provide. Although the collective would like to rent a space eventually, they first see themselves functioning as a clearinghouse, where information and struggle about health care and the politics of health care could be shared.

Women involved in forming the collective were in agreement that education, both internally and in the community, would be an important and ongoing function of the group. They discussed natural, as opposed to traditional methods of healing. They feel that since traditional medicine has a monopoly and many women therefore find easier access to this kind of care, it is important to make information available on both of these aspects of healing.

The collective is also involved in addressing various political issues involved with medicine as one institution that maintains and exemplifies the oppression of women.

The collective had a booth at this

More on Page 14

struggle

Revolutionary Art

“Certain pieces of revolutionary art stand out in each of our minds as being truly inspirational and energizing and, as such, moving us toward a stronger commitment to our politics. Revolutionary art at its best acts as a battery recharger, a strong and inescapable reminder of what is at the core of our work, and sometimes even clarifies, sharpens or introduces certain theoretical aspects of our politics. In short, it acts as a vehicle for revolution.

Revolutionary art should and must be, in order to be effective, an extension of the artist's life as an active revolutionary. It cannot be the work of persons whose lives consist of passively receiving inspirations and transmitting them into works of art. Such works of art will not be revolutionary.

In order for any work of art more concerned with content than form to be truly effective it must have an experiential base. This is why there are far more love songs in this world than political songs; most persons have experienced love for another in some way, shape or form and can relate to the subject easily as artist or recipient of a work of art. Most persons in the general population see themselves more readily as lovers than as politically active people. This situation feeds well into the hands of maintenance of the status quo. The unspoken message to the artist is to keep art personal and by so doing, keep people working toward personal, apolitical solutions to their problems.

As revolutionaries we must learn to put our daily experiences of jobs, sexual harassment, child rearing, welfare, rape, health care, police brutality, political organizing, etc. into songs, dances, poems, novels, plays, photographs, paintings, murals, works of graphic art and so on. In order for these kinds of inspiration to hit us, we must be strongly, actively and constantly connected with their sources. And, for more of these works to be created by more people we must stop dividing the artists from the others by virtue of upbringing, schooling, technical proficiency or categorizing.

Revolutionary artists cannot work in a vacuum of “creativity." Nor can they be allowed or encouraged to let their works of art be their only contribution to making revolution. Revolutionary artists must know those lean years when they're exhausted from typing, counseling, walking picket lines, doing layout, running errands, putting together meetings, cooking and cleaning up for benefit pot-lucks that the time and space for works of art simply is not there at all. Being an artist in this society, by its very nature, brings some rather delightful goodies and privileges such as applause, appreciation, admiration and excuse from the doing of shit work. In short, it's a glamorous life, and as such has no place being the life of a revolutionary.

The artist in America is quite often, although admittedly not always, a product of the privileged class. Such is often also true of the feminist revolutionary artist. It is she who has had the money to afford her college-made skills, her set of paints, her 35mm camera or her Martin guitar. It is she who has had the space away from demeaning and degrading wastes of time and energy to develop her skills, her style, and, indeed her works of art. It is often money, upbringing and lifestyle that have determined her life as an artist as much as it is inborn skill and inclination. Persons from privileged backgrounds must learn to give up the benefits of that privilege; they must learn to stop feeding the divisions caused by a society which allows and promotes privilege. Privileged background often allows people the additional privilege of being an artist. Double privilege does not a revolutionary make. And even if privilege has not determined a woman's artistry, each woman must determine at every point in her life what acts as a whole and what individual acts of her own will best bring about revolution.

As has been earlier determined, revolutionary art as a fan for the fires of revolutionary fervor can be a very effective vehicle for revolution. Yet, it is not always a person's best use of time. We must stop allowing artists their creative time and space when energy is needed desperately elsewhere. And, we must allow oppressed mothers, workers, burnt out activists, etc. to tap their own creative/inspirational sources by relieving them of those duties and responsibilities which make it impossible for them to create art, or even just necessary leisure. Granted, not everyone given needed space and time will create art, but it is not the creation of art that concerns us here, but the creation of revolution. And, the proper and egalitarian distribution of hard work and time/space will best create revolutionaries, some of whom will spend some of their time creating revolutionary art and some of whom will spend some of their time inspiring themselves and others in extremely different and equally as valuable ways.

We must all learn to sharpen our sensitivities toward revolutionary inspiration to a greater extent. We must learn to stop looking for the technical perfection that is often the earmark of schooling and lifestyle privilege. Effectiveness and excellence in revolutionary art is a product of what it conveys emotionally and intellectually. A work of art must be admired as a work and not the artist as a product of training and upbringing. In essence, the viewers and audiences of revolutionary art cannot court snobbery or they will miss the impact altogether.

Just as we demand more revolutionary effectiveness of ourselves in our feminist projects, we must do so of our artists. This demand must be for better and more highly sharpened impact; for content. The demand for better form and better skill must, and by nature will, come from the artist herself. If the improved skill heightens our experience, all the better. But we must not demand it as a prerequisite for appreciation of her art because in our present society sheer technical skill is often a direct product of privilege. Our eyes and ears must be tuned to what she says, and as an artist, she will to the best of her ability take care of how she says it.

Needless to say, artistic skill developed from privilege must be shared as competency, proficiency and skill are an integral part of anyone's self-concept and thus their effectiveness. In illustration of this point, a song sung by a trained singer accompanied by strains from a $690 guitar should have no more impact on us (should have perhaps less) than an equally as powerful song sung by a craggy voice and accompanied by beats tapped out on the bottom of an old saucepan.

Revolutionary art plays an important role in our lives, and has a long and wonderful history of inspiring courageous and much-needed acts, awareness and fervor. We need revolutionary art. Yet, we need to ensure its effectiveness by demanding more active non-artistic revolutionary work hours of effort, by eliminating artistic rewards and mystique, by encouraging and appreciating the work of less trained artists, by sharing artistic skills, by each of us helping free up the time of the less privileged, by each of us determining how we can best use our time/energy at any given time, and by demanding high revolutionary standards of artists. We must have revolutionary art. But it must be the most effective revolutionary art possible or, in other words, art which will most effectively bring about revolution.