more-on page

Where We're At from page 2

Many of us have talked, at one time or another, to others
about killing ourselves. This hasn't been done carelessly
but out of the anger, desperation, and pain that we have
in our lives. Our daily lives are not the stuff fairy
tales are made of: the oppression that most of us have in
the workforce from sexual harassment; bad health and
health conditions; fascist bosses, tedious work, bad pay,
long hours; co-workers that are homophobic in a society
that is homophobic; racist and anti-Semitic "jokes";
knowing your days are limited in the workforce because
you can't compete with 20-year-old women and men; and for

many, not even having a job;

arguing with the landlord;

dealing with welfare, food stamps; worrying about your
kids; knowing you never have and never will conform and
will be feared and hated by others; dealing with the la-
bels that are put on you; fear of what the future will be
like because you can't change who you are and "they" in-
sist you change or you'll get yours in their own time and

their own way.

We have so little control over how we live. Sure, we
can go to any city, we can move around but once we get to
where we're going, we have the same situation over and
over and over. Our quality of life is determined by our
race and class. For women of color, so much more enters
into their assessment of quality of life, and we hear the
words but never can feel what they feel on a daily basis.
In their communities, the police intrude every day; the men,
children, and women are never safe/free from the cops and
the “mental health" and “criminal justice" systems and
none are ever free from white rule/white values/white

judgments.

For other women, killing themselves has been a very
guarded thought, not shared with others. The fear of talk-

ing about it is real because

"suicidal tendencies" is a

whole category that the shrinks can really get their
hooks into and take your life in their hands. Whether we
want to kill ourselves to fight back or to end the in-
credible pain, we have the right to control that part, or

any part of our lives.

Saralinda Grimes (page 6) wouldn’t compromise herself.
She fought the patriarchal society she hated and knew
they would kill her eventually by using psychiatry and

Black Liberation from page 5

support for their children. We support their strug-
gles, made with blood, sweat,
sacrifice to raise their
children with no support
from Waller, their father.

We support reparations to
those whose labor was ex-
ploited by Waller. Speci-
fically, we are opposed to
Waller's efforts to deny
years of work and sacrifice
women have made to the de-
velopment of APSP and his
own individual development.

Waller has refused to hon-
estly and progressively
discuss his brutal exploita-
tion of black women and has
consistently refused to
give up his exploitation
and oppression of women.
Instead, he has resorted to
lies, slander, and innuendo
to attempt to discredit
the women who struggle ag-
ainst his and other so-called
leaders’ exploitation
of women.

We demand Joe Waller par-
ticipate in an upcoming
community seminar to strug-
gle principledly around his
oppression of women.

We call on women and men
to break the silence and
speak out against the op-
pression of women in the
Black movement. Join with

other women who are refus-
ing to passively keep the
peace by going along with
sexist practices for fear
of being accused of being
divisive, man-haters, and
lesbians. The refusal of
the Black Liberation Move-
ment to recognize women's
oppression as valid issues
hinders our progress as a
people.

Join with Ajowa Ifateyo
and Linda Leaks and the
African Women's Committee
for Community Education to
educate our community and
struggle around practices
which hinder our movement.

For more information,
contact AWCCE, P. O. Box
2293, Washington D.C. 20013.

Saralinda was

enough to take a courageous,
active part in freeing us
from that patriarchal in-
stitution.

You are needed to join my
fight to keep women from
being destroyed by the now-
existing patriarchal psych-
iatric system. We mustn't
allow our sisters to be
destroyed any longer!

Love and Courage,
Saralinda Grimes

Page 16 - Big Mama Rag, November, 1993

their tortures and she wouldn't submit. She wanted women
to understand her fighting back and not to mourn her.

In last month's LETTERS HOME TO MAMA, T’Nina: Movement of
Israeli Women Against Anti-Semitism spoke of the oppression
and dangers of anti-Semitism, their government's policies
and of having to survive as a nation for Jewish survival.
They forcefully said that they "...would rather be able to
live as free Jews in the world than commit suicide for the
sake of what is "politically correct," agreed that commit-
ting suicide is NOT politically correct."

Many women reject the idea of women killing themselves be-
cause their own culture is so threatened by genocide that
fighting back by living and speaking out is absolutely nec-

essary.

In BMR we don't use those words, politically correct, or
politically incorrect, for us they just don't relate to the
issue of women killing themselves. But we do view killing

ourselves as a political act.

When a woman we know kills herself, how do we feel? Could
we have helped, together could we have found another choice?
How many of us are threatened when that happens? Her pain

and oppression is in my face.

If her life was so bad, mine

is not much better--is killing myself the only choice? Do
I want to live when she felt she must die?

We have to actively support each other, which is real
hard. How do I know when your silence is necessary for you
to get through hard times, when for me, hard times need a
lot of talk and touching? We are all so different, our minds
work on so many levels at the same time, our emotions are
raw and sometimes so hidden, that many times we can't talk
about our deepest fears or hopes.

We have to break through barriers that society has put
up, we have to speak, think, and write about women killing
themselves. To call it a sin like religion does, or to call
it a crime like the court system, or to label it a sickness
like the shrinks do, doesn't mean a damn thing. It's a
thought many women live with daily, it is an act many women
try and many succeed. Women killing themselves is not an
abstract issue and we have to deal with it, not only per-
sonally but in the paper--for all to see.

And all of our struggles continue.

Janet Grimes
(Saralinda's mother)

From February 22, 1975,
when Saralinda made her
first suicide attempt, to
July 14, 1976, when she
died, I encountered the
world of psychiatry. I can-
not conceive of any crisis
in my life that would mo-
tivate my asking for help
from this profession again.

Knowing nothing at first,
Saralinda's father and I
brought her to what we be-
lieved was the most highly
respected psychiatric center
in the country. We were as-
sured by the admitting psy-
chiatrist that in all pro-
bability Saralinda would be
home in two or three weeks.
Two and a half months later
her "evaluation" was still
incomplete. During this time
Saralinda was kept in a
locked ward and injected
with drugs and secluded when
she expressed any anger a-
bout this state of affairs.
I cannot believe this exper-
ience was beneficial.

Saralinda believed, as I
did, that the highly trained

professional staff would re-

spect her identification of
herself as a lesbian, and
that she would be counseled
and advised in her choice
of non-traditional life-
style. How naive we were...
The number and variety of

approaches to "helping" peo-

ple are overwhelming, and
the devotion of each indivi-
dual to his/her own approach
is similar to a religious
fervor. We were advised of
as many different theories
as we had time and money e-
nough to hear. When we ex-
pressed perplexity over the
problem of choosing amongst
them, we were once told that
it didn't matter, really, as
long as we believed we were
making the right choice.

Perhaps this answer was
the closest we came to the
truth. Perhaps there was no
way for anyone to help Sara-
linda, and perhaps a choice
was not the crucial issue
we believed it to be. But
I am left wondering if the
mental agony we all suffered
as our inner lives and emo-
tions were explored and vio-
lated was either helpful or
necessary.

Saralinda spent the last
months of her life living
amongst feminists and fight-
ing against psychiatric
oppression. Women gave her
the comfort and support she
was denied in the psychia-
tric world and this was ex-
tended to me so that I no
longer felt put into the role
of maternal monster.

I have somehow survived
Saralinda's death. Without
the continuing love and
support of women, I would
be destroyed.