more letters home to mama

But remember that the more overt act-
ions by the most exploited whites
who are immediately threatened by de-
caying schools, loss of jobs or home
are not as heinous in the long run
as the duplicity of more privileged
whites who provide ideological just-
ifications for racism: who by their
material success and self-righteous
smugness provide a persuasive exam-
ple of the material benefits of com-
plicity—however silent—with white
supremacy.

The sap of the poison flower is
heartless, calculated violence.

Sure, one by-product of imperialism
is violence among the people, caused
by material desperation and deep
alienation. But this violence is
like a teacup to a reservoir compared
to the violence of our government.
U.S. support of reaction in Southeast
Asia, Africa, Latin America has cost
millions of lives and the decimation
of lands and cultures. U.S. corp-
orate pollution of air, ground and
water (most extreme in their third
world locations) is costing tens of
thousands more every year. And what
of the violence done to the children
sleeping with their shoes on in ur-
ban centers because they have no
heat? Do they have the same equal
opportunity to study as children who
have their own warm room?

The thought or sight of children
cold and hungry, of the dignity of
teenagers being whittled away by de-
cayed schools and no jobs...these
commonplace occurrences can still make
me weep. I cannot insulate myself—by
whatever means—from these realities
for it would necessitate a deadening
of the spirit, a neutralizing of mor-
ality. I have fiercely guarded my
ability to cry out at pain by being
an activist. That is why, given the
choice of prison or cooperation with
the perpetuation of global vio-
lence, I chose to join the folks in-
side, for they are my people. And
the middle choice of numbing the pain
holds no appeal. I do not want to
die in spirit.

My mother taught me to respect the
dignity of other human beings. This
allowed me to understand that the
oppressed peoples are best qualified
to define their struggle for freedom.
As a white person, wanting to contend
with racism, sexism and economic ex-
ploitation facing me and a majority
of other whites, I recognize that it
is third world communities, fighting
U.S. imperialism in all its forms,
who have exposed the diseased cor-
ruption of U.S. culture and who are
taking realistic and courageous steps
to move beyond it. In that context,
I want to take this opportunity to
extend my solidarity to the people
and communist parties of Vietnam and
Cuba, to the freedom fighters of
Africa, El Salvador and Chile and the
Black, Puerto Rican and Native Amer-
ican liberation struggles amongst us.

I also send love and thanks to my
sisters who have fought to help us
women and our children to find the
insights and courage to stand up,
proud, gentle and fierce. Without
the inspiration and guidance of these
forces I would still be confused and
frightened by the barrage of propa-
ganda foisted on me, as on all of us,
by our government.

And I want to send a special love and
solidarity to the sisters and bro-
thers of the Puerto Rican movement
who are POWs in our prisons, to
Assata Shakur, William Morales, and
their comrades who remain free and
fighting, and to the Black and Indian
freedom fighters serving life terms.
You see—it is obvious: a government
which enforces its corruption and
barbarities on all levels—from enfor-
ced poverty, to miseducation, misin-
formation, social manipulation and
pervasive violence must expect to be
fought on all levels. Fascism was
not fought with words alone. The
other day, General Haig justified U.
S. intervention in Chile resulting in
the bloody coup against Allende and
the murderous Pinochet regime. He
argued for more of the same around
the world. His only regret about

Vietnam is that this government lost.
In the face of this, no one should
expect freedom movements which have
shown such courage and sacrifice to
avoid the responsibility to take up
arms in defense of these movements.
And since the most minimal struggle
against imperialism is met with over-
whelming repression by the government
the early stages of armed struggle
must follow closely behind the birth
of a movement. In the long run, the
battle of words is decisive, but at
moments, armed struggle will be
crucial in defending the political
gains of the people. Sometimes these
actions will focus on exposing a par-
ticular aspect of the repression of
the state, and at other times they
will defend a revolution itself.

For twenty years I have participat-
ed in many areas of struggle. Be-
cause I think it is a delusion to
separate one aspect of my life, that
of March 1970, from others, I believe

From Page 2

I am being sent to prison for the
totality of my activities. How can I
think otherwise when so many who
fight against society's evils are in
prison and others who cause death and
destruction through illegal wars, re-
pression, industrial pollution and
right wing violence remain free?

Nonetheless, I remain committed to
fighting to change our world because
I believe the beauty and productivity
of the human spirit cannot be contained
by the few who rule with greed,
selfishness and cruelty. Finally, to
the children, I send love and hope
that while you wrestle with the in-
equities and confusions of our sys-
tem, you hold onto the gentleness,
courage and caring with which you
were born. Especially today, Martin
Luther King's birthday, you should
know that there are others grappling
with the evils and holding hopes for
the future.

A Luta Continua

Take Back The Night Coalition

Dear BMR:

On October 11, 1980 the Take Back
the Night Coalition of the Bay Area
successfully held a rally and march
of several thousand women in San
Francisco, Ca. to protest violence
against women. The Coalition has
decided to continue working together
in planning a 1981 March.

As you may know, last year a date
in August was chosen as the Nation-
al Take Back the Night Day. Unfort-
unately, many of us could not organ-
ize in time to hold our marches on
that day. The Bay Area Coalition,
however, would like to try having a
national day again this year, with
hopefully more cities being able to
hold their marches/events on the
same day. The primary purpose of
this would be to allow all of us to
get more media attention on the
issue and the marches/events them-
selves.

From what we can find out, no
national date has yet been set. If

you do know a national date, please
let us know. If, as we suspect, no
date has been set, we'd like to prop-
ose two of our own: Saturday, August
8th and Saturday, August 15th. The
final date would depend on this in-
formal poll as to which date would
be best for most places planning a
march/event.

Please write back as soon as poss-
ible telling us if you are planning
a march (or, if you aren't and know
someone who is, please pass this on)
whether you have chosen a date yet,
and, if not, if you could hold your
march on either of the days in
August. We will get back to you as
soon as possible.

Together to end violence against
women,

Loree Cook for the
Take Back the Night Coalition
1697 Dolores St.

San Francisco, Ca. 94110

Racial Superiority Theories Abound

destroy through the unnatural not-
ions (i.e. democracy) which are the
modern products of his intellect—
what his inherited instincts have
striven throughout those eons of
time to preserve," he concludes. So-
ciobiology, like its sibling forms
of biological determinism, is scien-
ce in the service of fascism.

One of those siblings, genetic
screening, is a bit older than the
sociobiology concept and has actual-
ly been in practice in the petro-
chemical industry for the past 15-20
years. Corporations such as Dupont
and Dow Chemical claim that some
genes increase one's susceptibility
to certain occupational illnesses
and that genetic screening of poten-
tial employees is necessary for
their protection.

To implement the screening a small
blood sample is drawn from each wor-
ker and tested for the activity of
specific genes. The companies argue
that "hypersusceptible" people should
be kept away from the industrial
poisons for their own good.

SHIFTING THE BLAME

But critics, including scientists
and union leaders, maintain that the
tests are not primarily to protect
workers but to shift the blame for
occupational illness from industry
to the victims.

According to Eula Bingham, direc-
tor of the Federal Occupational Sa-
fety and Health Administration (OSHA)
industry uses genetic testing "to
place the burden of controlling to-
xic substances on individuals who
are denied employment because of their
supposed sensitivity rather than on
companies who should be cleaning up
the workplace for all." Proponents
of genetic screening claim that it
is not economically feasible to make
the workplace safe for all.

Critics claim that genetic screen-
ing leads to sexual, racial and eth-
nic discrimination in hiring. There
are documented instances of women
and Blacks being excluded from jobs
due to "hypersusceptibility."

General Motors, for example, does not
hire fertile women to work around
lead although lead appears to be equ-
ally toxic to both men and women.
The Equal Employment Opportunity Com-
mission recently said it had 40 cas-
es of people claiming they had been
barred from certain jobs due to "hy-
persusceptibility.” Almost all were
women.

In 1979 OSHA charged American
Cyanide with adopting "a policy
which required women employees to
be sterilized in order to be eligib-
le to work in those areas of the
plant where they would be exposed to
toxic substances."

Blacks are singled out for genetic
testing by the DuPont Company, a New
York Times investigation revealed.
DuPont gives a preemployment blood
test to all Blacks to identify car-
riers of sickle-cell trait, although
simply being a carrier for the trait
(that is, having only one gene in-
stead of two for sickle-cell) is rare-
ly detrimental. Sickle-cell is a gen-
etically carried blood disease found
mostly in Blacks. When a person has
two sickle-cell genes, she or he may
face chronic illness or death.

Furthermore, in other ethnic groups
(whites of Mediterranean ancestry,
for instance) there are other geneti-
cally transmitted disorders that pre-
sent similar or greater risks in the
chemical industry, yet those people
are not subjected to genetic testing
at DuPont. "There is no evidence that
heterozygotes (carriers) for sickle
trait are substantially more sensi-
tive than other people," Jonathan
King, a molecular biologist at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
told the New York Times. "Dupont's
position is scientific racism. They
say they are not bigots because all
this is based on science. But the
fact is that people are not going to
get sick because they are hypersus-
ceptible, they are going to get sick
because they are being poisoned."

A more notorious example of such
scientific racism is the claim made
by Arthur Jensen in 1969 that differ-
ences in IQ, or intelligence quotient,
between Blacks and whites are due to

“genetic differences. In his paper en-
titled, "How much can we boost IQ and
scholastic achievement?" published
in the Harvard Educational Review,
Jensen makes these points: (1) Blacks
score 15 points lower on IQ tests
than whites, on the average. (2) This
difference in IQs is largely due to
genetic differences between Blacks
and whites. (3) Therefore, IQ is re-

sistant to change and attempts to

achieve equality in education are
unrealistic.

Jensen's argument is flawed at
various levels. First, what does IQ
measure? Many analysts of the IQ is-
sue maintain that it measures at most
a handful of capabilities out of a
huge ensemble of intellectual funct-
ions. In many cases, IQ may not even

reflect the few capabilities it is
supposed to, because the tests are
culturally and class biased in both
subject matter and language. IQ is
actually a measure of how well one's
experience conforms to that of a
white, middle-class individual.

Furthermore, Jensen made an elemen-
tary mistake in his use of a concept
from population genetics. This mis-
take was exposed in a paper by Rich-
ard Lewontin, a population geneti-
cist at Harvard, shortly afterwards.

Jensen's scientific racism prov-
ides an excuse for the failure of
affirmative action programs in aca-
demia and for the poor representa-
tion of Blacks in prestigious posi-
tions in general. As David McClellan
of Harvard has said, "The IQ score
was the most effective device ever
invented by the middle class to op-
press the poor, and it had the beauty
of seeming very democratic."

IQ AND EUGENICS

Shortly after Jensen's paper was
published, Nobel laureate William

From Page 3

Shockley, a physicist at Stanford Uni-
versity in California and subsequently
a Nobel sperm bank contributor, drew
up legislation calling for sterilization
of people with IQs less than 100. He
proposed to start with welfare recipients
and to entice them to "volunteer" with
the offer of $1,000 per IQ point below 100.

Shockley's scheme was not particu-
larly new. Last spring, for instance,
the American Civil Liberties Union
uncovered massive sterilization pro-
grams in Virginia. Particularly dur-
ing the Depression, it was found,
hundreds of poor Virginians were
legally sterilized without their
knowledge. Most of the victims were
institutionalized at the time. The
probe revealed that in a 50-year
period, 8,000 men and women had been
involuntarily sterilized in the state.
Victims of the scheme have filed a
class action suit against state off-
icials, agencies and six mental in-
stitutions seeking redress for the
sterilizations.

The basis of the sterilization pro-
grams was a theory of eugenics. This
concept discourages the reproduction
of people considered less desirable
and encourages the breeding of the
more desired. It is closely linked
to Nazi racial science, the myth of
overpopulation, race-and-IQ theory
and sociobiology.

IQ and eugenics have had a long
association. In 1912 the First Inter-
national Congress of Eugenics, held
at the University of London, announ-
ced as one of its goals the "preven-
tion of the propagation of the unfit
by segregation and sterilization."
The “unfit" were the poor, and the
underlying assumption was that the
poor were by heredity inferior, that
this was the cause of their misfor-
tune. IQ was developed the same year.

STATE STERILIZATION

The eugenics movement spawned state
sterilization laws—by 1930, 31
states had enacted such laws and more
than 60,000 people had been sterili-
zed. Idiocy, imbecility and feeble-
mindedness were among the character-
istics for which a person could be
sterilized. Such laws are still
backed by the Supreme Court and
exist in nearly 30 states.

(reprinted from the Guardian)