national

Wounded Knee, S. D. - Ten Years Later

Shainape Shcapwe

Reprinted from News and Letters

Editor's Note: Ten years ago a Lakota woman who participated in the Indian occupation of Wounded Knee, S.D. told

resistance

N&L: "From Feb. 27 to May 8 there was the Independent Oglala Nation, established within the boundaries of the state of South Dakota, USA. It was the first time we had ever known freedom. For 71 days there was power in the hands of the Indian people. Men and women stood side by side in the kitchen, in the bunkers, on patrol. The governing body of the Oglala Independent Nation consisted of every resident.”

On this tenth anniversary of the Wounded Knee occupation, Native American activist Shainape Shcapwe was asked about what the ten years since Wounded Knee have meant to Native Americans.

I would have to say that economically the conditions of Native Americans haven't changed a heck of a lot. Indian fishermen in Michigan, like on the Bay Mills reservation, are nowhere. Many are on welfare, not fishing like they want to be. They were frozen out economically. And it isn't just in Michigan. On my reservation in Fort Totten, N.D., a factory was started after Wounded Knee, with CETA programs and government contracts. They set it up to be dependent on war production. It was planned to employ about 400 from different reservations, making parachutes for the Army and shell casings. Now the contracts are being cut off and they are constantly in danger of closing down, with no private contracts. Only 150 workers are left.

The factory in Shiprock, N.M. that received so much publicity is the same way -- it's not nearly as big as it used to be. Even when it was hiring it was no good. I wrote about it years ago in N&L and called it "Sweatshops on the reservation."

After Wounded Knee the government also started some housing programs, but the housing is like the projects in Detroit. It's the cheapest kind of housing, and three years after they put it up for the factory on our reservation, it is falling apart. People are freezing in the North Dakota winter. They didn't take into account the environment.

February 27, 1973

Wounded Knee Occupied by the Oglala Sioux.

-Peg Avrill/LNS

Today people remember Wounded Knee. They will never forget it. But they are very careful now; they know where and when to talk. They are talking quietly among themselves on the reservations I know in North and South Dakota. They don't just run off and do any old thing, but they are thinking and planning about how to change conditions, how to challenge the powers on the tribal council.

Eight years ago I wrote: "The most important accomplishment we have made is not that we have found ways to make the white man listen to us, but that we have gained a new awareness of our own strength and ability.” Today I feel that is more true than ever, because we are not ever going to put up with the kind of thing they tried to do in the 1950s, when they tried to get rid of the whole reservation system and move us to the cities -- what they called "termination." Watt and Reagan are running a public relations campaign now, saying that there is "socialism" on the reservations, and hinting that termination of government aid is called for.

They are mistaken if they think we will just give up the reservation and leave. We will fight for this land, because it is all we have after America was stolen from us. In the 1950s they did "terminate" the Menominee and the Klamath, and they were working real hard to do the same on a lot of other reservations. People were willing to leave then and try it in the cities. My brother and I did. When we went to Chicago we had no idea what we would find. Today people know better; they wouldn't go because there is nothing for us in the cities. They know what the conditions are.

When I remember Wounded Knee today, it isn't the guns we had or the stand-off with the FBI and the marshals. It's how we organized ourselves and made Wounded Knee work despite the conditions of being under fire. It's how decisions were made and people of many tribes learned to work with each other. The generation that grew up since Wounded Knee feels differently about being Indian, about our culture. They know the struggle isn't over. Some of them are talking of getting real health care. Not the kind the Public Health Service brings to the reservations, but health care that considers people. The doctors we have now don't understand us. You talk to them and they don't hear what you are saying. Forced sterilization was something they could practice so easily because it wasn't people they were dealing with, it was Indians.

cover-up in the autopsy. -Peg Avrill/INS

MORE ON PAGE 16

america held hostage day 1666

Mama Nature is telling us something -- mixed in with the bombings of people revolting in the US, we are hit with out of season snow storms and in-season floods and tornadoes.

Jd. Watt, masquerading as a human, celebrated the 20th anniversary of taking the desert Glen Canyon and making it into a waterway, while making plans to develop more natural parks and make them more accessible to people (business).

When you look at your phone, really look at it. Federal and state judges throughout the US of A have not denied one request for wiretapping either from the FBI or state pigs. And there has been an increase in requests for the taps over the last year. They say it is mostly for drugs, gambling, and racketeering. We say it is to catch politically active people. But really look at your phones!!

RayGun constantly telling the Big Lie, that our economy is recovering fast doesn't fool 483,000 workers who filed for unemployment this month.

As hard hit as the workers are in this country we have the example of our federal Senators to look up to -- their annual salary is $60,663. As if that wasn't enough, what with speeches, articles, investments, and dividends we can be assured that the boys are eating good, with 30 to 40 of them classified as millionaires. Sure boys, you understand our problems.

Like Moses on the Mount, RayGun from his mountain top ranch said women's history has been written by men, that's why we haven't, as moms, wives, and women, been given credit for our role in history. Bo tell!!!

To all the freedom fighters in this country and everywhere -- fighting for their nations, their children, and their lives, we salute you.

Suddenly I feel like dancing |

Big Mama Rag, June, 1983 - Page 5.