voices from our lives...

19

Dealing With the Dilemmas of Martial Arts

Debbie Squires

The Women Martial Artist had its
second annual training weekend in the
mountains just outside of Nevada City,
California. The WMA is a collective
of women in the martial arts from
Sacramento and the Bay Area. The
weekend consisted of a five-day sche-
duled but flexible workout with the
martial arts divided into three sec-
tions: Karate, Mat workouts, i.e.
Aikido, Judo, and T'ai Chi. There
were also workshops and demonstra-
tions introducing the various forms
in the martial arts.

While the purpose of the weekend
was to train in the martial arts,
several discussions came up among
the individual women attending. The
issue about the differences between
women and men taking a martial art
was raised. Most women start train-
ing to learn self-defense/survival
as opposed to keeping in shape, learn-
ing a new sport, or improving one's
Ki Energy. Therefore, the attitude
toward teaching women should be dif-
ferent but usually is not in the tra-
ditional martial arts schools. Be-
cause of this, several all-women
training schools have been estab-
lished throughout the United States.
These schools have not been approved
or recognized by the established mar-
tial arts federation.

My personal opinion is that an all
women's training school is needed but
must be combined with training at an
established martial arts school. My
limited observations and knowledge
of all-women schools have been that
there seems to be a lack of disci-
pline and intensity in training that
exists in most established schools.
There is a need for support while
achieving the strength in this skill
many women never thought possible.

An all women's school can give this
support. However, if we are ever in
a real life/death situation the
chances are that a man will be attack-
ing us and not a woman. We must re-
cognize that threat and learn to deal
with it at a real level. The reality is
that men at this point in time have

a superior knowledge of this skill
than we do. We must learn what we can
from those men in the traditional
school framework.

Another issue was raised among
some of us that once we who are in
traditional schools have reached a
point in our training, we are then
asked to teach. Do we want to teach
and help perfect these skills in men?
A few all-women schools have been ap-
proached by homosexual men to teach
them self-defense. While some women
felt that anyone who is oppressed by
our macho-male society should be sup-

ported in learning skills of survival,
other women felt that a man, homosex-
ual or not, could learn more readily
in a male-established school than a
woman. And if a woman has to go
through the sometimes torturous con-
ditions to learn this skill, why are
not the homosexual men beside us at
the school learning and giving sup-
port? I tend to agree with the last
statement made, but my feelings ex-
tend to women also. When women have
approached me about teaching them
self-defense, I wondered why they
were not at the school learning with
me?

The issue of teaching men, however,
focused mainly on heterosexual men.
With statistics showing wife brutal-
ity, child molestation, and rape on
the increase, do we want to teach men
who already have the advantage over
women in structure and skill? I am
uneasy about teaching this skill to
men. Although it might be a power
trip to have men follow my orders and
see me as their instructor, down deep
I must realize I am helping to per-
fect a skill that can be and is used
to kill women every day. My main
fear in training is when I must spar,
i.e. fight with a lower-ranking man.
Usually, his size and strength is
greater than mine and I know this.
Then I must determine if my rank
threatens him. If so, he may charge
full force at me with his "street
fighting" techniques. When this hap-
pens I must concentrate on total
defense/survival, and the reality of
what men are capable of doing comes
to life. But, if I am to continue
my training I must follow the instruc-
tion of my teachers. And if I want
to teach, teach well, I must prac-
tice in my class with men. Men who
want to learn this skill will learn
it whether it is taught by me or not.

The weekend continued and even
though the workouts were not as rigor-
ous and disciplined as my school's
special training, this event was es-
sential in feeling the strength of
women coming together to share their
skills, ideas, and lives. It certainly
rejuvenated my spirit to continue my
individual training.

During one demonstration, a group
of women from Olympia, Washington,
read a statement:

"The history of Karate is a
history of oppressed people using
their available resources to de-
fend themselves from their oppres-
sors, often invaders. This after-
noon, I have been in many discus-
sions of how as women we must
train to defend ourselves as an op-
pressed group. So we decided to
combine a poem, kata, and share a
song as part of this demonstration:

-Betsy Warrior/The Rape Journal

Self-Defense or How to Make Revolution Without Being a Violent Person

Before every battle you must say a prayer:
Death to the violence within and without.
Death to the father and the god of property.
May this be the last battle of the revolution.

And may life prevail.

Every

time you aim your rifle, you must say this prayer:
May my bullets be as pounding rain.

May they heal the land and cleanse the sky.
May this be the last shot of the Revolution.

And may life prevail.

Every
great mother of us all

time you see a comrade die, or an enemy fall, you must invoke the

In the name of the prisoner and the hungry child.
In the name of the witches and the buffalo.
May this be the last killing of the Revolution.

And may life prevail.

Every time you rise to go on you must look to yourself and say:
There can be no violence in a heart that loves life.
No more than in the seasons, or in a river's course.
May my heart be centered in the rhythms of life.
May my hand be steady to steer its course.
May this be the last sad morning of the Revolution.
The last sad morning of the Revolution.

And your ears must be open to the voice that answers you:

Act now, that life may prevail.
Act now, that life may prevail.

Susan Saxe is a Lesbian feminist revolutionary.

Susan Saxe and Becca Todd

At the time she was underground

and has since been captured and imprisoned. She redefines the concept of vio-

lence, demonstrating that the real violence in our society comes from the people

who own and control our lives.

Children’s Books

Capable Kids That Can

Fran Day

From the Mixed-Up Files of Mrs. Basil
E. Frankweiler

Elaine L. Konigsburg

Atheneum

$1.95/paper, for ages 9-13

When twelve-year-old Claudia de-
cided to run away from home (due to
"injustice"), she planned very thor-
oughly. She carefully chose her nine-
year-old brother, Jamie, as her runa-
way companion. The two children ran
away to the New York Metropolitan
Museum of Art. This unlikely setting
is made believable by Claudia's fore-
sight in perfectly planning the det-
ails of the expedition. The ways in
which the two children become invol-
ved in solving the mystery of a
museum statue and in meeting Mrs. Ba-
sil E. Frankweiler are engaging. In
spite of some negative aspects (not
the least of which is the irritating
way Claudia corrects Jamie's gram-
mar), the story is generally fun to
read. Although not perfect in its
portrayal of females, From the Mixed-
Up Files shows Claudia as a very
capable, thorough, interesting per-
son.

Elaine Konigsburg's first two books
won special awards; From the Mixed-
Up Files was awarded the Newbery
Medal for the most distinguished chil-
dren's book in 1968. Jennifer, He-
cate, Macbeth, William McKinley, and
Me, Elizabeth was voted a Newbery Hon-
or Book during the same year.

The Little Engine That Could

Watty Piper

Illustrated by Doris and George
Hauman

Scholastic Book Services

$1.75/paper, for ages 3-7

This is the complete, original
story of The Little Engine That
Could, only it has been delightfully
retold by Watty Piper. The major
change is that the two main engines
in the story are females. Most
importantly, the "little engine that
could," the hero of the book, is a
female.

Little Sisters of the Grassland

Shanghai Film Studios

Foreign Languages Press, People's
Republic of China

$1.50/paper, for ages 5-8

This picture-story book tells the
story of two little
Mongolian sisters who battle a
blizzard for a whole day and night
to protect commune sheep. Following
Mao's teachings, they conscientiously
guard their flock in spite of free-
zing weather. Meanwhile, a rescue
crew (the composition of which is
confusing - the text refers to them
as men but the pictures show both
women and men - the confusion could
be due to translation problems) sear-
ches for the lost girls. Later,
safe at home, the two sisters re-
ceive thousands of letters and gifts,
commending them for their revolution-
ary spirit of fearing neither hard-
ship nor death. This book shows two
strong, brave girls; it presents a
positive image of females. It could
also have been improved by having
women play a more major role in the
rescue.

Lesbian Art Show

The Great American Lesbian Art
Show collective is looking for women
willing to work - to help make a
celebration of Lesbian culture. Dur-
ing April of 1980, Lesbians all over
the country will be invited to set
up regional shows in galleries, or
alternative spaces like bookstores,
bars, or homes. Documentation of
these shows in the form of slides
will be sent to the Woman's Build-
ing in Los Angeles where an invita-
tional show will be held May 3 to
May 30. (Contact address is: 5256
York Blvd., Highland Park, CA
*213-257-4968).