Fighting in Eritrea

Women Struggle for

By Judy Barlow

A struggle worthy of celebration
is that of the women of Eritrea.

On November 1, 1977, 4,009 women of
Eritrea marched through the streets
of Keren calling for women to organize, 
politicize, and arm themselves.
One of the demonstrators presented
her views in the following poem:

We the women of Keren
As part and parcel of Eritrean women
From Turkish to Ethiopian colonization
Have lived through foreign aggression
and double oppression
The first, colonialism, we face our
people;
the second, supremacy of our brothers
Rise, Women of Eritrea
We'll be liberated from oppression
and misery
Not through slogans but we'll prove
in practice
Even today, we can see the foundation
for our liberation
Women, let us unite, get organized,
and armed
Lest we be found weaker than men
Only after this, will men believe
in our equality.

Eritrea is a small agricultural
and nomadic country bordering on the
Red Sea in Northeastern Africa. It
has a population of 3.5 million within
the country and an additional 1.5
million in exile abroad. For the
past 17 years Eritrea has been fighting
Ethiopia for its national independence.
Ethiopia considers Eritrea
to be part of Ethiopia and fights to
suppress Eritrean culture and tradition.

Invasion of Eritrea is documented
as far back as the early 16th century
when Turks occupied the country.
In 1865 invading Egyptians displaced
the Turks.

Eritrea has been struggling to
maintain its separate national identity
since the Italian occupation in
1885. In 1941 the British defeated
the Italians and Eritrea became a
trustee under the British Military
Administration. Then, in 1952, the
United Nations resolved to federate
Eritrea as an autonomous state with
Ethiopia in order to secure military
bases for the United States and
achieve access to its Red Sea ports
and natural resources. In 1962,
Ethiopia illegally abrogated the
United Nations' Resolution 390 A/V
and forcibly annexed the country as
its 14th province. After years of
peaceful resistance, the armed struggle
for national independence began
in 1961.

The atrocities of the past two
decades of war are overwhelming. So
far over 60,000 defenseless civilians
have been massacred by Ethiopian
troops—1/3 of the war victims being
children under age 12. Nearly one
million have been made homeless.
Over 500 villages have been totally
eradicated by constant aerial bombardments
and an incalculable amount of
property has been destroyed.

The methods used by the Ethiopian
colonial troops to wage this terror
campaign are even more blood-curdling—bayonetting pregnant women and
cutting their wombs, strangulation
of young women and men with piano wire,
burning large numbers of civilians
alive in their own huts, hacking
earlobes, noses, breasts, or other
extremities.

The major governing body in the
territory of Eritrea independent of
Ethiopia is the Eritrean Peoples
Liberation Front (EPLF). It sponsors
the army which has been waging a
successful struggle for the liberation
of all of Eritrea.

Women fighters of EPLF in the forefront leading the women
demonstrators in Keren

Almost a third of the EPLF troops
are women. Women are involved in
both the educational and governing
bodies. Women participate in all
activities of the party and in the
work force—in machine shops, garages,
mines, and on the farms. The city of
Keren was liberated from Ethiopia
last July by women revolutionaries.

The women are fighting on two fronts,
the second is the backward prejudice
against women.

Women have been doubly oppressed in
Eritrea for a long time. They could
not own land, their marriages were
prearranged, they were seldom allowed
divorce, and were hardly ever
allowed outside of the home alone.
They have not only been slaves at
home but also in the fields. With
the Italian and then the British
invasions, women were forced into
factory work often earning only 40-
50 cents a day for a 10-12 hour work
day. In the course of the war with
Ethiopia and recent famine, to survive,
many women have been forced
into prostitution or semi-slavery as
household servants. Despite these
odds, women have insisted on participating
fully in the struggle of
their country, and their own struggle
will be a continuing one.

The demonstration in Keren was called
after women complained that their
husbands were interfering with their
political work, and that they wanted
equality. One young woman said,
"There are no fathers who let their
girl children go and fight. They
went on their own, and it is they who
began the struggle for emancipation.”
Another said, “Our husbands consider
us as the dishes and other kitchen
equipment. But now we are beginning
to gain our liberation through our
mother the EPLF. Let all women and
girls stand up and carry arms to
liberate our country and ourselves!"

Women recruits in the EPLF are
given intensive political and military
training for six months separate
from the men. This training is given
in camps where the administration and
other activities are almost entirely
run by women comrades. Illiterate
recruits are taught to read and write.
Seeing women carrying out their duties
in the administration and training
activities is an inspiration to
the Eritrean women, who through a
backward culture were limited to the
kitchen. After six months of extensive
training, ranging from gymnastics
to tactics of guerilla warfare
and handling of various weapons and
explosives, the women are integrated
with their male comrades in the various
fields of activities of the Front.

In the military field, both women
and men fighters are now undertaking
virtually all types of military operations. Indeed, this has rendered
the reactionary male-supremacist
myth that a “woman can never raise
arms against an aggressor" quite
meaningless.

This year the fighting between
Ethiopia and Eritrea has taken a decisive turn. Two provinces have been
liberated, including the city of
Keren, Eritrea's second largest city.
The EPLF has control of all roads
leading to Asmara, the Eritrean capital,
and last stronghold of Ethiopia.
Sixty percent of the EPLF arms have
been captured from the Ethiopian army.
These arms are mostly from the United
States and the Soviet Union, who both
have supported Ethiopia against
Eritrea.

The EPLF has been fighting a large
Ethiopian army which is well equipped
with automatic weapons, and yet is
winning. The Ethiopian army has been
set back because it is highly demoralized.
Ethiopian militia captured by
the Eritreans speak of the repression
in the Ethiopian army. The most illiterate and politically unaware people
are herded by force, untrained,
totally uninformed, onto the battlefields. They are told different
stories of who they are fighting. One
Ethiopian militia captured by the EPLF
said, "They told us we were going to
fight against bandits, and that we had
to protect the population. We discovered
that there were only old people
and children in the villages and that
everyone was against us."

Recently the EPLF has released Ethiopian
POWs who were captured in May
1976. The POWs were taught to read
and write and finished basic political
education programs. Before leaving,
the POWs expressed their appreciation
of the humane treatment rendered them
by the EPLF. Ethiopia has hunted and
killed those POWs who returned home
after being released.

The EPLF has proven itself to the
people through its methods of government
and its conduct in war. It has
provided numerous refugee camps for
those fleeing from battered villages,
medical facilities have doubled,
schools have sprung up and public
transportation has been established.
Because it is mostly a land of peasants,
land reform has been important.
Land is being taken from the old feudal
absentee landlords. Many small
industries have been set up. The object
of the economy is to be self-reliant.
In 1976 the Eritrean liberated area
produced 50% of its own needs
which is a great improvement over the
past.

While these changes are significant,
they are by no means sufficient. The
Eritrean revolution for independence
continues and only with the total
destruction of the oppressive and
exploiting society will the Eritrean
women gain total emancipation.

Lesbian Loses Custody

Custody Action for Lesbian Mothers
(CALM) is a Philadelphia group presently
involved in the case of Sandra
Panzino of South Jersey. Panzino,
a lesbian mother, is trying to regain
custody of her two children. Rosalie
Davies of CALM has interested the
American Friends Service Committee of
Philadelphia and American Civil Liberties
Union of New Jersey to write
amicus briefs for the appeal of
Judge Joseph Gruccio's decision.

Two years ago the father sought
transfer of custody of two girls, then
7 and 11, who had been in their mother's
undisputed care for 7 years.

One year ago, the judge's decision
was conveyed by telephone and the
girls were put in the father's custody.
The mother's appeal had to wait for
receipt of the judge's written decision,
15 months later.

At the hearing it was brought out
that the father denied paternity of
the younger child for the first two
years of her life and refused to see
the child, even when she was hospitalized
for an operation. At the time of
the hearing he was over $6,000 behind
in support payments.

There was psychiatric testimony that
a child's sexuality is fixed by the
age of 5. This was rejected by the
judge. The psychiatrist, who had been
suggested by the father, said that a
change of custody would be harmful for
the younger child. This was ignored.

In his opinion the judge specifically
rejected as antediluvian the doctrine,
often used in initial determination of
custody, that the mother is presumptive
custodian of children. The appeal is
not based on this doctrine; rather it is
based on the desirability of continuity
of care. Here the only issue is the quality
of the relationship between parent
and child. In this Gruccio repeatedly
recognized that Sandra Panzino is a
loving mother; this was borne out by
testimony from the children's teachers
and school principal.

The judge based his decision in part
on the greater financial capability
of the father, ignoring the three
years’ arrearage in support payments.
The judge also said the mother seemed
too dependent.

Phyllis Warren, a New Jersey lawyer
who spoke to AFSC on behalf of CALM,
said that both points raised by Judge
Gruccio have to do with women's issues.
There is a real disparity between the
earnings of men and women—should
child custody be based on this?

The mother was called dependent because
she had to rely on her parents
to take care of the children while
she was at work, yet it was not seen
as dependency for the father to rely
on his new wife for child care.

The judge's opinion mentioned that
the mother’s family was somewhat
alienated from her because of her
sexual orientation and that the older
girl had been subjected to teasing
from fellow students. Warren pointed
out at the AFSC meeting that there
are broad legal precedents for not
taking account of community pressure
because people are different—politically,
racially, or otherwise.

At the trial the younger girl expressed
a preference to stay with her mother.
The older girl chose to live with her
father; however, she has since
changed her mind and wants to return
to her mother.

David Ferleger, a Philadelphia lawyer,
will be writing and arguing
Panzino's case on appeal in New Jersey.
The amicus brief will be bringing out
the issues of human dignity and equality
and the moral aspects of the case,
and it is hoped that the case would be
decided on a basis that would affirm
not just the right of lesbian mothers
to child custody, but also the right
to be different.

American Civil Liberties Union of
New Jersey is also interested in the
case and will probably enter a separate
amicus brief.

At the time of the trial, which took
4-5 days, Judge Gruccio was sitting
in several different courts and the
transcripts were taken by different
clerks. When the transcripts were
ordered so that the appeals lawyer could
prepare the case, they were not
available. 

MORE ON PAGE 14