Culture

A Dialogue with Constance

Constance Perenyi is a Lesbian feminist who lives in Denver. She's a writer and an artist and is currently culture editor for Big Mama Rag. During the month of an exhibition of her quilt and fabric pieces, it is held at the Rocky Mountain Women's Center in Denver.

Dona Calacone

BMR: I'm curious about how you've moved from the study of traditional art history to the study of women artists and into doing your own work.

C.P.: I've taken studio classes all along with my art history. It wasn't so much to explore my own creativity; it was to kind of understand what the process was in making art so that I could then understand art history, or so I thought. I think I harbored a lot of resentment toward artists when I was laboring to understand what they were doing and not being creative myself.

That started to change at Colorado Women's College when I took a women's art class. It gave me a feeling that I could be more creative within art history. My thesis pulled together a lot of things that I had observed, especially in terms of sexual art and what impressed me as far as feminism changing sexual art. So that was my first step of creativity in claiming something for myself.

I've always worked with fabric but somehow always felt that it wasn't integrated into my life. It was something I did for other people. So I feel that what has happened in the last year and a half is an integration of those interests with an acceptance of myself as a creative person, and using the women's movement to validate craft for me.

BMR: You mentioned sexual art. It seems that a lot of people think that sexual art is that which portrays the crudest, most basic feelings.

C.P.: I think that a lot of men's art does. I started getting really angry when I was taking art history and I couldn't relate to the images of women that I saw, even before I developed a feminist consciousness. I couldn't relate to it as a woman, as a lesbian, as someone who liked art. And it made me very angry.

BMR: And through all of western art that's still true.

C.P.: Really. Men were pushing a perspective on women's bodies, were twisting and convoluting them. My last story for BMR talked a lot about that and about violence. I didn't feel as though there was any escape until we started looking at different kinds of imagery that women were making, contemporary women as well as some historical... looking at Judy Chicago, for instance, and feeling really excited about what she was making. It was kind of contrived but it was a very positive statement about how she felt about herself as a woman, and how she felt about sexual imagery and when sexual imagery changes, how it becomes centralized. She and Mimi Schapiro did all the stuff around making feminist imagery acceptable. I think they almost went too far because they have promoted another stereotype. But not all feminist art fits into it, and I think that it shouldn't fit into it.

BMR: I think that a lot of women don't understand the importance of feminist art and feminist spirituality. If we're going to remake our world, we have to remake ourselves and all the images and all the symbols inside our heads. It is important to replace those old patriarchal images and symbols with something new of our own because if we don't replace them, unconsciously we are still clinging to them.

C.P.: I agree. I think you can just flounder, you can be totally uncentered, and you can come up with good things for yourself. But unless you've got some kind of base to work from which you've created for yourself that feels right, you're not going to get anywhere.

BMR: And for women that's a radical overhauling. It's no small task.

In my preoccupation with women's imagery, I feel as though I'm cutting myself off from mainstream art and that I'm depriving myself for doing that, even though I know that for me the future lies in investigating my own art through feminism and as a feminist. What do you think of that dichotomy?

C.P.: Because I think that fine arts adhere to a lot of tradition and have a lot of expectations. In making prints, painting, making sculpture, you're going to be conforming to long lines of tradition. I'm still thinking that fine arts, for the most part, is stuff that's meant to be marketable.

I get real queasy when I start thinking about Warhol or even Rauschenberg lately, just mass producing because they know that they have that market where they can sell. And a lot of "minor artists" also conforming because they want to make their mark.

I think somehow that in working with crafts, there's a whole different philosophy, a more humanistic philosophy that goes along with crafts. It's more respectful of the material. To me, it seems almost spiritual, too, spirituality in this case meaning that you've connected to something outside of you. And outside of you in this case means using wood, fabric, fiber, whatever it is you're using, to bring an inside image out, but also to use the outside material to go inward.

BMR: And crafts is not as exclusive an area or an endeavor as fine arts. That's an important part of that philosophy.

C.P.: You know, I'm feeling more and more of what you're saying. I don't think that what you were just talking about-- coming up with new things for ourselves-- I don't think that very many women have done that. And I need a lot more stimulation sometimes than I can get from the feminist community, within what we know as feminist expression, whether it's art or writing. I think I need much more diversity. I agree a lot more lately and it makes me feel a little defeated that I can't get everything I need. But it also makes me feel like I want to go and search it out. I've been going to lots more openings and to more traditional galleries. I'm starting to make more traditional contacts and feeling like I don't have to compromise. I'm still going to keep doing what I have to do but these people have something to give me, too, because they're working with different aspects of art.

BMR: So you are finding things to use in traditional art, in men's art?

C.P.: I know that I get tremendously good feelings from going to a couple of galleries in town-- craft galleries that have some really beautifully made things by both men and women.

And somehow the works by both men and women seem to transcend whichever it is, because of the craft. I'm not sure that I could be getting that out of fine arts.

BMR: Why not?

C.P.: I can go into a crafts gallery, find a really wonderful piece of pottery that is unique-- I mean there is nothing else like it-- and be able to afford it. It doesn’t even have to be useful. That's something else that's exciting to me about crafts is that they are moving away from having to be useful. They are art objects in themselves now.

BMR: The fabric work which you do has been traditionally women's work as have been most crafts. Do you strongly feel that you're connecting with that tradition?

C.P.: I feel that I'm connecting with that tradition, but making it my own. I feel that women just had to work with scraps before and there's always the feeling that these women were using whatever was left to them. I'm making a conscious decision that I'm going to choose my fabric very carefully, and that I'm making the piece exclusively for me. I'm not making clothes for anybody else and using scraps.

BMR: So in that way, women have been limited and it has devalued the work that they have done in the light of male priorities in art and fine things.

C.P.: Right. It's just like being in another serving position, like being a secretary or a cook.

BMR: Let's talk about your technique in making your quilt pieces. First of all you choose a traditional quilt pattern.

Big Mama Rag, Vol. 7, No. 1

Perenyi

photo by Trudy Sauter

C.P.: Yes. All the ones I use are just traditional American patterns. When I choose a pattern I know how it's going to look finished, for the most part, but sometimes there are some real surprises. In choosing a pattern, what I'm looking for is the size of the entire piece, the size of the block, the shape of the pieces that go into the block and just kind of a general effect that I know will come out of it. Traditionally, except for crazy quilts, there is a continuity of colors so that one block is exactly the same as another. So you've got a certain predictable pattern.

But I've taken liberties with a lot of the traditions to get the effects I've wanted. I've taken a lot of risks in letting things work together.

Maybe we should talk about leaving edges unfinished, too. When I first started to think about getting ready for a show, I was thinking of backing, of binding, of making everything very presentable in traditional ways. What I would do is I would finish a piece and I would hang it on the wall and think, “Oh, I'll come back to this in a month or so and finish backing it." Well, I started living with them and saw that they were finished: that the raw edges, that the uncentered pieces, that the strings hanging from them, were as much a part of the piece as the original conception. It's an unacceptable kind of thing to do-- people don't show “unfinished work". But it was a tremendous relief for me to know that it was my work. I could do whatever I wanted with it.

BMR: I was just thinking back to the difference between painting and quilting. In painting, all the forms are determinedly patriarchal whereas in craftswork, form is essentially an outgrowth of function and as a result is saved somewhat from being ruled by some ideology. And with quilts you have a ready-made structure to follow whereas in painting, much less is defined and you have fewer limitations but what a relief it must be -- being able to begin with a pattern, like having a map to guide you.

C.P.: I think that's been a step in my development too, because originally when I'd been in architecture school, everything was very clearly laid out. That was too stifling. But I haven't been ready to just suddenly leap into my own expression without using another vehicle. I feel that this has given me the impetus to know that I can do that, because I still have made all of these things, these traditions, my own.

BMR: Working with fabric in this way seems to make so much sense. It's such a sane method of expression.

MORE ON PAGE 10,