motherhood. ..

I want to write a journal about  
myself as a woman and as a mother,  
to explore my thoughts in a deeper  
and more coherent way. I also want  
to share my own struggle because if  
I had been able to read something  
like this, I would never have felt  
so isolated and full of self-hate  
and doubts.

I think being pregnant and giving  
birth and then motherhood are  
very different experiences. For  
example, before finding out I was  
pregnant, I fantasized about being  
pregnant and giving birth and nursing.  
I didn't think about what it would  
mean on a day-to-day basis. Mo-  
therhood was so undifferentiated  

and idealized as a glorified state  
of being, as something I magically  
became; it got very confusing as I  
struggled to define how the ideal  
fit into my daily experiences.

After my second wedding anni-  
versary, I found out I was preg-  
nant. A diaphragm baby—a dia-  
phragm used carelessly because,  
well, I believe I wanted to have a  
baby. We more or less planned to  
get pregnant in a year or two's  
time.

As soon as I left the clinic,  

waiting for David to pick me up and—  

to tell him, I cried. I felt  
cheated because I had always looked  
forward to deciding consciously to  
get pregnant. I felt like a fail-  
ure because I saw myself as some-  
one who had control over such mat-  
ter-of-fact processes as birth con-  
trol. I also realized that David  
and I would no longer be totally in-  
dependent and without responsibili-  
ties. One reason for putting off  
getting pregnant was that I wanted  
more time alone with David.

It was really a matter of timing.  
On one hand, David and I figured  
there was never a perfect time.  
There was always something else to  
do—travel, education, work. On the  
other hand, "if not now, when?"

I always thought I would get  
pregnant after I got my career to-  
gether. We had fantasies of each  
of us getting half-time jobs while  
we had babies so we could share in  
their care, and taking turns working  
once the children (notice the plu-  
ral form) were older. Well, there  
I was, a first-year graduate student  
in Sociology at Berkeley, and I knew  
that I was not going to be a profes-  
sor one day. I was not going to  

read.  
one woman and her trying to work through for herself just what it means to be a  
The development of this one woman's mind and feelings over a  
two-year period and many of her conclusions made in the latter parts of the journal  
encompass the kind of soul-searching—and-sharing that breeds real sisterhood.  
Of its length, the staff of BIG MAMA has edited it somewhat and plans to print it  
in six parts. This is Part One.

woman and a mother.

While in Berkeley, California, one of the women working on BIG MAMA met the woman  
who wrote the following journal, and brought it back to Denver for other women to  

It is a very long, thoughtful journal relating the concrete experiences of  

have one of those careers or be a  
traditional academic woman. Yet no  
alternate lifestyles appealed to  
me—regular movement politics or  
hippy hang loose. I wanted to do  
some meaningful work, but was con-  
fused about what kind of work to  
get into.

So there I was, dissatisfied with  
my work and vaguely figuring I  
could get some kind of fulfillment  
out of parenthood.

Now, two years later, obviously  
due a large part to being a mother  
of a 17-month-old girl, I see a  
career, travel, and education dif-  
ferently. My career will be inti-  
mately involved with the women's  
movement; I am more into internal  
journeys than travel to other lands,  
and I see my formal education in a  
much more utilitarian fashion—I  
use it to get a job (I am a teach-  
ing assistant), and will use a pro-  
gram to be trained in a skill if  
it is expedient.

But I am getting ahead of myself.  
I hadn't considered much about ac-  
tual motherhood—the caretaking and  
responsibility for a child or in-  
fant. Pregnancy and birth were the  
center of my fantasies as I thought  
about and decided to remain preg-  
nant.

Because

I think at this point more de-  
tails of my personal biography are  
relevant. This was February 1969.

I had heard about women's libera-  
tion and welcomed it wholeheartedly  
as very relevant to my life. When  
I married, I thought I legally had to  
change my name. I did, and hated  
being Mrs. Him. When I arrived in  
Berkeley, I changed back to my mai-  
den name. I realize it is my fa-  
ther's name, but it was me for 22  
years and I never felt like I was  
Mrs. David Him.

I went through bureaucratic and  
emotional hassles doing that change.  
I felt like a lonely fanatic.  
"What's in a name?" is the message  
I got from my circle of leftish  
male graduate students. From David  
I got passive support. From the  
straight world at the University I  
got expressions of unbelief and  
hostility. From women friends I got  
tacit support, but many wondered if  
it was worth the hassle. But I had  
to do it for my state of mind. I  
did it in some slightly devious ways  
because I didn't have the energy or  
support for honest confrontations.

That Fall, I sought out a women's  
liberation small group. I went to  
two different ones. One had been  
going on, and I felt I needed to be  
in one from the beginning. The next  
was composed of women connected to  
Berkeley male political heavies. It  
was very in-groupy, and I felt left  
out. So I didn't go back. But I  
read available literature and saw  
my marriage as being liberated. I  
saw it like that for a couple of  
reasons. I no longer was Mrs. Him,  
and I shared the household tasks  
with my husband. I was unaware  
that I still felt and acted on the  
total responsibility for that work.  
In the Fall of 1968, I believed I  
had an equalitarian marriage, that  
when we had a child we would con-  
tinue being equal in child care.

So when I found out I was preg-  
nant, I used to say "we" are preg-  
nant. We planned to share the ex-  
perience in as total a way as we  
knew how.

I got into being pregnant. I  
had always looked forward to that  
time as one of joy and beauty. I  
didn't feel I was creating a being  
really. I used to tell people, "It  
is creating itself." I dug the  
changes in my body; it was a groovy  
physical experience. I read books  
about the natural process of preg-  
nancy. I found another woman who  
was pregnant, and we shared experi-  
ences, pains and aches, doctor stor-  
ies, and information on natural