women in cages

Sunni-Ali Is In State Hands / Baraldini Is Arrested

Fulani Sunni-Ali (Cynthia Boston) surrendered to federal authorities on Nov. 24th as a "material witness" in the attempted expropriation of money from a Brink's armored truck in Nanuet, N.Y. She had already twice refused to cooperate or collaborate with the U.S. government around the Brink's case. She had been underground since then, because, as she stated, "...I will not continue to place my life in the hands of this racist, imperialist Nazi-like government and authorize them taking me out for the count."

When turning herself in to the authorities, Sunni-Ali said, "I have returned to fight in my husband's case because he was framed just as I am being framed." Her husband, William Johnson, was recently arrested in South America and has been brought to the U.S. and named in an indictment as one of eight "conspirators" in the Brink's case.

(There are currently six people awaiting trial in New City, N.Y., on state robbery and murder charges in the attempted expropriation. Sekou Odinga, David Gilbert, Kuwasi Balagoon, and Judith Clark do not recognize the legitimacy of the court to try them and so are refusing to participate. Kathy Boudin and Solomon Brown are participating.)

No charges have been filed against Sunni-Ali, who surrendered on a warrant that demanded she submit samples of hair and handwriting to the grand jury.

Her attorney, Chokwe Lumumba, said "no deals" had been made and she would not collaborate in a government attempt to destroy the black liberation movement.

(Information compiled from Rocky Mountain News, Big Mama Rag, and Resistance.)

Still Caged

trained by the female police officer. The male officer had my Son up against the opened back door of the cruiser. Managing to break loose I ran to my Son, trying to stop the abuse of the male officer. The female officer once again tried to restrain me. During the scuffle I heard the discharge of her gun. I actually thought I had been wounded. Going into shock is the reason I can't recall those unknown minutes as what my Child describes as defending myself against the male officer's threats with his drawn gun.

I later learned we fled in the cruiser. We were rammed by one of the many Okla. City Police cruisers that were pursuing us.

My Son was then jerked out of the window and searched. They then forced him in the backseat of another cruiser. I was handcuffed and severely beaten by several of the arresting officers, as my Child sat and watched.

A few days later I regained consciousness and found myself in the hospital's intensive care unit.

Eight months passed before I stood trial for 1st degree murder and attempted murder, with the State seeking the death penalty.

On Nov. 9, Sylvia Baraldini, a member of the May 19th Communist Organization, was seized and arrested by the FBI Joint Terrorist Task Force. This task force, formed from the Special Joint Police Force of the FBI and the New York Police Department, was organized to destroy and criminalize the black revolutionary movement.

The excuse used to arrest Sylvia was a criminal complaint issued by the U.S. Attorney which contained no factual evidence, but is supposedly based on the allegations of a confidential source (C.S.1, identified as Solomon Brown, who was forced under torture to give a statement to the FBI, which he has since recanted). The only contacts Solomon Brown has ever had with Sylvia Baraldini were in legal visits since his arrest.

The Joint Terrorist Task Force seized Sylvia in order to be able to confiscate political documents on her person and in her house. According to their own warrant, they raided her house with at least 10 agents to gather information on organizations such as the Weather Underground, May 19th Communist Organization, and the Black Liberation Army.

On Nov. 10th, the day after her arrest, Sylvia was served with a subpoena to appear before a grand jury on Monday, Nov. 15.

On Nov. 19, she was indicted by the government for aiding and abetting the prison escape of Assata Shakur. Another member of May 19th, Allan Berkman, was also indicted as an accessory after the fact.

The U.S. government is targeting revolutionary North American forces who openly support the struggle of National Liberation Movements towards independence and socialism in their respective homelands (lands taken by U.S. imperialism): Puerto Rico, Mexico, and New Afrika.

(Edited from a May 19th Communist Organization press release printed in Conciencia Mexicana, a publication of El Comité Nacional contra La Represión.)

-Bulldozer

An all-white affluent Okla. City Jury who admitted feeling intimidated by the presence of Native Americans in the courtroom, found me guilty of a lesser charge of 1st degree manslaughter and attempted murder charge.

MORE ON PAGE 16

Thomas Awaiting Appeal

A letter to Big Mama Rag,

It's been a while now since readers have heard from me. I am a “Battered Woman" serving a life sentence for the murder of my live-in boyfriend. My case was and still is self-defense. I am still here waiting for my appeal; each day seems longer than before.

I used to receive mail; since this is my third year here, it seems I am forgotten. My mother has passed since I have been here, so prison life is hell. If other sisters in prison would like to write me, I will answer all mail.

Juanita Thomas

# 161091

3511 Bemis Road

Ypsilanti, MI 48197

P.S. Pass this on to other Women's news journals.

January, 1983 - Page 3;