‘We Live Day to Day With Nothing’

Native Women Walk 100 Miles For Rights

Two years ago a group of 25 women  
and children occupied the council  
offices of the Tobique Indian Reserve  
in New Brunswick, Canada. Fighting  
harassment from the council and coun-  
cil supporters, many of whom were the  
women's own relatives and friends,  
they occupied the building for four  
months.

That action spearheaded a movement  
involving native women across Canada  
lobbying for basic human rights which  
they are denied by both the Canadian  
Indian Act of 1951 and their own  
band councils.

The decision to occupy the band of-  
fices came from the situation around  
the poor housing conditions, and the  
lack of housing altogether, facing  
the Tobique women.

Housing for reserve Indians is con-  
trolled at the band council level;  
women band council members are an ex-  
ception. Single mothers are the low-  
est on the rung of priorities and  
most are forced to live off the char-  
ity of already welfare-dependent  
friends and relatives in over-crowded  
and run-down dwellings.

For married couples, a house is most  
often the property of the husband and  
in cases of divorce or separation, a  
woman has no claim to property. Coun-  
cils indiscriminately decide who is  
and who isn't going to get a house.

One of the Tobique women said that  
women complaining about corrupt and  
unfair council procedures don't get  
houses—charging their own band coun-  
cil with deliberately denying them  
housing. "The chief is against women,"  
the organizer said. She told of the  
last band housing meeting, which was  
held 60 miles off the reserve; the  
women went anyway, but were told by  
the chief that if they went into the  
meeting, he and everyone else would  
walk out. At the end of the meeting,  
only one woman had received housing;  
she had been living in a secondhand  
trailer which was put on the reserve  
without a foundation. Water and fumes  
filled the trailer, making the family  
sick. Even with letters from the dep-  
artment of health and welfare saying  
she needed a house, she had to "fin-  
agle" to get one.

According to other native women who  
have joined the struggle of the Tobi-  

Big MamajeRag Vol. 7 No. 9

July 14; communities along the entire  
route supported them—providing accom-  
modation, food and recreational facil-  
ities for the children. The hundred  
mile walk ended on July 19, when the  
original 50 women and children arrived  
on Parliament Hill with 150 supporters  
who joined in the last trek of the  
march.

That evening, the women met with a  
representative from Indian Affairs; he  
asked for a "grassroots" reaction to  
the revisions which are to be made to  
the Indian Act. He was told that, im-  

‘We knew we would have to take  
action into our own hands’

mediately, women wanted equal input  
in the decision making affecting re-  
visions to the Act. To date, the only  
consulted body has been the Native  
Indian Brotherhood and there are no  
women members of the Brotherhood's  
national council. (The National Indian  
Brotherhood announced its support of  
the march). The women said they are  
asking for protection for women who  
stand to lose their status during the  
long process of revision.

"Many women have lost their status  
and live from day to day with nothing,"  
said Monique Sioui.

Canada's new Conservative govern-  
ment said it appreciated the fact that  
native women let the government know  
what their concerns are (the women  
turned in a brief that listed 21 pro-  
blems and concerns of Indian women  
covering housing, adoption of Indian  
children, the right to be buried on  
reserves, education, health and more).  
The government said it will consider  
the recommendations of these women  
as policies are developed and revi-  
sions to the Indian Act are under-  
taken.

The women from Tobique and reserves  
all across the country are watching;  
they are also deciding if they should  
form a National Indian Sisterhood.

(Information from three articles  
in Upstream, a Canadian feminist pub-  
lication.)

Jo Ann Yellow Bird Wins Police Brutality Suit

The trial involving a Native Ameri-  
can woman's suit against police offic-  
ers and medical authorities in north  
Nebraska is settled. Late summer, an  
all-white jury of four women and two  
men awarded Jo Ann Yellow Bird the  

sum of $300,000 in damages. She had  
brought an $8 million lawsuit against  
the city of Gordon, the county and  
six Gordon police officers, whom she  
charged with violating her civil  
rights and causing the death of her  
unborn child.

Jo Ann Yellow Bird, an Oglala Lakota  
woman from the Pine Ridge Indian Res-  
ervation, was seven months pregnant  
when she was kicked in the stomach by  
a Gordon, Nebraska policeman September  
15, 1976. Two weeks later her  
baby, Zintkalazi, was born dead.

The incident occurred in the small  
northern Nebraska town near the South  
Dakota border. The bartender of a loc-  
al tavern was harassing a group of  
Indians, which included Jo Ann Yellow  
Bird and her husband Bob, both activ-  
ists in the American Indian Movement.  
As they left the tavern, the police  
arrived and began arresting them in  
a violent way. When Jo Ann Yellow  
Bird yelled for officers to stop beat-  
ing her husband, policeman Robert  
Barnes turned and kicked her in the  
stomach, even though she was obvious-  
ly pregnant. She was then thrown in  
the back of a police car and taken to  
county jail.

The sheriff's deputies ignored Jo  
Ann's pleas for medical help. After  
several hours, they finally took her  
to Gordon Memorial Hospital where  
the doctor, after hearing a question-  
able fetal heartbeat, refused to ad-  
mit her because she is an Indian.  
She was then driven to the Pine Ridge  
Indian Hospital over many miles of  
bad roads. The doctor who finally  
examined her found that the baby's  
heartbeat was silent.

Two weeks later, Jo Ann delivered  
a stillborn baby girl. In the offici-  
al autopsy, an FBI pathologist found  
that the seven-month fetus had been  
dead since approximately the day of  
the policeman's kick and that the  
baby had been healthy up to that time.

The $300,000 award is meager in  
comparison to many civil suit judge-  
ments, and Jo Ann Yellow Bird is not  
satisfied with it. But she and other  
American Indian Movement activists  
think a significant victory has been  
achieved in this case. One of Jo Ann's  
main reasons for going to court was  
to try to stop such brutal abuse,  
and Native people feel this court de-  
cision serves notice to communities  
and law enforcement officers on or  
near “reservations” that they will be  
held accountable for their actions  
against Native people in the future.

Jo Ann Yellow Bird's case was not  
unique; it represented for all Indian  
people a struggle for survival. Re-  
cently in Geneva, Switzerland, the  
International Indian Treaty Council  
presented extensive documentation on  
"Genocide Against Indian People" to  
the Human Rights Commission of the  
United Nations. Some relevant statist-  
ics from that documentation are:  
- 24% of all Indian women have been  
involuntarily sterilized.  
- 25-35% of all Indian children on  
reservations are forcibly separated  
from their families and put into  
foster homes, BIA schools and adopt-  
ed by non-Indian families.  
Of every 1000 Indian babies born on  
reservations, 32.2 die within the  
first year, compared to a national  
rate of 23.7.  
Life expectancy on a reservation is  
44 years, compared to the national  
average of 64.  
Average per capita income for an  
Indian in 1975 was less than $2000  
compared to the national average  
of $6000.

The decision in favor of Jo Ann  
Yellow Bird is also a clear victory  
for all women who are brutalized ev-  
ery day by a violent woman-hating  
culture—women who fight back both  
inside and outside of the courts and  
prison system; to stand up and fight  
back is a courageous political act.  
Her victory attests to her strength  
as a woman, as a Native American, and  
signals to all people the power in-  
herent in fighting back.

-Native American Solidarity Committee