Woman-Energy Opens Velvet Hammer II

Mary Wadding:

After two weeks of determined cleaning, the new Velvet Hammer II opened on July 15th, at their new location, 38th and Chestnut. Through the efforts of the many women who just "dropped by," the task of preparing the new bar was completed by the morning of the grand opening. The atmosphere during those two weeks was light and filled with discussion centering around the opening. Women tore down walls, wallpapered, painted, scrubbed, scraped, and did general cleaning. As Morgan Ahern, the general manager of the Hammer, said, "The women were fantastic; feminists just appeared out of the woodwork.”

According to Linda Ryan, owner of the Hammer, the reasons for the move included the neighborhood, safety, parking space, and the need to create a good space for women to gather.

The neighborhood at the old bar was strictly residential. And the parking situation did nothing to increase the safety of the women as it was on the street, and many times they had to park a couple of blocks away. Cars were vandalized, and Linda felt that when it "got down to the nitty gritty, someone could get hurt.”

In addition to the hassles of safety and the neighborhood, there were a few problems with the rent, which was “atrociously high for a place of that size."

Verdict Draws Protest

(LNS) "Some were shocked, some were disillusioned, and many were angry. They were all asking, ‘What can we do now?'"

This was how one of the 500 supporters who packed a Detroit courtroom and overflowed out onto the street described the scene when two Filipino nurses were convicted on five counts of poisoning and one count of conspiracy on July 13 at the conclusion of a 4-1/2 month trial.

The charges stem from the deaths of 6 to 13 patients at the Veterans Administration Hospital in Ann Arbor, Michigan during a six-week period in the summer of 1975. The administration of Pavulon, a powerful muscle relaxant, is believed to have caused breathing failures which led to the deaths and affected 50 other patients.

After the verdict was announced, several hundred demonstrators, mostly nurses in their uniforms, picketed in front of the courthouse carrying signs reading, "Stop the FBI Frame-Up," "Stop Unjust Discrimination," and "Leonie and Pi, We Support You All the Way."

"I am very disillusioned with American justice," said Filipina Narciso, one of the nurses, after the jury's decision was announced.

"The evidence was highly circumstantial," added the other defendant, Leonora Perez. "Our mere presence at the bedside of patients shouldn't convict us. It was our job.”

The government's case against the nurses was entirely circumstantial and could have been used equally to show possible guilt of other people. At no time did anyone testify that they actually witnessed either of the nurses administering the drug to the patients. The only motive the prosecution has suggested is that the nurses wanted to protest bad working conditions at the hospital.

The new bar is located in a more industrialized neighborhood and has parking around the building as well as on the street that runs along the south side of it.

Concern for the women who frequent the Hammer remains a priority with Linda. As she said, most gay bars are dirty and contribute to the lower opinion that a lot of gays, especially women, have of themselves. She has a lot of expectations of the bar and the women who go there. Among those expectations are that there must be space for women to be able to meet each other in a comfortable atmosphere and to be able to be political in an open manner. "I just want it to be a good space for women to be able to come to."

Linda has good feelings about the response that women have given to the bar. Many types of women have been going, and the different groups seem to feel comfortable and like it. As at the former bar, the Hammer does not sell Coors beer, and the women who have asked for it have not expressed any strong regret that they cannot get it there. Most of these women have switched to another brand after a brief discussion with Linda about the boycott and the link between the Save Our Children group and Joseph Coors. (One woman bar owner from down the street was convinced by Linda not to sell Coors.) In addition to refusing to sell Coors, the Hammer does not serve Florida orange juice. Although most gay bars do not stock Florida juice, the Hammer was the first to refuse to deal with Coors and remains only one of two who don't.

There have been no significant hassles or problems encountered as yet, though there are always possibilities when moving from a small bar to one that is larger and has a kitchen. Things seem to be running smoothly. The police of district #2 have been fantastic, according to Linda, making the transition to the neighborhood easier. Any woman who has been in the bar late at night has more than likely seen a couple of them come in just to see that all is running smoothly. "They don't come in and hassle for IDs. It could make women feel uncomfortable, but they come just to check to see if there's anything we need or if we're being hassled or anything. Their attitude has been very positive, and they've been very professional about the whole thing," she explained. They also come by later and make sure that everyone has gotten safely out of the bar and it's closed up without incident.

In regard to potential problems, Linda is concerned that a feminist might not support a feminist bar. "Something that isn't supported won't last."

The philosophies vary from separatism to the apolitical, with the different women sitting and discussing their differing views. Many see the bar as a political statement, a reinforcement of the values that they live with daily.

Unlike the majority of bars, women need not be over 21 to get into the Hammer. As a restaurant and bar, there is no age requirement for admission. However, those women who are underage are requested not to order nor consume alcohol. In the event that a check is made of the bar for IDs and someone gets busted for drinking without an acceptable form of identification, the bar stands a good chance of losing its license and being given a heavy fine for serving liquor. IDs are checked at the door, but no one is denied entrance for not being old enough to drink.

The restaurant serves a variety of food for both vegetarian and non-vegetarian diets.

More on page 6

THE NAIAD PRESS, INC

LOVE IMAGE by Valerie Taylor

180 pp. paper $4.50

New Lesbian novel from the best-selling author of Whisper Their Love, Stranger On Lesbos & The Girls In 3-B.

THE MUSE OF THE VIOLETS by Renee Vivien

84 pp. paper $4.00

The lyric Lesbian poetry of Renee Vivien available in English for the first time.

LESBIANA by Barbara Grier [Gene Damon]

Her famous columns from the Ladder.

A WOMAN APPEARED TO ME by Renee Vivien

135 pp. paper $4.50

Autobiographical novel about her affair with Natalie Clifford Barney.

SPEAK OUT, MY HEART by Robin Jordan

148 pp. paper $4.00

Novel about coming out to your family.

CYTHEREA’S BREATH by Sarah Aldridge

240 pp. paper $5.00

Lesbian novel set in the early suffrage movement.

TOTTIE by Sarah Aldridge

A Lesbian Romance.

THE LATECOMER by Sarah Aldridge

310 pp. paper $5.00

Sarah Aldridge’s first Lesbian novel.

THE LESBIAN IN LITERATURE, A Bibliography by Gene Damon (Barbara Grier), Jan Watson, Robin Jordan

96 pp. paper $7.00 Individuals $10.00 Institutions

2500 entries, coded and annotated for easy use.

Send total amount of your order plus 10 percent postage & handling to: THE NAIAD PRESS, INC. 20 Rue Jacob Acres BATES CITY, MISSOURI 64011.