struggle

x-Inmates Gather To Combat

Lori Bradford

The Ninth Annual Conference on Human
Rights and Psychiatric Oppression was
held at a boy scout camp outside of
Cleveland, Ohio, August 21-25. The
conference brought together about 100
current or ex-inmates (and a very few
non-inmates who were sponsored by ex-
patient groups) from across the United
States and Canada, and finally one re-
presentative from the International

conference coverage

Cooperative Struggle against Psychiatry
based in Holland.

Sharing a reality that defined the
psychiatric system as a dangerous at
best—deadly at worst—strong arm of
social control. We denied the posi-
tion of individual powerlessness left
to us by psychiatry to come together in
workshops, meetings, actions, and for
emotional support and solidarity. To
demand the right to self-determination,
and to continue to plan how to put that
demand into action. It felt real fami-
liar to be with a bunch of people who
had been trapped by psychiatry. It had
been a while since I had hung around
with any "loonies" like myself. Just
to know that for a while all the
people you would come in contact with
understood the reality of being a “men-
tal patient". It was good for me, I
needed it, but it was also real hard.

The hardest part was dealing with the
kind of collective anger and fear that
was brought together at the conference,
however, unlike dealing with these same
feelings through the psychiatric system
the conference gave us political space
to direct our anger, and validation for
our anger and fear. Pissed off about
drugs and shocks and having been treat-
ed like animals, and lies, and pieces of
our lives taken by doctors and hospi-
tals. Left stigmatized and stereotyped
in society—"crazy dangerous violent
patients on the loose"; unemployable,
left with permanent damage to our bodi-
es and minds. The therapeutic community
—mind police in disguise. Terrified
of being caught up by them—by every-
thing—the pressures of the world. All
too well we know how quickly you can be
eaten up by the "mental health system".

I was (am) frightened, am furious.

I paced...you know back and forth
across the floor, and we were at this
boy scout camp with lots of inside space
huge dining hall and sleeping ca-
bins. I paced through meetings, drunk
—half the night I paced, just to han-
dle the fright. Odd you say...well I
usually only do it in private. I had
forgotten, it's nice to do it with
friends. It used to feel so “symptoma-
tic" to be doing any kind of "behaviors"
like that. Now—well you do certain
things to maintain, there is always

Page 8 - Big Mama Rag, October, 1981

the standing joke that everybody has
something that they only do in private.
We just need to overthrow psychiatry
and make a new definition of "average,
normal type behavior". So it was at
the conference, working within a really
broader definition of ways of acting.

Ideas about what kinds of actions
(behavior) are disruptive or indicative
of "mental imbalance" and what kinds of
action are not seems based on such a
white, polite, middle-upper class atti-
tude that you learn along with being
nice and sitting still and quiet in
church on Sunday morning. An assump-
tion of assimilation into a society do-
minated by a divide-and-conquer system
based on racism, sexism, classism, Chris-
tianity/Freudianism, and Capitalism—
each supporting the other. Psy-
chiatry then makes up theories of health
and illness and the necessary “treat-
ments" from within boundaries set by
the "isms" listed above. Profits before
people.

All of our lives, not just the lives
of ex-inmates, are affected and con-
trolled by the assumptions of psycho-
logy/psychiatry. Even though one of
the more recent "fronts" of the "mental
health system" has been "de-institution-
alization", i.e. a movement of patients
from the wards of state institutions to
boarding houses, halfway houses, and
community mental health centers; the
"front" is a false one. In fact very
few individuals have really been set
free from the psychiatric vise grip.
Most inmates being allowed freedom from
the wards only under the bondage of psy-
chotropic drugs or shock; nourishing
that already internalized "patient pas-
sivity".

The self-same psychiatric system that
was so concerned about the effects of
“forced confinement" on the 50 American
hostages held in Iran, remains unmoved
over the fate of countless inmates/pri-
soners (doubtless most of them politi-
cal prisoners also) who are shuffled
around like animals between prisons and
psychiatric institutions and then "set
free" with no acknowledgement of the
realities of people becoming “institu-
tionalized". Ronnie Reagan has made his
position in support of incarceration—
bigger and better prisons—quite clear.

Psychiatric attitudes, techniques,
and drugs are being used in schools,
nursing homes, prisons and workplaces.
It seems that a short term focus on de-
institutionalization has in fact made
the process of institutionalization a
controlling power at the community le-
vel. One man at the conference com-
mented that the community mental health
centers function more like revolving
doors back into the state institutions.

In both the film, Hurry Tomorrow by
Richard Cohen, and in the workshop ti-
tled "Getting Out and Staying Out"
the best advice for doing just that, is

to lie, tell them what they want to
hear. In one of many interviews re-
flected in Judi Chamberlin's book On
Our Own, Patient Controlled Alterna-
tives to the Mental Health System, the
necessity of “learning the lie" is
clear:
The interview continued, with the
patient presenting a reasonable ex-
planation of why she preferred to
leave the hospital and get a labora-
tory job rather than take a work re-
lease placement while remaining a
patient.
PATIENT: I'd do much better if the
hospital would free me.
DOCTOR: What do you mean, “free you"?
P: Well, it would be just like the
other work placements I've had.
You're never really free.
D: But if you stayed here on a work
placement, you'd be free to come and
go on your own time. It would be
just like a job.
P: No. You would still be control-
ling me if I stayed here.
D: Do you mean we control your mind
here?
P: You may not control my mind, but
I really don't have a mind of my own.
D: How about if we gave you a work
placement in [location]? Would you be free
then? That's far away from here.
P: Anyplace I went it would be the
same set up as it is here. You're
never really free; you're still a pa-
tient, and everyone you work with

press release

Since 1973 this conference has brought
together former psychiatric inmates
(commonly referred to as "mental pa-
tients") from across the United States
and other countries as well, all of
whom work in their own communities to
combat psychiatric assault.

From our own experiences we know that
every day people are locked up for no
crime; that once incarcerated, they are
given crippling and mind-damaging drugs;
that they have dangerous electric shocks
passed through their brains; that many
suffer lifelong physical damage as a re-
sult; and that the result for some of
us is death. For the painful evidence
of this, just look at yesterday's Plain
Dealer (see nation's news story page 3).
The victim was a fourteen-year-old Ohio
girl, Susan Deliman, dead because of the
administration of an anti-depressant,
Norpramine, for which there is no anti-
dote.

Because this is no isolated incident,
but an extreme example of what has hap-
pened to all of us, WE DEMAND:

AN END TO FORCED COMMITMENT, which
indefinitely imprisons hundreds of thou-
sands of people who have broken no law.

AN END TO FORCED DRUGGING, ELECTRO-
SHOCK, AND ALL OTHER PSYCHIATRIC "TRE-
ATMENTS" GIVEN AGAINST OUR WILL. Both
electroshock and major psychiatric drugs

struggle

knows it. It's tough to get away

from the hospital's control.

D: That's the most paranoid state-
ment I ever heard.

Obviously, the patient did not get

her discharge. When interviewed

afterward on the ward, she remarked,

"I did learn something from that

staff [interview] though. If I ever

get a chance to go again, I'll keep
my big mouth shut, and I'll lie like
hell. This time I said what I real-
ly felt, and look what happened."
I know that if I ever need help again,
I would want to move to a place with an
inmate-controlled house or program, un-
fortunately you can never be guaranteed
that you will have a choice.

To see how many of us have come to-
gether to organize and live out ex-in-
mate/client groups and houses was an
important aspect of the conference.
Also the many journals, newsletters,
and other publications that document
the movement against psychiatric oppres-
sion, and help us make contact with
one another was real exciting. To know
that it is possible to stay away from
therapists and drugs and hospitals, and
still get help from somebody, helps
keep that edge of fear a step further
away, makes the political struggle an
easier commitment for me...gets the
anger going outward—in the right di-
rection for a change.

In psychiatry there is always an as-
sumption...an understanding of who

THE NINTH ANNUAL CONFERENCE ON HUMAN
RIGHTS AND PSYCHIATRIC OPPRESSION

are acknowledged to cause, among other
things, loss of memory, brain damage and
even death. The drug manufacturers,
such as SmithKline, reap enormous profits
from the suffering of those who are gi-
ven the drugs and the exploitation of
those who produce them.

AN END TO A WAY OF THINKING WHICH

CALLS OUR ANGER "PSYCHOSIS", OUR JOY
"MANIA", OUR FEAR "PARANOIA", AND OUR
GRIEF "DEPRESSION".

AN END TO THE PSYCHIATRIC SYSTEM,
which includes state institutions, pri-
vate hospitals, community mental health
centers, and shrinks in private prac-
tice. This system is inherently coer-
cive, and helps perpetuate the racism,
sexism, exploitative oppression and oth-
er evils which are found throughout our
society.

WE DEMAND

THE RIGHT TO CONTROL OUR BODIES AND
MINDS. We want to get the shrinks off
our backs, and to define and create our
own alternate systems of support.

AN INVESTIGATION INTO ALL DEATHS OCCUR-
RING IN OR BECAUSE OF PSYCHIATRIC IN-
STITUTIONS, such as that of Susan Deli-
man.

Finally, we demand:

THE CLOSING OF FAIRHILL MENTAL HEALTH
CENTER (an Ohio institution) AND ALL
OTHER PSYCHIATRIC INSTITUTIONS.

will know what's best for you, and you
are right—Father knows. In one of the
long established examples of the sexist
assumptions in psychiatry are the Bro-
verman studies. Psychiatric clinicians
were asked to determine personality
characteristics for a healthy adult, a
healthy man, and a healthy woman. The
characteristics of a healthy adult and
a healthy man were the same, the char-
acteristics for a healthy woman were
those of a deviant/sick adult. In an
extension of this setup—it also ap-
pears that the qualities of a “healthy
woman and a mental patient" are the
same: passive and accepting, economi-
cally dependent, lacking in verbal
skills, incoherent—saying no meaning
yes.

Keta Rose wrote in BMR, April 1980,
that she was “angry and disappointed
about how little interest the women's
community has shown in women in psy-
chiatric institutions...10% of the po-
pulation gets locked up in mental hos-
pitals at some time and two thirds of
these people are women of all ages,
races and classes." And furthermore
73% of all women have been given psy-
chotropic drugs. And although it
varies from state to state, generally
more women are shocked, and are the vic-
tims of psychosurgery. Poverty being
suggested as a major corollary to
"mental illness". More women and mi-
norities fill the roles of poverty,
women earning only 59¢ (is it even less
now?) for every dollar earned by men.
The treatment of the poor has been me-
dicalized—from ye olde debtor's prison
into the state institutions of today.
Poverty viewed as a personal defect
rather than a societal problem.

The oppression of women under psychia-
try operates in imitation of the socie-
ty at large, reflecting racism, sexism,
and classism. Sexual harassment, rape,
forced sterilization, forced pregnancy,
and threats to child custody follow
each woman inside the doors of the
psychiatric system. Fear of rape, lab-
eled paranoia, even as women are stripped
or clad in hospital drag, and tied
to four corners of a bed "spread eagle"
for days. Shrinks fascinated by the
up and coming female "ailment", ano-
rexia nervosa, still continue to deter-
mine their "patients" health on their
ability to be traditionally attractive,
to apply her make-up right—to keep the
house and kids clean. Psychiatry has
also long served to help hide the real
facts of woman/child abuse and incest
in the nuclear family structure, breed-
ing only more of the same.

One task that must be taken on by
feminism as we try to clean up our own
racism and classism, is the struggle
for a clearer understanding of the de-
gree to which the structures of such
powerful systems as psychology/psychiatry
and education were built and are
maintained by a bunch of people whose

Psychiatric Assault Worldwide

self-interest definitely does not re-
flect our own, or even serve to cover
our asses.

-Nicole Hollander
/That Woman Must be on Drugs

Because it is not just the oppression
of women under psychiatry that defines
it as our enemy. I am not only angry
and disappointed, but, like Keta...
again over a year later, I am question-
ing the present feminist response to
therapy issues and the "mental health
system" in general. If the Denver com-
munity is any indication of what is
happening nationally, "feminist thera-
py" is on the rise. Rising without
stopping to consider the politics of
the psychiatric system, no thought for
women and men locked up in institutions
around the world. No discussion to
connect the struggle against sexism in
psychiatry to the Mental Patients Li-
beration Movement, to the struggle
against all facets of oppression that
are supported by the psychiatric insti-
tution. In your workplace just ima-
gine...Transactional Analysis can make
your employer into an "OK Boss", which
seems to always leave the worker in
the "NOT OK" position. Or at school,
the psychologist counseling white males
into “white-collar careers", white fe-
males into liberal arts programs, and
minority and poor males and females in-
to vocational programs—into no pro-
grams—all because after ‘psychological
testing" it was what the individual was
best suited for. I guess I need to
know how feminist therapists view the
people they are "therapizing". Does
feminist therapy deny the idea of men-
tal illness? Not that I have heard.
One local paper, the Double Standard,
presents an ever-growing list of "pro-
fessional feminist counselors". It
seems to me that a clearer analysis
of the ways that the psychiatric and
educational systems serve to mystify
the people, diverting them—us—from
getting rid of more of the real ‘sources
of our "problems"; would also lead us
to a clearer criticism of the
issues raised around “professionalism.

The issue of classism/professionalism
is a complex question for both the Fe-
minist and Mental Patients Liberation
Movements. Both movements require some
alliance with, and often the services
of "sympathetic" doctors, lawyers, and

MORE ON PAGE 17

Big Mama Rag, October, 1981 ~ Page 9