Redefining Our

For Sue: "It's kind of hard on my
mother that I'm a bus driver. She
really values education and the learn-
ing process-- a degree is proof that
you really have done something. I
don't have a degree and I remember the
day I just couldn't take school any-
more she told me that I might as well
not consider myself to be her daughter
if I didn't finish school.

"Since I work on Big Mama Rag, that
makes it a little better because she
can see the work I'm doing, and it
looks good, even if she can't show
it to her friends."

I can still remember her

School proved to be an extremely
lonely experience, putting a lot of
emotional energy into something that
wasn't meeting her needs. “I still
don't deal very well with people's
expectations of me. The most crushing
blow when I left architecture was
when the woman who had been my room-
mate and best friend said "damn, I
thought you could make it.' That has
stuck and I still remember her voice."

Judy said she started out with an
unrealistic picture of what she would
be doing because growing up the lack
of money was never an issue for her

voice when she said,

‘damn, I thought you could make it’

Vicki's experience with family ex-
pectations is quite different from
Fran's and Sue's: "When I went right
to work out of high school instead of
college, it was no big deal. In fact,
it was really expected that I would
work all along. I didn't have the
pressure from my parents to succeed
at anything in that way.

"My parents are real pleased that
I have a steady, secure job-- they see
that as being successful. Although it
is mind-rotting work, and I hate it,
it's the size of my paycheck that de-
termines my success for them. In fact,
if I were a lawyer, and not making as
much money, they wouldn't see that as
being successful, comparatively speak-
ing."

Both Connie and Judy expressed that
they were not brought up to deal real-
istically with what work would mean
to them in their lives. Connie said,
"I grew up not really knowing what it
would mean to support myself. My mot-
her got married right out of college,
had me, and was prohibited by my fath-
er to work. Everyone expected that
anything I would do would be for self-
fulfillment rather than money, always
in addition to someone else's income.
But at 13 I knew I wouldn't get mar-
ried so I started thinking about work
differently.

Connie started out by studying arch-
itecture in college, applying her lib-
eral arts background to something
"practical." But, she commented, "that
was a real set-up for failure. The
small, conservative school was not
at all supportive of women, let alone
lesbians." Women had only been allowed
admittance to the school for a year
and a half before Connie arrived and
she found she was one of the few
women in a program where women were
not taken seriously. "I ended up hav-
ing to leave the school in my fourth
year because when I ran into problems
that were a result of not having some
technical background to finish a
course, no one, particularly my in-
structor, took it serious enough to
want me to get through.”

family. "In a town of 1000 we were one
of two families that had any money
in the community; we'd go to Hawaii
on vacation while everyone else went
to Wisconsin." Judy's mother quit
her job as a teacher after she married
and by the time her fourth child was
born, had gotten a PhD. “My father
wasn't threatened by my mother's edu-
cation because he knew she would nev-
er work-- she was just a professional
student. She trained me well."

When Judy went to college she want-
ed to be a poet, but again, "money
wasn't an issue-- I thought I could
somehow support myself with poetry."
But when Judy got heavily involved
with anti-war activities on campus
she was disinherited by her parents:
"All of a sudden I found myself with-
out any money. Becoming poor so sud-
denly was such a culture shock; it
looked like I had all this wealth
behind me but I couldn't get at any
of it."

Judy then turned to working full-
time, going to school full-time as
a theatre major, but ended up in the
hospital with hepatitis which brought
her back into contact with her parents.
"My dad said he would put me through
school, but the reason was for me to
be able to make money; he said I was
to choose something and do it as
quickly as possible. So, I got a de-
gree in math, very quickly.

“Even with math, I knew I didn't
want to teach, all I wanted to do was
write math puzzles for Scientific Am-
erican; needless to say only one per-
son has ever done that for the maga-
zine, so there wasn't a demand for
that. In the meantime I got married.

I thought with getting married that
all of a sudden it would be magic—

if there's a husband and a wife, well,
then there's money and you don't have
to worry about being poor."

After getting pregnant, having a
child, working a variety of medical
jobs, as a morgue assistant in a hosp-
ital and as a lab technician, coming
out as a lesbian and deciding she
wanted to put her time into working

Own Worth

with feminism, Judy found a job that
would pay the bills without taking
too much mental time. "I went to TV
repair school and got hired by Sears
before I graduated and have been
working there a year and a half.”

School First

Connie noted that when we sat down
to discuss our experiences with work
and expectations, that all of us in-
cluded our schooling as a starting
point, and continued to make refer-
ence to the role formal education has
played in our lives, more so than the
types of jobs we have had. She's
right: we didn't learn where Vicki
went to work after graduating high
school, only that she didn't go to
college; we heard Judy say that she
worked full-time while attending
school as a theatre major-- no one
asked her at what job. There are
many more examples.

Looking at this, it really points
out how much we have internalized
that our "book learning" is somehow
connected to our work. How many times
have we heard "for a good job, get a
good education?" We have been told
in so many ways that it's part of
America that you can be anything you
want with the “proper education.”

If this is true, why does Connie,
with four years of completed college,
say about that education, "I feel
like I've been duped and am very an-
gry about that." Why does Judy, with
a degree in Mathematics, say, "If
Connie and I are bitter, it's because
we were told if we jumped over all
these hurdles, we would get this pot
of gold at the end of the rainbow.” 
Why is Fran, who after 17 years of
teaching, facing a crisis right now
about whether or not to abandon that
profession? Is it that there is no
pot of gold or, are they just not
seeing it?

So where are all the women who are
unable to find work with their college
degrees? Well, they are waiting tab-
les, typing someone else's letters,
or doing the laundering along with
the rest of us. Some are doing it
for no wages in the privacy of their
homes.

Connie said, "There is no way I
can ever use my degree for a job.
When I first started applying for
jobs after college, they paid about
$3.50 an hour, but I kept getting
told they wouldn't hire me because
I would get bored too fast because
of my degree and that I should try
for something higher. There was noth-
ing ‘higher’ for me to try for, so
it meant that I starved." It also
meant that she learned not to put
down her college experience on appli-
cations, so they couldn't charge her
with being “overqualified."

Sue pointed out how when people go
to college, the financial burden
falls on either the student, their
parents or the state. “We have to pay
for our own training for jobs that
corporations are going to use. They
need us to work for them, but they
don't have any of that financial re-
sponsibility. And more people get
trained than there are jobs available
so that when people come out of
college, so many of them can't find
jobs but the corporations can call
on them if they ever need to and the
people are already trained."

The idea that college will enable
women to get in on “the good life"
is so false. Judy and Connie would
not do it over again, but the exper-
ience did make them suspicious of
the success models our culture holds
out for us. They, along with Fran,
learned to challenge the definition
of what "the good life” really means.

Although Fran has found some rewards
from teaching, she questions whether

I thought with getting married

that

all of a sudden

there would be magic and money

It's so easy to believe in it.
When we look around and see all those
highly educated people with good pay-
ing jobs, wearing suits and ties,
leading what must be a life of com-
fort, and then look at all of those
people dressed in dresses, laundering
those suits and ties, for bad pay
in extreme discomfort, the "good
job/good education" connection is
easy to make. It seems to have work-
ed for men; why can't it work for us
too?

It is part of our history as women
that we have been excluded from edu-
cational opportunities: it used to
be that this “opportunity to be any-
thing you want" was reserved mostly
for men, with very few women going
beyond high school and with even few-
er graduating college with a degree
other than an Mrs. But, next Septem-
ber, about half the people entering
their first year of college will be
women: some will be looking for hus-
bands, others will be attending for
the sole purpose of "self-fulfillment,
but the majority will be there in
hopes that their efforts in school
will enable them to escape the drudg-
ery of the routine woman's life by
then finding a "decent" job.

How come these women are not being
told the facts: that 4 out of 5 new
job openings will not require a
college degree; that when (or if) they
graduate, more than half of them will
not be able to find work in areas re-
lated to their education; that if
they are able to find work, most of
those jobs will be characterized by
the same lack of creativity, subord-
ination, pressure to produce and will
contain all the same trappings of
"unfreedom" as jobs not requiring a
degree; that they will make less money
than men who have attended no college.

Only 15% of women in the workforce
are professional or technical workers;
this percentage includes more than
2 million teachers and 14 million
health care workers, women, who are

not “free” in their work.

More than the lure that college
is the first step we should take in
order to get a good job, another rea-
son behind our seeking educational
opportunities is the whole idea of
"respectability." The idea of working
with our minds and not our hands;
the idea of “having a career" vs.
“holding down a job"; the idea of
"better" and "worse". No matter how
much that “respectability” might
have nothing to do with the economic
situation we find ourselves in, to
work with your mind is to be impor-
tant, but to work with your hands
is to be common, as in "second-rate”.
This was made really clear to me
the other night at work: a group of
us were walking to the cafeteria for
our last break and I heard a super-
visor not so jokingly tell a foreman,
“these people are just like the
machinery here; when their hands
break down, we can always replace
them with another pair." Hands can
be replaced, but minds are unique--
Judy's parents were more proud of
her when she started graduate school
than when she settled down to be a
TV technician.

That "respectability" is also
false. Even though one in four
women in the workforce have complet-
ed more than a year of college and
find themselves in "white collar",
no sweat jobs, they are also finding
that their income and working condi-
tions are closer to women who are
sweating away in factories and on
assembly lines; they are finding
that "respectability" can ring hollow
when being told “you're fired" be-
cause the boss has just been deliver-
ed a machine which can do the
work at a faster rate. Respectable?
Maybe. Expendable? Definitely. Any
closer to becoming one of the few
women who make it to the elite of
managers and professionals who get
paid well and can tell other people
what to do? Absolutely not.

To be continued next month.