20

Spanish Feminism From Pg 6

some places, women have become a new
adversary that hopes to transform
society. The proletariat, and their
parties have become conservative long

before gaining power as a class. Their

struggle to preserve male class priv-
ileges is becoming more and more

acute. Between the proletarian parties

and the feminist movement all the

natural class contradictions which the

“dignified representatives" of the
revolutionary vanguard have tried to
cover up have now come to the surface.
Even before gaining state power, the
proletariat, the peasantry and their
revolutionary parties expose themsel-
ves before our very eyes, attacking

But it is during such an epoch that
we acquire the class consciousness
that enables us to organize ourselves
effectively. In the words of Mrs.
Pankhurst: "We have the men to thank
for having shown us the joy of strug-
gle." We know that it is the obliga-
tion of every exploited class to
organize itself and fight for its
liberation. Beyond this, we intend to
participate in the global struggle of
our people, giving a concrete alterna-
tive to each question that faces us.
In order to realize these tasks, we
must organize ourselves as a political
party--strong, coordinated, organized
and efficient, able to conduct a pro-

us openly and boycotting our struggle.
They try to deceive us and, in the
end, they betray us.

tracted struggle for feminist revo-
lution.

More On Black Hills From Pg 19

representing a culture in its own
right, and be recognized as such by

our own culture and lives will be
stepped up next. The Earth is in

the other factions involved in the the care of us all, and wounds that
coalition. Only in this way can we are suffered in one part, will event-
realize our fullest potential as a ally affect the whole.

powerful unit in struggle. I felt The purpose of the Survival Gath-

that this was understood and accept-
ed by many of the Native American
women in leadership positions at the
gathering, particularly the women of
W.A.L.R.N.

I see this in practical terms of
survival; ours is a unique and valu-
able force which cannot be tossed off
as simply “pushing ourselves out
front at the cost of focusing away
from the survival issues." We must
learn to align with each other as
oppressed peoples, and respect
each other's integrity. We are not
here to "support a cause", but to make
political alliances in the face of a
very real threat to the survival of
all of us. If the Lakota lose the
little land and culture that is left
to them, it is a very realistic
probability that the destruction of

ering that is being planned for the
Black Hills in 1980 is to see to it
that the Earth does survive, and so
her people. If any legitimate cul-
ture is repressed within the up-
coming Survival movement, the input
from that group will also suffer,
and thus weaken the movement, no
matter how good the intentions of
those of us who choose to continue
to struggle on in spite of it.
However, as I have already said;
all this does not necessarily reflect
the views of the network, which has
yet to form its position. Any and
all input from interested women is
delightfully anticipated.

In Struggle,
Carol Stern

Working On A Unified Feminist
Analysis From Pg 11

us are trying to live like we would like everyone to be able to live, we are
trying to do some of what we see ourselves as doing in a different society.

We become cynical when we fail ourselves; and the pain of that failure is of-
ten devastating, because sometimes we have seen a vision, and at times actu-
ally believed it to be here, because of the support and the relationships that
have been an outgrowth of our fight.

I know I have failed many times, but I am sincere in my effort to understand
cultural values-- philosophical, political, social, moral, economic, artistic--
which ones I still incorporate and which ones I have truly discarded. I know
I have many more to get rid of; I need to be challenged and also need to be
told when I am doing something right. I need the connection to other women
who are committed to doing the same thing, who are coming from the same moti-
vation, otherwise when I am challenged, it won't be trusted.

This is the task facing the women's movement-- the sincere effort to under-
stand cultural values. I think that the creation of a separate "women's cul-
ture" is necessary, but not as the ultimate goal, because we cannot change
society by creating one within or alongside the dominant culture. It is only
the initial step to connecting what we have observed into a plan of ac-
tion, and then to get on with what that word "revolution" means, which, at
least in a feminist context, won't happen in our lifetimes. But groundwork is
begun.

What
-The
-The
-The
-The

Revolution Requires:

organization and mobilization of most of the people.

political unity of the different groups of people.

rejection of social and cultural values that get in the way of struggle.

good use of arms and other means of warfare.

What should be our framework:

-The development of a popular "feminist"
values.

-The constant promotion of the political and social awareness of people.

-In the context of the women's movement, the practice of “feminism" (patriot-
ism), of the idea of devotion to the cause of independence and justice.

-The understanding of technology. Using science so that it is compatible with
the requirements for decent living, using it to our advantage rather than
destruction.

-The development of art, literature, etc., as the expression of popular femin-
ist cultural values, accessible to everyone.

-The constant promotion of feelings of respect and unity with human beings.

culture of all positive cultural

This discussion is not seen as the final answer on what role women and cul-
ture play in making social change. It was mostly written in order to help
clarify some questions I have, and still have, about why it seems the move-
ment is losing ground, instead of gaining momentum. The criticisms raised
do not mean that we should abandon what we are doing, but hopefully gives us
some clear areas for struggle, so that we can develop a unified feminist anal-
ysis. To end on a positive note, I want to quote Helen Levine, who said:
"Given the premise of oppression, the contemporary women's movement has done
and is doing a remarkable job of surviving; fighting back; helping women in-
dividually and collectively to locate strengths and possibilities; smashing
assumptions; and organizing networks of women, for various purposes in vari-
ous ways that men and society never dreamed of."

Probation

do so even without contemplating the
long-range ramifications of her
actions.

Police and friends of Ms. Robinson
said that during her six month marri-
age to Omar "Cherokee" Robinson, he
repeatedly attacked her, often while
he was intoxicated.

The night of the killing, Robinson
was badly bruised by her husband dur-
ing a beating that lasted more than
two hours.

After killing her husband by shoot-
ing him in the head, Ms. Robinson

Velvet Hammer

butted beyond the bounds of friend-
ship. I will not, in my anger, con-
tribute to the pessimistic tone of
the interview. A lot of things went
wrong. Other people got "conned" and
“ripped-off", and treated in a
rather inconsiderate manner. There
are other factors involved, person-
al ones, unfortunate circumstances.
I feel a sense of personal loss
in trusting friends, giving my time
and energy, being victimized in the
name of friendship. I am saddened
by the lack of objectivity in the
blame placed in other directions. I
am angered by the disparaging impli-
cations thrown at too many of the
wrong people by the neglect of
stressing the point that there were
many who gave so much. Maybe that
is just too positive and had no
place in an interview of this type.
As the owners of the Hammer, they
did receive a lot of bullshit, but
to cast themselves as the victims,
not only of others, but their own
gullibility, is an overemphasis of
the wrong sort. Linda and Linda
are not beyond the responsibility
of actions they, themselves, under-
took. And, before casting stones,
should re-evaluate their own roles
in the events of the past two years.
Retrospective reflection can have
the advantage of omitting things

Big Mama Rag Vol. 7 No. 9

From Pg 1

went to a friend's home to call pol-
ice. Officers immediately arrested
her. She was charged with first
degree murder even though an examin-
ation by a doctor showed that she
had 28 fresh bruises and numerous,
recently healed scars all over her
body.

On the day her trial was to begin,
Ms. Robinson entered into plea bar-
gaining with the district attorney's
office and agreed to plead guilty
to the lesser crime of manslaughter.

From Pg 18

which are not convenient while
stressing another point.

I am angry. And, I have little
doubt as to the impact this letter
is going to have on my relationship
with both women as friends. I have
to seriously consider the overall
picture which includes a lot of good
women who, through the interview, as
printed, deserve some emphatic words
of gratitude. I am not bitter,
though I feel ripped-off in the name
of friendship. I am not alone in
feeling this way. Several of us
have learned a sad lesson through
this. There were a lot of games
and unkept promises. And, the debts
of the past make us wiser in the
future.

But, to dwell on the negative
doesn't change the past. We've all
learned some rough lessons about
trust and friendship.

It is, however, my hope that we
can begin to move on and use those
lessons in the future to avoid hav-
ing such an unpleasant aftertaste
when we think back on what really
happened. Surely, we can try to be
more objective and less plaintive
when we reflect on the past, and
weigh the ramifications of our
candid verbalizations.

Mary Wadding

Ain't I A Woman From Pg 18

room, so it was set up so they had
glory holes, blow holes in the stalls.
They put us in this dressing room,
and it was this little cubicle with

a bench. I had a feeling what it was,
but Ronna says, “what is this" and
the woman says, "oh, these used to

be the baths." So we were in a fuck
room of the baths. So we gathered in
this room and tried to psych ourselves
up.

The audience was some drag queens
and gay men and some lesbians and
some straight men, who incidentally,
came on to some of the women who came
with us in the first five minutes.

It wasn't a very big audience.

We gave the first part of the show
and were in the dressing room to try
to pull ourselves together for the
second half, and there's a knock at
the door, so Sandy answers the door.

Here is the world's ugliest drag
queen. This guy has got this big
square head with these big jowls, and
his head alone weighs over a hundred
pounds. He's got chopsticks in his
hair and this puffy little dress.
Sandy took one look and hid behind
the door, and Ronna looked up then
buried her head and began moaning.
And Paula, Paula is really great.
Most of the time you can't shake
Paula; but she can't deal with trans-
vestites. So she was in this comatose
state. Which left me to deal with
him. "Hi, I'm Connie Country.”

He says, "Hi, I'm Big Dave, and I
run the show upstairs. I came down to
see how you girls were doing." So
here I am, just hoping, praying Ronna
is not going to cry and Paula is not
going to start having hysterics and
start screaming. "Well, yes, we do
improvisational theater and we're
from Denver and yadayadayada..." And
you never saw anyone leave a stage
so quickly as we did. We've been real
leery about where we perform since
that time.

Tea: My final question, since
everyone wants to get moving, is what
are your plans for the future? What
are your dreams for the theater group?
Do you continue more of the same kinds of skits that you're doing?

Sandy: We want to do a show. We
want to do a big production, three
rings, four lions, and a couple of
trapeze artists in November. We want to
have some support, goddamn it. We
would like to have our own show and
not have to share billing or have to
share disco music or have to share
beer and wine being clinked in the
background. We want to say "This is
‘Ain't I A Woman'" period.

Paula: And we want everybody in
tuxedos.
Sandy: That's right, especially the

penguins. We would like to continue
to educate and try to make some
points. We want to reach women who
normally wouldn't be gotten to in
bars. We want to further that.

One of our reasons for putting on
a big show is we would like to make
money on our shows to be able to
travel. We think it's real important.
Feminist theater is growing all
across the country. In swarms. On
the north side of trees. We would
really like to pass it on to

Ronna: The south side.
Jane: My sister.
Sandy: Jane really wants to perform

for her sister; Paula wants to per-
form for her mother; Ronna's fooled
because she thinks crabs really
exist. We want to start doing script-
ed material. We hope someday that
Jane will overcome her fear of im-
provisation and overcome her fear
of audiences and have some person
say, "I want to see you do the
dynamics of faith" and Jane will
say "Okay".

All four of us need practice in
pure improvisation. It's terrifying
to go out for an hour and say "tell
us what you want us to do". Well,
that's not so terrifying. Theatrically,
tell us what you want us to per-
form and we will do it, within rea-
son. We want to try and grow; we
want to be better; we want to be on
the front page of the Rocky Mountain
News—instead of the fifth page,
with our faces showing.