education

by Mary Maynard

The Rites of Fall have begun in and around
Boston. Up and down Commonwealth Aven-
ue, over by the Fens, and out along the
Charles, the familiar sight of moving vans
and packing crates is once again with us as
the class of ’82 takes up residence.

For many of the young women college
students their first major decision, and
perhaps their most important, will already
have been made. Last spring, as anxious
high school seniors they sorted out their
prospects for a college career. Finances and
S.A.T. scores aside, the major considera-
tion, real dilemma for some was: Which
shall it be — a single-sex college or a
coeducational one?

Until the last decade or two, this wasn’t a
question that concerned their male contem-
poraries. Since the founding of the first
college in this country, Harvard in 1636,
secondary education remained exclusively
for “men only” for over two hundred years.
The novel idea that women were educable
was introduced in 1837 when the first
women’s college, Mount Holyoke, was
founded. In the same year, Oberlin College
pioneered in the field of coeducation.

But the idea was slow to gain acceptance.
In 1869 the new president of Harvard,
Charles William Eliot, blatantly opposed to
coeducation — or women’s education in
general — stated in his inaugural speech,
“The difficulties involved in a common
residence of hundreds of young men and
women of immature character and marriage-
able age are very grave. The necessary
police regulations are exceedingly burden-
some.” He further added, “the world knows
next to nothing about the natural mental
capacities of the female sex. Only after
generations of civil freedom and social
equality will it be possible to obtain the data
necessary for an adequate discussion of
women’s natural tendencies, tastes, and
capabilities.” Fortunately, he lived to eat his
words.

This year, as many prestigious women’s
colleges are celebrating or about to celebrate
their centennials, two important milestones
will be recorded. For the first time in their
history, all of the “Seven Sisters” (Barnard,
Bryn Mawr, Mount Holyoke, Radcliffe, Smith,
Vassar, and Wellesley) all have women
presidents, indicating women’s strong
confidence in their own abilities. And
secondly, this is the first year that the
percentage of women in college will exceed
that of men. The growing percentage of
women in college is part of a long-term
trend; from 35% 20 years ago, and 40% 10
years ago, to 49% this year — and still
accelerating. In a recent study by John
Bishop of the University of Wisconsin’s
Institute for Research on Poverty, the
increase is the result of two major changes.
First, and most importantly, the economic
payoff for women’s college education has
grown remarkably since the end of World
War II. The other reason is better access:
Many two-year and four-year public colleges
which have opened since 1950 have made
higher education more available and less
costly.

Now that the doors to both single-sex and
coeducational colleges are swinging wider
for women and as education becomes more
egalitarian for both sexes, young women can
place their emphasis where it belongs — on
quality and choice. The debate over which
type of college environment is most suppor-
tive to women’s career aspirations —
single-sex or coed — continues to be argued.

M. Elizabeth Tidball, professor of phy-
siology at George Washington University
Medical Center has done considerable
research on the subject. She contends that
women graduates of single-sex colleges are
far more likely to be active in the
professions, thereby profiting the most from
their education. She bases her opinion on the
results of extensive, comparative research:
“An adolescent or adult will imitate a
same-sex model rather than an opposite-sex
model, especially when the learner’s own
past experience provides little guidance to
what behavior is appropriate; Both women
and men faculty tend to affirm students of
the same sex more than those of the opposite
sex and a favorable climate for women
students is one that conveys to them a sense
of being in an environment where there are
many other women seriously involved in a
variety of academic pursuits.” Her research
showed that women’s colleges produced
about 2.5 times as many achieving women as
coeducational colleges, due in part to the
greater number of faculty female role
models.

Tidball’s findings are corroborated by
Jacqueline A. Mattfeld, president of Barnard,
who states “It’s the ratio of women
faculty to women students that correlates to
higher achievement among women.” Matt-
feld believes in the theory that successful
women provide role models and that women
are becoming the “legitimate force in
women’s lives.” Jill Conway, president of
Smith College commenting on the extent to
which women are represented in the
corporate, professional, and education lead-
ership of the nation, says “Women’s college
graduates play a disproportionately larger
role.”

Marjorie Wagner, former college pres-
ident and now vice chancellor of the
California state universities and colleges
(the first woman to hold such a position) says
however, that no woman has achieved a top
position in higher education without help
from men “because universities and col-
leges are male power structures.” When a
woman achieves a position of leadership at a
university, “my experience has been that
the sex stereotyping becomes much more
intense. The higher up the ladder you go,
the more threatening you are to men.” But
women’s colleges have always been innova-
tive,” says Wagner, and “women have more
concern about individuals. They do things
differently.”

While other research has been conducted
that tends to give the edge to women’s
colleges (some of it supported by women’s
colleges themselves in an attempt to justify
their existence), an interesting question was
posed by Linda P. Lentz at the American
Education Research Association in New York
last year. She researched the question
“What type of college do career-salient
women choose — coeducational or women’s?” The results of her research concluded
that “women entering women’s colleges are
significantly more career salient than women
entering coeducational colleges. Thus, it is
possible that this factor may contribute to
the future achievement of women’s college
graduates. In other words, output may partly
reflect input.”

Coeducational colleges haven’t had to
justify their existence with research. Most
coeducational schools are state and public
supported so they can offer a double-barrelled
bargain for students; lower tuition and
costs, plus the advantage of being able to
lure the best-qualified professors and in-
structors with higher salaries and well-
equipped facilities. But are the benefits
derived equally beneficial to male and
female students? Are they egalitarian?

Historically it’s been argued that men
dominate campus activities at coed schools.

In the area of college athletics, the women’s
teams have never had the same prestige
(i.e. equipment and facilities) as men’s
teams. And worse yet, coed colleges have
been considered places where young men go
to be educated and young women go to find a
husband.

In researching some of these problems,
David Riesman and Christopher Jenks, in
The Academic Revolution said, “the dilemmas
confronting women in extracurricular
activities are of course, mainly a reflection of
larger dilemmas confronting all American
women...It could theoretically be argued
that an exclusively female college forces
girls to take charge and discover their
talents, whereas a coeducational college
encourages them to play subsidiary roles.
Some women’s college papers lend credence
to this thesis...In general, however, the girls
who run newspapers at women’s colleges
appear even less willing to be combative or
entrepreneurial than those in coeducational
colleges. They create papers that, instead of
liberating their staffs from conventional
definitions of femininity, seem to reinforce
them. On coeducational campuses on the
other hand, the newspaper is more often a
mix of masculine and feminine staff, skills,
and attitudes. Girls often rise to the top of
these papers, and despite the pseudo-profes-
sionalism and front-page posing into
which their male colleagues sometimes push
them, they usually get a broader view of
themselves and their powers than they
would on a girls’ college paper.”

Liva Baker, who recently wrote a book on
the failure of single-sex women’s colleges
says that it may not be so much male
aggressiveness (on coed campuses) but
“female passiveness” which is a prominent
feature, not only of the women’s colleges’
academic life but also of the organized
extra-curricular life, “a characteristic that
the Sisters institutionally, in their choice of
what to support, what not to support, and
how to do it, have done more to perpetrate
than alter.”

As for athletic programs, Baker notes the
increasing national interest on coed cam-
puses for sports training camps for women
athletes and intensifying competition for
skilled women athletes. But the Sisters tend
to stay out of the “business of athletic
scholarships with its indecorous unladylike
pressures and potential for corruption.” Women’s colleges are still dictated to by
middle-class gentility where “women had
been taught from childhood to hide their
aggressiveness behind their croquet mal-
lets.”

So much for the “experts.” To find out
what the students in the Boston area have to
say about coeducational colleges versus
single-sex, I asked some young women who
are about to start packing for the next
semester — and a few who recently
graduated — such questions as “What were
your reasons for choosing a co-ed school/
single-sex college?”, “Has your experience
met with your expectations?” “Have you
had both women and men teachers — any
problems or preferences?” and “Would you
make the same choice again?”

The answers were many and varied —
with the exception of the last question. Each
student said she would make the same
choice again — indicating that they had firm
reasons for choosing the type of college they
did. Also, most of the students said they
found little difference between male and
female instructors — and had no preference
as long as they taught well and were
“enthusiastic about their subjects.” Kristine
Dever, who did her undergraduate work
at Emmanuel College said, “that it was
difficult, at times, to encounter instructors
with sexist attitudes, whether from men or
women.”

Many of the young women who chose a
coed school did so, as Lois Montgomery of