theater

Of Ducks &

Perversity

by Sherry Weingart

Sexual Perversity in Chicago
and Duck Variations

by David Mamet

Charles Playhouse

Through September 17

In 1977, he was the great white hope of the
Great White Way. Broadway has hosted four
of his plays in two years. Jose Ferrer
continues the New York run of A Life in The
Theatre, and American Buffalo was widely
acclaimed for its “scathingly realistic”
dialogue. All the critics spoke of his fabulous
ear. Too bad no one talked about his not so
fabulous mind. Because when David Mamet
attempts a serious exploration of male-
female relationships, the enfant terrible is
just plain terrible.

Duck Variations, the opening one-act
play, worked nicely. This was, I suspect,
because Mamet limited his scope and didn’t
deal with women.

The play involves two older men who sit
on a park bench talking about the ducks’ life.
George and Emil engage in an amusing,
sometimes touching dialogue about the
tribulations of an unsheltered life, and the
joys of an unfettered one. As they describe
the natural and unnatural threats to duck
sovereignty, they are clearly speaking also of
their own lives. We get only brief glimpses
of what their lives are actually like. At one
point Emil says “I don’t like the park.” (It’s
been clear that he loves it.) “At home I can
wish I was at the park, but from here all I can
go is home.” Mamet doesn’t linger on these
bittersweet realizations though and the
duck discussion continues, increasingly
intense.

Mamet has used the image of wildlife
before (American Buffalo) and the specter of
extinction looms large in his work. George
and Emil are able to control their panic at the
prospects of their own deaths by always
returning to the duck’s plight. The men then
agree there is a rhyme and reason to all
natural phenomena. This belief allows them
to feel that they have not lived in vain,
although they are hard pressed to provide
proof.

The dialogue’s humor derives from the
characters’ not letting anything pass
unnoticed. It’s as though every time you said
a casual “Y’know” your listener said “Yes, I
do. As a matter of fact...”? And then you
pounce back with “You’ve got it all
wrong...” This kind of patter continues
revealing new and vital duckie tidbits all the
while.

There were a couple of disturbing things
in the production. Mamet strains at ersatz
Jewish humor and the actors speak in old
world Yiddish accents. Emil (Ted Kazanoff)
fakes his so badly though, that it under-
mined all the richness Jewish humor holds.
He was uncomfortable onstage, delivered
his lines monotonously, solely as clues for
George (Jerry Gershman) who was delight-
ful. All in all Duck Variations was pleasant,
but didn’t prepare me for what was to follow.

The problems of another kind of wildlife
preoccupy Mamet in Sexual Perversity in
Chicago. As the disco music fades, the lights
go up on a large brown tufted naugahyde
bed centerstage. We know we’re in for
sexual variations contempo.

At rise, Bernie and Danny are boozing at
a Near North Side dating bar. Bernie is
bragging to Danny of last night’s exploits
and conquest. It’s a fantastic tale (we later
learn that Bernard’s stories are mostly
fantasy) of degrading maneuvers. In flash-
back, Joan had been sitting alone and Bernie
approached, cooing clichés and coming on
strong. When Joan didn’t respond in kind,
Bernie dropped any pretense of romance and
lashed out violently. He then insulted her
with the penultimate accusation: “cock-
teaser.”

It should have stopped here. It would
have been a clean example of the underlying
misogyny of the singles’ scene, a clear
portrait of sexual manipulation and mach-
ismo. But no. Upon hearing that word, Joan
turns, contrite for the pain she must have
caused him, and apologizes. This of course
fuels his rage, and Bernie hurls the price of a
drink at Joan and storms out. She, you
guessed it, cries.

It gets worse, although most of the
audience thought it improved. Two men and
two women tango through a two month
period of supposed sexual and emotional joy

- and anguish. Bernie and Danny are co-work-
ers, Joan and Deborah roommates. Bernie and
Joan are repressed neurotics, Danny and
Deborah have a normal messed-up affair.
Mamet can’t seem to deal with anything but
simplistic dualities. Complexities, different
personality types, possibilities for alter-
natives elude him. Two by two, he has a
Noah complex.

Sexual Perversity supposedly shows that
the ark is full of holes. A satire of “modern
nervousness,” the playwright wants us to
see that normalcy is perverse. Mamet is
ambitious; there are allusions to Kafka and
Freud. Like Joseph in Kafka’s The Trial,
Danny Shapiro is an assistant clerk in a huge
bureaucracy. He tries for love. He would like
the simple pleasures of lasting love, avoid-
ing Bernie’s one (zero?) night-stand model.
Like many guys who are schooled in
impossible expectations and images of
women from bar mitzvah to bar exam, he
tries, fumbles and fails and decides Bernie’s
objectifying sexism isn’t so bad after all. At
least that way he can accept alienation as
inevitable.

So far so good, perhaps, but how did
these people get this way? Bernie’s moti-
vation is an early homosexual experience.
“Some guy reached over in this movie
theatre and grabbed my joint.” Never mind
that in this era of Bryant and Briggs such
scapegoating is particularly irresponsible.
Never mind that such armchair psycho-
analysis is harmful in its inept reduction.
The audience is justified in believing this is a
true threat and leaves feeling sympathetic to
Bernie because ohmigosh, think of the
alternative.

In an effort to be hip, Mamet demon-
strates that lesbianism is just a convenient
excuse from the responsibilities of mature
heterosexuality. When Danny first ap-
proaches Deborah in a library, she responds
to his advances by saying “I’m a lesbian.”
Ever anxious to show his contemporary
sexual politics, Danny knows just the right
rejoinder: “Is that a sexual preference or a
political position?” Later we learn that
Deborah is not gay, though she has made
love with women, during a fellatio rhapsody
she delivers in the leatherette bed. Hetero-
sexual privilege wins again.

Sexual Variations Contempo

Given then that perverse heterosexuality
is the only game in Chi-town or any other,
what are the prospects for change, for
release from this conundrum? None. Joan
and Deborah are left with their bitchiness
and neuroses. The final scene has the boys
lying on the beach cursing the “broads and
the cunts” for mercilessly “teasing” them
by walking around in swimsuits.

By drawing the characters in narrow
stereotypes and by avoiding any detail that
might show a third dimension to relation-
ships, Mamet lets the audience off the hook.
We know we’re not as abusive or trauma-
tized as the players so there’s no pressure to
seriously examine sexual roles or dynamics.

I'm quite able to deal with angst and
depression of the modern age. I wasn’t
pining for a Pollyanna ending where the
characters all sign up for consciousness
raising groups. But gee David. There is a
women’s movement. Mamet should stick to
ducks.

-

for adults

programs.

Write to:
CLARK UNIVERSITY
COPACE

950 Main Street
Worcester, Massachusetts 01610

CLARK UNIVERSITY

COPACE®*
Means

—LIFELONG LEARNING
A commitment to part-time university education

—LEARNING SUPPORT
Special programs and counseling to make it
easier for adults to return to formal education
and sometimes to convert significant life
experience into academic credits.
— BACHELOR'S DEGREE PROGRAMS ————
In General Studies
In Business Administration
— GRADUATE PROGRAMS
Master’s degrees in public administration,
public health and criminal justice
A challenging Master of Arts in Liberal Arts

*“COPACE is Clark University’s College of
Professional and Continuing Education.

COPACE

INVESTIGATE just what the COPACE program can
mean to you. Call or write for your Bulletin of courses
and information about registration and other COPACE

Registration: September 5-9. Classes begin September 11.

Call 793-7217, 793-7408 or 793-7225

Equal Times September 11, 1978

17