A Review of the Decade

Feminism In The Seventies

March 8, 1970

Mar 18, 1970

Spring 1970

1970

Apr 28, 1970

June 1970

1970

Aug 26, 1970

Fall 1970

1970

Sep 1970

Sep 1970

1970

International Women's  
Day is visibly celebra-  
ted for the first time  
in many years, corres-  
ponding to the rising  
consciousness of women.  
Events happened in 15  
major cities, uniting in  
struggle for the rights  
of women all over the  
world. Rallies, forums,  
panels, conferences,  
demonstrations and plays  

plays covered the issues of  
childcare, health and abortion rights, working condi-  

tions, education and sexuality.  
Over 100 radical women storm the editorial offices of the Ladies  

Home Journal, occupying the magazine for a full day. This action,  

led by Redstockings, New York Radical Feminists, The Feminists,  
and Media Women, leads to a special supplement in the August  
issue with articles on abortion, orgasm, birth control and the  
fashion racket.  

Radical Lesbians is founded and publishes the article, “The Woman-  
Identified Woman." It starts, "What is a lesbian? A lesbian is  
the rage of all women condensed to the point of explosion..."  

The feminist newspapers Off Our Backs, It Ain't Me Babe, and  
Ain't I a Woman start publication.  

3000 women march in New York yelling "Free Abortion on Demand  
For All Our Sisters." At the time, New York and Maryland are  
the only states with “abortion reform" bills on the dawn of be  
coming law.  

80 women hold an “ogle-in" in New York, shouting at male passer-  
byes, "Hey, baby, your fly is open," and "Look at those gorgeous  
legs!" aimed, in part, at making men understand how degrading  
their "flattery" is.  

The straight press picks up on feminism and publishes several  
theoretical and historical works including Sexual Politics,  
Sisterhood is Powerful, Voices From Women's Liberation, and  
The Dialectics of Sex.  

15,000 women march and 40,000 rally in New York City for “Wo-  
men's Strike Day," commemorating the 50th anniversary of  
woman's suffrage, with large and smaller rallies held in 40  
cities across the country, many celebrating the fact the women's  
liberation movement had arrived.  

The US Senate holds the first ERA hearings since 1956 and kills  
the amendment which had passed the House. Senator Sam Erwin  
says, "I'm trying to protect women from their foolish friends  
and from themselves."  

The women's movement faces debate over the ERA with the issue  
of class splitting women's groups across the country. Women's  

and labor groups in California pass a resolution to amend the  
ERA to extend protective labor laws to men, citing if the ERA  
passed in this form it would make it clear that women are not  
asking for a pseudo-equality that would in fact mean much great-  
er exploitation and hazards for working women.  

Anti-war activists Kathy Power and Susan Saxe go underground.  
The FBI places them on their "Most Wanted Men List."  

Women again target the Miss America Pageant (the first action  
was in 1968) as a "mockery of womanhood," stating women are  

not cattle and that destruction of this oppressive institution,  
a symbol of a deliberate campaign to denigrate women, is imper-  
ative.  

Oct 8, 1970  

Oct 13, 1970  

Oct 14, 1970  

Nov 4, 1970  

1970  

Del Martin writes in It Ain't Me Babe her "good-bye" to the  
male dominated gay movement. "...And so, like my sister, Robin  
Morgan, I have come to the conclusion that I must say "goodbye  

to all that." Goodbye to the male homophile community. "Gay is  
good," but not good enough- so long as it is limited to white  

males only..."  
Women demonstrate outside the Women's House of Detention in New  

York shouting "Free Angela" just after Angela Davis was captured  
by the FBI, after she evaded them for two months.  

A group of women claim responsibility for a bomb that exploded  
at Harvard University's Center for International Affairs. They  
issue a statement-- "The women's movement in America is growing.  
Last August we saw thousands of angry women in the streets. But  
this is not enough. We want to build a militant women's movement  
committed to the destruction of American imperialism."  

Women of the Free Future burn books, degrees, theses and sexist  

literature and documents at the University of California at Berk-  

ley to protest the irrelevance of present-day formal education  
to the needs of women and the discrimination against all women  
in the job market.  

Many cities see the formation of Women’s Anti-Rape squads, groups  
of feminists dedicated to  

“avenging rapes and all kinds of har-  

assment by male supremacists." Women begin learning karate in  
large numbers.  

Over 150 mostly Puerto Rican women occupy welfare offices in  
Chicago to demand emergency winter clothing for their child-  
ren.  

The New York Women's Strike Coalition at a march and rally for  

free abortion and childcare wear lavender armbands in support  

of Kate Millett and to show solidarity with lesbian feminists.  
Time magazine had just “lesbian-baited" Millett, and through her,  
the women's movement by stating Millett had probably “discredit-  

ed herself as a spokeswoman for her cause because she disclosed  

at a recent meeting she was bisexual."  

"The Lavender Menace" is what Betty Friedan is calling the pres-  
ence of lesbians in the women's movement. A NOW spokeswoman  
won't allow a lesbian to address a meeting of women saying, "A  
lesbian? That's a personal problem. Women aren't ready for that."  
Lesbians say that the women's movement belongs to them as much  

as any woman. Martha Shelly writes, "If hostility to men causes  
lesbianism, then it seems to me in a male dominated society,  
lesbianism is a sign of mental health..."  

1971  

The rise of Female Liberation, an organization which encompasses  
all aspects of feminist struggle, including education, CR activ-  
ities, and action around such basic issues as childcare, abortion  
and equal pay. "No woman is excluded from Female Liberation who  
is interested in the development of a strong autonomous women's  
movement capable of bringing about change on every level."  

Fifteen women in Paintsville, KY are suspended from high school  

until they submit to paddling. The spankings were ordered by the  
school after the women showed up for classes in pants during the  
near-zero weather: The school repeatedly denies women the right  

to not wear dresses.  

Women file complaints of sex discrimination in skyrocketing  
numbers.  

250 Milwaukee Welfare Rights Organization members invade one  
of the biggest downtown department stores, disrupting business  
in protest of the 40,000 children receiving welfare in the ADC  
program going without winter clothing. The women empty racks  
and shelves, selecting the clothes they want the store to do-  
nate in light of the city's freezing the $50,000 fund for child-  
ren's clothing.  

Feminist publications spring up everywhere, including “The Sec-  

ond Wave." Women's living collectives and community centers  

grow in numbers. The Women's Press Collective forms in Oakland  

and moves in with ICI A Woman's Place Bookstore.  

500 women march to Cambridge and seize a Harvard-owned two story  
warehouse. They immediately open a daycare center, establish a  
round the clock security force of 40 and send out a call for  
women to join them. They join forces with a minority community  
group that had been demanding Harvard to build low-income  
housing.  

Women challenge not only companies, but labor unions in keeping  
women down. Several dozen women in Indianapolis file suit with  
the EEOC and the NLRB charging the Bridgeport Brass Co. and the  
United Steelworkers with sex discrimination. The women said that  
Bridgeport Brass failed to recall them after layoffs while men  
with less seniority were given their reactivated jobs and the  
union failed to intercede for them.  

After ignoring International Women's Day activities in dozens  
of cities, the press reports in banner headlines the attempted  
"slap-in-the-face-attack" on Ti-Grace Atkinson by Patricia  
Buckley Boswell. Boswell was “upset” at Atkinson's speech on  
the Church given at Catholic University. The media, however,  
failed to report her words: "I, Ti-Grace Atkinson, in the name  
of all women, charge the Catholic Church with conspiracy to  
commit first-degree murder; with incitement to rape; with con-  
spiracy to corrupt the democratic process; with conspiracy to  
enslave women, forcing many of them into prostitution."  

Feminists demonstrate in New York against stepped up police  
activity against prostitutes. The police campaign of harass-  
ment and arrests announced by the police commissioner followed  
assaults on two prominent men by women alleged to be prosti-  
tutes. The demonstrators assailed police for failing to react  
with similar alerts "to clean up the streets" in the wake of  
recent rapes and murder sex crimes against women.  

Women march in mass on the Pentagon in protest of the US war  

in Indo-China. A leaflet from the march states; "We identify  
the government as an enemy of women in this country and all  
over the world. We call on women to fight to end the war, know-  
ing that war is only part of the government's policies directly  
responsible for the quality of lives women are forced to live."  

1500 women attend the first "Gay Women's Conference" in Los  
Angeles. “Lesbians have to get more political, become feminists  
and fight for women's political, social and sexual rights,"  

was the major focus. The Lesbian Mothers Union forms as a re-  
sult of daycare neglect.  

Thousands of women march and rally for the repeal of all abor-  
tion laws, the free availability of contraceptives and the end  
to forced sterilization, organized by the Women's National Abor-  
tion Action Coalition. Controversy develops within the women's  
movement over the organizing of this Nov. action, which was  
heavily controlled by the SWP, who effectively eliminated the  
fourth demand of the march-- freedom of sexual expression for  
all women.  

The US Supreme Court hears arguments from Sarah Weddington to  
repeal the Texas and Georgia abortion laws on the grounds they  
infringe on a woman's constitutional right to privacy.