10

WOMEN OF CHINA

Big Mama Rag Vol.7 No.4

HOLDING UP HALF THE SKY

Fran Day  
INTRODUCTION

Feminists around the world have followed the progress of Chinese women  
with great interest. Chinese feminism has its own way of looking at life,  
its own view of the world. This view can be understood only in terms of  
the history of Chinese women.

It is impossible to describe China uniformly. This article makes many  
generalizations; exceptions to each probably exist.

This article explores the history of Chinese women in "The Bitter Past".  
Next, the struggle for liberation is described in "Turning Over". Unsolved  
problems are presented in "The Fourth Mountain".

THE BITTER PAST

Our husbands regard us as some sort of dogs who keep the house.  
We even despise ourselves.  
--Chinese Peasant Women (Hinton:397)

On 14 November 1919 Miss Chao Wu-chieh of Nanyung Street, Changsha,  
took out a dagger, and, as she was being raised in the bridal chair,  
slit her throat... The event symbolized at once the centuries of hope-  
less female subordination--the extreme act of suicide was the only  
way Miss Chao could avoid her arranged marriage--and the critical  
forces which were being brought to bear on traditional Chinese  
society.

(Rowbotham: 173)

The woman followed the man. In youth she followed her father and  
brother. Married, she obeyed her husband, and after the husband's  
death, she obeyed her son.

--The Book of Rites

How sad it is to be a woman!  
Nothing on earth is held so cheap.

No one is glad when a girl is born:  
By her the family sets no store.  
--Fu Hsuan (Hinton: 157)

Chinese women seldom speak of the past; they speak instead of the  
"bitter past". (Sidel:3) There may be nowhere in the world where the past  
was as bitter for women as in China. (Gordon:2) In all the social classes,  
whether urban or rural, females were clearly a subordinate group.

Childhood: In a poor family, the birth of a daughter was often considered  
such a curse that she was killed or sold. Girls were kidnapped or sold  
into prostitution; child streetwalkers were not uncommon in the streets.  
Girls had no position in their own homes and were raised only to become  
obedient wives and daughters-in-law. They were often not even named, but  
assigned a number or called such things as "Little Mistake" or “one who will  
make way for a brother". When they married they were frequently called  
"married to so and so". Marriages were arranged by both sets of parents  
when the girls were very young. These child brides became the property of  
their husbands' families where they served as domestic servants.

photo credit lost

Marriage: Marriage epitomized female degradation and domination. Wives  
were often beaten by their husbands and mothers-in-law.

The mother-in-law, showing the effects of a hard life, was little more  
than a living corpse, so Gold Flower did not suffer much from that  
quarter as did most Chinese brides. But her husband made up for this  
lack, treating her worse than a dozen mothers-in-law. She had to wait  
on him, day and night. When he went to sleep she had to take off his  
shoes and clothing; in the morning, she had to put them on again.  
She had to light his cigarettes, pour his water, hand him the cup  
with both hands and a subservient smile on her face. He struck her  
daily as a matter of course and beat her unmercifully if she did not  
obey his commands on the instant.

(Hinton: 12)

Security and status increase with age; the tradition of tyrannous mothers-  
in-law taking revenge upon the younger woman perpetuated the system. Mar-  
riage seldom involved love; female sexuality was ignored. Women were not  
permitted to divorce their husbands--they were married for life. Remarriage  
of widows was forbidden. However, the man could divorce his wife. Concu-  
bines, parallel wives, secondary wives, prostitutes and/or female slaves  
were common in the upper classes.

Women prepared the food for men and later ate the left-overs. Thus,  
their diets were inferior and often inadequate. Insufficient clothing left  
them cold in the winter. Heavy domestic labor and/or field work and contin-  
uous childbearing added to the burden of peasant women.

Footbinding: "A small foot and an ocean of tears." (Old proverb) Women  
of the gentry were kept secluded, "protected" from public exposure. To show  
that the woman was a useless ornament, her feet were bound to prevent them  
from growing to be more than two to four inches long.

The feet of young girls were bound after first being soaked in hot  
water, then massaged; the four toes were flexed and pressed over the  
sole of the foot and bandaged with a cloth two inches wide and ten  
feet long.

(Sidel:12)

As the child grew, the normal growth of her foot was checked by these  
cloth bands, which forced her bones to break and reset in a clenched  
position. It was excruciatingly painful. I saw many old women who  
had had their feet bound. They used canes and hobbled with tiny,  
jerking steps. It is revealing to consider how thorough must have  
been the conditioning of mothers that made them willing to inflict  
that upon their daughters.

(Gordon: 2)

The bound foot became the embodiment of the oppression, the subordinate  
role of Chinese women and concurrently, a mark of femininity and beauty.  
Peasant women's feet were not bound because they had to work in the fields  
in the south and in heavy domestic labor in the north.

HERESIES

(X-ray of a woman's foot showing the damage of footbinding)

Rights: The women of China were not recognized as independent entities  
under the law. They had no property rights; they could neither own nor in-  
herit land. Instead, property was divided equally among the sons only. The  
only occupations open to women were those related to their sex--wife, mother,  
daughter-in-law, slave, prostitute, concubine, marriage matchmaker and mid-  
wife. Outside the home, women had no work rights and their earnings were  
given directly to the male head of the family.

Education: The education of women consisted of learning about proper  
household duties and/or field work. Illiteracy was extremely high; women  
were systematically denied an education. In addition, they had no opportu-  
nity to develop any skills or to learn about the world outside their homes.

Conclusions: Peasants or gentry, urban or rural, mindless aesthetic orn-  
aments or domestic/field slaves--women had little choice. Illiterate, phys-  
ically handicapped, secluded, economically dependent, their only future de-  
pended upon their ability to provide their husbands with sons. Escape  
from an intolerable existence was possible only through fantasy, religion,  
sexual intrigue or suicide. “It is no surprise that many women chose suicide;  
in 1955, of 351 reported cases of suicide caused by family conflict, 72  
were women. (Sidel: 12)

Continued: on the next page.