1]

Artificial Insemination — Do It Yourself

When Corrine and Joyce contacted
the few clinics where artificial in-
semination (A.I.) is offered, they
were told that only married (hetero-
sexual) women were accepted as pati-
ents. Furthermore, they could not af-
ford the doctor's initial $700 fee,
plus $25 for each sperm insertion.

Beth is a lesbian who helped found
a cooperative daycare center in the
Midwest. But adoption attorneys said
they couldn't help her, considering
her single status, her alternative
job, and of course her gayness.

The solution both Beth and Joyce
found was self-induced artificial
insemination.

The Sperm Source

Several lesbians report their big-
gest difficulty in arranging their
pregnancy was locating a suitable
sperm donor. Before making the selec-
tion, they suggest several considers-
tions to keep in mind:

+ Learn the health of the donor. At
least his general health must be good,
and his family should be free of dia-
betes or other diseases for which you
know you carry a susceptibility.

“Decide whether or not you want to
know his identity, or to reveal yours
to him. There are positive arguments
on both sides. Arranging security for
your identities is difficult but not
impossible. For instance, a friend
could ask another friend unknown to
you, to secure a donor unknown to the
first friend. Probably no chain is
completely secure, but a reasonable
amount of anonymity can be obtained.

* As you will learn in the procedure
section, the length of time required
to deliver the semen may influence
the practicality of many go-betweens.
Also, several insemination attempts
may be necessary before conception
occurs.

- Consider inseminating yourself
with semen from several different do-
nors each time you are fertile. This
way paternity will be even more ob-
scured.

“If you decide against going through
friends to locate a donor, or if that
method fails, consider contacting men
through gay organizations or publica-
tions. Going to another town or city
may be a hassle, but it's also a fur-
ther provision for anonymity. Remem-
ber, you need not use your own name
and could borrow a friend's address
for the purpose.

« Being a donor, whether acquainted
with the woman being inseminated or
not, can be a positive experience for
the man/men, especially with the sup-
port of a friend or lover. Gay males
are just beginning to organize ways
to make their semen available for A.I.
so be prepared to offer suggestions
to get your needs filled.

Al,

Women report that preparations for
insemination should begin as soon as
you decide on pregnancy, even if you
have not located a donor. Determining
your fertile days requires several
months. Also, you and your support
group will want to study and practice
so the actual insemination will be
handled as efficiently as possible.

To start with, the better you know
your own body, the more accurately you
can know your fertility cycle and the
more relaxed you'll be for the actual
insemination. Many women report that
anxiety decreases fertility, so being
at ease may be doubly helpful. Proba-
bly the best way to learn about your
body is in a Self Help group, offered
at most women's clinics. There you
will learn not only about general fe-
male anatomy, but also how to examine
your own vagina and cervix with a plas-
tic speculum, mirror and lamp. This
way you will learn to recognize what
is normal for you. Examining yourself
at home for a month or two will help
you be able to read the color and con-
dition of your cervix. When you are
about to ovulate, the cervical mucus
changes in appearance and consistency:

Procedure

It is called “fertile mucus."

Normally, the mucus produced in the
cervical tract is viscous and matted.
If a small amount is held between
thumb and forefinger and pressed be-
tween them, and then the fingers are
separated, no strand forms between
the fingers. During ovulation, how-
ever, there is a distinct change in
the tack of the mucus: it stretches
easily to form strands.

Another useful way to map out indi-
vidual fertility cycles is to keep a
basal temperature chart. Before ovu-
lation takes place, the basal temper-
ature is below 98.0° for most women.
For some it will be below 97°. Immedi-
ately before the egg is released, the
temperature falls distinctly, though
just a little. It then sharply rises,
as the egg is released from the Gra-
afian Follicle, the small sac in
which it has ripened. Some women actu-
ally record slight fevers during this
time. When the time of fertility has
passed, the temperature will return
to “normal” or 98.6.

Basal temperature is taken orally,
rectally or sometimes vaginally, as
soon as you awaken in the morning -
before eating, drinking, smoking or
changing position.

There are often other signs of ovu-
lation too. Some women have a deep
pain or twinge on one side at ovula-
tion. (This should be recorded on the
chart.) Others may pass a few drops
of blood.

Insemination can begin two days be-
fore ovulation and be done as often
as you like for three or four days.
There are many myths around when and
how to inseminate to determine the
gender of the child. DON’T COUNT ON
ANY OF THEM!

The man or men who have agreed to be
your donors should ejaculate into a
small, clean container. It need not
be sterile, just very clean. A small
jar works well, as there will not be
a large amount of semen. Tightly cap
it immediately, as air will kill the
sperm.

When making arrangements with the
donors, remember that two hours is
the maximum sperm will live. A half
hour between ejaculation and insemin-
ation would be good, and the less time
the better. In one case, the men were
in the next room, cutting the interval
to three minutes. In another case, a
driver picked up the container from
the donors and quickly delivered it
across town. If unforeseen delays pre-
vent you from making the half hour
limit, you may as well complete the
procedure. The sperm may die, but it
cannot be genetically damaged by the
wait.

Now That You're Ready

Although you can do it yourself, it
helps to have friends assist with the
insemination.

To insert the semen into the vagina,
you may use a syringe, dropper, baster
or the like. As soon as the semen con-
tacts the fertile mucus, the sperm
will swim through the hole in the
cervix, called the os, into the uterus
where fertilization occurs.

Women have used several different
methods for the insemination. Techni-
ques found to be helpful include:

* Lie with your hips supported by a
pillow. Thus the semen will pool a-
round the cervix, and not be so likely
to drip out.

* If you do not use a speculum, in-
sert the syringe or dropper comforta-
bly into your vagina, as you would
a tampon. Do not press the syringe
against the os; this may insert air
into the uterus. Just insert a ways
and squeeze the bulb to eject the semen
and withdraw the instrument.

- If you use a speculum, you may
squirt the semen at the top of the
cervix, allowing it to drip over the
os.

(NOTE: Be sure NOT to place the end
of the tube into the cervical opening
(os) because of the danger of intro-
ducing air into the uterus. The air
could enter the bloodstream through
a uterine blood vessel, causing an air
embolism. Though unlikely, caution is
advised because an air embolism may
cause death.)

After the semen is deposited, close
the speculum halfway, and pull it part
or all of the way out to maintain the
semen pool around the cervix.

If a woman has used a diaphragm and
it still fits, she can use a home-made
cap method. The dose of semen is placed
on the inner (up) side of the diaphragm
and the diaphragm is left in place for
eight to ten hours or overnight.

None of these methods is better than
another. You should use whichever
method you and your friends can perform
well and seems to you to be most effec-
tive.

MORE ON PAGE 14

Abortion Rights Movement Organizing

Kris Klemann and Beverly Sorensen

Marcia Kerwit and Gail Goldstein, two
women from the Abortion Rights Move-
ment of Women's Liberation (ARM) came
to Denver to speak on March 24.

ARM is a new organization,
about two months old. It started be-
cause women working in women's health
centers and other feminists saw that
the rights to abortion that women in
the U.S. had won were being taken
away. The erosion of abortion rights
began in 1977 with the Hyde Amendment,
which provided government-funded ab-
ortions only in cases of rape, incest
or very limited medical circumstances.
"Right now early abortion is available
to women who can pay and to women re-
ceiving Medicare in seven states...
And the withdrawal of public funds for
abortions for economically disadvantaged
women has occurred at the same time
that funds for sterilizing poor
women are being increased." Marcia and
Gail say that control of our lives can
only come with control of our bodies,
and our reproductive rights and our
right to abortion is essential to this.

The Abortion Rights Movement's pur-
pose is to “secure abortion rights for
all women, promote greater access to
abortion, promote safe birth control
methods for women and to oppose harm-
ful birth control methods, dangerous
birth practices, experimentation and
forced sterilization." But they say
lobbying isn't enough—women must pro-
test, demand funding be reinstated
for abortion, expose hospitals who
refuse to provide abortion care, en-
courage doctors to use safer methods
of abortion, decrease women's depend-
ence on the medical institution and
develop self-help groups.

Anti-abortion forces are organized
and working to end the abortion rights
we now have. (For example, the group
PEACE—People Expressing Active Concern
for Everyone—claiming responsibility
for bombing abortion clinics.) To
oppose this, the women's movement needs
a grassroots movement which will work
against these forces. Even if you will
never need or want an abortion your-
self, these women say that abortion is
the first step for women to take con-
trol over their own bodies.

Both Gail and Marcia have worked at
the L.A. Women's Health Clinic. The
clinic opened during the surge of the
women's movement in the late 60s. Its
purpose is to make health care acces-
sible to women, and to give women in-
formation about how they can care for
their own bodies—such as using self-
help or menstrual extraction. (NE is
a procedure developed by the LA Self
Help Clinic in 1971. This process
gently removes the contents of the
uterus by suction. It isn't a medical
procedure performed by a physician,
and the instrument used to do it, a
Del-Em, can be made from materials
most women have access to. It's a home
health care procedure done by a group
with the woman herself in control.)
Women's health clinics and self-help
groups across the country have taken
a role in developing more information
on women's health as well as making
the medical profession and doctors
more responsible to women’s health
needs.

ARM's original funding comes from
women's health clinic workers who are
donating a percentage of their own low
salaries to help fund this national
organization based in Washington, D.C.,

and women from women's health clinics
plus other women are running the nat-
ional office with donated time of from
a few weeks to a few months.

Projects that ARM has in the making
are, one, a second trimester abortion
clinic in Washington, D.C. (since later
abortions are becoming so difficult to
get even if you can pay) and a sym-
posium on second trimester abortions
in Los Angeles sometime in May. Contin-
uing education credits will be avail-
able for doctors and possibly also for
nurses for attending the symposium.
Other topics ARM wants to cover are
"how to start a hospital advocacy
program," and “how to start a women's
health clinic."

If you are interested in joining ARM,
want to start a local chapter or want
any kind of information about the group
or the resources they have available,
you can call ARM (ask the operator for
their toll-free # in Washington) or
write them at the Abortion Rights Movem-
ent of Women's Liberation, 1212 Penns-
ylvania Ave., Washington, D.C. 20003.
They have a slide show about their
organization and are very willing to
come for speaking engagements to share
more specific information in women's
health and abortion-related topics.