Feminists...

"The Woman Identified Woman" states the following:

"As long as women's liberation tries to free women without facing the basic
heterosexual structure that binds us in one-to-one relationships with our
oppressors, tremendous energies will continue to flow into trying to
straighten up each particular relationship with a man... It is the primacy
of women relating to women, of women creating a new consciousness of and
with each other, which is at the heart of women's liberation, and the
basis for the cultural revolution... We see ourselves as prime, find our
centers inside ourselves. We feel a realness, feel at last we are coinciding
with ourselves. With that real self, with that consciousness, we begin a
revolution to end the imposition of all coercive identifications..."

How do you explain your co-opting the term "woman identified woman"? Do you
think it is impossible for lesbians to share sexuality with each other? You
present lesbianism either as a frightening apolitical proposition when there is
sexuality or, as a non-frightening political proposition (by men's terms) when
there is no sexuality. And what do you mean by “emotionally celibate"?

I expect you to make a clear political statement on lesbianism in the feminist
press. Again, I expect you to apologize to lesbians for your public anti-
lesbian stance.

Finally, why did you discuss lesbianism with Lois Gould, a heterosexually
defined woman, who you knew would, and indeed did, pass information on to men
from her own - heterosexual - point of view?

Lesbian Separatism

It is clear from the tone of the article that the Times did not want you for
your seriousness as a women's publishing house, but rather for the ‘sensationalist' aspects of your lives: (1) their seeing you as professional feminists;
(2) your alleged "separatist" lifestyle; and (3) your voyeurism towards lesbians
from your closet vantage point.

It is common political knowledge that this society in general, and the Times
in particular, are hostile to both women - especially lesbians - and the WLM and
also that the establishment media has a track record of twisting our (feminists')
words. Furthermore, as you are feminists, it is expected that you have an
awareness that lesbian separatism is, and has been, a highly controversial
issue within the WLM.

In light of all the above, why did you give the Times your words on the particular
issue of lesbian separatism which you could have expected they would use
as ammunition against the WLM - particularly against lesbian separatist ideology? 
How do you explain passing for "(lesbian) separatists" while putting down lesbian separatism?

Daughters Inc. is not necessarily typical, either in its politics or in
the "separatist" lifestyle of its members...

(June Arnold and Parke Bowman) say the stories (about "separatist" women's
bookstores not allowing men inside) are exaggerated, but everyone knows
there are still extremists at large in the feminist press, and elsewhere.

"The extremists are a small minority," June says... "most of us hate to see
women fighting one another over this point. We think each woman has the
right to decide how separate she wants to be, and from whom - and for how
long."

The phrase: "at large" has traditionally meant (at least in the United States)
fugitives from justice who have not yet been, but should be, caught and punished
for an act/acts against society. It is shocking that you take this position. If
lesbian separatists are "the extremists," then you must be the acceptable feminists. 
Unfortunately, you seem to earn your acceptance, in part, by endorsing society's
fear of women who have no illusions about men's capacity for destruction - men's
proven ability to wantonly destroy all that is life-giving.

Furthermore, you soothe men's fears by presenting us as a "small minority."
The implication of your quote is: If the “extremists are a small minority,"
and if "most of us (feminists) hate to see women fighting one another over this
point," then "the extremists" like to see women fighting one another over this
point - as they do not share majority opinion.

Is this implication your opinion? Regardless of your answer, myself and other
lesbian separatists are angered that you promote this dangerous lie as truth in
a major establishment newspaper and thereby assist men in once again dividing
women.

Charlotte, in Lois Gould's description of why you no longer consider yourself
a separatist, you seem to have “separatism” confused with segregation:

Charlotte has been to extreme separatism and back. She thinks that women
must now begin to commute, in ever-shortening cycles, between separatism
and the country's political and social centers - where other women are
already working to make changes from within.

This statement gives the impression that lesbian separatism (as opposed to
other sectors of feminist thought) has an exceptionally noteworthy proportion
of escapists. This is not true; lesbian separatism is intrinsically a politics
of activism. Escapism, unfortunately, permeates the entire feminist spectrum;
as a matter of fact, anything remotely pro-woman is now considered to be feminist
- i.e., political. I, under protest, am forced to acknowledge this regrettable situation.

Do you think that it is possible for any lesbian separatists other than a few
very privileged women, to not be involved in the commuting process that you describe? 
Are you aware that your statement makes invisible the Third World and lower-class women
who have always been forced to commute between the real world and the preferred world
of women?

In addition, how do you explain your political shift to one which advocates
"working from within"? What accounts for your conversion? How do you politically
justify this? Are you aware that your statement feeds into the establishment's taming
of the movement? What political and social centers do you have in mind?

Why do the four of you not embrace lesbian separatist ideology as your own?

Finally, who was responsible for the section in the Times article glibly called
"A Sampling of Separatist Sentiments"? Who decided that the following women
would represent separatism: Z. Budapest, Charlotte Bunch, Frances Hornstein,
Linda Phelps, Coletta Reid, Ann-Marie Troger, and Lucia Valeska? How was
this decision made? What were the criteria?

Exposing the “Weaknesses” of Women
Any discussion of our conditioned weaknesses should happen with trusted peers.
Only under these conditions can we realistically hope that our confidences won't
boomerang.

The following three statements publicly demoralize women. Charlotte, the first
is attributed to you by Lois Gould; the second appears to have been said by you;
the third is your direct quote.

ON WOMEN AND LEADERSHIP
As Charlotte herself admits, women are still afraid to lead, afraid to let
each other lead, afraid to be taken - or to take themselves seriously.

ON WOMEN AND SUCCESS
Part of what holds them back (Quest staff) - besides lack of money - is the
same emotional stumbling-block that hampers so many women's ambitions; fear,
not of failure but of success, fear of acquiring the power to make one's
own dreams come true, instead of waiting for a prince, or even an ordinary
man, to do it.

ON WOMEN AND FEMINISM
"Feminism still can't promise a woman anything, not even rhetoric."

Charlotte, these statements present an image of us as passive followers with an
investment in failure, and needing guarantees before we are motivated to action.
This may be the image of women, but it is not a true portrayal of how women are
or ever have been.

It is shocking that a feminist like yourself, not only falls for the male-defined
image of women, but also perpetuates this dangerous lie by disseminating it in public.

And June, why did you volunteer the following?

"we have trouble with the daughters (as opposed to the sons) too." Some of
them are hopelessly attracted to macho men, she (June Arnold) explains, and
to male brutality and violence... "I think they're trying...to get in touch
with the violence within themselves. We're still afraid of that. We have
to begin to see it as energy, as a great untapped force. Power and eroticism.
Think of the passion little girls have for their horses. We should never take
away their horses."

The way in which this statement appears is dangerous. You seem to condone women
acting on any lingering, conditioned attraction to male brutality and violence.
Furthermore, you imply this situation is not just an extremely unfortunate result
of conditioning. "Hopelessly" implies that this attraction is rooted in women's
physiology - with masochism being an inborn trait and not a political casualty. Not
only is your statement in total contradiction with pioneer women analysts such as
Karen Horney and Clara Fromm Reichmann, who devoted their respective careers to
fighting this patriarchal notion, your statement ignores economic reality. Due to
economic reasons most women stay in violent circumstances as they have no other
choice. Most women are too busy dealing with the inevitable violence of their
everyday lives to actively seek it out.

As your statement stands it is misleading because it leaves out any political
analysis. I do not believe that any analysis of women's sexuality - physiological or
political - should appear in The New York Times. Therefore, I am not suggesting
that you should have expounded further on the subject. Rather, I am stating that,
in this article, you should not have said even one word about women's sexuality -
specifically as it may relate to brutality and violence.

You added insult to injury by using the illustration of "horses" - horse riding
being known as the sport of kings - to explain your thoughts on power and eroticism
in women. I am sure you are aware that the majority of women never had horses.
Your use of "horses" is an example of the class privilege within the United States
women's movement, which already causes pain to poor and working-class women -
especially in urban areas where most women live today.

Contrastingly, space was given, in the Times, to describing male children as
casualties of this painful transition period - a period where "feminist mothers
are concentrating on themselves and their daughters, the coming generation of free
women."

I (Lois Gould) say it is very hard to raise a boy child to fight against his
world - to renounce masculine power and privileges, only to be looked at as an
oddball, or worse, by his peers.

June says there is no choice. "You have to...teach him how to survive by his
wits, his brains. He'll learn to outsmart and outrun the others. And in the
end, he'll be the one who survives. In the feminist world that's to come, he'll
marry the best woman."

It is politically irrelevant to talk about males - no matter what age - undergoing
minimal discomfort as "casualties" of feminism, after the agony that women have
gone through in the last several thousands of years - and are still going through as
casualties of patriarchy.

Moreover, it is wrong to spread the belief that there are “exceptions” to the
rule that all men are sexist. There are no exceptions!

And June, do you really believe that there are better and worse women? If so,
what is this based on? Why would a male have any right to such a "best woman"?

Finally, why are the sons spoken of sympathetically and highly - one being described
as a survivor, while the daughters are implied to be masochists? How do you
explain presenting feminism as benefiting the sons, while the daughters remain —
hopeless cases?

Are “Feminist-Businesses” Feminist?

Since feminism is expressly dedicated to the interests of women, and since all
businesses are, at the very least, dedicated to the interests of those who are hostile
to women, it is politically false to merge these opposing ideologies in any
one concept - i.e., feminist-business.

Daughters Inc. considers itself and similar operations to be feminist-businesses.
Unfortunately, this concept causes unnecessary friction - and confusion - within the
WLM because this idea is based on a shaky foundation: (1) that political progress
is significantly tied to the establishment of "feminist-businesses" - your alleged
“critical next stage of feminism"; and (2) that feminists generally have the means
with which to start such enterprises.

Because your words carry disproportionately heavy weight within the movement,
and because you collectively have an extensive amount of privilege as compared to
any average woman, or grassroots feminist - this is an especially regrettable situation.

In an economy such as our capitalist economy, the political interests of the
minority in power are maintained by all businesses. That is the way our economy
works. For this reason, it is misguided to believe (and/or promote as political
strategy) the erroneous concept that business structures - either as individual
structures or as a network - can be sufficiently developed to be able to function
outside the economy, thereby serving only the political interests of their owners.
Therefore, no business can be considered feminist, even when such a business is
owned or operated by feminists.

One exception is when a business functions as a front, and thus obscures its
real objective which is political work. (Such a front, however, would have to be

MORE ON PAGE 12