A Decade of Feminism

13

Is the Movement Facing an Identity Crisis?

What do you see as the primary issues facing the women's Liberation movement? What have they been the past ten years? In what ways, and for what reasons, has the focus changed? Or has it?

Big Mama Rag did not want the '70s to pass without comment from women who have been actively involved in the building of this feminist movement as to the changes women's Liberation has undergone in ten years' time. We asked Eileen Bresnahan, Pandoura Carpenter, Kathy Riley, Janet Serge, and Kate Sharp, five activists who have years of combined experience as unpaid workers for the cause of feminism, to discuss the questions asked above. Given our space limitations, what follows is a very edited version of their discussion.

Transcribed and edited by Vicki Piotter

Janet: One of the big differences between the women's movement now and ten years ago is back then just about every woman was straight. Historically there was a lesbian culture, but feminist culture came from women working with the New Left who were basically heterosexual, white, middle class, and attending universities. White women who had worked in the anti-war movement wrote a lot of the first position papers and took a lot of that rhetoric of liberation from the black power movement and civil rights movement. Now, ten years later, a tremendous amount of women are lesbians and we have a whole range of ideologies from someone who could be a very conservative Republican might say she's a feminist because she supports the ERA to your radical/communist/anarchist/socialist and everything in between all called feminism.

Where Did the Outrage Go?

Eileen: We really suffer from lack of definition. To be a "feminist" doesn't mean a whole hell of a lot anymore. Dottie Lamm (wife of Colorado governor Dick Lamm) is a feminist. The media has taken the word and applied it to so many people that women in the movement would not apply it to that it has become a meaningless term. And we are responsible for that, because in not deciding "who we are," the media has decided that for us. There is a need for definition now—we should not be trying to encompass everybody in the “warm blanket of sisterhood.”

Kathy: Do you see that in the beginnings we had more definition of feminism and that slowly it's been eroded?

Eileen: I think that we had less people.

Pandoura: We do have more women now. Those women who applied the word feminist to themselves back then were a real select, limited group. I will grant that the meaning of feminism has been greatly diffused from what it once meant, but regardless of what the media says, women who see themselves as working for the greater good of women are much larger in number.

Eileen: I don't think feminism to the people in the mainstream means working for the greater good of women; for a lot of people feminism means working for the greater good of myself, who is a woman.

Pandoura: Granted, there are those, but there are still women who are working in groups, for groups of women, that was never happening before. Look at the women in welfare rights working for welfare mothers—groups we never saw before. Here in Denver, the Chicanas working in groups for better health care and better housing, women who have decided "we count, we have to do it for ourselves.” We have to see that in terms of feminism, in terms of women working to better their own lives. What's happening now is much, much different than what was happening even six years ago, and a lot of it is economic.

Janet: I was talking to Pandoura about the first feminist bookstore in Denver in 1972. It had about 50 titles, was hidden in a small back alley, and only a very few young, white women still coming basically out of the anti-war movement, knew of its existence. Now the bookstore is located on main street, has 1500 titles, with all kinds of women coming in. Those 1500 titles represent 1500 different ideas of what feminism means and show how the analysis and ideology have grown, whether we agree with what those 1500 titles say or not. The diversity is a difference. The movement grew so fast when women started asking all the ways we are oppressed.

Kate: The growth is really alarming. There doesn't seem to be outrage anymore around "bad politics." If a woman dared to espouse some degree of feminism without espousing anti-capitalism, women were outraged.

Eileen: In the women's movement we have been so wishy-washy about making definitions; we have been unwilling to say that “this is correct thought, and this is incorrect thought," that "this is going to get us where we want to go and this is going to oppress us." When you look at things like drug counseling or religious groups, they take people from basically alienated positions, give them some criteria for belonging, which for drug programs is "be free of drugs," and then give them all this support in their pursuit of that goal. That's what we need to do in the women's movement—decide where our criteria are, and then when women come in, support them and give them something that makes them want to continue identifying as feminists so we can build some kind of group movement. Where we are at right now is being a feminist is just as alienating as not being a feminist.

Janet: The feminist movement has never had a Party, where "correct and incorrect thought" comes from, so we never had internal discipline with an ideology everybody agreed on that could be enforced. I came into the movement through Consciousness Raising—there were no formal or informal initiation rites on how to be a feminist. The movement didn't develop with the aid of a "feminist primer."

Kathy: One of the things I've been thinking about the change over the last few years is that when communities were smaller, there were fewer women and groups to be accountable to. Now I see the feminist community as more “communities," that we all build our separate support groups reinforcing our own ideologies and that we are not accountable to each other as groups anymore. We have decentralized in terms of who we listen to, who we give credibility to, and that works against building the kinds of definitions we've been talking about.

Selling Out Women’s Projects

Janet: Feminism has grown; it has gotten diluted but it has also covered more issues that were never thought of in 1970. In 1970, I never thought of battered women in the context of a feminist issue, even though my mother was one. Battered women weren't in the first feminist literature. It's happened over time. Now there are shelters, even though they aren't perfect. At least the issue has come onto the public consciousness.

Kate: But we've lost the economic analysis around battered women. Initially we would say, "We have to make revolution here because these women cannot economically survive outside of these fucked-up marriages. They can't make enough money to support themselves and their kids." Now we're saying, “Let's put them in these homes," as if that really answers the problem. Where's our economic analysis?

Janet: That economic analysis was lost when the state took over. The state can't say "we need revolution."

Eileen: But the way the state takes over is to reach women who are professional feminists. The state shows willingness to work with feminist groups and then the women start writing grants and because they've got the professional credentials, they get the grant money and have created nice little jobs for themselves directing battered women shelters. The women who actually started the project, the feminists who don't have the university credentials, are left sitting there wondering what happened. And it happens over and over again with grassroots women's projects. They get sold out by professional women.

Janet: I see feminism becoming even more diverse in the ‘80s. Women went through a period of isolating off and tried to think about what the world would be like without male thought. That was necessary, but now it's obvious we can't withdraw from the system. We're thrusting outwards into all kinds of issues and we'd better begin to define what a feminist issue is—I see it as every old woman who can't pay her heating bill, as every person who's denied an education because of race. The issues are going to be economics—for every man who suffers as inflation rises, 14 women and minorities suffer—it's going to be transportation, what do we do about the oil crisis, things like solar energy. We are saying "it's not a feminist way to have nuclear power." Feminism is going to be with broader people, many more people than we ever imagined.

Kathy: Ten years ago I was straight, having an abortion and reproductive rights issues were very much my focus. I worked with a collective women's health center. Women are still working on that issue of reproductive rights, but now, as I've grown, more issues are important to me like energy and the environment which I incorporate under a feminist label. Do I need to find a feminist analysis of environmental issues, or is it enough to say I feel strongly about this issue and want to do something about it, as much as I maybe once did about abortion because it touched my life much more closely once?

Kate: Sometimes you might find yourself concerned with something not entirely a feminist issue and it's not bad to involve yourself in that for a while. It would be important to do it in the context of an all-women's group and then join in a coalition, but you have to think to yourself, "I'm not going to get stuck here."

A Lesbian Does Not a Feminist Make

Eileen: I think abortion is still one of the prime continuing women's issues because the issue of abortion isn't just abortion, it's who controls our bodies—do we control them or does the state control them? Is it the state's right to say that women are primarily breeders, or is it our right to decide when, where, and how we will have children? It's an issue that not only has gotten primacy from straight women, but also from lesbians, because of the question around control. It was the issue of the decade and will be one of the issues of the eighties. The focus has changed where before women were taking to the streets and everyone was speaking out and it was really felt that every woman was affected by this issue. Now it's not even that women have the right to control our bodies, but that some women have the right to choose. There's a great internal movement backlash against the women in the street by the other women, by the middle-class women around not only abortion, but also the ERA. The one group of women said, “You radical women are alienating the legislators. Stay away from the legislators and let us leave roses and tea cakes on their desks and say 'please be a dear and vote for the ERA,' or 'please be a honey and give us our rights to abortion.' There was a split with these two groups, one saying "let's be nice and beg them for what we want" and the other group saying "let's get out and gain what we want." We deserted the field to the other group.

Janet: I don't know if we deserted the field, or if we were outnumbered. The more watered-down your politics, the more people you get. To say that we had the right to control our own body also implied that one could be a lesbian, and “lesbian" was the red herring that they wanted to put under the cover. That demand frees everybody's choice on sexuality, and it's a continuing battle for radicals to put forth that analysis, but it's important to keep saying it. It's helped more women come out. At least in the larger cities, if a woman wants to be a lesbian, she can, where there wasn't that choice ten years ago.

Kate: But we are losing women to the gay movement, asking only for civil rights without having a feminist understanding of lesbianism. When we make the connection to feminism, it's more threatening and requires more work on a personal level. But now the women's movement says, ‘it’s ok to be just a lesbian.’ If it's ok to just be a lesbian, why struggle? We don't give each other the encouragement to make the personal political anymore. To be gay-identified doesn't cause you to go through personal changes.

Eileen: That's the point. The women's movement has historically made real demands on people involved—the political is personal and the personal is political. If you're beating your lover, that doesn't sound very feminist, and it used to be that you'd be criticized on that. In the gay movement you can be just about anything so long as you believe in gay civil rights.

Pandoura: One of the reasons lesbians can come out and find their space and time in the gay movement, as opposed to the women's movement, is the vast numbers of women who have recently come out, and I'm talking about mostly younger, white lesbians, who believe they can go out and get any kind of job, get any kind of training, if essentially their financial status can be anything they want it to be, and that's what they think can happen, getting back to where you were at, why struggle when you can go and be cute in the gay rights movement.

Eileen: I think that Lucia Valeska (co-director of the National Gay Task Force) getting up in front of the lesbian conference and saying, ‘Hello, lesbians, isn't that better than feminists,’ and implying to these women that they were feminists because they were lesbians is dangerous, it's wrong. In all the mass of women we've been getting together, we've lost that group spirit because we don't have definition. When we go to a women's concert for example, we can know that all the women around us are probably lesbians, but that is about all we can know.

Kate: That's because we've opted for quantity vs. quality.

Pandoura: I feel there are fewer women I can share my guts with—to me that’s the most personal part of the struggle. My expectation of feminism was to gain that. When you mentioned that woman who was in a lesbian group who said she was in the Ku Klux Klan, that hurt me to my soul. That experience hasn't happened to me personally in a group, but something that negative in terms of feminist politics, in terms of women, has happened to me, and it's devastating.

Kathy: To work on gay issues doesn't mean necessarily going over to gay civil rights. I felt something when I heard Anita Bryant was coming to town that I don't feel anymore when abortion is being talked about. Even though I feel strongly about reproductive rights, I know it's unlikely I will need an abortion. I'm more likely to get beat up or killed for holding a woman's hand. It’s difficult to be a lesbian feminist.