Haste Makes Waste  
or  

Blowing Your Cool Under Fire  

The flurry of activity in recent weeks by the FBI and grand juries has created much confusion. It has elicited emotional but impulsive responses and defensive counter-charges from those of us who are involved or fear we may be implicated. It has taught some vital lessons.  

One of those lessons is illustrated in the case of Jane Alpert. When fugitives and non-fugitives alike began to be busted and hauled before grand juries, we panicked. In our rush to keep things together, to alleviate guilt we felt about the possibility of a feminist informing to the FBI, and to be reassured we were still considered revolutionaries (by whom, we might ask), we began to take stands around Jane Alpert.  

Before all the facts were in, before we could separate emotion, rumor and appearances from actual evidence, we denounced a sister. We withdrew our support of her at a time when we might have wanted most to give it, had we remained calm enough to evaluate what was going on; had we been centered enough to insist on knowledge before making a stand.  

For the first time, the feminist movement is under heavy fire from the government. We can expect this attack to continue. We can expect FBI harassment to increase. We must be confident of our position. We must be aggressive in our behavior. Remember that the FBI will never tell YOU the truth. Do not forget it. Know your rights and use them.  

By believing what the government has either said or implied, by jumping to conclusions, by momentarily losing our newfound confidence as strong women and by reacting in old ways we have dealt ourselves a blow. This blow is called factionalism.  

It is now becoming clear that we have been baited. And we bit, this time. For the future we must remember that the FBI, grand juries, or anyone who seeks to divide us and intimidate us is our enemy. We must respond accordingly.  

We must make the leap of faith the covenant of sisterhood requires. We must assume the integrity and honor of our sisters until evidence persuades us otherwise.  

Remember who built that women’s center with you. Remember who started that health clinic. Remember who helped you learn to be strong and to believe in that strength. Remember who held you when you cried and understood the source of your pain. Remember who nurtured you for the first time in your adult life. Remember who gave you love and how that felt. Remember who we are. Remember the words of Susan Saxe, “The love I share with my sisters is a far more formidable weapon than the politics the police state can bring against us... Keep growing. Keep strong. I am a free woman, and I can keep strong. Pass the word: I am unafraid.”  

Carol Lease  

The benefit for BMR at the Three Sisters with Raw Honey on April 16th was a huge success. Thanks to all our sisters who supported us by boogieing to the best women’s rock band in the country at the best women’s bar in the world. Special thanks to our sisters who own the bar — without their support the paper would be in a bad financial position (and that’s an understatement.)  

We went to the conference on Feminism in the Cowboy State in Casper, Wyoming the last weekend in April and made many good contacts with women who live in Utah, Montana, North Dakota, Nebraska. We hope they can provide regional news and reviews so we can all be better informed on the struggles that our sisters to the north are having in their states. We hope to be able to cover the struggle of the American Indian women better than we have been able to in the past.  

Thanks to Jill Johnston for giving BMR her part of the blood money from Women Coming Together — Psycho-gymnastic Event with Ann Shaef. We need all the financial support we can get.  

BMR pays any and all contributors with a free subscription for every photo, graphic, story published. We will also give a free subscription to any woman who gets us two distribution points anywhere in the world. If there are aspiring writers out there come in to us — we need news writers, stringers who can take and complete assignments. You become a member of the staff by working on the paper, attending meetings and taking responsibility. Come over and have some coffee or tea and get to know BMR.  

Fair Trial Unlikely  

Big Mama Rag Vol. 3-A No. 4  

American Chicana Jailed  
Tortured in Argentina  

A growing campaign in the San Francisco Bay area to free Olga Talamante, a Chicana activist jailed in Argentina since last November, has resulted in the cessation of torture by Argentinian authorities of the 26-year-old American leftist.  

Talamante, who had been visiting Argentina and explaining the Chicana movement in the U.S. to Argentinian leftists, was arrested in a November 10 pre-dawn round-up of 12 radicals in the city of Azul, 200 miles south of Buenos Aires.  

The arrests were made four days after a proclamation of martial law by Argentine President Isabel Peron, which gave the federal police wide powers in arresting and interrogating suspected subversives. Hundreds of leftists, especially left-wing trade unionists, have been arrested and detained without charges since the November proclamation, and dozens of leftists have been mysteriously assassinated by right-wing terror squads which are suspected to have government backing.  

Talamante and her companions were arrested on charges of possessing two pistols and “subversive literature,” although they spent several months in jail before even learning of the charges. Talamante, who says the group never possessed the weapons, has yet to receive a trial date.  

Friends of Talamante, in her hometown in San Jose, California, learned of her arrest three weeks after it occurred, and formed an Olga Talamante Defense Committee (OTDC) to secure her release. The Argentine government, which had held Talamante incommunicado until December, was pressured to allow her to correspond with her friends. Subsequent letters soon revealed that she and her companions had been subjected to torture through electroshock and beatings.  

In a letter to her parents, postmarked January 30, 1975, Talamante described the torture:  

“I bent over with pain as one of them kicked me between the legs, but I was soon straightened up by a blow to my left breast. That whole day we were interrogated constantly and by the time the night came my arms were numb from being tied, and my body could find no comfortable place in which to rest.  

After that I was taken to a room upstairs and there I was totally undressed. I was placed in a bed with my arms and legs open, which were firmly tied to the bedposts. Then the nightmare began. The (electroshock) machine was applied to my nipples, inner legs, vulva, to the joints of my fingers, toes, legs, stomach and to my teeth.  

The sons-of-bitches knew really where the greatest pain is caused. The pain caused by that diabolical machine is impossible to describe. The only way I can explain it is as a burning electric current that bolted my whole body...  

The torture apparently stopped after the OTDC organized several hundred people in the Bay Area to write to the U.S. Embassy in Argentina expressing concern for Talamante’s safety. The group also managed to secure an attorney for Talamante and arranged to have a representative from the U.S. Embassy visit her once every two weeks.  

“We asked the State Department to secure her release and safe return to the United States,” said Ed McCaughan, a friend of Talamante’s and an organizer of the defense effort. “They seemed anxious to help at first, but after a couple of weeks we concluded their interest in the case was not in getting her out of jail, but rather in making sure they couldn't be held responsible for anything that happened to her.”  

Although the defense committee thinks that they have made some progress in securing Talamante’s safety, they don't think it is enough to make sure she gets a fair trial. Already two of Talamante’s companions arrested with her in November have been cleared in court of the charges, but remain in jail because the Argentine President hasn't authorized their release. Under the November “State of Siege” proclamation, the President can keep “subversives” in jail despite the court's decisions.  

Talamante’s parents, who are farmworkers from Gilroy, California, have been instrumental in arranging several dinner benefits in the Bay Area on behalf of their daughter. They say they are proud of her activities and intend to go to Argentina themselves to put on pressure for her release.  

Letters of support for Olga Talamante, which will be forwarded to the Argentine Embassy in Washington and the U.S. Embassy in Buenos Aires, can be sent to the Olga Talamante Defense Committee; Box 1313, Oakland, California 94604.  

— LNS, The Feminist  

Jane Alpert...  

From Page 1  

of the left. His response it is said, is to ask, “Why should I go out on a limb for that middle class, Jew, cunt?” The issue seems to have returned to basics. Since Cohn is both middle class and Jewish, it seems it is Alpert’s cunt he objects to.  

Several petitions begin to circulate. Some defend Alpert’s rights. Some denounce her alleged actions. We are told that the strongest anti-Alpert petition (called by Majority Report statement #1) was drafted with the help of Suzanne Cohn, Fred Cohn's wife. Her signature, however, does not appear on the document. Many signatures do. Some of the signers will later be surprised to learn they have signed it.  

The Chorus drones.  
March 24, 1974: Newsweek magazine reports the Justice Dept. has stated to them that the information on Pat Swinton came from Barry Stein. The statement seems to get conveniently overlooked. Stein, meanwhile, seems to have disappeared. A publication called The Midnight Special, published by the National Lawyer’s Guild, a radical newsletter for prisoners, prints an editorial saying that Alpert is an informer and states, “We feel that it is necessary for us to print this in order to point out to the sisters inside that there is a traitor in their midst.”  

The government puts Alpert in “protective isolation” (otherwise referred to as solitary confinement). She is taken to Westchester County Penitentiary and held, she is told, for grand jury testimony. Each day she is told she will be brought up to testify. Each day she is not. She is later returned to Muncy, her original prison. She is told, say our sources, that the government cannot protect her from other inmates unless she cooperates fully. Who knows, they say, what might happen?  

The chorus drones on.  

Act V: April, 1975  

Scene 1: Some old leftists are talking. They say the charges being made by the movement against Alpert are reminiscent of the red baiting, witch hunting days of McCarthy. They are saying how it is well known that Vermont is full of fugitives. They are saying information could have come from many places. Inside FBI offices: There is laughter. The feds think that feminism, that total threat to the patriarchy, has been severely set back, at least, while they have cleared away a few strong radical fugitives they have been watching for a long time. They are saying how they knew the right time would come to pick these people up and thereby shake up the forces of change. They laugh about all the mistrust that is growing. They talk about being frustrated at not picking up Hearst and busting radicals then, as they had planned to discredit the SLA and feminism at that time. Maybe this is better after all, they are saying.  

In the April 19 issue of Majority Report many women have written in to say publicly that they did not ever sign petition #1 and want to make this clear. They wonder how this happened.  
The chorus drones on.