Feminism in West Berlin

An Interview with Two German Feminists

Dona Calacone

I recently had the opportunity to
talk with two German feminists from
West Berlin. Tommy Tomek has been ac
tive in the German feminist and lesbian
movements for several years. She now
works at the safehouse for battered
women in West Berlin and, while in Den
ver, has been working at a safehouse
there and at the Woman to Woman Book-
center. Alexandra Goy is a feminist
lawyer who, in conjunction with her
feminist law partner, has only women
clients. She has a reputation for
dealing with radical issues and has
defended terrorists associated with
Baader and Meinhof and the Red Army
Fraction. She also does legal work with
the women of the safehouse in West
Berlin.

This is Part One of a two-part series.
In this issue we will be discussing the
safehouse for battered women. Next
month we will discuss the lesbian and
feminist movements in Germany, the
political scene there, Alex's legal
work and terrorism.

BMR: Alex, what is your connection with
the safehouse?

Alex: Many of the cases I handle are
from battered women and raped women.
They call us and we go with them (the
battered women) to the court and to the
police and we tell them about the trial
and when they have to give testimony
before the trial we go with them.

Alexandra Goy

BMR: Tommy, how are you associated with
the safehouse?

Tommy: I've been working for two and
a half years at the safehouse. It’s
the only one in Berlin and it's a
model project for all of Germany. We
are paid for three years by the West
German government and the Berlin gov-
ernment. In October the model project
phase should be over and the whole
thing should be paid for by Berlin.
Before I left in April we were just
fighting about that: how we get funded.

Alex: You should know the background of
this house for battered women. It
came out of the feminist movement and
it was the idea of the feminists to
create the house because the government
said, oh, this is no special social
problem, and they thought that a woman
who has been beaten by her husband
could go to other social agencies and
they should find a place for her. But
women from the women's movement said
no, it's a special kind of problem so
we have to found a house. The govern-
ment was very skeptical about this
idea and therefore gave them money
dependent on research done by other
women to find out if a house like this
is really necessary or if this problem
can't be absorbed by other social a-
gencies.

Tommy: The other reason (for the re-
search) is to find out if a house run
like ours, with self-help and no di-
rector, works.

BMR: The safehouse is run completely
by the battered women themselves?

Tommy: Yes. That's one principle of the
house. All of the women have a meeting
once a week and there are only two
counselors there and we discuss every-
thing involved in running the house;
things like when visitors can come,
the women decide that themselves. The
staff has their own meeting once a week
too and there are two women from the
house who come and then tell the other
women of the house what went on in the
staff meeting.

BMR: There's no hierarchy at all for
making decisions?

Tommy: Usually we do it together. If
there are problems we all come together
and try to discuss it and then decide.
But sometimes the staff has to make the
decisions like about not having alcohol
in the house.

Alex: There must be another difference
between the Berlin safehouse and the
one in Denver. I go into the safehouse
and counsel the women about their legal
rights and there are three other women
lawyers who go there twice a week. We
all go around the rooms and ask: "Do
you know about your rights?" We also
have doctors who come into the house
and provide evidence (for the court
case) that the woman has been battered.

BMR: What changes do you think would be
good for the safehouses you've seen
here in the states?

Tommy: I think that they could do more
self-help. (The women residents) could
be better trained in running the house.
They could do the telephone or the
overnight and that's not such a big
thing but it gives them more of a feel-
ing that it's their house and they run
it. When we go out in public and give
talks to people about the safehouse, I
think that only the staff does it here
but in Germany we try to take the women
from the house with us and I think that
a lot of battered women have good ideas
and they can help the staff to change
things. Although many battered women
have low self-esteem, they can learn to
talk in public.

You know, I think we need both kinds
of houses, ours and this one in Denver.
I would say that this one is not a shel-
ter or crisis center; this is a second
stage house for women who have been in
a shelter before. This safehouse (in
Denver) does good work with groups,
like in assertiveness training, self-
defense, C.R. (consciousness raising)
groups and support groups. That's what
we (in the Berlin safehouse) often
can't do because we are so full and the
women leave so often but I will try to
start an assertiveness group and maybe
when we have a second safehouse we will
have more space to do the groups but
think that the women who come to this
one could benefit from that.

MORE ON PAGE 25

“If You Ever Come to Germany...”

Tommy Tomek

If you ever come to Germany, you have to come to West Berlin. I know that
many Americans don't like to visit Berlin because they have to travel two and
a half hours through East Germany before they reach the "little island,” West
Berlin. But if you are interested in women's issues, you have to go there.
Berlin is known as the city with the biggest and strongest women's and lesbian
movement.
We have three feminist bookstores:

Labrys Lilith Miranda

Yorkstr. 22 Kantstr. 125 Fennstr. 34

1000 Berlin 61 1000 Berlin 12 1000 Berlin 65

Tel. 785-5566 Tel. 312-8044 Tel. 465-7905

No man is allowed to enter these bookstores. It is by women, for women only.
The women who work there can earn their living with this job.

Of course we have a women's center too, with a coffeehouse. It's at Strese-
mannstr. 40, 1000 Berlin 61, Tel. 251-0912. Many different groups such as
women over forty, C.R. groups, lesbians, women's archives, women and science
and others belong to the center.

Until January we had a lesbian center too, but the rooms were too big and
too expensive, so we moved out. We are looking now for a smaller residence.
Maybe with a new center we will get new ideas, new motivation and, with that,
more new members fighting for lesbian rights.

If you become hungry in the late afternoon, you can go to one of our two
women's restaurants: Blocksberg (that's the name of the mountain where the
witches were dancing), Yorkstr. 48, 1000 Berlin 61, Tel. 215-4986. Every first
Thursday we have a lesbian dance there. The other women's restaurant is called
Frauenzimmer (women's room). You can find it in Berlin-Steglitz on Bundesallee
near subway station Friedrich-Wilhelm-Platz.

Maybe after your stomach is satisfied, you would like to go dancing. You can
choose between Die 2, Martin-Luther/Motzstrasse and Pour Elle, Fuggerstrasse
and Pussycat, Fuggerstrasse. These bars are operated by lesbians who are not
in the movement, and in July some women from the women's center will try to
open a new women's disco in Berlin-Kreuzberg.

Since October 1976 we've had a safehouse in West Berlin. As we are always
very crowded (sometimes over one hundred women and kids living there), we are
fighting for a second shelter. We have an open door and battered women can
stay as long as they need to.

One year ago we opened a Women's Health Center (Feministisches Frauen
Gesundheits Zentrum) at Kadettenweg 77, 1000 Berlin 45, Tel. 833-5412.

And there are some more women's places and organizations:

The Women's Gallery, Bleibtreustrasse, 1000 Berlin 19

The Women's Book-sell, Tel. 821-0018

The Women's Therapy Center (PSIFF, Psychosoziale Initiative für Frauen)
Hortsweg 27, 1000 Berlin 19, Tel. 321-9879

13 Mond, self-help health group, Am Chamissoplatz 8, 1000 Berlin 61,
Tel. 693-5035

Gropiusstadt neighborhood women's Center, Joachim-Gottschalk Weg, in der
cafestube

Wedding Neighborhood Women’s Center, Bellermannstr. 1 (Wed. 3pm-9pm)

Weiberplenum, Seelingstr. 42, 1000 Berlin 19 (Fri. 6:30 pm)

If you can read German, you should look into these women's newspapers and
magazines:
Courage, Bleibtreustr. 48, 1000 Berlin 12....monthly, $1.50 each
Die Schwarze Betin, radical lesbian newspaper, % Brigitte Classen,
Geibelstr. 4, 1000 Berlin 45....quarterly $2.50 each
Kassandra, women's art magazine, Windscheidstr. 19, 1000 Berlin 12
+ Quarterly $2.50 each
Clio, periodical from the women's health center. $1.50 each
Women in Prison, % Annebell Oeff, Friedbergstr. 17
Women and Film, Rotbuch-Verlag, Potsdammerstr. 98, 1000 Berlin 38 ..$2.50
Nebeneinanderspruch, university women's newspaper, OSI-Frauengruppe, Otto-
Suhr-Institut, Ihnestr. 21, 1000 Berlin 33
Lesbenpresse, periodical of the lesbian center....$1.50
UKZ, lesbian magazine of the group Lesbos 74 (older lesbians), Mariannen-
str. 34, 1000 Berlin 36...monthly $1.00 each
Die Partnerin, lesbian magazine, % Helene Richter, Postfach 410-803,
1000 Berlin 41
You see the women's movement in Berlin is active. It's worthwhile to visit
us. Hope to meet you sometime in our little island. I will be back in West
Berlin at the end of September. You can call me at home in West Berlin at 614-
8976, or at the safehouse there, 826-3018.