culture

Big Mama Rag Vol. 8 No. 9

Clausen Stereotypes ‘Political Women’

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 11

told, the two may have shared what
Clausen calls a “comparable level of
political confusion" until:

-..Jean one day ushered in a new
era with the ominous remark, 'You
can't remain unaligned forever. I
am joining a study group.'

And of course you are curious about
the precise content of the political
disagreement which ensued. I have,
however, decided against going
into all the gory, sectarian details.

For one thing, Jean's organization
changed its analysis several times,
and to follow this development
would be extremely tedious. For another,
it was precisely Amanda's problem
that she could never care deeply about
the particulars of a given line; her
clash with Jean was not, in essence,
one of beliefs versus beliefs, but of
beliefs versus skepticism.

Nowhere is Jean portrayed as a
thinking woman, as a feminist who
has clearly thought out her own
oppression and put those thoughts
into a broader feminist perspective.
Instead, we see her as a blank-faced
politico, blindly following "party
directives." True to her word, the
narrator (Clausen) spares us the
details of Jean's politics, so we
never have any idea of the substance
of the issues that prompt Jean to
write leaflets, design posters,
live collectively - in short, to do
all the things that Amanda and her
friends proclaim to be “misguided,
crazy, dangerous, and above all
irrelevant." Amanda laments the
fact that her former friend, who
"used to be an artist" (in the traditional
sense) has "given up" art to
create political posters instead.
And once again, we are told by a
woman who calls herself a feminist
(both Amanda and Clausen, because
they really seem to be one in the
same) that art and politics are
mutually exclusive.

The story goes on like this, with
Amanda lodging various complaints
against Jean, while all the time
maintaining that she still cares
about her "former friend," this
crazy woman who reminds Amanda of
"the type to have been burned for
her too-intense, heretical devotion."
And in conclusion, Clausen
offers three possible endings:
the first being that Jean ends up
in prison after having been found
responsible for a series of bombings.
Amanda works on her defense
committee, and finds that while incarcerated,
Jean begins to change,

to become "broader and more ecumenical."
(read: less fanatic, more
"laid-back") which is what Amanda
had hoped for all along. The second
ending involves stability, with
Jean's political involvement remaining
status quo, until one day she
is killed in a car accident; and

in retrospect, Amanda is pleasantly
surprised that Jean's life had
been neater, more meaningful than
she had imagined. And the third
ending is that nothing happens for
years, until Jean and Amanda finally
meet and talk about the past.
Amanda admits her love and caring
for Jean, and Jean responds:

"I think...that you've always
been so goddamned involved with
what I represent, something I mean
to you about yourself politically
on who you think you ought to be or
something, that you don't have the
slightest fucking idea what you
feel about me personally. So let's
not discuss it, okay?!"

The truth, Amanda thinks, but
not the whole truth. Yet what
choice does she have but to accept
it?

And that is how the story ends,
with Amanda once again refusing to
take responsibility for herself.
She sees herself as the passive
victim of Jean's "fanaticism",
she is the imagined innocent. She
has not even built a very good case
against Jean - her evidence is obscure,
personalized, circumstantial. But
Amanda's hands are clean because she
has refused to stoop to Jean's level
and discuss politics.

If politics has torn their friendship
apart, as we are told in the
beginning, then Amanda certainly is
not going to let politics tear her
apart and make her question her precious
and innocent self-image.

This story was painful for me to
read because I could identify with
Jean on so many levels. I saw myself
as Jean because I have had Amanda's
in my life; I have lost friends because
they saw me as too difficult to deal with.
I have been accused of abandoning art
because I do not buy into the traditional
art scene.

I also saw Big Mama Rag, and other
revolutionary feminist projects, as
Jean; I recognized the scornful responses,
the lack of support that

all such projects receive because
they are out-of-system, because their
politics are defined and challenging.
And because the women involved question
their communities and various aspects
of the women's movement in general while
defying the status quo. While I am not
idealizing these struggles, I am saying
that the process is goddamned hard. If we
question and have strong convictions,

we are branded “crazy and fanatic"
by the outside world; and I want very
badly to believe that such labels,
such write-offs, are not as automatic
within the movement.

But experience teaches us otherwise.
And now, Jan Clausen has put it in print.
What makes her stories so dangerous is
that she appears to know what she is
talking about.

There is a sense of, "This seems so
true. She really understands what
is going on..." that can lead us to
doubt the validity of political analysis
and commitment. Clausen comes across
as an insider, and from what we know
of her poetry, we can assume that she
has been around long enough to know
what happens in women's communities,
in feminist politics.

It is her self-proclaimed innocence,
imagined or not, that is the key here.
Never once does Clausen define the
politics behind her short stories - and
I can only assume that she would see
such definition as taking away from the
“art" in her writing. Also, to do so
would confuse her with Jean; she would
become political, which means fanatic,
“un-fun", and certainly she would no
longer be an artist. She would have to
take responsibility for herself and her
writing; she no longer could be innocent.

What bothers me most about Mother,
Sister, Daughter, Lover is Clausen's
portrayal of political women. The
short story as a means of criticism/
self-criticism could potentially be
a very effective analytical tool,
both for the author and the movement.
But Clausen seems as afraid of this
potential as she does of politics in
general. She clearly is not going
to dirty her hands, and I contend
that she makes life even more trying
for those of us who are defying
stereotypes. Women reading these
stories will pick up a lot of half-truths
about feminism and political lifestyles
and in turn use these as excuses to
avoid responsibility, just as Clausen
has done.

Even more disturbing is the fact
that this book comes across as being
apolitical (actually, personal
rather than political). This is not
true because in reality, Clausen is
making a very strong political statement.
She is telling us, she is showing us,
that politics is the monster that Amanda
perceives it to be. She is telling us
not to question or rock the boat, but
to drift along on an ambiguous sea of
liberal guilt just as Alice and Amanda,
and Jan Clausen do. Her characters are
passive, as "plain and boring" as Alice
says that she is; and in much the same
way that Alice's daughter protects her
mother, so Clausen's women protect her.
She does not want to say what she really
knows about feminism either, and this is
why this book is so dangerous. Clausen
sets it up so that she does not have
to be accountable because she has hidden
behind her own “imagined innocence."

And in conclusion, it is my hope
that someone will eventually make
Clausen accountable. In the meantime
I hope that women who read Mother,
Sister, Daughter, Lover will see
through it and not be discouraged.
Living political feminism is difficult -
there are few precedents - and we owe
each other constructive, politically-based
criticism rather than distorted, self-conscious
portrayals of feminism. And finally,

I hope that sometime soon, a feminist
writer will share more of herself; more
of her own struggle with politics and
art; more about the problems of living
a revolutionary, committed lifestyle;
and more of her own relationships with
other women, be she a mother, sister,
daughter, or lover.

-Women A Journal Of Liberation