8 Big Mama Rag Vol. 3-A No. 3 9

Told Not to March

Feminists Rejected by Women’s Day Committee

B

%

Mee es ALISM Ad
bs HO A s : 3
el

niOU NL

Carol Lease

‘A march took place in Denver on International Women’s Day in which
feminists, lesbians and gay men were told they could not participate in
the demonstration carrying their signs that supported the rights of
homosexuals and women. The leaflet issued by march organizers
described the event as being “in support of all oppressed people.”
However, it seems that the only oppressed groups that the organizing
Committee wanted to support were working class and minority people

and these classifications strangely seemed to exclude all women and
homosexuals that are themselves working class and minority members
and are, in fact, oppressed.

On paper, the organizers of the march were a “coalition” of represen-
tatives from women’s groups and individual women. In practice, the
“coalition” was two or three women who tried to make it look like
women’s groups were doing the planning for the International
Women’s Day celebration, and second, used the oppression of women
to further the male-defined socialist line that their particular socialist
clubs were espousing for the salvation of the world.

According to reliable sources, the plans and details for the march
were basically worked out before any women’s organizations were
even contacted. The groups that were “invited” to the march were not
necessarily feminist groups or even groups that identified themselves
as feminist. It seemed that the criteria was that women be involved in
the membership of the organization, nothing else.

Two such groups, Chicana Welfare Rights and Mountain Bell Strike
Committee, seemed to realize that their names were being used by the
“coalition” so that the march “would look good to the community.”
Some minority women who participated in the demonstration were es-
sentially aware of what was happening from the beginning. “We're
used to this kind of co-optation from white, middle-class groups,” one
woman said. “But we need to let our people know that we are here and a
march is a good way. We used them. They didn’t use us. They like to
have our name there — that's fine — as long as we can use them and
their privileged resources it's o.k.

At least one other women’s group, the Coalition of Labor Union
Women (CLUW) seems to have a steering committee that is heavily
stacked in favor of the “good guys” socialist clubs, and was, therefore,
pretty happy with the exclusion of the feminists and homosexual con-
tingents.

According to former members of the coalition, the two or three male-
identified socialist women were “intolerant” of any feminist or par-
ticipation in the organizing. This eventually led to a split in the coalition
itself with many women who had originally intended to be involved in
the march deciding not to.

No feminist group was asked to participate in any way with the Inter-
national Women’s Day activities. A spokeswoman for the National
Organization of Women (NOW) said that they had heard nothing of the
march until the Friday before when someone put up one poster in the
office. No rape-help group was notified. Big Mama Rag found out that a
group called the International Women’s Day Coalition was sponsoring
an evening of speeches, but that this coalition in reality preached the
politics of the Revolutionary Union as opposed to the political line of the
October League who sponsored the now infamous march. In other
words, the two HEAVY DUTY male-defined socialist groups were
fighting with each other. One was sponsoring the march and the other
sponsoring speeches. My goodness, boys, if you can't get the correct
line down how do you expect the unenlightened to?

When the Gay Student Alliance, the Radical Gay Caucus, staffers
from Big Mama Rag, and community feminists arrived at the starting
point of the march, they were told that their signs were “not in accord”
with the previously agreed upon slogans and that they could therefore
not march. Lonna Carp, one woman from the “coalition” said that
“legitimate women’s liberation is in opposition to the liberation of
homosexuality (because) homosexuality is an attack on minority and
working class women.”

Another disciple, Marcia Tremmel, said that "banners that raise the
rights of women and homosexuals are inconsistent.” She feels that
feminism and lesbianism are not issues that working-class and minority
women will get up and rally around and therefore should not be used
to organize the masses for revolution.

When told that widely accepted and recognized statistics show that at
least 10% of the population and sub-groups within the population are
homosexual and that therefore 10% of working-class and minority
women are homosexual, and that their policy therefore oppressed
these women, Carp repeated that “homosexuality was an attack on
minority and working-class women and therefore could not be
recognized as significant oppression.”

Carp and Tremmel see homosexuality as destructive to their line and
revolutionary goals because they believe in the ultimate value of the
‘nuclear family.’ They do not see this institution as capitalist instituted or
maintained by the oppression of capitalism. They see the nuclear family
as essential to socialist revolution, and therefore put a high value on its
existence.

After a brief caucus, the feminist and gay groups decided to march
anyway. They were told to stay away from the main body of the march
and at one point in the march were momentarily cut off from the main
body when the macho driver of a van that was carrying children too
young to walk, cut in front of them. The driver tried to run down two
feminists who were marching in front of it. According to the women, the
man kept bumping into them.

Neither the feminists nor the gay marchers were allowed to speak
after the march to the teeming crowd of fifty. "We asked to speak. But
they wouldn't let us,” said Linda Fowler, staff member of BA. One
woman who had split from the coalition when it was “obvious that the
interests of women were not being served by the march,” tried to have a
statement read that the feminists had written. Carp and Tremmel refus-
ed to have it read to those gathered. So in the interests of free speech it
will be reprinted here:

“The radical feminist and gay liberation groups that came here today
came to support this women’s day march. We are anti-imperialist, anti-
capitalist, and anti-racist. We also will not be excluded from
revolutionary movements. We realize our presence here today could be
seen as disruptive — we are willing to enter into dialogue about our
political differences. Solidarity among all oppressed groups.”

Attempts were subsequently made to talk with the remaining
organizers of the march. Marcia Tremmel agreed to meet with
representatives of the radical feminist and gay groups but didn’t show
up.

The attitude of the “coalition” is well stated through their editing of
one of Emma Goldman's songs:
“A woman's struggle is hard
Even with a union card.
She's got to stand on her own two feet
And not be a servant to the rich elite.”
The way Emma wrote it read... and not be a servant to the male elite.

photos by Carol Lease