letters home to mama

Response Wanted

Dear BMR:

I sent you an article about three months ago for your religion issue on women and Judaism. It was not published, nor was I contacted about it to say it would not be published. I got the impression while talking to one of the collective members on the phone that you would be glad to publish it. If it was not what you wanted, I would have appreciated being told that -- even by getting a note to that effect.

I am disturbed by your editorial policy because I think you are prepared to publish articles which are both positive and negative about Christianity, but none which are positive about Judaism. In your spirituality issue, you included a long diatribe by a Jewish woman on how horrible and patriarchal her upbringing was; and on how racist Israel is. In your issue on organized religion, you included nothing on Judaism and feminist women's involvement and struggle with it. Believe me, we exist!

To go down the list of your articles on Jews, Israel, and anti-Semitism in the past half year:

In the February issue, a letter from Brenda Lee Carter, discounting the reality of anti-Semitism and questioning the legitimacy of Israel. Rose's article on Judaism, which presented an almost totally negative picture of it. Women Against Imperialism's anti-Semitic, anti-Israel harangue (which incidentally I have seen in many publications this year -- evidently they are making a concerted push to propagandize the women's movement on this issue). Again discounting the reality of anti-Semitism and denying that Israel has a right to exist. My letter. A letter from Illinois women, presenting a more balanced view, in which anti-Semitism is taken seriously and Israel criticized but not denied the right to exist. Susan Korn's letter on Juana Maria Paz's letter of a previous issue, on her experiences with Jewish women on women of color land.

March -- In an issue devoted to women's spirituality, not one article on Jewish women's spirituality.

April -- Juana Maria Paz's letter on her experiences. I do not know what happened on the land, I have heard her story. I would like to hear all sides, then I would better be able to judge what happened there. As a Jewish woman, I do not appreciate being told that Israel is committing many injustices against the Palestinians. Israel is committing many injustices against the Palestinians -- but I was not aware it was systematically trying to exterminate them physically, which is what I always thought genocide was. Just as a rhetorical question, why is it that I and other progressive Jews are willing to admit the injustices Israel commits and are fighting against them and are fighting for a two-state solution, a Jewish state and a Palestinian state, while those who go on about Israeli "genocide" and equate Zionism with racism are never willing to admit any injustices committed on the Arab and Palestinian part? I think that as usual Jews are being held to a higher standard than anyone else.

Also, articles in the April issue on the church in Central America, Peru, Mormonism -- but again, nothing on Judaism.

May issue -- new subjects introduced.

Well, a pretty sad record! It would be nice to have an article on Jewish lesbian groups and their activities, both cultural and religious, on New Jewish Agenda, a progressive Jewish political group, on the peace movement in Israel, on positive approaches to Judaism which look at what we want and what we reject from the tradition, what we might want to add, etc. In short, a positive Jewish voice.

I'm really pissed about this. I would advise you to read Nice Jewish Girls, recently published by Persephone Press, to gain some insight into your own lack of sensitivity and knowledge on this issue.

Rebecca Lesses Somerville, MA

Dear Rebecca,

You're right about us being wrong in holding your article (and another article, by Vivian Mayer). As we said a month or two ago, if we haven't printed an article and the author hasn't heard from us, it's probably because we're still considering printing it in the future. This is the situation with yours and Vivian's articles.

We intended to hold them until we had more information and analysis of Zionism. We felt uncomfortable printing articles by Jewish women who had rediscovered their Jewishness and didn't explain their feelings about Zionism. Yet, we did feel comfortable printing articles on women's spirituality by women who did not discuss the racism and anti-Semitism of the spirituality and wicca movements, for instance. This double standard was anti-Semitic.

At that time (and right now) we were trying to develop relationships with anti-imperialist and national liberation movements, who are all anti-Zionist. We have not embraced any stand on Zionism and felt we were not prepared to defend any position. And we knew that printing yours and Vivian's articles would open us up to confrontation and criticism about this. So we tried to cover our ass and

& BACON @@ HOME-FRIED POTATOES

HAM

EVERYBODY

Woman to Woman Feminist Bookcenter

2320 E. Colfax,

Gay & Lesbian Community Center

1436 Lafayette, Denver

hold your articles until we had a position we could defend on Zionism to print in the same issue.

This month we are printing yours and Vivian's articles (on pages 9-11), which we should have printed in the issue on Spirituality. For further information about where we're at, see page 2.

In Struggle, Sue, Bobbe, Lori and Liz for the collective

Explain Flyer

BMR Collective:

We just got your June 1982 issue and are very puzzled and disturbed by your inclusion, without comment, of the John Brown Anti-Klan Committee flyer. The reason for our concern is the JBAKC position on Zionism as reflected in the flyer by the statement: "The fight against Zionism--the foundation of imperialism in the Middle East and the oppressor of the Palestinian people--is inextricably linked to the fight against white supremacy and racism here in the U.S.

MORE ON PAGE 18

FRESH FRUIT SALAD ®#®VEGGIE QUICHE @%

a :

ot” + “ :

9 oe hd FE

@ © .- a

soon} i ae’ ¢

bY Ye gt of +

* S o al
a ? » ea me >
:

$7 more or less

NO WOMAN TURNED AWAY FOR LACK OF $$$ children free

Tickets available at:

Denver 320-5972

or

831-6268

WELCOME!!!

Big Mama Rag, July, 1982 - Page 3