Inmate Interview...

From Page 3

is Lt. Cooper. This is my penitentiary. You do as we say to do in here. You don’t go to other girls’ rooms. There is no body contact. You don’t touch. We do not practice homosexuality in our institution.”

So she runs it all down to you. No body contact means that if you had some death in your family and you were crying, and I’m one of your friends and I come up to you and say, “Hey, everything is gonna be OK.” and I pat you on the back to console you, then I’m accused of being a homosexual. That means that you and I have a thing going because of the fact that I’m patting you and consoling you.

After you talk to the warden, you go on up to your wing area and they assign you to your room. You might meet some of the girls in that wing area. I put all my things on the bed, then I went out with one of the girls that knew me. We went outside. I was shaking like this. I was really nervous because I’d never been around a lot of people, especially women, in the joint and it really got to me.

BMR: What’s the daily routine? Does everybody work?

RL: Six o’clock in the morning they come over the speaker and say, “Good morning ladies. It’s six o'clock.” BMR: The rest of

are girls. you're ladies?

RL: Right. Six-thirty comes and it’s time for count. You're laying in your bed, really resting. Six-thirty comes and you have to get up out of your bed, go to the door and stick your arm out until the officer comes down and counts every arm. On her way up, she says, “Thank you” and you can put your arm back in. If you want to stay up, you stay up. You have to be out of your room for breakfast at 7 am.

You go to the dining room and you have to sit at the seat where you're assigned. After breakfast you have your medication. If you work on the cleaning crew you have to go down to the auditorium at 8:00. If you’re in the sewing room you have to be there at 8:00.

BMR: How many different work areas are there?

RL: You have the cleaning crew, the sewing room, the yard crew, the state and industrial sewing room. You can work in the library or the kitchen.

BMR: Does the women’s kitchen prepare food for the men’s prison, too?

RL: No. Only for the women. In the women’s kitchen, they don’t have enough stuff to work with, as far as cooking is concerned. Not enough seasonings. And they have a food service class! Now you can have vocational training. You can take typing, bookkeeping, shorthand, and filing. That’s it. Now I’ve been through all of that. I didn’t have anything to do.

BMR: Are the classes every day?

RL: Every day of the week. But you have to do your work detail. In the laundry you might be there an hour. On the cleaning crew you go to work at 8 and you might get off at 11. You never know how long you may have to work.

BMR: Which means when you get up in the morning, if you have something you want to do that day, like writing or something, you never know during that day when you're going to have some time to yourself.

RL: Right.

Interviewer’s note: If an inmate at CWC doesn’t behave in the approved manner, the prison administration has a number of ways to pressure her into obedience. One of the more effective ways is to threaten her with an extension of her sentence. This threat keeps many women from speaking or rebelling. Another disciplinary method, which has both immediate and long-term implications, is to place a woman in lock-up by herself.

BMR: Can you tell us something about lock-up?

RL: It’s the same room that you have isolation when you first come in.

BMR: What’s in there?

a blanket and a washcloth. What was so funny about it was that they took the string out of my pajamas so I couldn’t hang myself, but if I'd wanted to, all I'd had to do was to take the radio earphones and hang myself. They were still in there. Or the sheets. I could have taken my pajamas off and hung myself too.

BMR: Do people use cigarettes as barter in the women’s prison?

RL: Some people might. I don’t. See, you get two packages of Pall Mall on Friday. They give you one bar of soap. You can get 12 Kotex.

BMR: No tampons?

RL: If you want Tampex you have to take your own money and buy them.

BMR: What is contraband here?

RL: We can’t have gum. The reason for that they say is because ten years ago Sally Sue had gum and she jammed a lock. Or five years ago somebody had gum that she stuck on her plate and it got jammed in the dishwasher. You can’t have lighters. Because if there was lighter fluid around you could start somebody on fire. Our people can’t send anything in, like homemade goodies. Something might be in it. They’re afraid your parents might put some dope in it.

BMR: Are drugs easily available?

RL: No, but you can get drugs into the institution.

BMR: What are some of the ways that women relieve themselves of the insanity here?

RL: Well, now we can have tapes and radios in our rooms. And you can read or knit or crochet. That's what I don’t understand about all this contraband. You can’t have matches and all this other stuff, but you can have scissors and knitting needles, needles, pins. Knives are contraband. If you want a knife, all you got to do is go down to the kitchen, put it in your sock and walk back to your room.

BMR: What else can you do?

RL: Well, you can pick up a book or do whatever you want in your room. But really you don’t have privacy in your room. The officers come and look in all the time.

BMR: And you can’t have a friend in?

RL: Not in your room.

BMR: So what you’re saying is that in the women’s prison there’s very little contact between the women as individuals?

RL: Right. Very little.

BMR: I'd like for you to talk a little bit about being gay in and out of prison.

RL: Okay. Well me, for instance. I’m gay. I was gay when I came in and I'll be gay when I leave. In the prison, you’re around women. You might see someone you might dig on and you might want to be with that person. So you rap to each other and you get real close to her.

BMR: When do you get a chance to talk to her?

RL: When the yard is open. Or going to dinner together. If you're in different wings, then you can go over to her wing and talk to her. You just go and stand at her door. She might pull a chair up to the door. But you can’t go inside anyone's living quarters but the one you're in. You can talk in the beauty shop when you are doing each other’s hair.

BMR: That's the only body contact you can have?

RL: Yes, when you're doing somebody's hair.

BMR: How many women in the institution are Lesbians?

RL: There are so many changes coming down here. There’s probably only two for real. Then there are some that came into the institution and don’t have anything better to do than this, get it on with women. They think, “I got to do my time. I might as well have somebody to do this with.” It's an outlet.” So they get involved. But there’s not that many who come in gay.

BMR: What are some of the differences that you can see between what happens in the women’s prison and in the men’s prisons?

RL: They have more freedom than we women do. I guess that’s because there are more men locked up than there are women.

Interviewer’s note: Ronnell didn’t expand on this point. A noticeable difference between the men’s and women’s institutions is the larger variety of vocational training and educational opportunities available to men. It seems that there are also fewer petty rules at the men’s prisons.

BMR: What do you think is our responsibility as women outside to those of you who are inside?

RL: Women on the outside, not being aware of prison and how it really is, should get some type of group together and come and visit the women's institution. They should see how each woman feels in there about being locked up. There needs to be more communication among all women, inside and out. There are some women inside who have kids. There are women on the street who have kids and they're not away from their kids. They need to know how it feels to be away from your child, being confined, doing time. Women on the outside have no knowledge of this. You need to see how a woman feels when she has to go and do time and when she gets out her child doesn’t know her.

Like the NOW women came down and one lady brought her little boy down. Everybody was really enthused. But if they had their kids to come in, they would be more happy than they are now.

BMR: In other words, people on the outside should try to find out who has a child and bring them along when we come to visit.

RL: Yes, that’s one of the things I want to do when I get out. I want to relate to women on the outside that prison life is not for a woman. It’s really not. I want women to know, “Hey, don’t commit any crimes. If you got a man and he’s pimping you, tell him you want to do something better than going to prison.” You got responsibilities out there. You got more responsibilities if you got a child. Say one of my best friends had a case. She might have ten kids. She’s worried about what her kids are going to do, whether they’re going to go on welfare or the welfare department is going to take them away from her and all this. Before I see her kids given away, I'll take the rap for her.

Interviewers note: This was all the time we had to talk with Ronell during our initial visit. She is interested in staying in touch with women outside of prison. Those of you who are concerned about women inmates should consider visiting the women at CWC and possibly taking an inmate's child for a visit. For more information about the subject, read Women in Prison by Kathryn W. Burkhart.