Page 4

The Denver Post in its issue of Sunday, September 8, published a feature article about Big Mama Rag. The article, in the best tradition of patriarchal arrogance, was a smear intended to discredit not only BMR but the women’s community of Denver and the entire Feminist movement. It is important to realize that the Post article, as written, passed the editor's desk with an okay for publication. This must be recognized as the attitude and position of The Denver Post toward Feminism.

Utilizing tactics of classism, Lesbian-baiting, out-of-context quotes, rampant misrepresentation of facts and innuendo, the article portrayed our women’s newspaper as a narrow-interest publication. (Fact: BMR provides national, regional, and local coverage relating to Feminist theory, women’s poetry, women’s health, welfare rights and legislation, Lesbian issues, book reviews, NOW activities, union women's activities, media analysis and community announcements.) By the time UPI had “whispered down the aisle,” a Philadelphia radio station named Chocolate Waters as the editor when in fact we have none, and a Houston newspaper called Ronnie Martin the only man on our staff, when in fact we have none.

It is apparent that the Post has at last felt the power and influence of a growing and active women’s community in this city; felt it as a threat. And rightly so. A recent Denver Post devoted four of its eighty-eight pages to women’s news. Over 50% of this space was given to advertising. The copy included fashion news, engagement announcements, news of a home decorators show and Ann Landers’ column, with less than one page of articles actually relevant to women as women.

Reacting out of fear, The Denver Post is contributing strongly to an already hostile political climate in Denver. As the women's movement grows this type of counter-action can be expected to increase. It is important that we have a clear understanding of what is happening and that we not be intimidated or divided by the defensiveness and smear attempts we will encounter.

The Post, realizing the necessity and power of effective communication to a growing movement, made an attempt to cut the heart out of Denver Feminism. By striking at what it considered to be the soft underbelly of Feminism (Lesbianism), the Post attempted to destroy one of our major exchange mediums and thus seriously curtail Feminist communication in Denver.

Through letters to the editor and cancellation of subscriptions we can show the Post (and other media interests) that the Denver women’s community cannot be so easily trampled or brushed aside.

The Post has performed two invaluable services for Denver Feminists: first, it has clearly revealed the position and depth of resistance we must overcome in order to realize Feminist principles in Denver; secondly, it has shown us the type of tactics which will be used against us; i.e., name-calling and traditional appeals to the standard bigotry against anyone who is not white, not male, not middle class and not supporting patriarchy.

the second wave A MAGAZINE OF THE NEW FEMINISM

Box 344, Cambridge A Cambridge, MA 02139 VOLS no3

corporate child care

* for a year sub (4 issues). Start my sub with issue NO. ———$0.75 + $0.25 postage for 1 copy of issue no.

name address

BRR

City State Zip

“add $1. outside of USA; $7.50 airmail overseas

Big Mama Rag Vol. 3 No. 4

To the Man Reporter from the Denver Post

Chocolate Waters

I knew from the start it was a mistake to talk to you—

Six Radical Feminists and the Man of the Press and his frightened photographer with the evil eye.

Even with those odds we were outnumbered.

But you expected us to be reasonable to defer to you as a man and a member of the Almighty Male Media to explain our position logically, to smile a lot.

After all we are living in a civilized world:

RECALL a picture of a woman hunched up on top of her knees, her mouth awry, the red blood rolling around her ankles like falling red stones with nowhere to go.

She is naked.

She is also dead.

The victim of an “abortionist” who already had all the money she could borrow tucked inside his shirt pocket when he left her there.

RECALL the housewife married 25 years to a man who called her Lard Butt because she ate a lot remembering the time when she had no food because her alcoholic father drank it all up. Married to a man who wanted to punch her frequently for being “stupid” and often did, then sat at his supper table like a king saying, “The potatoes are lumpy. You've burned the roast. and I’M the one who likes cream in my coffee.” We see it every day on TV - only in your version she’s the buffoon.

RECALL a young woman in the dormitory of a midwestern university lying unobtrusively on the floor with a broom handle rammed so murderously up between her legs that her intestines were hanging out her mouth like tiny penises in reminder—

It was not an isolated incident.

RECALL an old woman run over under the wheels of an Army truck driven by a young GI who could’ve been anybody’s brother. Fleeing from her burning hut, she was a gook and the Enemy anyway; the story wasn't newsworthy.

RECALL a Lesbian woman whose face was torn apart by the irate husband of a straight friend. He claimed she had designs on his woman over coffee. She took the case to court.

“Are you a Lesbian?” the judge said. “Yes,” she said.

“Case dismissed,” he said. He didn’t say it would've been just as OK had he killed you. (The story did not make front-page news).

RECALL the 19th century sailors who captured an island full of Polynesian women - dragged them on their ships and brutalized and raped them, then tossed them overboard to drown. And when to the men’s surprise the women swam, the sailors shot them through the heads for sport with bullet holes arranged by one click of one finger pulled through weapons resembling pricks and talking louder.

It only took us 200 years to find this out.

RECALL NINE MILLION WOMEN tortured individually as witches over a period of FOUR HUNDRED YEARS which we never read three lines about in all your scholarly history books.

RECALL the disc jockeys of Every Major City in This Country who laugh at women 100 times a broadcast: “I was going to do a bit about the groupie as bowwow, but I lost the dog...” or “And there we have Helen Reddy singing ‘I Am Woman,’ the national anthem of Women’s Lib - Can you imagine saluting a broad on a flagpole?...”

Can you imagine a woman doing any of these things?

Because she hates men as you and your kind have hated women since the beginning of the time you first appeared on this earth?

Yet there you sit in your 20th century casuals—casually—with a notebook in your hands. Your hands writing busily. Your hands that are so clean they never dirty anything more than newsprint. Your mouth working rapidly. In the midst of six women-identified-women you say, “So first you get freedom for Blacks, then for women, then for Lesbians, then for rapists, then for axe-murderers. Now isn’t that carrying the argument to absurdity?”

Well, of course not. Anyone knows that it is completely reasonable to classify Lesbians with axe-murderers (though personally I have never known either a rapist or an axe-murderer who was a woman).

So we don’t smile at you. And you are shocked when we talk about the “boys and their games” (and you think THAT'S discrimination!)

Shocked when we say we are indifferent to you.

So shocked that you are compelled to write about “Lesbian bombardment and man-hating polemics.”

After you’ve said that the “women with beehive hairdos are really the enemy.” (You should look to your own polemics.)

The night after your article appeared in the Denver Post someone called me on the phone and said,

“Are you that man-hating lezzy Chocolate Waters? You're the one I want. I'm going to rape you and murder you.”

Six months ago someone called my sister on the phone 1600 miles away. She is not a Lesbian. She is not even quite a woman yet.

The voice said,

“Is your name Tena Waters? You're the one I want. I'm going to rape you and murder you.”

Neither voice belonged to a woman wearing a beehive hairdo...

More on Page 17