8

Pro-Abortion Over Pro-Choice  
Working to Guarantee Women’s Rights  

Background  

A federal judge ruled January 15,  
1980, that Congress' attempts to deny  
Medicaid payments for "medically  
necessary" abortions are unconstitu-  
tional.  

Brooklyn U.S. District Judge John  
Dooling ruled funds must be provided  
for abortions if a doctor determines  
it is needed because of all factors  
"relevant to the health-related well-  
being of the pregnant woman." These  
factors include age, physical, emo-  
tional, psychological and familial well  
being of a woman.  

The funds were originally denied in  
late 1976 when Congress passed the  
Hyde Amendment. The Hyde Amendment  
limited federal funds only to abor-  
tions necessary to save the life of  
the mother and to women who immedi-  
ately reported a pregnancy stemming from  
rape or incest. It eliminated funds  
for women who needed an abortion to  
avoid severe or long-lasting health  
problems.  

This ruling is the second time  
Judge Dooling has said that the gov-  
ernment must pay for medically nec-  
essary abortions. The first ruling,  
made just after the Hyde Amendment  
was passed, was later vacated by the  
U.S. Supreme Court and returned to  
Dooling for reconsideration.  

In his decision Dooling said, "To  
terminate her pregnancy because that  
is medically necessary to her health  
is an exercise of the most fundamental  
of rights, nearly allied with her  
right to be, surely part of her lib-  
erty protected by the Fifth Amendment,  
doubly protected when the liberty is  
exercised in conformity with religious  
belief and teaching protected by the  
First Amendment.  

The Assistant U.S. Attorney, who  
represented the government said the  
decision would be appealed immediately  
and directly to the U.S. Supreme  
Court.  

Abortion had been legalized by the  
U.S. Supreme Court only 4 years be-  
fore the anti-abortion movement lob-  
bied successfully for passage of the  
Hyde Amendment. And the anti-abortion/  
forced-pregnancy movement is stronger  
today than it was three years ago. On  
January 22, the anniversary of the  
Supreme Court decision legalizing  
abortion, the anti-abortionists held  
demonstrations in Denver (see page 1)  
and elsewhere led by such people as  
Anita Bryant, Ronald Reagan, Senator  
Richard Schweiker (R-PA), Representa-  
tives Jesse Helms (R-N.C.) and Robert  
Dornan (R-CA) and Arthur Link, gover-  
nor of North Dakota.  

These demonstrations were covered  
by the establishment media which  
virtually ignored pro-abortion demon-  
strations happening on the same day.  

The appeal and overturning of  
Dooling's decision would be a major  
loss of what gains we have made. Even  
as it stands, while the ruling places  
no restrictions on abortions during  
the first trimester, except that it  
be performed by a licensed physician,  
beginning with the second trimester,  
states are still free to regulate a-  
bortion procedures “in ways that are  
reasonably related to maternal health."  
Nor does it require public hospitals  
to perform abortions for women who  
need them.  

Much still needs to be done in the  
fight for control of our own bodies.  
Clearly fighting for legislative  
reform is not the answer. This last  
decision by Dooling is the third time  
in 7 years that we have won the right  
to abortion and that right may again  
be taken away by the U.S. Supreme  
Court Appeal. *  

Feminist groups, such as the Los  
Angeles Feminist Women's Health Center,  
are researching inexpensive, safe and  

easily administered methods of abor-  
tion. Developing a safe, inexpensive  
means for abortion that we can admin-  
ister to ourselves or with the help  

of friends seems to be the solution  

we need to work for and support. Only  
when women have the knowledge and means  
for abortion will we be free of  
legislative manipulation.  

Editorial  

Carol Hanisch  
Barbara Leon  

A little over a decade ago women's  
liberationists burst on the national  
scene demanding total repeal of all  
abortion laws on the grounds that wo-  
men have a right to control their own  
bodies. Until then, the abortion re-  
form organizations, largely composed  
of population-controllers with little  
concern one way or another for women's  
rights in the matter, had been making  
little headway. Their reform programs  
readily accepted various restrictions  
on who could get an abortion, when  
and how.  

When the outpouring of support for  
women's demand for total repeal cul-  
minated in the Supreme Court's his-  
toric decision in 1973, it became  
possible for large numbers of women  
to get abortions legally. Even though  
repeal had not been won, and despite  
the prophetic warnings of feminists,  
repeal groups disbanded or lost sup-  
port and became ineffective.  

Today we are faced with the results  
of that incomplete victory as more  
and more restrictions are added to  
the current law. It's easy to blame  
it all on the Right Wing fetus-worship  
ers who are out in full force these  
days. But then they were around ten  
years ago, too, calling us murderers  
and lobbying and doing all the damage  
they dared. The difference is that  
we were becoming a strongly united  
women's liberation movement then and  
they didn't loom as large as they do  
from our splintered ranks of today.  

Weakened as we are, however, it  
does no good to fight if we do not  

Jessica Lipnack  

Perhaps because I was born and  
raised in the beautiful Pennsylvania  
countryside, my thoughts have focused  
on the news of Three Mile Island  
since the accident was first announc-  
ed. In the past week, I have begun  
to see the similarities between what  
is happening in Harrisburg and what  
is happening with childbirth in this  
country.  

There are 10,000 babies born in the  
United States every day; they are all  
being born on Three Mile Island. The  
technology that has brought us nu-  
clear reactors run amok and presents  
us with an image of our world explod-  
ing has also brought us the modern  
American way of birth. Space-age  
electronics -- whose long term ef-  
fects have not even been studied --  
are now a routine and integral part  
of prenatal and intrapartum care.  

Just as the antinuclear activists  
sadly find themselves echoing a giant  
"We told you so," so a relatively  
small group of childbirth activists  
have been trying to warn the medical  
establishment that it is blindly  
proceeding down a path whose conse-  
quences cannot be clearly foreseen.  

Natural childbirth -- giving birth  
to a baby with no form of mechanical,  
chemical, or electronic intervention  
-- does not exist in this country. A  
pregnant woman today has to become an  
expert in medical technology even to  
understand the procedures that will  
be administered to her. Amniocentesis,  
fiberoptic endoscopy, ultra-  
sound, pitocin, telemetry, epidural,  
and fetal scalp sampling are the lin-  
guistic relatives of roentgens, mil-  
lirehms and zirconium. Although this  
medical terminology may sound so  
exotic as to be appropriate for only  
a very few severely distressed cases,  

hold on to our principles and remem-  
ber how we were able to progress to  
begin with. With some courageous ex-  
ceptions, such as the Abortion Rights  
Movement (ARM), the cry has arisen  
from within the feminist ranks that  
"We are not pro-abortion. We are  
Pro-choice.” Now some who raise this  
cry trace their political lineage  
back to the old abortion reformers  
and are usually population-controllers.  
But the alarming thing, at root,  

is to see women who consider them-  
selves to be feminists, who often are  
connected with groups such as NOW  
which fairly early on took a stand  

for abortion repeal, taking up this  
"pro-choice" cry. Some of these groups  
are changing their very names, replac-  
ing the words like “abortion rights”  
with "pro-choice."  

To them we say, Sisters, where is  
your courage? And where are your  
brains? How can women have the right  
to choose unless one of those choices  
is abortion? And that means legal  
abortions with no restrictions, in-  
cluding the restrictions of social  
pressure from those who want women  
to have a choice -- but only in theory,  

Big Mama Rag Vol. 8 No. 1  

not in fact. And it must eventually  
mean freedom from having to cross a  
picket line of people calling you a  
murderer for making that choice. To  
claim to be pro-choice but not pro-  
abortion is to try to appear to not  
take sides, which means to NOT side  
with the woman who has to cross that  
picket line, be it an actual one or a  
psychological one set up by social  
pressure.  

Abortion is not a wonderful exper-  
ience. All women know that. BUT BEING  
ABLE TO GET A SAFE, LEGAL ABORTION  
WHEN WE DECIDE WE NEED ONE IS WONDER-  
ful -- and not only is it wonderful,  
but it is ABSOLUTELY NECESSARY FOR THE  
LIBERATION OF WOMEN.  

So we must be pro-abortion. We  
value the lives of living, breathing  
real women over the potential life  
of the unborn fetus. We must affirm  
abortion as one available means of  
birth control, however imperfect, and  
demand that all laws regarding it be  
repealed. It's the only way that  
women CAN have a right to choose.  

(Reprinted from Meeting Ground where  
it appeared as an Editorial)  

LEGA.  
AROULIGN  

Childbirth Technology & Nuclear Power  

the reality is that most parturient  
dyads (mother and baby) undergo at  
least one of these experiences; more  
frequently, once the "cascade of in-  
terventions" has begun, the dyad ex-  
periences them all.  

In both childbirth and nuclear  
energy, scientists are motivated by  
the philosophy that "man (which  
gender I use deliberately) can con-  
quer nature" -- a thoroughly absurd  
contradiction in terms. This idea  
represents a separation from self  
and reflects a kind of schizophrenia  
relative to being human. We are man-  
ifestations of nature, not its enemy.  
though we can, through our short-  
sightedness and arrogance, create  
Frankensteins more terrible than our  

nightmares have ever suggested.  

My generation was born in the shad-  
ow of Hiroshima. Today, our babies  
are being prodded and poked at with  
needle and video scans before labor  
even begins. What will become of our  
children, twenty or thirty years  
from now, when the long term effects  
of Harrisburg surface to claim their  
victims?  

The issues are one, the concerns  
the same. There is a Harrisburg in  
every delivery room in this country,  
and the superficial solutions offer-  
ed to meet consumer demands have  
little substantive meaning. Metro-  
politan Edison can evacuate the  
entire state of Pennsylvania for a  

few days, but the truth is that this  
"solution" is purely prophylactic;  
those people can never return to  
their lives as they have known them.  
Their lives, their health, their  
land has been permanently altered  
by Three Mile Island. Likewise  
hospitals can decorate birth suites  
with curtains and carpets, but so  
long as the basic view of birth  

prevails -- as a risky process from  
which mothers and babies must be  
rescued -- each baby's birth is a  

mini-Three Mile Island whose long  
term effects cannot even be seen.  
The technologists have settled for  
a level of “acceptable risk" in  
building nuclear power plants, and  

they have settled for a level of  
“acceptable risk" in their "aggres-  
sive management of parturition," to  
use a popular obstetrical phrase.  
Some proportion of people may be con-  
taminated and die from nuclear acci-  
dents; some proportion of babies may  
spontaneously abort after undergoing  
prenatal uterine diagnostics.  

I believe I speak for millions of  
people when I say that my life cannot  
be reduced to a cost-benefit analysis.  
Even so, most of us have left figur-  
ing out the long-range implications  
to the experts -- to the nuclear  
scientists and the obstetricians whom  
we invest with the authority to under-  
stand science for us. If we continue  
along behaving as we have in the past  
thirty years, we will have surrender-  
ed all of our authority to the  
religion of science and its priests,  
the nuclear experts and the doctors.  
There will be no “babies” in our  
next generation. Science will cre-  
ate new humans who are genetically  
sustainable in a radioactive world.  
Birth will have taken its place as a  
remnant of human history.  

(Reprinted from the Boston Health  
Packet, Number 22)