REGIONAL NEWS _

Feminist Guide to Santa Fe

Hello sisters:

You may have read Linda’s article on New Mexico Feminism in the June issue of BMR. Since Linda’s visit a lot of exciting things have been happening in Santa Fe that I’d like to tell you about.

The biggest and best of all those things is that we’ve finally secured a huge new women’s center! It’s a large house at 220 Manhattan St., which will provide space for Santa Fe women's health services, our office and library facilities, a large meeting room and a place for our one resident to live. The Women’s Center is called the Gathering (405-982-4716).

The Women’s Health Services, which has been struggling to survive financially, recently received a small (very small!) grant, and will now be able to carry on three days a week (W. - F. from 9-5). 

Another recent development in Santa Fe is the Feminist Media Collective. These sisters are working on a series of films titled, “Women of New Mexico.” For more information about this contact Mary or Ann at 405-982-8073.

We also have, at last, an organized rape crisis line which works out of the Santa Fe Crisis Intervention Center (listed in the phone directory).

The Santa Fe Women’s Press has now become the Santa Fe Community Press. The women forming the core of this group are heavy-duty Feminists, but are also dedicated to Marxist-Socialist principles. They want the press to be a viable political tool, available to all oppressed peoples and crossing over the barriers of racial, ethnic, sexual, economic, and age backgrounds. For more information call Maria, Kathy, or Sue (405-983-1963).

Two other established projects which are currently meeting at the Gathering are the Women’s Prison Project and Older Women’s Liberation. The Lesbian Alliance and a radical Feminist Rape and Study group are in the formative stages (ask for Pat at the Gathering for more information).

We welcome all of our sisters to come for a short visit, a long stay, or a lifetime. There’s a lot going on here and a lot of beautiful sisters struggling to make it happen. In addition, Santa Fe itself is a lovely place, surrounded by rainbow deserts and high mountain ranges. So please come when you can. You will be welcome!

Much love and energy;  
Pat Aspen

Quicksilver Times/LNS/A Little Help

Albuquerque Woman Shares Feelings on Monogamy

Dear T-,

Entering into this letter has been most trying. My mind goes into spasms of thought leaving me too tired to write it down, and usually goes too fast for me to stop it long enough to communicate it.

I am alone for the first time in a while. I try not to think of it as a long time, because I have a feeling only loneliness knows how long time can be. Being alone isn’t as frightening as it once was. As I have gotten older I have developed a few distractions that really work, but it is more a confusing situation than anything else. Confusing for its blatant simplicity. In most everything else there are at least two sides to reason out, why, where, etc., when I am by myself, there is nothing to figure out - I am. I might question do I want to be by myself, but then I am confronted with the thought that maybe I have something to learn through it. Of course that seems most logical, but I guess my energies feel at an incredible stalemate. The proverbial question ‘why’ is replaced by ‘what’ a seemingly healthier question but equally frustrating.

We are certainly living through one of the most difficult periods of evolution our species has ever encountered. It sometimes seems that through all our genius we have figured ourselves out to be extinct. No longer do we have immediate goals to be fulfilled ritually, filially, maritally, etc. We are here as free beings to note our essences, but to do what with them?

When I think specifically about our relationships with one another, our honest efforts in trying to figure out our needs and desires, when I then think about sexual monogamy, celibacy, polygamy, I become wary about what we are really doing. There seems to be a total awareness between two people when they first begin to learn about each other, of each other. There are two living patterns of ideas, feelings, attitudes, that, for whatever reasons, try to merge, move together, not necessarily compromise themselves but rather learn to peacefully co-exist with each other. All of this takes time, weeks, months, years, but when those people have achieved an understanding with each other, there is a time of respite and almost a honeymoon of sharing and knowing; but then after that, what?

It seems that what happens is that the result has been one finding someone else to be alone with, depending upon what those individuals want. It can be a time of incredible creativity or it can be a time of frustration. That is where monogamy sometimes ends and the cycle begins anew, flavored slightly with either the original two not being with each other, or both trying to maintain the peacefulness they've found with each other, as well as attempting to expand it with others.

The way I have seen and experienced the latter has meant an incredible amount of pain with the results being shattering. I am going through it now and feel angry about the waste of energy and denial. I guess what I believe is that the only time we can honestly deal with a polygamous situation is only after we are sure that we can live with ourselves first, and one other happily, only then do we know honestly what we are expanding. Polygamy as it happens now is just another way for us to be distracted from whom we are, in my opinion a dangerous distraction.

With love and strength and smiles......