Battered women from wealthier back-  
grounds also face financial difficulties when  
they leave their husbands, because he  
usually earns and controls the lion’s share of  
their income. Betsy put it this way: “I left a  
comfortable home with financial security.  
It’s not easy to give up all that. But finally  
you ask yourself, What good is all this  
furniture if I’m too depressed to enjoy it, or  
if I end up dead?”  

70% of the assault  
victims seen in the  
emergency room  
of Boston City  
Hospital are  
women who have  
been attacked in  
their homes.  

Abuse and the Law  

It’s a fear of death or maiming that  
usually drives a woman to call the police on  
an abusing man. The difficulties women  
encounter after taking this step should be  
lessened a great deal in Massachusetts when  
the Abuse Prevention Law goes fully into  
effect.  

The law was signed by Governor Dukakis  
on July 16, was enacted in the courts on  
August 16, and will be in effect in the police  
departments on October 16. The bill, written  
by lawyers and other members of the  
Battered Women’s Action Committee and  
sponsored by Representative Sharon Pol-  
lard, is a far-reaching, precedent-setting and  
extremely hopeful improvement over the  
outmoded old law.  

A battered woman was poorly protected  
by the police and courts under the old law —  
as she still is in most of the rest of the  
country — primarily because restraints on  
the abuser were too weak.  

To begin with, assault and battery is a  
misdemeanor, and a policeman won’t arrest  
someone for an assault and battery unless it  
is committed in his presence.  

A woman can take her case to criminal  
rather than civil court, but pressing felony  
charges (“aggravated assault”) against a  
battering husband is rare. It’s an emotion-  
ally painful, expensive and time-consuming  
process. Moreover, the chances of a convic-  
tion and jail sentence are minimal: the clerks  
(usually male) try to discourage a woman  
from going the criminal route; and the  
judges (usually male) traditionally hand out  
light sentences, or none at all, to abusive  
husbands.  

The Old Law  

So, under the old law a married woman  
generally chose the only other option, which  
was to obtain protective orders from Probate  
(family) Court. First she had to be willing to  
file for a divorce or separation; then she  
might be granted a Temporary Vacate Order  
(T.V.O.), which says that the offender must  
move out of the house, a Temporary  
Restraining Order (T.R.O.), which forbids  
him to restrain her liberty, and/or Custody  
and Support Orders for the children, where  
applicable.  

Under the old law, unmarried women  
couldn’t use these protective orders, but it  
didn’t really make much difference: they  
were largely unenforceable anyway. Their  

violation was merely “contempt of court” —  
a civil misdemeanor — and, again, police  
could not arrest for a misdemeanor not  
committed in their presence.  

So, while the wheels of justice rolled  
slowly forward processing the contempt  
charge, an aggressive abuser could use his  
fists again undisturbed by the authorities,  
whose hands were, so to speak, tied.  

The New Law  
Under the new law, protective orders are  
greatly strengthened, the definition of abuse  
is widened, and women’s rights are better  
guaranteed, regardless of marital status.  

Anyone can file for protective orders  
against any household member (related or  
not) or a former spouse. If granted, a copy of  
the order is filed with the police, and if  
violated, the police can arrest the offender,  
who may be charged with a criminal  
misdemeanor, which carries a potential  
penalty of two and a half years in jail and/or  
a $5,000 fine.  

Under the new law the concept of rape  
within marriage is at long last recognized. A  
woman who is forced by abuse or threat of  
abuse to engage in involuntary sex with her  
husband can file charges against him.  

Under the new law police are not  
supposed to play a conciliating role, as they  
have often done in the past (“Aw honey,  
you’ll make it up with him in the morning”),  
but are to treat domestic violence as a  
serious and dangerous crime. They must  
inform the woman of her rights, hand her a  
card printed in English and Spanish clearly  
explaining her options, and provide her with  
protection and medical aid, if necessary.  

A woman will find it easier to receive  
money for expenses incurred by the abuse  
and ensuing legal proceedings under the  
new law. And she will have access to the  
District Court for emergencies on weekends  
and holidays.  

The new law covers most of the bases.  
What it cannot do, however, is change the  
attitudes of the law enforcers. As Betsy said,  
“You’re caught in a bind because you’re  
dealing with a macho man, the police are  
macho, and you have to go to macho  
institutions for help.”  

“I left a comfort-  
able home with  
financial security.  
It’s not easy to  
give up all that.  
But finally you  
ask yourself, what  
good is all this  
furniture if I'm  
too depressed to  
enjoy it, or if I  
end up dead.”  

Shelter From the Storm  
Nowadays, fortunately, not all battered  
women in the Greater Boston Area have to  
rely exclusively on male institutions when  
fleeing an abusive home. They can go to one  
of the refuges run by sympathetic women for  

abused women and their children.  

PRIMARY REFUGE  

In addition to the specific services described below, Respond, Transition House and Casa  
Myrna Vasquez all provide: telephone and in-person referrals, advocacy, paralegal  
assistance, transportation to medical facilities and outreach to the community. The  
locations of the refuges are kept secret for the safety of the residents, but personnel can be  
contacted at the addresses and numbers listed below.  

Transition House  

C/o Women’s Center  
46 Pleasant Street  
Cambridge, MA 02139  
661-7203  

Transition House provides up to 6 weeks’  
food and shelter for as many as 30 people  
in their 22-room house, opened in  
January, 1976. Among their many pro-  
grams are: a 24-hour crisis intervention  
center and hot-line; a program to help  
children cope with emotional problems  
stemming from abuse; training in crisis  
intervention for recruits at the Boston  
Police Academy, and weekly support  
groups available to all community  
women.  

Transition House has given numerous  
workshops, lectures, video presentations,  
etc., to educate the public about women  
battering, and has been associated with  
many feminist projects, such as the  
recent “Women Take Back the Night”  
demonstration held in Boston.  

Casa Myrna Vasquez  
P.O. Box 18019  
Boston, MA 02118  
262-9581  

Casa Myrna Vasquez (C.M.V.), estab-  
lished in the South End in 1976, is  
Boston’s largest shelter for women who  
have been battered, raped, evicted or  
burned-out. Primarily a shelter for minor-  
ity women, last year they served 600  
people: 40% Hispanic, 30% Black, and  
30% White and “other.”  

The residents (who may stay up to 2  
months) of their 25-bed house are  
primarily from Boston, but they will  
accept Hispanic women from anywhere in  
the country. The staff at Myrna Vasquez  
is very experienced in dealing with the  
special problems of Hispanic women,  

The first step on the road to freedom  
might lead to Respond in Somerville,  
Transition House in Cambridge, or Casa  
Myrna Vasquez in the South End — the  
three main refuges in the area, all estab-  
lished since 1974.  

They were founded by people (usually  
battered women) who worked to make a  
reality of their dream; that there should be a  
haven where a battered woman and her  
children can go for a few weeks to receive  
food and shelter, companionship and sup-  
port, information and referral, while she  
tries to put her life back together.  

The refuges are not gray bureaucracies.  
They are poorly funded and over-crowded  
yet peaceful and homelike places that win  
the loyalty of most of the women they help.  
Former residents often drop by to see if they  
can lend a hand. Some take other women  
into their homes, or undergo training  
programs in child care and crisis interven-  
tion, so that they can volunteer time to the  
program that may have helped save their  
life, or at least their dignity.  

It’s not easy to break away, former  
battered women warn. “Society is not  
greeting single women with open arms,”  
cautioned Betsy. Finding friends and sus-  
tenance, and redefining goals and values are  
hard to do.  

According to Judy Barry, a support  
group leader at Respond, “The first phone  
call (to a refuge) may be the most  

who are often extremely isolated because  
of language and cultural barriers, and  
who come from cultures where women  
are traditionally expected to stay in the  
home, raising large families.  

Casa Myrna Vasquez has weekly  
house meetings and transportation to  
cultural events. Because of insufficient  
funding, Myrna Vasquez cannot offer  
support groups, child care or 24-hour hot  
line.  

Respond  

Box 555  
Somerville, MA  
623-5900  

One of the first refuges in the country,  
Respond was started in 1975 by three  
Somerville women. They can provide  
emergency shelter and food to three  
Somerville women and their children in  
an apartment donated by the city.  
Respond has applied for grants, which, if  
funded, would enable the purchase or  
lease of a sorely needed house. Now they  
must turn away four applicants for every  
woman they accept.  

Open to all are Respond’s two weekly  
support groups, run by formerly battered  
women. Gestalt, role-playing and other  
techniques are used to help women  
develop self-respect, get back in touch  
with repressed emotions, and cope with  
life — with or without a man. Child care  
is provided during sessions.  

Along with 12 other services state-  
wide, these three belong to the Mass.  
Coalition of Battered Women Service  
Groups. The organization was formed  
this year to better coordinate services,  
share skills and resources, apply for  
funds jointly, and in general find strength  
in numbers. A national network of  
services for battered women is in the  
planning stages.  

courageous thing she has done in her life.”  
But the difficulties are offset by a rejuvena-  
ting feeling of freedom and a renewed sense  
of self-worth. As Betsy said, “At least I  
don’t go around hating myself anymore. I  
actually like myself.”  

*(Names in this article have been changed.)  

Equal Times September 11, 1978