Hospitals Not Bargaining Six Years In Court.

Susan Goding

Three Denver area hospitals have
decided to fight the ruling by the
National Labor Relations Board (NLRB)
to negotiate with the nurses’ unions
at those hospitals. Last month the
NLRB ordered the hospitals to ne-
gotiate after they had refused for
over 7 months.

The Denver Federation of Nurses
and Health Professionals has helped
organize unions at St. Anthony, St.
Luke, Beth Israel and Rocky Mountain
Osteopathic. All but Rocky Mountain
Osteopathic have refused to nego-
tiate. However, the Federation feels
that even Rocky Mountain Osteopathic
is not bargaining in good faith.
St. Anthony, St. Luke and Beth
Israel are appealing the decision
by the NLRB with the 10th U.S.
Circuit Court of Appeals.

The NLRB has ruled that the unions
fairly won the right to represent
nurses and that church-owned insti-
tutions are not exempt from national
labor laws.

On January 29, 1980, the union
was certified as a bargaining agent
at St. Anthony after nurses voted
310 to 171 in favor of unionization.

The Federation's bargaining goals
include:

1) Responsible negotiations
2) Job security
3) Cost of living adjustments
4) Safe levels of staffing for pa-
tient units
5) Improved health services to
Denver citizens

Nurses at the four hospitals have
been subject to harassment by hos-
pital managements. The nurses are
filing complaints with the NLRB,
the complaints will be heard some-
time in the spring.

In response to the decisions of
the hospitals to refuse to nego-
tiate with the nurses union, the
Denver Federation of Nurses and
Health Professionals has formed a
10 member strike strategy committee.
The Federation is asking support
from the Denver community by boy-
cotting the four hospitals involved
until they come to the negotiating
table to bargain in good faith.

Action/Study

Group Is Meeting

The Feminist Action Group continues to meet every second and fourth
Wednesday of the month. The group has decided to spend the next few
meetings studying feminist theory. Women who come to the next meeting
should bring a copy of Sisterhood Is Powerful, an anthology edited by
Robin Morgan. Copies are available at the Denver Public Library and
at Woman To Woman. Actions will be organized by the group as the need
arises. All women are welcome, come to Woman to Woman, 2023 E. Colfax.

The meetings start at 7:00 pm.

I'M TIRED OF HEARING HOW WE;

ARE THREATENED.

Girls Used By Porn Ring

Kate Sharp

Two women and one man were arrested
in Denver, Sept. 24th, on sexual as-
sault charges stemming from a police
raid on the headquarters of a local
child pornography operation. It is
suspected that as many as 100 girls
may have been victims of the porno-
graphy ring operating near Morey Dr.
High School at 840 E. 14th Ave.

The three suspects arrested in the
raid were John Wilson, 46, his wife
Sharon Wilson, 39, and Donna Sly, 20.

The arrests came after a 14 year
old Morey Jr. High School student
told police that she and her 12 year
old sister were lured into a car by
a man and woman who told them they
should be models and promised them
cosmetics in return for modeling.
Once in the car, the girls were taken
to a house at 932 E. 25th Ave., where
they were told to try on several cos-
tumes. When the outfits began to get
too scanty, the older girl refused to
continue trying them on. At this
point she was threatened, photograph-
ed in the nude, and forced to parti-
cipate in sexual activities with Sha-
ron Wilson.

The girls were released with a
warning not to tell anyone about what
had happened. The older girl, how-
ever, told her school counselor, who
called the police.

When police raided the house, they
reported finding the three adults and
two girls, ages 14 and 15. Confisca-
ted in the house were hundreds of
pornographic photographs featuring
young girls in various stages of un-
dress and/or involved in various
kinds of sexual activity. Also con-
fiscated were lewd costumes, porno-
graphic posters, and various kinds of
sado/masochistic paraphernalia.

During the raid, detectives were
approached by two other girls who
claimed they'd been subjected to sim-
ilar treatment by the adults. As far
as has been determined, all the as-
saults have been confined to girls
between the ages of 12 and 15.

This is the second arrest of the
Wilsons. They were arrested in 1975
on sexual assault charges; however,
the charges were later dismissed for
lack of evidence. Police have been
unable to determine as yet whether
any of the pictures were sold to por-
nographic publications that feature
children.

Constance Perenyi

On September 15, 1980, the United
States Court of Appeals, District of
Columbia Circuit, handed down a fa-
vorable decision regarding tax exempt
status for Big Mama Rag. The Court
has ruled that the “full and fair ex-
position” test on which the district
judge relied is unconstitutional, and
cannot be used to deny BMR tax exempt
status as an educational organiza-
tion.

This decision comes three months
after the case was argued before the
Court of Appeals, and some six years
after BMR originally sought tax ex-
empt status from the Internal Revenue
Service. The initial request was
denied by the IRS District Director
in Austin, Texas on the grounds
that the newspaper was the same as
an “ordinary commercial publishing
practice." Then, after BMR filed
a protest and a hearing was held in
the IRS National Office, the denial
was affirmed on three separate
grounds:

1. the commercial nature of the
newspaper;

2. the political and legislative
commentary found throughout; and

3. the articles, lectures, editor-
ials, etc. promoting lesbianism.

Enabled by a final IRS determin-
ation letter from the IRS to seek
judicial review of the decision, BMR
took the case to the District Court
for the District of Columbia. Al-
though the court rejected the IRS
argument that BMR was not entitled
to tax exempt status because it was
a commercial organization, it did
agree that the paper did not meet
the definitions of "educational" and
"charitable" as determined by treas-
ury regulations. Furthermore, the
court found no constitutional basis
for contesting the IRS decision.

At issue in this case are treasury
definitions of "educational". The
term can be defined as: (a) The in-
struction or training of the individ-
ual for the purpose of improving or
developing his (sic) capabilities; or

(b) The instruction of the public
on subjects useful to the individual
and beneficial to the community.

An organization may be educational
even though it advocates a particu-
lar position or viewpoint so long as
it represents a sufficiently "full
and fair exposition" of the pertin-
ent facts as to permit an individual
or the public to form an independent
opinion or conclusion. This means
giving both sides of a story.

The case presented to the U.S.
Court of Appeals was based on the
premise that denial of tax exempt
status because of the "full and fair
exposition” standard is unconstitu-
tional. The September 15 ruling was
indeed based on the Court's judge-
ment that this standard is “unconsti-
tutionally vague."

Thus, the Court of Appeals has
reversed the district court's deci-
sion and instructed the district
court to hold "further proceedings
consistent with this opinion." Bas-
ically, this means that the battle
is not over yet, and that the case
is still in litigation. The import-
ance of tax-exempt status for BMR is
not that the paper is aiming for
a profit, but that the project is
heavily reliant upon charitable
contributions for our continued
existence. With tax exempt status,
BMR could give contributors a break
in their taxes.

Keep watching BMR for updates on
the case.

No Joke

Denver U.S. District Judge John Kane Jr., while addressing a group
of corrections officials and probation officers recently, made an
appalling, though humorously intended remark about rape. At one point
during his speech, Kane complained that the U.S. Congress and state
legislatures had been creating laws resulting in the courts now ar-
bitrating in matters that they traditionally had not been involved in.
Kane stated that he yearned for the days when judges presided over
more traditional matters such as criminal cases. Said Kane: "I'd just
love to have a garden-variety rape case. It keeps you awake in the
afternoon and provides a little vicarious pleasure.”

In a show of not surprising media logic, the Denver Post excused the
seriousness of the remark by "reassuring" us that, "Kane presides
over cases in which federal constitutional questions are at issue...
Because rape isn't a federal crime, he doesn't preside over rape
trials."

Federal District Court Judges are appointed instead of being elec-
ted to the position. Therefore the only ways they leave office is
through death, impeachment or resignation. A picket has been organi-
zed calling for Judge Kane's resignation, scheduled for Monday,
October 6th, from 4-6 pm at the Federal Center, 19th and Stout, down-
town. Come and picket!

March And Conference Held

Regional Conferences on Violence

From September 18 through 21, the Second
National Conference on Violence Against
Women was held in Denver, CO. The conference started off on Thurs.
with a speech by Andrea Dworkin (author
of Our Blood and Woman Hating) followed
by a march to take back the night. The speech and march was attended by
about 1000 women. The march was followed
by entertainment and a speak-out
by women who had been victims of
violence. The speech and march had been
originally scheduled for Fri. but was
changed to Thursday in order that
women who wished could observe Yom
Kippur.

Friday through Sunday a conference
was held at the Auraria Campus.

Because the conference and march
occurred late in the month, BMR will
cover the conference next month. We
would like to encourage women who
attended the conference to send letters
or articles.