Abortion  
From page 10  

minor damage.  

Appleton, Wisconsin, Fox Valley Re-  
productive Health Care Center - Repeat-  
ed acts of vandalism culminated in a  
firebomb exploding August 23, 1978 out-  
side the clinic, charring the window,  
woodwork and part of the roof.  

Hempstead, New York, Bill Baird Cen-  
ter - A man with a can of gasoline and  
a torch set fire on February 15, 1979  
to the reception room of the clinic.  
Miraculously, the 40-50 patients in  
the clinic at the time escaped unharmed.  

The following clinic invasions by  
"People Expressing a Concern for Every-  
one” (PEACE) and other anti-abortion  
activists all occurred on January 6, 1978.  

Omaha, Nebraska, Ladies Center - Dem-  
onstrators entered and sat down in  
front of procedure room doors. Police  
removed them, but the Deputy Chief of  
Police let them go a few blocks away.  

New York, New York, Center for Repro-  
ductive Health - Demonstrators entered  
the clinic, distributed literature,  
sang anti-abortion songs and sat in the  
procedure rooms. Police arrested seven  
persons, charging them with trespassing  
and resisting arrest.  

Minneapolis, Minnesota, Midwest  
Health Center for Women - Demonstrators  
entered the clinic, distributed litera-  
ture, sang anti-abortion songs and sat  
down in front of the procedure room  
doors. Police arrested them and charged  
them with trespassing.  

Baltimore, Maryland, Hillcrest Clinic  
of Baltimore - Demonstrators barged past  
a staffer who had just unlocked the  
back door to the clinic. The clinic was  
empty since it was just opening for the  
day. Ten people were charged with tres-  
passing.  

Anchorage, Alaska, Alaska Clinic -  
Demonstrators chained themselves to a  
procedure table, and refused to leave  
after security guards cut the chains.  
The police were called and people ar-  
rested.  

Fairfax, Virginia, Northern Virginia  
Women's Medical Center - This clinic was  
the victim of one of the January 6 in-  

cidents, and has further been victimized  

by a whole series of illegal harass-  
ments:  

Johnston  
From page 3  
agreement was that I would not sue  
him or his attorney or attorney's  
firm for bringing the lawsuit against  
me nor continue to attempt recovery  
for civil damages for rape.  

The suit was dismissed and became  
final September 13, 1979. Henderson's  
attorney declined to elaborate on the  
reasons why Henderson dropped the  
suit against me. Those involved with  
my case were surprised that the case  
wasn't dropped sooner due to strong  
evidence, national support and public-  
ity, and a local investigation of re-  
cent harassment.  

The implications of my case are  
clear - women who go through the dif-  
ficult decision and traumatic process  
of prosecuting their crimes must know  
what their rights are. Otherwise, we  
run the risk of retaliation through  
the legal system if the accused are  
acquitted. We should refuse to cooper-  
ate with the criminal justice system's  
policies and practices which violate  
our rights.  

A defense fund has been set up to  
pay remaining expenses I endured from  
this suit. Donations will be appreci-  
ated and can be sent made out to the  
"Tori Johnston Defense/Support Commit-  
tee" at PO Box 22525, Milwaukie, OR  
97222. Phone (503) 659-4612. The office  
hours are 8 AM thru 8 PM, Monday thru  
Friday. I was represented by the Com-  
munity Law Project of Portland and  
consulting attorneys on this case were  
the Victims Rights Center of Virginia  
Beach, VA.  

Attorneys across the US - Inform oth-  
er attorneys of this case and show  
this to them. The Victim Rights Center  
of Virginia Beach has offered to do  
research for attorneys at no cost who  
wish to do further research pertaining  
to the time statute of limitations.  
This case is believed to be the first  
in the US and has brought to light ser-  
ious inequities in the laws which  
could affect every state in the United  
States. For more information contact  
the above address and phone number.  

Demands of Women  
From page 2  

Four demonstrators, arrested on Novem-  
ber 12, 1977 and on January 6, 1978 were  
acquitted by a judge on the grounds that  
the Virginia statute allowing first tri-  

mester abortions is unconstitutional!  

On February 11, 1978, demonstrators  
pushed and kicked staff, including one  
who was 6½ months pregnant. Police ar-  
rested them, but were then told not to  
respond to the clinic's calls since the  
courts were obviously not going to pro-  
secute the cases.  

Anthology  
From page 23  

through women's studies. Stories of  
harassment of lesbians on campuses  
ought also to be included. I'd like  
articles from women who have included  
works by and about lesbians in their  
introductory women's studies classes.  
One or two articles might describe  
“lesbian studies". Should they be  
autonomous?  

All of us know that lesbians have  
had a profound impact on the develop-  
ment of women's studies. How can we  
document this? What would the field  
look like without us?  

These are only preliminary sugges-  
tions. What articles would you like to  
see in an anthology on lesbians and  
women's studies?  

The book will have an annotated  
bibliography. I'd appreciate any  
notes you can send me for it, e.g. on  
books you are now reading or have  
reviewed. Would any of you like to  
do the bibliography?  

I hope to form a small committee  
of five or six lesbians to read sub-  
missions for this book and help me de-  
cide which articles to use. The con-  
tents ought not to reflect only one  
lesbian's point of view.  

If you can take a few minutes to  
respond to this memo, you will help  
bring the proposal to life.  

Peg Cruikshank  
56 Mars  
San Francisco, CA 94114  

don't need them in order to have a  
strike power. In fact, if we don't  
organize ourselves into democratic  
unions, our forces will be mobilized  
by our enemies to support environment-  
ally destructive industries, a mili-  
tary economy, and further division in  
the ranks of workers.  

Besides organizing our workplaces  
independently of George Meany/Alfred  
Shanker-types, we can maintain our wom-  
en's community (which is growing in  
spite of failures at the organization-  
al level). The space we need to devel-  
op our own culture and our sense of  
sisterhood can only be created by tith-  
ing or taxing ourselves to support  
newspapers, coffeehouses, safe houses,  
clinics, bookstores, etc. (note:  
those which have survived over the  
years made no attempt to provide a  
"living" for anyone and were able to  
appeal to us for sustenance whenever  
necessary).  

We do not have to give up our wom-  
en's space because of the financial  
failure of small businesses that ser-  
ved our needs. Nor do we need to ap-  
peal to the government for grants. We  
can organize and discipline ourselves  
to sustain those activities that are  
vital to our survival and development  
as a community.  

The rest of so-  

many activists in the women's move-  
ment have known for quite a while that  
it would come to this, but have been  
timid about “preaching from the roof-  
tops". Maybe that was not a bad idea.  
Now we are a big enough force to be  
reckoned with, and we have seen where  
the “small business" approach has led  
us. We have also seen where our fear  
of leadership and organization has led  
us. It's time to seek out the leaders  
among us (there are many) and to in-  
sist that they train us all in the  
skills we need to become invincible, to  
inspire us all in building a truly re-  
volutionary women's movement.  

Andrea Gabriel  

Female Processes  
From page 2  

We all think “training bras“ are it. Imagine Big Bird and Miss Piggy  
doing a bit on training tampons -  
t is for tampons, t is for training,  
etc.  

Jennifer's slogan is “Out of diapers and into tampons" or maybe vice versa, considering female anatomy.  

This plan has several advantages:  
1) Anything that demystifies female  
processes is a good thing (I'm ser-  
ious about that, though not about  
training tampons).  
2) Little girls can feel grown up at  
an early age and can play "The Curse"  
instead of "bride and groom".  
3) The advertising industry will love  
it - there are a lot of girls in the  
world and more coming up all the time.  
4) And of course, capitalism will  
jump right in.  

Emily (9) is developing a whole  
repertoire of other things (besides  
the obvious) to do with tampons -  
watch this space!  

Hang in there.  
Donna Breed  

Lucia Valeska  
From page 8  

It is very important for us to understand how difficult coalition work is,  
how patient we are going to have to be as we try to build coalitions within  
our own, first, just the lesbian community - we are republicans, we are demo-  
crats, we are black, brown, yellow, white, red, different classes, we cover  
it all. Our own community has to be a coalition. So then we are trying to build  
coalitions with other coalitions and it gets very complicated. It takes pati-  
ence, endurance and a good ear for the experiences of others. Gay coalition,  
by its nature, is the hardest one to form. Not only do we have to deal with  
diversity, which is the biggest problem for any coalition, but the second  
problem for gay coalitions - coalitions built between lesbians and gay men - is  
the closet. The closet gets in the way of building gay coalitions and gay or-  
ganizations. Black people have never been afraid to join a black organization;  
women are not afraid to join a women's organization. The Church has never come out  
against being female and the State has never come out against being black or  
working class. There is a difference between being inappropriate only in special  
places, that is, places of power, and being inappropriate altogether. The  
Church, the State, the entire medical industry have suggested we simply do  
away with gay people. Until we impress them with who we are, where we are  
and just how big we are, our zero class status will continue unthreatened.  

The weapons that we need to fight with were chosen long before we appeared  
on the scene. Weapons chosen, battleground laid out, the perimeters of possi-  
bilities were set down far in advance of our arrival. For most Americans,  
electoral politics are the only politics. This coalition with gay men is un-  
easy - this has led Sally Gearhart, in a recent political race on the West  
Coast, to support a feminist candidate over a gay male candidate, and said  
this in defending her position, “Weary lesbians have spent untold hours ex-  
plaining to middle America that lesbians do not worry about venereal disease,  
do not have sex in public bathrooms, do not want to go to the barricades  
fighting for the lowering of the age of consent for sexual acts. I will con-  
tinue to defend my gay brother's right to his sexuality, though many of its  
dimensions embarrass and frighten me. But I am frustrated and angry that many  
gay men remain totally oblivious to the effect on women of their objectifica-  
tion of each other, their obsession with youth and beauty, their camped up  
consumerism and their demand for freer sexual expression.” She is one tough  
woman and does not quibble over what she means, but notice that she is coming  
out for a political candidate; notice the dialogue has begun. It's not that  
we can leap into supporting gay candidates for offices. We have to know what  
they stand for and we have to begin a dialogue with the gay male community  
which lets them know where we stand; and they have to begin to deal with fem-  
inism in a much, much deeper sense than they ever thought they would have to.  

It's time to understand the differences and work with gay men. Here is some-  
thing that's really unpopular - oppression is the responsibility of the op-  
pressed. We used to hear in the Sixties, “It's not black people's responsibil-  
ity to teach white people what racism is about. White people have to deal with  
white racism.” Women then said to men, “We don't have to teach you what sex-  
ism is and how you oppress,” but guess what, we are going to have to do it for  
such a time because if we don't deal with them, they won't deal with sexism at  
all.  

On the other hand, lesbians have a great deal to learn about the gay male  
community. I have learned that the gay male is now cannon fodder for the gay  
movement. The gay male has been subjected to violence across this country  
that lesbians... it's not that we are immune to it - as soon as we're as vis-  
ible as they are, we'll get it too. But right now they are serving cannon fod-  
der for your right to love. If we don't deal with violence against the gay  
community we'll all lose.  

In ten years' time we have torn down several boards from the closet, but for  
every board destroyed, the right-wing collects several hundred dollars? sev-  
eral thousand dollars? hundreds of thousands? No, millions. Every board that  
comes down out of that closet door, the right wing collects millions of dol-  
lars. The right wing coalition is powerful. It has money - you would not be-  
lieve how much money. Its enemies are the women's movement, feminism, abortion  
rights, the ERA, and homosexuality. There is a new bounty out on your freedom.  
You can gather here today, this year in this room. I don't know how long that  
freedom will last for us. It is something we must take note of. Right wing  
people seem to have a knowledge that it takes money to create political power  
in this country and I don't think that's a knowledge that is widespread in  
the gay community. Everybody knows the gay community, especially the gay male  
community, has a lot of money in it. We're talking about 20 million people;  
yes, we have our poor, but we have our rich, too. It has been said that the  
Jews without knowledge of or interest in power never thought of exercising  
more than mild pressure for minor purposes of self-defense. Gay disinterest  
in power is a communal suicide note. Apathy is our worst enemy.  

Del Martin  

is that perpetrated by women against women - when so-called feminists who  
are supposed to be about the business of liberating women reject lesbians  
as the albatross of the women's movement.  

From page 9  

The different kinds of violence against women cannot be separated from our-  
selves. We talk in terms of "us" and "them" at our peril. As women, we have  
all been sexually harassed, or raped or battered - think about that. Have you  
ever had an argument with a man in which you backed down because you were in-  
timidated? Did you think that if you took that argument a step further he  
might just strike out at you? Did you ever stay in a relationship longer than  
you should have? Did you stay because you felt responsible for the other per-  
son? Did you stay because of the children? Were you afraid of loneliness?  

Did you have doubts as to whether you could live by yourself and support the  
children on your own? Did you ever have intercourse with a man even though  
you did not really want to have sex with him then? Have you ever faked org-  
asm? Have you ever felt humiliated or degraded by sexual remarks made by  
the men you work with? Has one ever made a pass at you? Did your boss ever  
try to seduce you? Were you ever called a lesbian or a whore because you  
rejected a man’s advances? Or because you have become an advocate for women?  

Get in touch with those experiences and your feelings about them. Then  
you will know that you are no different than the battered woman, the rape  
victim. It is only when we understand our collective victimization that we  
begin to redefine ourselves as women and change the structure of our world.