Holly Near Lives Her Art and Politics

Interview and photo by Clare Strawn

Out of her way across the country, Holly Near and her pianist Jeff Langley stopped in Denver to give us the rare and unexpected treat of a free concert. The Three Sisters Bar was full of women who had heard Holly on her three self-produced albums and with the usual Saturday night crowd who, for the most part, were pleasantly surprised. A large part of Holly’s appeal is her ability to incorporate so completely her art with her political message. Her subject matter includes women of Vietnam, factory workers, and women incarcerated in prisons, mental institutions, and the nuclear home. Her message is also implicit in her presentation. After encouraging the audience in a three-part round, she exclaimed, “See how organized you are!” The lyrics of “Sister, Woman, Sister” about life in prison were brought home to all of us by Holly’s reminder that if Senate Bill 1 is passed, we too might live in prison. Holly discussed the growth of her art and politics in the interview excerpted below.

BMR: How would you say you bring together your art and your politics?

HN: It started, I guess, a long time ago. When you’re a child, you start to develop experiences and have a certain set of things that happen to you that leads you to come to the conclusions you come to. I was raised on a farm, and my parents had been involved in the labor unions during and before the McCarthy period. I remember my dad saying he was on one committee that was on child care; it puts you in some perspective when you hear that. So these things were around; they were not desperately new ideas to me completely. I was really involved in school and singing. I started performing when I was seven; I did a lot of popular music, show tunes, Broadway kind of things, and then when I got into college, I went into film and television and wasn’t doing anything that was very politically conscious. But what I was doing, not knowing it at the time, was developing skills. I was creating; I was practicing; I was getting all these skills together that finally, when the series of experiences came together, and I got the kind of support and pressure I needed from my peers, I realized that I wanted to put the skills that I had learned to really constructive and responsible use. There were all kinds of different events that brought me to having a political consciousness—things like the FTA show (Free The Army). It was kind of like an alternative to the Bob Hope show, and meeting the women in the different countries we went to like the Philippines and Okinawa and Japan. I learned a great deal about imperialism and what the United States' role was in that, and my consciousness about women started developing—via those third world women who were showing me how they were fighting within the context of their country’s struggle for independence and liberation. Then I came back to work in the anti-war movement, and then, when the war was over, started committing myself to understanding the deeper meaning of feminism. I’m still in the process of that right now. I’m really learning a great deal that I just didn’t know before.

BMR: Did you learn anything special as a result of the concert that you did in February with Meg Christian, Margie Adams, and Chris Williamson?

HN: I hadn’t worked with a lot of women musicians before. I had found myself working with a lot of women in the anti-war movement; I just hadn’t become conscious of the fact. I think back now and realize that I spent a lot of time with women; I just hadn't really thought about it. I was invited to work with Margie and Chris and Meg for a benefit for the women’s building in LA, and through that, I learned a lot from all of them in different political discussions and arguments we would have because we all four don’t agree on everything. The music was what kept bringing us back together again. Then we decided to do a tour around California this year, which involved about a hundred women up and down the state of California doing all the skills. A production company called “Women on Wheels” did the sound and the lights and the graphics promotion, and the music and everything was done by women. I think the only thing done by men in a couple of cities was child care.

Power of Music

BMR: You said that even though you do have political differences, the music brought you back together again. I think that’s a really intense comment about the power of music. How do you see music as actually being part of the political movement?

HN: Well, first let me get off the thing about the power of music. I knew very early in life that music is powerful. I knew I walked out on the stage and I did something and people reacted immediately. It wasn’t like, well, I’ll think about it and let you know in a week. It was immediate reaction. I also knew that when I listened to records, that just listening to a record, a piece of vinyl going on a scratchy old record player, could make me weep and laugh and dance. It affected me incredibly. In fact, I later learned that it taught me everything that I knew about being a woman—most of which was bad. It’s good that I had enough instincts to fight those things. But I still was affected by them, all those images. I go to a movie, and if there's a love scene going on, and the string section comes in, you know, it makes me weep, even if what’s happening on the screen makes me angry. So if, in fact, music has this power, then people who make music have got to be responsible to it, from my thinking. Learning how to be responsible for the music one does is a lifelong process. To be sensitive to, first of all, creating. I think one of the most political things artists can do is try to create a situation, an environment, or a space that gives people who come to it the opportunity to have their lives changed in a very substantial way. Trying to set up that kind of a situation is real exciting to me; now what that change is going to be, you can never have any control over. You do have to put a lot of energy into thinking about what you’re doing with that music. Music has been used by people for generations; they have put their children to sleep with it, muzak is used in office buildings to get women to type at a certain rate of speed, it’s been used by the military to send young, innocent people off to war, and it’s used to sell commercial products. It’s also used to give strength and courage to people who are creating revolutions. So it’s used by everybody. It's this incredible weapon. That's why people like Victor Jara, who was killed in Chile by the Junta, was a dangerous man, because he had music, and it was people’s music, and people responded to his songs. About the issues on the concert: Well, they were some real major ones and ones that seemed minor but actually were part of major questions like... What were the ticket prices going to be? If the ticket prices were less, then the women who worked on the tour would not get paid. There were people in the group who wanted to fight volunteerism and see that everyone was substantially paid for their work, but it would be reflected in the ticket prices. And other people felt the ticket prices should be low so that no woman could not come because she couldn’t afford it.

BMR: As it worked out, you had low ticket prices and there were a lot of volunteers working on it, right?

HN: Well, high-low. Ticket prices were four dollars. If you don’t have four dollars, that’s an expensive ticket. Someday, hopefully, the arts will be funded in a way that you don't have to pay anything. Why should people have to pay for music? It belongs to them. It’s theirs. We don’t live in that world; we live in this one, so the tickets were four dollars. Ten percent of each auditorium’s seating was given to low-income women. Responsible groups in the community gave those out to people. There’s a problem in that, too. Some poor women got to come to the concert—on the other hand, there’s a kind of tokenism about it. There were issues about whether to try to do outreach into communities that we were not including in the process. We're four white middle-class singers; should the organizers in each city try to bring third world women to such a concert? It’s a huge political question about what are women in the women’s movement doing to make connections with third world women?

Prison Problems

BMR: Do you feel that giving the concert at California women’s prisons was an attempted outreach, or how did you incorporate that?

HN: The prison concert was done because there were a lot of us involved in the concert who love those women very much. That came from an emotional place. It also symbolically came from a place of women’s music is for everyone, and we will take the music to those women who have been locked out of it and won't be able to come to the concerts. In that sense, it was symbolic because there are a lot of women’s prisons; they're not necessarily jails; they may be homes with children.

BMR: I think that was a very moving aspect of the concert for those of us who were able to be there. Can you tell us a little bit about your efforts to get the concert presented at the prison—I know there was some controversy about that.

HN: For a while, there didn't seem to be any problem at all—and then we found out that we weren't allowed to come into the prison because some of the women on the production did not get clearance because of their prior political work. It was an access issue whether they were going to let us in—see, there's a group called the Santa Cruz Women’s Prison Project that has done really fine educational work, which is not always welcome in the prison. See, the Santa Cruz Women’s Prison Project had been banned, and because there were some of those women on the production—because the Santa Cruz Prison Project was filled with some of the most talented women in the state—and we were gonna have them in our production! We refused to go in without having the whole production crew be able to go in; we were not going to be divided like that. On the last day before we were supposed to be there, we were still not given permission. We said there were a couple of people who were absolutely essential to the production. We said, well, please give them clearance, and the other women who are not essential will not go in. We were not allowed to walk around the prison like I had done before—we were kept locked in the auditorium—and the women came in and saw the concert and then left.

Overwhelming Response

BMR: What was the women’s response to the concert—especially to some of your prison-related songs?

HN: It was a most overwhelming event for me because so seldom do I get to sing for predominantly third-world audiences, and prisons are not made up of rich white girls. So, it was a stunning experience. I heard our songs through different ears, you know, the lyrics took on a different context, which I was proud of and some of which I was not. We saved the song “Sister-Woman-Sister” that I'd written about women at CIW until the end so in case the sound plugs were pulled, we’d have still gotten the concert in. But they weren't pulled, and the women were amazing, ‘cause that song speaks of different aspects of prison life, and the women in the audience would talk to me during it. They’d say: “Oh, yeah—woman—I know about that,” or you know the line about how “did they take away your child,” you’d hear someone say: “they sure did, honey.” It was almost like a revival meeting. I was in a state of shock; it was just an amazing experience. Prison is such an oppressive place. You go inside those doors, and they clang behind you, and your energy is just drained. You feel like you want to lay down and go to sleep immediately. It's a kind of escapism, and you have to fight with everything you've got not to fall into that. It’s barren, and it's cold, and smells like an institution, and you're caged, you know? It’s brutal, real brutal, and there’s just not a whole lot of warmth around. Once the concert started, it took a little while for us to gain the trust of the women there. Why should they give attention to anybody from the outside? After a while, they really started hearing that we had concerns and meant what we were saying, and it just became a wonderful womb inside a very cold place.

BMR: You organized workshops after your concerts to talk about what the purpose of going into the prison was and also to get music and instruments donated. What kind of follow-up happened with this?

HN: Well, we received incredible numbers of instruments; I don’t even know, hundreds, hundreds of instruments, and now it becomes a process of the distribution of those instruments. We would like to give one instrument to any woman who wants one so she would own it. Then, when she leaves the prison, she takes it with her. The rules are that you give things to the institution, and they belong to the prisons. Many times women don’t respect that which belongs to the prison, and if it belonged to them, and they knew that, they could take it with them; it would make it worth their while to work with it and learn it and care about it. So that’s still in the process of being worked out.

The workshops were to introduce women in the community to prison work, but also to show a film called “We’re Alive,” which was made by women inside CIW with the help of some video women on the outside. It’s an example of how art and politics can be mixed. You have a film, which is a piece of art, and you also have political content in it. Then we discussed art, politics, and prisons. The workshops were run by a woman named Carleen Faith, who is a real fine organizer. They were real important ‘cause women got all this energy after the concerts, and then they could go to the workshop and plug in and put that energy towards something. ‘Cause if you do music and everybody gets all excited, they just go out and boogie it away. Then what’s happened, nothing, you know, it’s so temporary. If you can create a 

More on page 10

Alicia’s

Restaurant

278 So. Downing 777-9904 “Good Home Made Food”