Joann Little

Joann Little disappeared from the  
North Carolina Correctional Center for  
Women in Raleigh, N.C. on Oct. 19.  

Little, who is Black, became a sym-  
bol of women's resistance to sexual  
attack when she was tried and acquit-  
ted of murder for the 1975 stabbing of  
a white jailer who tried to rape  
her.  

Little's attorney, Jerry Paul, said  
that he did not know the exact reason  
for her disappearance but that she  

had been very upset at the end of last  
week. Paul cited harassment from  

prison authorities, with notoriety  
gained during her trial as another  
pressure.  

"In many ways the public won't let  
the woman alone and let her be in  
peace," Paul told reporters. “The pre-  
sent administration at the prison was  
pushing her hard."  

Little was completing a 7-10 year  
sentence for breaking and entering and  
robbery, the same sentence she was  
serving at the time of the attempted  
rape. It seemed unlikely that she  
would be granted parole at hearings  
scheduled for next month. Little had  
already been turned down for parole  
once.  

Last week prison officials removed  
Little from a work-release job as a  
dental assistant. She was charged  
with failing to show up for work Sept  
13 and 14.  

Since May, Little had been working  
for Dr. David Lane, a Raleigh dentist.  
Lane, who is Black, offered her the  
job after seeing news reports that she  
had been unable to find an employer  
who would take her on work-release  
because of the publicity with which  
she has been surrounded.  

The disciplinary committee which de-  
cided to demote Little from work-re-  
lease status failed to consider a  
statement by Dr. Lane that she was at  

work on the two days in question.  

Prison Superintendent Ethel Fincher  
likewise failed to take Lane's state-  
ment into account when confirming the  
committee's verdict. Sources within  
the prison administration indicate  
that had the statement been considered,  
it might have resulted in Little  
being found not guilty in the discip-  
linary actions.  

Little had been denied parole earlier  
last spring after minor disciplinary  
charges were entered on her record by  
prison officials. She had hoped that  
successful participation in the work-release  
program would help her get out when she  
came up before the parole board again.  
With the demotion, Little's hopes for pa-  
role were all but gone.  

The Guardian  

Dessie  

On February 2, 1976, Dessie Woods,  
a poor Black woman, was railroaded  
into prison in Georgia for success-  
fully defending herself and a friend  
against a rape attack by Ronnie Horne,  
a white insurance salesman. Dessie  
Woods shot and killed Ronnie Horne  
with his own gun after he attempted  
to rape her and threatened to kill  
her when she fought against his rape  
attack.  

From the State's point of view, this  
righteous act of self-defense was  
intolerable because Dessie fought  
back against a traditional tactic  
used to maintain the subjugation of  
Black people: rape of Black women by  
white men.  

For resisting this form of colonial  
violence, Dessie is now serving 22  
years in the Georgia Women's Institute  
of Corrections, where she has been  
the victim of nude solitary confine-  
ment, forced druggings, and brutal  
beatings.  

These are the facts behind this  
emotional case: On June 14, 1975,  
Dessie Woods and Cheryl Todd, two  
Black women, hitchhiked from Atlanta  
to the Reidsville prison in Georgia.  
Todd's brother was incarcerated at  
Reidsville. She had received word  
that he was ill and she feared that  
he was not obtaining proper attention  
from prison officials. It was a hot  
day, Todd suffered from high blood  
pressure so she took medicine. This  
combination, claimed Todd, caused her  
to faint on the street outside Reids-  
ville prison.  

State troopers, stationed across the  
street, arrested the two women for  
public drunkenness. When the women  
protested, they were assaulted and  
imprisoned for three days. Upon  
their release, their only desire was  
to get back to Atlanta as quickly as  
possible, they said. Again, they  
were forced to choose hitchhiking  
because it was the cheapest method of  
transportation.  

Todd and Woods had been hitching  
for nearly 10 hours when they were  

Joann Little  

picked up by Ronnie Horne, a white  
insurance salesman from Rantz, Geor-  
gia. Horne was friendly at first,  
according to the women. They were  
exhausted and gave Horne a detailed  
description of their ordeal in Reids-  
ville. Horne picked up his CB micro-  
phone and radioed a description of  
the women to another man and arranged  
to meet him at a nearby restaurant  
for "further discussion." (1975 were  
pre-CB days; the citizen's radio were  
mainly used by truck drivers and law  
enforcement officers. Horne's large  
car and his CB radio led Woods and  
Todd to believe that Horne was some  
sort of detective, and Horne encour-  
aged this fallacy.)  

It was when Royce Yawn, the second  
man, demanded that he be able to  
"take" Cheryl with him that the women  
began to get suspicious and uneasy.  
When they attempted to leave Horne,  
he threatened to “arrest” them. Horne  
intimidated the women back into his  
car, said Todd and Woods. He then  
began to bombard them with threats of  
sexual assault. "He began to threaten  
us," Woods stated later; he said  
he was going to 'fuck' both of us."  

When Horne pulled into a deserted  
area, the now hysterical Todd jumped  
from the car and began to run. The  
enraged and intoxicated Horne  
reached for his (unlicensed) gun and  
was obviously intending to shoot  
Todd, said the women, when Woods  
started to struggle with him from the  
back seat. (Dessie Woods is a petite  
5'2", Horne was 5'9" and weighed 215  
pounds.) Nevertheless Woods won the  
fight and shot Horne twice in the  
head.  

According to her story, she found  
Todd, brought her back to the car,  
and assured her: “look at him Misty;  
he's dead, he won't mess with us no  
more." Woods then took money from  
Horne's wallet so that she and Todd  
could return to Atlanta without hitch-  
hiking.  

Throughout the subsequent trial,  
the prosecution repeatedly returned  

Pregnancy  

The U.S. Supreme Court began hearings  
this month on two cases which could  
further erode the rights of pregnant  
workers.  

In 1976 the court ruled that an em-  
ployer may deny pregnant workers the  
same health benefits provided for  
other non-work related disabilities.  
In the cases now before it, the court  
will consider the issues of seniority,  
sick leave and enforced leave for  
pregnant workers.  

The cases were initiated by Nora Sat-  
ty and Sonja Berg. Satty earned three  
and a half years of seniority as a  
clerical worker at Nashville Gas Co,  
before she took a 3 month leave to  
have a baby. She received no sick  
pay during that time and lost $732 in  
wages. When she returned to work she  
discovered that her seniority had been  
wiped out. Satty was rehired for a  
temporary job paying $10 less per  
week and was fired when the job was  
terminated a month later.  

Sonja Berg was a teacher in the Rich-  
mond (Calif.) Unified School District  
when she became pregnant. Her income  
supported both herself and her husband  
so she asked to continue teaching up  
to her anticipated delivery time. Al-  
though her physician had certified  
that Berg would be able to continue  
to work, she was forced to take a  
maternity leave beginning with the  
seventh month of pregnancy. The  
school district also said she was  
ineligible for sick leave pay.  

The women have both filed sex dis-  
crimination suits. Satty was award-  

African People's  

Socialist Party  

to the fact that Woods was amazingly  
calm and courageous during the inci-  
dent. The concept that Woods had  
chosen to fight her assailant, and  
in doing so fight against the "good  
ol' boy" Southern tradition of white  
men assaulting Black women, was in-  
comprehensible to her prosecutors.  

Woods was arrested the day after  
the murder. Her first indictment  

was handed down by a Grand Jury which  
was considered to be so blatantly  
racist that she was released free on  
bond, pending a re-indictment by a  
second Grand Jury. The second of  
the few motions granted the defense  
was a change of venue from Alamo  
County to Pulaski County.  

Pulaski County is a rural town with  
a population of 3,000. Traditional  
black-white relationships are perpet-  
uated. Black plantation laborers,  
for example, still work long hours  
for as little as $10 a week plus room  
and board. Black high school  
students demonstrating support for  
Woods were threatened with suspension  
and expulsion. Presiding Judge O'Connor  
issued a gag order against pub-  
licity and demonstrations.  

On January 31, 1976, the jury re-  
cessed and after several hours of  
deliberation returned hopelessly dead-  
locked. But Judge O'Connor ordered  
them to reconvene the following Mon-  
day. Finally the jurors returned  

with compromise verdicts: Todd was  
found guilty of theft and sentenced  
to five years in prison, with three  
and a half to be spent on probation.  
Woods was sentenced to two terms  
totalling 22 years (to be served con-  
currently) and denied bond.  

The appeal recently filed on behalf  
of Woods pointed out 12 “errors” com-  
mitted by the trial court. The most  
legally blatant is the fact that  
Woods was convicted of voluntary man-  

slaughter and armed robbery, two in-  
consistent verdicts. Voluntary man-  
slaughter is the result of a "sudden,  
violent and irresistible passion," while  
armed robbery implies intent. Woods  
could not have acted with intent in  
one instance and without intent in  
the other. The two decisions strong-  
ly contradict each other.  

Also the jury was not presented  
with the racial and sexual aspects of  
the entire incident—that Woods was  
acting in self-defense, protecting  
herself and her companion against  
assault. Nor was the jury allowed  
to deal with the fact that Horne was  
a white man acting under the assump-  
tion that Black women may be sexually  
abused at will.  

Woods has remained in jail since  
her conviction. She has reportedly  
been mistreated, drugged, and put into  
solitary confinement without clothing.  

More On Page 14