about their jobs and indicate by their  
behavior that they are not at all free  
from guilt. They repeatedly, compul-  
sively say, as if to convince them-  
selves, “This is a job just like any  
other job." The more they say that the  
more preposterous it seems.  

The major topic of conversation here  
is drugs. Eighty percent of inmates  
have used drugs when they were in the  
street. Getting high is usually the  
first thing a woman says she's going  
to do when she gets out. In prison,  
as on the streets, an escapist cul-  
ture prevails. At least 50 percent of  
the prison population take some form  
of psychotropic drug. Elaborate  
schemes to obtain contraband drugs  
are always in the works.  

Days are spent in pleasant distrac-  
tions: soap operas, prison love af-  
fairs, card playing and game playing.  
A tiny minority are seriously involved  
in academic pursuits or the learning  
of skills. An even smaller minority  
attempt to study available law books.  
There are no jailhouse lawyers and  
most of the women lack knowledge of  
even the most rudimentary legal proce-  
dures. When asked what happened in  
court, or what their lawyers said,  
they either don't know or don't remem-  
ber. Feeling totally helpless and to-  
tally railroaded a woman will curse  
out her lawyer or the judge with lit-  
tle knowledge of what is being done  
or of what should be done. Most plead  
guilty, whether they are guilty or not.  
The few who do go to trial usually  
have lawyers appointed by the state  
and usually are not represented well.  
The word seldom ever, “the hapless,”  
if not at all. Most of the  
homosexual relationships here  
involve role playing. The majority of  
relationships are either asexual or  
semi-sexual. The absence of sexual  
consummation is only partially ex-  
plained by prison prohibition against  
any kind of sexual behavior. Basically  
the women are not looking for sex.  
They are looking for love, for concern  
and companionship. For relief from the  
overwhelming sense of isolation and  
solitude that pervades each of us.  

Women who are “aggressive” or who  
play the masculine roles are referred  
to as butches, bulldaggers or stud  
broads. They are always in demand be-  
cause they are always in the minority.  
Women who are "passive" or who play  
feminine roles are referred to as  
fems. The butch-fem relationships are  
often oppressive, resembling the most  
oppressive, exploitative aspect of a  
sexist society. It is typical to hear  
butches threatening fems with physical  
violence and it is not uncommon for  
butches to actually beat their "women."  
Some butches consider themselves pimps  
and go with the women who have the  
most commissary, the most contraband  
or the best outside connections. They  
feel they are a class above ordinary  
women which entitles them to "respect."  
They dictate to fems what they are to  
do and many insist the fems wash, iron,  
sew and clean their cells for them. A  
butch will refer to another butch as  
"man." A butch who is well liked is  
known as "one of the fellas" by her  
peers.  

Once in prison changes in roles are  
common. Many women who are strictly  
heterosexual in the street become  
butch in prison. "Fems" often create  
butches by convincing an inmate that  
she would make a "cute butch." About  
80 percent of the prison population  
engage in some form of homosexual re-  
lationship. Almost all follow negative  
stereotypic male/female role models.  

There is no connection between the  
women's movement and lesbianism. Most  
of the women at Riker's Island have no  
idea what feminism is, let alone les-  
bianism. Feminism, the women's liber-  
ation movement and the gay liberation  
movement are worlds away from women  
at Riker's.  

The black liberation struggle is  
equally removed from the lives of wo-  
men at Riker's. While they verbalize  
acute recognition that Amerika is a  
racist country where the poor are  
treated like dirt they, nevertheless,  
feel responsible for the filth of  
their lives. The air at Riker's is  
permeated with self-hatred. Many wo-  
men bear marks on their arms, legs,  
and wrists from suicide attempts or  
self-mutilation. They speak about  
themselves in self-deprecating terms.  
They consider themselves failures.  

While most women contend that whitey  
is responsible for their oppression  
they do not examine the cause or  
source of that oppression. There is  
no sense of class struggle. They have  
no sense of communism, no definition  
of it, but they consider it a bad  
thing. They do not want to destroy  
Rockefeller. They want to be just like  
him. Nicky Barnes, a major black dope  
seller, is discussed with reverence.  

When he was convicted practically  
everyone was sad. Many gave speeches  
about how kind, smart and generous he  
was. No one spoke about the sale of  
drugs to our children.  

Politicians are considered liars  
and crooks. The police are hated. Yet,  
during cop and robber movies, some  
cheer loudly for the cops. One woman  
pasted photographs of Farrah Fawcett  
Majors all over her cell because she  
"is a bad police bitch." Kojak and  
Barretta get their share of admiration.  

A striking difference between women  
and men prisoners at Riker's Island  
is the absence of revolutionary rhe-  
toric among the women. We have no  
study groups. We have no revolution-  
ary literature floating around. There  
are no groups of militants attempting  
to "get their heads together." The  
women at Riker's seem vaguely aware  
of what a revolution is but generally  
regard it as an impossible dream. Not  
at all practical.  

While men in prison struggle to  
maintain their manhood there is no  
comparable struggle by women to pre-  
serve their womanhood. One frequently  
hears women say, "Put a bunch of  
bitches together and you've got nothin  
but trouble"; and, “Women don't stick  
together, that's why we don't have  
nothin." Men prisoners constantly re-  
fer to each other as brother. Women  
prisoners rarely refer to each other  
as sister. Instead, “bitch” and  
“whore” are the common terms of re-  
ference. Women, however, are much  
kinder to each other than men, and  
any form of violence other than a fist  
fight is virtually unknown. Rape, mur-  
der and stabbings at the women's pri-  
son are non-existent.  

For many, prison is not that much  
different from the street. It is, for  
some, a place to rest and recuperate.  
For the prostitute prison is a vaca-  
tion from turning tricks in the rain  
and snow. A vacation from brutal  
pimps. Prison for the addict is a  
place to get clean, get medical work  
done and gain weight. Often, when the  
addict gets herself busted (usually sub-  
consciously) so she can get back in  
shape, leave with a clean system  
ready to start all over again. One  
woman claims that for a month or two  
every year she either goes to jail or  
to the crazy house to get away from  
her husband.  

For many the cells are not much  
different from the tenements, the  
shooting galleries and the welfare  
hotels they live in on the street.  
Sick call is no different from the  
clinic or the hospital emergency  
room. The fights are the same except  
they are less dangerous. The police  
are the same. The poverty is the same.  

The alienation is the same. The rac-  
ism is the same. The sexism is the  
same. The drugs are the same and the  
system is the same. Riker's Island is  
just another institution. In child-  
hood school was their prison, or  
youth houses or reform schools or  
children shelters or foster homes or  
mental hospitals or drug programs  
and they see all institutions as in-  
different to their needs, yet neces-  
sary to their survival.  

The women at Riker's Island come  
there from places like Harlem, Browns-  
ville, Bedford-Stuyvesant, South  
Bronx and South Jamaica. They come  
from places where dreams have been  
abandoned like the buildings. Where  
there is no more sense of community.  
Where neighborhoods are transient.  
Where isolated people run from one  
fire trap to another. The cities have  
removed us from our strengths, from  
our roots, from our traditions. They  
have taken away our gardens and our  
sweet potato pies and given us Mc-  
Donald's. They have become our pri-  
sons, locking us into the futility  
and decay of pissy hallways that lead  
nowhere. They have alienated us from  
each other and made us fear each  
other. They have given us dope and  
television as a culture.  

There are no politicians to trust.  
No roads to follow. No popular pro-  
gressive culture to relate to. There  
are no new deals, no more promises of  
golden streets and no place else to  
migrate. My sisters in the streets,  
like my sisters at Riker's Island,  
see no way out. "Where can I go?",  
said a woman on the day she was going  
home. "If there's nothing to believe  
in,” she said, "I can't do nothin  
except try to find cloud nine.”  

What of our Past? What of our His-  
tory? What of our Future?  

I can imagine the pain and the  
strength of my great great grand-  
mothers who were slaves and my great  
great grandmothers who were Cherokee  
Indians trapped on reservations. I  
remembered my great grandmother who  
walked everywhere rather than sit in  
the back of the bus. I think about  
North Carolina and my hometown and  
I remember the women of my grand-  
mother's generation: strong, fierce  
women who could stop you with a look  
out the corners of their eyes. Women  
who walked with majesty; who could  
wring a chicken's neck and scale a  
fish. Who could pick cotton, plant a  
garden and sew without a pattern.  
Women who boiled clothes white in big  
black cauldrons and who hummed work  
songs and lullabies. Women who visited  
the elderly, made soup for the sick  
and shortnin' bread for the babies.  

Women who delivered babies, searched  
for healing roots and brewed medi-  
cines. Women who darned socks and  
chopped wood and laid bricks. Women  
who could swim rivers and shoot the  
head off a snake. Women who took pas-  
sionate responsibility for their  
children and for their neighbors’  
children too.  

The women in my grandmother's gen-  
eration made giving an art form.  
"Here, gal, take this pot of collards  
to Sister Sue"; "Take this bag of  
pecans to school for the teacher";  
"Stay here while I go tend Mister  
Johnson's leg." Every child in the  
neighborhood ate in their kitchens.  
They called each other sister because  
of feeling rather than as the result  
of a movement. They supported each  
other through the lean times, sharing  
the little they had.  

The women of my grandmother's gen-  
eration in my hometown trained their  
daughters for womanhood. They taught  
them to give respect and to demand  
respect. They taught their daughters  
how to churn butter; how to use elbow  
grease. They taught their daughters  
to respect the strength of their  

MORE ON PAGE 17