12

culture

Big Mama Rag Vol.7 No.11

struggle

Saving Us From Ourselves:

"It's a mighty funny use of the word family when we don't share nothing but
the bottle."

June Arnold
Sister Gin

Constance Perenyi

Once upon a time, in 1975 to be exact, Daughters Press released a book that
said a lot about women's culture - not the culture of Molly Bolt (Rubyfruit
Jungle) or Carole Hanratty (In Her Day) - but the culture of women who crash
through the stereotypes of defined dykedom. The heroines are aged, alcoholic,
fat: they are real, they are fictionalized; they are free, they are enslaved.
And they make June Arnold's Sister Gin an enigma.

One of the first books I read after coming out, Sister Gin remained a fond
memory for me . . until last week, and then I reread the book because I also
remembered that something about it really bothered me. And it was something
I had to define as we on BMR began talking about dependencies.

Inside the drawer that morning there was a typewritten sheet from Sister Gin:
"The best women do not see beyond their daily pleasures; what
makes them feel good is no more than what has always set women
up - flattery, prettiness and smiles, attention. In the new wave
of women, everyone tumbles over each other like periwinkles racing to get stranded on the sand. Us old periwinkles who have
been beached before shout with a mouthful of salt. Salt is full
of savor here in the breakers; wherewith shall it be sweetened?
My thirst...

Oh, S.G. Your thirst is legion. Have a salty dog then, briny bitch.
Your thirst has hands. My...

Your thirst has hands? Sister G., those are purple words. A blue periwinkle
whose thirst has hands is a metaphor that carries many colors on its back.
You are coated like your tongue today, Gin.

My words make you laugh from your height, Su, but
they race from my right brain faster than even periwinkles in
a fast surf and I leave you to edit. You locked your drawer last
week and shut me out. You use wooden means to block me. Take my
thirst's hand. I am your friend, S.G.

from Sister Gin

© 1999

At first, I wanted to do a close analysis and criticism of the overall ac-
ceptance of alcohol abuse in this book. I wanted to blast it for being de-
structive, oppressive. But halfway through, I realized that I disagreed with
everything I wanted to say. I was drawn to Sister Gin, who is really the
liberated alter ego of Su, the main character of the novel. Under her "sister's" influence, Su flies through the constrictions of her mind; she becomes
uninhibited, brilliant. For Su and Sister Gin, there are no shoulds and
should nots, only free-wheeling anger, love, creativity.

And so, I get confused. I am basically terrified of drinking and drugs...
I've had far too many brushes with people who did not know when to stop.
Even removed from childhood, I cannot forget, nor will I forgive my parents
for abusing both alcohol - and me. For three months in college, I spent my
weekends drunk because I was in love with my roommate (who also was becoming
an alcoholic) and because I could not yet deal with the implications of those
feelings. Later, as I was trying to prove myself to be heterosexual, I would
get stoned so I could fantasize about women while I was being used by a man.
And so, I've had my fair share of experience with both chemical and self-
abuse.

But, there is more to it than that...

"Connie, I'm helping start a support group for alcoholics.”

"That's good. I know you'll be supportive,” I say, wondering why she is
interested in this.

"Well, it's important to me. I have a stake in this."

"You'd be good for other women."

"Not just other women. Me. I’ve never told you this. I'm an alcoholic.”

She's serious, I think... We've been lovers, friends. We've known each other
for months... My mind is racing... I want to deny what I'm hearing... I've only
seen her drunk once... This can't be... But she's serious...

"Why didn't you tell me before?” I finally ask.

"I was afraid you'd never want to see me again..."

I respond, still not understanding.

And back to Sister Gin, I realize that at first, there's a fundamental dif-
ference between Su with Sister Gin and Bettina (Su's lover) with her rum and
tonics. What drink does to loosen Su, it turns around to enslave Bettina. In
the first chapters, Su is brilliantly drunk, and Bettina is nothing but gross.

"Don't you tell me - don't you ever tell me about what to watch when you're
the original drunk of the family, the family drunk, the town drunk..."

Bettina felt swamped by that violent face. She shivered and closed her eyes.
Su was going to leave her because she was a drunk. It doesn't take x-ray vis-
ion to see that, that's for sure, she cried inside. Maybe you never did love
me, Su; just accepted my gifts of costumes and props. You played those parts,
my paper doll with black hair and blue eyes - you let me put you on every
stage I found, you fit into all the cardboard boxes I cut into theaters and
you swayed in every position in your paper dresses, scarves flimsily tabbed
around your neck, onto your wrists, triangular off hair, Queen of Scarves.
I'm a fat slob dreaming of a woman who can wear scarves, whose neck is slender
and chin high above it, over whose beautiful shoulders a scarf fits with mo-
tion and grace... every woman with a short neck and a sloping chin, with upper
arms like clubs and a walk that rearranges the body at every step, wants you
to love her, so do I, Su.

from Sister Gin

"I was afraid you'd never want to see me again..."

But, the roles reverse. Sister Gin turns on Su, and Bettina begins to get
clear. She loses fifty pounds, gets a job, and becomes as independent as her
lover is dependent.

"You'll always love me, Bettina. Right?" Barely focused eyes hardly looked
blue now they were so dull and bloodshot. Su smelled of soap from a recent
bath, sandalwood between her pores battling gin from the pores themselves. Her
hair needed cutting. Her clothes seemed not so much put on as there - cloth
which somehow found a connection around her body one way or another. Her
body no longer looked the correct weight even though it had changed little;
there was something about the way it padded after Su's head or fell into a
chair below her elbows that made it appear not to be correct in anything at
all, although Bettina couldn't put her finger on it... she shuddered. She no
longer wanted to put her finger on Su at all. “You know I love you," Bettina said
roughly, shuddering again at the lie. As soon as you get the play done, Su,
so help me I'm leaving... a rat deserting a sinking ship? What else can a poor
rat do? she hollered at her meddlesome conscience.

from Sister Gin

And so, there is the first connection I make with my uneasiness with June
Arnold's book. In the world, both theirs and ours, it is OK to drink. It is
especially OK for women to drink enough to be loose, sexy, funny. That message
surrounds us all, jeering at us from magazine ads and billboards, from bars
and department stores. But, let that go too far, let a woman become an alco-
holic, and she becomes gross, a “drunken slut.”

"I was afraid you'd never want to see me again..."

There was no bottle on the table this evening - on any table. She looked
suspiciously at Su's hungover face, drawn, gray, tight with pain. Sudden
fury invaded her. How dare you put me through all you've put me through for
months and sober up now? she said silently, her teeth gritted against sound.

"I'm finished with gin," Su said. "Aren't you glad?"

Bettina sucked in rage and turned her face to the paper-strewn floor. “Does
that mean that you're going to clean up the house too? One careless match and
we'd go up in smoke. Aren't you getting curious to know what color the rug
used to be? She jerked the cigarette from her lips so they could be widened
to what she hoped was a smile. "Of course I'm glad." Teeth showed but no
pleasure.

from Sister Gin