oe .

Sterilization of Native American Women

Judy Barlow

Although federal funding is no
longer available for elective abort-
ions, the United States government is
pouring billions of dollars into pro-
grams to sterilize women. Much of
the sterilization is done on poor
women in third world countries such
as Colombia, Bolivia, Brazil, Puerto
Rico, and India. Most is done with-
out the woman's consent or understand-
ing of just what is being done to her.
Few realize that the sterilization is
permanent. Funding of sterilization
programs abroad for the most part is
through the United States government
funded agency for international dev-
elopment (AID).

"The United States plans to steril-
ize one-quarter of the world's women,"
said Dr. R. T. Ravenholt, director of
AID's office on population control.
According to Ravenholt, population
control is necessary to maintain "the
normal operation of commercial inter-
ests around the world."

Most of the "forced" sterilization
done in this country is funded
through the federal department of
health, education and welfare (HEW).
Sterilization of women in this coun-
try has increased 300% since 1970.
Most of the surgical operations are
performed in state teaching hospitals
and in birth control clinics set up
in ghettos and on Indian reservations.

An estimated 32% of all black women
under thirty have been sterilized.
High rates of sterilization among
Chicanas have also been reported.

Over 25% of all American Indian women
of childbearing age have been steril-
ized since 1973, leaving only about
100,000 women of childbearing age
who can have children. Among those
sterilized, 10% were under the age
of 21.

The results of massive steriliza-
tion campaigns are most evident in
this country among the American
Indian population. On some reserva-
tions, there are literally no young
children.

It is important to study the tac-
tics that the U.S. government is
using to sterilize Indian women be-
cause the programs used on Indian
reservations are very similar to
those set up in third world countries.
The major difference is that programs
abroad are usually implemented by the
Peace Corps and missionaries while
those within this country are more
likely to fall under the jurisdiction
of the welfare department or VISTA.

"It (sterilization of Indian women)
is an extreme problem," says Dr.
Connie Uri, a Choctaw and Cherokee
Indian. “There are so few Indians in
existence. We are not like other
minorities who have a gene pool in
Africa or Asia. When we are gone,
that's it."

Many Indian women are coerced into
signing forms agreeing to steriliza-
tion. It is frequently insinuated
that they will lose welfare payments
and benefits if they refuse. A large
number of women agree to steriliza-
tion operations because they are
afraid that their children will be
taken away from them if they don't.
To avoid this type of misunderstanding,
government agencies are now re-
quired to inform women that there are
other forms of birth control avail-
able to them and that other benefits
may not be withheld if they refuse.
However, there is no indication that
these laws are being followed or
enforced.

Many women are sterilized during
childbirth. Frequently consent is
given while the woman is heavily
sedated. There is, however, a feder-
al law requiring a 72-hour waiting
period between the time of consent
and the actual surgery. "Almost
every woman having a Cesarean section
agrees to be sterilized," says Dr.

Very few Indian women ask to be
sterilized. “In almost every situa-
tion, the woman is talked into it in
a very authoritarian or coerced man-
ner," says Uri. “Doctors have assumed
a God-like authority, and convince
women that they are helping them by
sterilizing them.”

The psychological effects of steril-
ization can be devastating.
Indian women do not realize that the
sterilization is permanent. Among
sterilized Indian women there are
very high rates of alcoholism, div-
orce, prostitution, mental breakdown,
and suicide.

“Families are torn apart by the
woman's distress, and husbands often
resent the operations done without
their consent."

One woman went to the doctor after
suffering from severe headaches. The
doctor told the woman her head hurt
because she was afraid of becoming
pregnant and advised sterilization.
The woman agreed, but the headaches
persisted. She later learned that
she had a brain tumor.

On a November day in 1972, a 26-
year-old Indian woman entered a Los
Angeles doctor's office and asked
the doctor for a womb transplant.

"A surprising request,” the doctor
thought.

The woman told the doctor that she
had heard about kidney transplants,
and she needed a womb because her
future husband and she wanted to have
children.

She had been sterilized for birth
control purposes six years earlier
with a complete hysterectomy. At
that time she was an alcoholic with
two children in foster homes. A doc-
tor convinced her that to make the
best of her life she should be steri-
lized. So, she did as the doctor ad-
vised.

But, at 26, the woman was no longer
an alcoholic. She was in love with a
man and they were planning to marry.

She was devastated when she learned
that womb transplants are impossible.
The distress she and her husband suf-
fered because of her inability to
have children later led to a divorce.

A woman with three children went to
the doctor to be treated for stomach
problems. The doctor immediately
assumed that the woman was vomiting
because she was pregnant and yelled
at her, "Why the hell don't you get
your tubes tied so you don't get sick
any more."

Sterilization, however, is not the
only trauma that threatens Indian
women and their families. Once a
child has been born, parents stand a
25-35% chance of losing that child to
a foster home, an adoptive home, or
an institution, according to the
Association of American Indian
Affairs (AAIA) study.

Evidence submitted to a Senate sub-
committee indicated that deceitful
and illegal means are often used to
remove children from good parents.

According to the executive director
of AAIA, the greatest influence on
the Indian emotional life today is
“the threat that their children will
be taken from them." Parents who
live in constant fear of losing their
children frequently have their "self-
confidence so undermined that their
ability to function as parents is
impaired."

At this point, the welfare depart-
ment frequently steps in and removes
the children--often without any ad-
vance notice to the parents. "Some
Indian mothers have left their child-
ren with a relative or babysitter,
and returned to find that a social
worker had taken the children." Some
never learn where their children have
been taken or why.

Cheryl DeCoteau said she went to
pick up her five-year-old son from
the babysitter and "They wouldn't
give him to me." He was taken to a
foster home and DeCoteau's social
worker ignored her pleas for help.

"The man from the welfare depart-
ment said that I wasn't a very good
mother and everything, and that my
child was better off being in a white
home. They could buy all the stuff
that I couldn't give him. There was
never a court hearing to prove Ms.
DeCoteau an unfit mother.

DeCoteau was not given notice of
court hearings, and the judge ordered
her children placed in custody of the
welfare department without informing
her.

Later, DeCoteau suffered again at
the hands of the welfare department.
She was pregnant and a social worker
visited her weekly to coax her to
give her unborn child up for adoption.

She refused continually before and
after giving birth and returned home
with her baby.

One day she was called to the wel-
fare department office and told to
sign some papers. "I was sick and I
didn't know what I was signing. I
just signed my name and then they
took the baby and I asked what they
were doing. The social worker said
that it was too late now, that I
gave him (the baby) up for adoption.
They just took him right out the
door."

Two Wisconsin women visiting South
Dakota Pine Ridge Indian Reservation
obtained custody of three-year-old
Benita Rowland by leading Benita's
mother to believe they were merely
planning to take the child on a
short trip. Benita's mother signed
papers she later learned gave consent
for her child's adoption. A local
missionary had urged her to sign.

For months the Rowlands unsuccess-
fully sought to obtain Benita's re-
turn. The two women offered the
Rowlands money instead of Benita, and
they refused. One woman wrote
Benita's mother, "God has ordained it
as it is. We have not taken Benita
from you. You gave her physical
birth which we could not do, and we
can give her opportunities which you
could not.”

Most families do not get the legal
help they need.

"I think that most of the Indian
women are usually overwhelmed by
people who think their children
should be taken away from them, and
really don't stand up to anybody, and
they don't have anyone to tell," said
a Nevada Indian woman whose children
were taken from her.

A major stumbling block many Indians
find is that both the welfare depart-
ment and the courts do not understand
the kind of relationship Indian par-
ents and their children have. In
many cases social workers claim pov-
erty, poor housing, lack of modern
plumbing and overcrowding constitute
parental neglect. In a custody hear-
ing one judge said that an Indian
reservation is "not a fit place to
raise a child." Remember, though,
few parents ever get to court. Often
the reasons given for removing Indian
children from their parents is that
the pre-adoptive parents (98% white)
have money and are able to provide a
"home and way of life superior to
that provided by the natural parents."

Many Indian children are never
adopted, and instead, spend their
childhood years moving from one foster
home to the next or remain in govern-
ment boarding schools where there are
problems of overcrowding and understaffing. Those children who are
“fortunate” enough to be adopted usu-
ally adjust reasonably well when
they are young, but when they reach
adolescence there are many problems.

Indian children growing up in a
white culture know very little of
their own heritage. They have been
raised in white homes and attended
white schools and churches, but dur-
ing adolescence they find that "society
will not grant them the white
identity" they already have. These
children, because they are so far
removed from their own Indian cultural
identity, frequently develop "chronic
insecurity and may have difficulty
adapting to family and adult life,”
says an Indian psychiatrist.

When Indian youths begin to date,
white parents do not want them dating
their children. In many instances
Indians have difficulty getting jobs
or in purchasing a vehicle or in get-
ting credit, although their peers are
having no problems in these areas.
Furthermore, they are called derogatory
names related to their racial identity
such as buck or squaw.

"They have no peer group or no iden-
tity with any group that might share
this identity," said one psychiatrist.
"The best adjusted Indians, the ones
most likely to be successful, are
the Indians with the highest identity
with their native culture.” Converse-
ly, Indians with low cultural identity
are more likely to have social prob-
lems, be imprisoned or suffer mental
illness.

MORE ON PAGE 10