It is a sorry fact that in our society, the prevalent model for relating to  
women is male-defined.  

After having struggled so long to convince men that women are  
people, and not objects, we are immensely discouraged to find our-  
selves confronted with the same stereotypical expectations coming  
from women.  

One example of this phenomenon in the feminist community is the  
oppression suffered by fat women. But they are not the only ones  
affected. As much as we would like to think of ourselves as liberated  
from male expectations, it is nonetheless true that we have inter-  
nalized the norms and values that support male power.  

The system of “beauty” standards imposed on women by the patri-  
archy is strikingly similar to other systems of oppression, in the way it's  
set up and in its effects on those oppressed by it. To a substantial extent,  
it permeates and is an extension of both racism and classism: for  
instance, poor women are less likely to have straight teeth, and black  
women don't have long blonde hair.  

To be attractive by male standards, a woman should look as though  
she is white and middle class to begin with. And, as with racism and  
classism, we find these standards internalized and applied within the  
feminist community.  

The link between all these forms of oppression is that the privilege  
vested in the woman who lives up to the male fantasy is a patriarchal  
reward for playing the game. It is a false power, and it co-opts.  

The benefits derived from such privilege — status, approval, upward  
mobility — all too easily blind her to her own oppression, while setting  
her up to endorse and maintain the system which keeps her sisters  
down.  

To believe that some accident of birth or circumstance makes one  
woman better than another is to give credence to the patriarchal propa-  
ganda that divides us and undercuts our political effectiveness.  

Women who accept strokes for their looks, as for their race or class,  
benefit doubly: from the Man for fulfilling his fantasy of womanhood  
and for not threatening his system of norms, and from women for  
personifying internalized male standards. Those who reject this game,  
by the same token, are doubly vulnerable.  

The way men objectify women arises out of their fear and their hatred  
of us, out of the degree of their alienation from us. The application of  
male-derived “beauty” standards is an expression of woman-hatred.  

The implications of women internalizing these standards, then, are  
chilling.  

If we reject them, what is left? Can we formulate truly feminist criteria  
for beauty?  

It has been said that the only real ugliness is that which results from  
destruction. The truth of this can be seen in the bodies of those women  
who are driven to punish themselves because they can't live up to male  
stereotypes; on the faces of those women whose everyday realities  
drain and stiffen and terrify them; in the stance of the woman whose  
response to oppression is hopelessness.  

We aren't suggesting that women whom men find attractive should  
shave their heads and gain 50 pounds. That would be as pointless as  
middle-class women contriving downwardly-mobile lifestyles in the  
belief that this will rid them of their own classist attitudes (see Class and  
Feminism, ed. Bunch and Myron, Diana Press, for an excellent analysis  
of this and other classist copouts). We aren't saying that women  
shouldn't find other women attractive.  

What we are saying is that every woman should check how male  
standards affect her self-image and the way she sees her sisters.  
Feminism, to be effective, must be a new way of seeing.  

We are saying that “attractive” women should look at whether they  
are playing the same games with women that pay off so well with men.  

We are saying that, if we are to build a truly revolutionary conscious-  
ness, we need to rid ourselves of the standards by which men have  
taught us to value ourselves and each other.  

Two of our present collective members are leaving us. Clare Strawn is  
leaving on a trip to the west coast during which time she plans to do  
research for a book she’s writing on feminism and the concept of collec-  
tivity. Ann Daniel is leaving us soon to involve herself with other femin-  
ist projects in the community. Ann wants, however, to stay with us until  
a new collective member is found. If you're at all interested in being a  
part of the BMR collective, please give us a call and we'll arrange a time  
for you to come by and meet with the collective members. Also, we'd  
like to announce the addition of our latest collective member, Theresa  
Schook.  

We're also looking for a benefits person. We need someone who will  
be willing and able to execute a series of successful benefits this year. If  
the idea intrigues you, let us add that we plan to give 1/6 of our net  
benefits income to whatever brave woman undertakes this mammoth  
task. Give the office a call, if you're at all interested. We have ideas for  
and experience with benefits and will work closely with you. Let not lack  
of experience be a deterrent.  

Meetings and Themes  

We had quite a sizeable crowd at our last critique meeting and would  
like desperately to make a habit of it. Please let us know what you think  
of the paper. Your input is very greatly wanted and needed. Community  
response is essential. Critique meeting will be January 26th this  
month. We've changed critique meetings to the last Monday in every  
month to be sure that papers have gotten out and been read by the time  
of critique.  

BMR has once again begun planning themes for its issues.  
February's theme will be Racism. March's theme will be Women and  
Money. April's will be Local Women's Resources. We hope you find this  
list helpful in terms of planning for writing articles to fit these themes. If  
you have ideas for articles, please call the office so as to avoid any dupli-  
cation of efforts. Also, our new copy deadline is the 27th of every month.  
We've moved it up a few days in order to avoid the “last minute produc-  
tion blues.”  

BMR hopes the new year will be everything you want it to be and  
more.  

Two Children Already Dead  

Plaintiffs seeking to reunite  
more than 2,000 Vietnamese  
children brought to the U.S.  
during the late April “Operation  
Babylift” were granted a favor-  
able ruling on November 6 when  
a three-judge panel in San  
Francisco ruled that the U.S. Im-  
migration and Naturalization  
Service (INS) must make avail-  
able their records on each of the  
Babylift children.  

The ruling came after two  
court-appointed experts studied  
INS records of 25 randomly  
selected Babylift children and  
found that 18 were illegally re-  
moved from Vietnam by private  
adoption agencies. In some  
cases there were no releases  
signed by parents or guardians  
for the adoption; in others  
orphanages had signed the re-  
leases despite the existence of  
living parents.  

The Center for Constitutional  
Rights, which is arguing the  
case, says that many of the  
children placed in orphanages in  
Vietnam were there temporar-  
ily and had been visited regularly  
by their parents.  

The suit to reunite the child-  
ren with their Vietnamese  
parents was first filed in May,  
1975. It has been opposed by the  
INS and the seven private adop-  
tion agencies involved, despite  
strongly worded statements  
against the Babylift made by the  
International Red Cross, Inter-  
national Child Welfare League,  
and the United Nations High  
Commission on Refugees.  

INS officials admit they had  
done nothing to seek reunifica-  
tion of the children with their  
Vietnamese parents, and they  
sent warnings to the adoptive  
parents only after the court  
warned them to do so, that the  
children may have to be sent  
back to Vietnam.  

The INS was given until  
November 20 by the San  
Francisco Federal Court to com-  
plete background checks on all  
the children and turn them over  
to the plaintiffs. The Center for  
Constitutional Rights will in turn  
present a plan for reunification  
of the children with their  
families.  
The United Nations, Red  
Cross, and Child Welfare League  
have all expressed interest in the  
reunification plan and the Re-  
volutionary Government of  
South Vietnam says it will  
cooperate with the inter-  
national agencies as it is anxious  
to see the children returned to  
Vietnam.  

High Fees, No Records  

Seven private adoption  
agencies were involved in the  
Operation Babylift which  
brought over 2000 children to  
the U.S. between April 3rd and  
28th. Most of the children were  
apparently not processed by the  
INS, which routinely takes  
fingerprints and photographs of  
all immigrants. U.S. govern-  
ment agencies are not even sure  
how many children were  
brought to the U.S. The INS says  
2000 were involved, and the  
U.S. Agency for International  
Development says 2700.  

The agencies are even more  
secretive than the government.  
They maintain a “right to  
privacy” and refuse to disclose  
the number of children they  
have processed, the names and  
addresses of the adopting  
parents, or the fees charged to  
the people adopting the children.  

The Center for Constitutional  
Rights learned, however, that the  
Friends of the Children of Viet-  
nam, thought to have handled  
nearly 1000 Babylift adoptions,  
charged one pair of adoptive  
parents a “reduced fee” of $800.  
With the government footing the  
bill for bringing the children to  
the U.S., volunteer nurses  
caring for the children at military  
facilities until they were  
adopted, and with an apparent  
minimal amount of bookkeep-  
ing, these agencies must be  
making enormous profits.  

In addition, it is apparent that  
the agencies did not do ade-  
quate background checks on the  
prospective adopting parents;  
two of the children have already  
died from beatings administered  
by their “parents.”  

The Friends of the Children of  
Vietnam admit they processed  
the child killed in Minnesota, but  
none of the seven agencies  
admit processing the child found  
dead in Georgia, although the  
Center for Constitutional Rights  
says it knows which agency is  
involved.  

Nancy Stearns, one of the law-  
yers arguing the case for the  
plaintiffs, said, “We know these  
things wouldn't have happened  
in Vietnam. This sort of thing is  
inconceivable in Vietnamese  
society.”  

Very Different Christmases  

Exploding Myth of Classless Society  

Jackie St. Joan  

For women who still believe  
that a class system doesn’t exist  
in this “egalitarian democracy”  
we live in, or that it is irrelevant  
to the feminist movement, con-  
sider the following excerpts from  
articles, printed back-to-back in  
the December 13 issue of the  
Rocky Mountain News.  

“Super Grande Dame Mrs.  
Bernard (Alva) Gimbel cele-  
brated her 84th birthday with a  
Utopian dream of a kiddies’ party  
put together by her daughter,  
Hope Solinger and her close  
friends, Benay Venuta Vincent  
von Berg and Harmik Gas-  
parian. It was the kind of Dis-  
neyland thing every 7-year-old  
fantasizes about.”  

The article goes on to describe  
how “the drawing room of  
Benay’s apartment was turned  
into a multi-colored paper tent  
filled with balloons” and a life-  
size blow-up of an ‘adorable  
Alva,” all “white ruffles and  
flowing hair ribbons,” from  
when she was 7. “She was a  
darling then, too. Lots of family  
and friends showed up with  
presents that every little girl  
wants. The article goes on to list  
20 multiple-named aristocrats  
who attended.  

Breakfast (for some) At  
Tiffany's  

Suzy, author, namedropper,  
and aspiring snob, next  
described the party of Harry  
Platt, the head of Tiffany’s. “‘It  
was the kind of beautiful, big,  
private gala you don’t see any  
more (at least, not since Harry's  
last one a year ago): glamorous,  
dazzling, fun, filled with really  
beautiful people, instead of  
what's been passing for them for  
more years than we all care to  
remember ... It really was like  
the old days, before the freaks  
and the weirdos started breaking  
into the social scene . . . Thank  
heavens, someone had the guts  
to edit a guest list with an iron  
hand. If you don’t keep the ras-  
cals out, you can kiss your party  
goodbye.”  

The description continues,  
“One smart thing he (Harry) al-  
ways does is ask the most beau-  
tiful girls in town. The ones  
floating around the other night  
were about the most decorative  
lot on the Eastern Seaboard. And  
they were all beautifully  
dressed. Not an ethnic outfit in  
the place, friends, and what a  
relief! And no ruffled shirts on  
the men. A miracle!”  

Shaking Faith in Santa Claus  

On the previous page of the  
News, UPI reported that “some-  
one stole Christmas from Tony,  
Tom, Kim, and Kelly Tuck,” four  
children, aged 4 to 8. While the  
children had been having  
dinner with their parents at their  
grandparents, all of their Christ-  
mas presents had been stolen  
from under their tree. It was the  
fourth burglary in their home  
this year. However, their  
mother, Rusty Tuck, 27, could  
not cry over the loss since she'd  
suffered a paralyzing stroke two  
years ago, and crying now is a  
physical impossibility for her.  

Her husband works on the as-  
sembly line at the local Ford  
plant, and is laid off about as  
often as he works. He also has  
occasional seizures from a  
stroke he suffered as a child.  

“The kids were so happy,  
they'd look at the boxes all wrap-  
ped up and shake them back and  
forth,” Mrs. Tuck said, staring at  
the empty space under the tree.  
“I spent all our money on  
presents; maybe I have $5 or $6  
left. Last year we didn’t have any  
money at all. Our friends gave us  
presents. This year we bought our  
own. Now they're all gone.”  

The article continues, describ-  
ing how the “Tucks” home re-  
flects their hard times. The furni-  
ture is worn, a hole gapes in the  
dining room ceiling from a leak,  
and the yard is cluttered with old  
toys.  

Mrs. Tuck's daughter was hit  
by a car a few months ago, and  
suffered a broken leg. The article  
concludes, “The stroke when  
she was 25 left Ms. Tuck unable  
to read or fulfill her ambition of  
writing poetry.”  
Donations to the Tuck family  
may be made through: Rev. John  
Coleman, St. Matthew the Apos-  
tle Catholic Church, Kansas City,  
Mo.