Before and After

In doing political work, I have found myself in situations where it has always been very easy for me to remain passive—to prefer others, “especially men, to do the work that I was too insecure or self-conscious to do. I have always known "which side I was on," but I have not always been so sure of the reasons why. Never having had much practice at actually analyzing situations myself, I was therefore very impressed (and intimidated) by people who could develop complex analyses and intellectualizations of different situations. This, of course, played right into my passivity, my willingness to accept someone else's theory, my insecurity in putting forward my own. Now, I am beginning to feel much better about myself and I have more confidence in my abilities to think, and this carries over into my relationships with others. I know that I have to PUSH myself to do those things that are important to do—to participate, to be active—even if I may feel terribly uncomfortable and awkward. One of the most important factors in this is the support I get from my sisters.

Support Raises Consciousness

This support not only makes me strong enough to speak out in groups and contribute my opinions, but I find that it becomes easier to do the kind of reading and research necessary to enable me to raise my political consciousness to the point where I think it should be. It isn't hard anymore to admit my ignorance without shame, because I know that I have the strength to do the self-education necessary to remedy that ignorance. I feel oftentimes that men are resentful of this kind of obvious strength. I understand that reaction, but it is only an example of the sexism which is in all of us. Most of us have learned to be threatened by people who are strong, who could be potential "competition."

These kinds of hostile, uptight reactions are balanced by the patronizing, "older brother" attitudes of some other movement men. It is almost as if they merely tolerate my sympathies with THEIR ideas—it makes me feel like a movement groupie. And it is an obvious indication that those men do not consider my political commitment and understanding to be anywhere near as serious as their own. This brings up a question which has been especially significant to me in dealing with "hip" or "movement" men: the question of integrating my sexuality with my intellect.

I consider myself a political person, and also a sexual person. It has been possible for me a number of times to have truly meaningful relationships with men—relationships in which little was hidden, thoughts were shared and expressed honestly—but these were rarely sexual relationships. The most egalitarian experiences I have had with men were not physical at all. And in the same way, the sexual relationships I have had with men were rarely able to develop into anything deeper without being extremely sexist—in other words, my role in the relationship had already been defined in a purely sexual way. So, a problem arises—in order to keep myself out of exploitative situations, I find myself continually denying my sexuality—negating my womanhood in order to function effectively with men.

I ignore my physical feelings as best I can—I have consciously decided that it is actually safer and much less hassle to avoid sexual relationships with men, at least for the time being.

People Change Slowly

I understand that people change slowly, and that's why I'm waiting and struggling with the people I love. But it also makes me very angry to constantly try to act differently than I feel—to be unable to really be the warm, open person I know I can be, because I know people don't understand that in the way that I mean it. So, I have to be cautious. It just isn't worth it anymore to make love with a man and have it end up the way it usually does—with a huge space between us afterwards—the cold feeling when I realize that suddenly the preliminary closeness, the meaningful talk is over, because he's finally fucked me. And all of the mechanisms I use to keep myself from dwelling on the shittiness of it all, my rationalizations, my overlooking of things he said and did—they don't work anymore. I like myself too much now—I respect myself and care for myself and I WON'T LET IT HAPPEN ANYMORE! So, for now, although I will work on building honest relationships with men, I must be sure that the sexual aspect is as honest as the intellectual.

This brings up another question which I have done a lot of thinking about recently—that of bisexuality or gay relationships. As I become more conscious of my womanhood, it becomes more difficult for me to submit myself to a heterosexual relationship in which I am uncomfortable or in which I see even the most subtle sexist patterns. But at the same time, my need for sexual contact, my sexual frustration, continues. And I find that the only people I can completely trust are the few women I have come to love. Because I know that they are honestly struggling with their sexuality and that they consider dealing with sexism (in themselves as well as in others) as an ongoing process that must be integrated into their everyday existence. So it becomes increasingly easy for me to think of making love to a woman—in fact, that doesn't seem at all threatening compared to becoming sexually involved with a man. It's quite a change for me. Until recently I hadn't even considered bisexuality, and now in many ways it is much more attractive than heterosexuality. I'm not saying I will cease to be attracted to men, not at all; just that I am now feeling comfortable about physical relationships with women also.

So what does all this mean? I cannot at all see myself withdrawing from men completely. I live with men, my political work must necessarily involve and include men. There are a few men whom I truly love and trust to a large degree. But I know that all men—and women too—have a thousand subtle, deep-seated feelings about each other—feelings that we cannot even identify, that color our actions in ways we haven't even imagined.

And I feel that these feelings operate most strongly and subconsciously in those situations that are based in emotions and in those situations in which we have had the least practice at being open and honest. Sexual matters are the perfect examples of this.

Our society has taught us to be secretive and non-communicative about sex, let alone being embarrassed and ashamed. We cannot talk to each other or learn from each other. We come together in bed and operate from two separate points—apart. How can we expect to communicate at that stage of the game, without any real preliminary honesty that deals specifically with sex? What I mean is that 99% of the time, men whom I sleep with are bound to be operating from a self-centered position—and necessarily so—because we probably have not been able to deal effectively with all of the quiet private thoughts, fears, and hang-ups we each have about our bodies and sex. So, men (and women, too) in a sexual relationship will be acting out a lot of emotional, largely irrational responses. Where intellectually, many people can recognize and struggle with sexist feelings, in a sexual relationship, which is largely emotional, this might not be possible.

I am by no means advocating the increased intellectualization of personal relationships. I am an emotional person. What I mean is that we must really try to understand our emotions, our spontaneous responses to situations and people. And this is very hard—much more difficult than changing one's mind about a political matter or an intellectual decision. It goes to the very root of how we function as human beings, and how we relate to others. This is what I see as the true struggle—the radical struggle—the willingness to examine and deal with those very things that govern our every moment of existence.