in Feminism and Business

LF: We were so in debt at that point that we  
had to open and at least try to recoup some of our  
losses. We were always looking for another $10,000. Constantly  

LR: What really hurt was that in the meantime we learned that women were  
stealing from us.  

LF: It was really hard to catch someone stealing.  
We lost about 3 cases of glassware a week,  
pictures, and even the mirror off the bathroom wall. It was an emotional thing - why were all  
of these women stealing from us? The employees taking money, people conning me of our money.  
LF: Linda fell for any sob story. We were “free-mealed” to death.  
LR: The final straw, when I just didn't care anymore, was when someone  
stole all of our tools from the storeroom. I just wanted out. For someone  
to take the tools - that was it.  

LF: Some women could take advantage of you just by getting you to listen  
to their heart-throb stories. We fed into it by sympathizing instead of saying, “That's too bad, now what are you going to do about it?"  

LR: It's like it was really our fault for perpetuating this bad state by  
saying that we'd help women stay in this bad place instead of trying to help  
them get themselves out of it.  

LF: A bartender is a shrink. What could we say? “Sorry you are hungry and  
haven't eaten today, but I've got to go cook?" We shouldn't have said, “What  
can I do for you?" but rather "How are you going to get yourself out of this  
mess you are in?" We never should have encouraged women to stay there and  
wallow in it.  

LR: Women are not all what you want them to be. That is not to say that we  
didn't get a lot from some women. There were a handful of you that were more  
than supportive. The other was just such a constant drain. We got to feeling  
that we gave and gave and got very little in return. It was especially hard  
when we had money trouble.  

LF: I don't want to get into a down-beat tone. We got some real positive  
things out of it. We learned a lot. We grew. Maybe we had to go through it.  

LR: I'm afraid that realistically a feminist business just doesn't cut it.  
Women are just not perfect. We expected too much.  

LF: We are discounting all the women who worked for free, who helped us  
out and supported us. We never could have made it so long without them.  

LR: One thing that happened was that the Globe opened 3 months after we  
moved and then the road to our bar was closed for a long time. The Globe  
offered a sterile environment where it was OK to get drunk, dress up, and  
forget about pressures.  

LF: We just weren't up with the times. We knew that disco was in, but we  
just were not into dealing with it. It seemed in direct conflict with what  
we wanted to do.  

LR: We should have put in a disco. If it was a purely business thing and  
not an emotional decision we would have put in a disco. But, once again, we  
made an emotional decision.  

“The money hassles got to be an  
emotional drain.”  

LF: We asked some feminists what they thought about a disco and they said,  
they yelled, "NO."  

LR: Yes, and then they would sit there and drink a cup of coffee and then  
run to the Globe.  

LF: We just should have had people over to our house. You don't just buy  
an enormous bar so you can have people over. And that is what we were doing.  
And I don't know why we got so upset about women stealing from us. Why should  
we be any different from any other bar? People always steal stuff from bars  
and restaurants.  

LR: But it is true, we just took everything to heart. But it's something that we  
have learned to live with. It's just that you are reliving it right now by  
talking about it otherwise you wouldn't be saying some of the emotional  
things. We have learned from this. I mean, our expectations were so high.  
They were totally unrealistic. Like we didn't think that we would be stolen  
from. Now, I mean if we had one brain in our head we would have anticipated  
it and written it off the top right away. We wouldn't have given every woman  
and her sister access to the cash drawer - especially when we knew that they  
were stealing from us. We took precautions the last 3 months, but why the hell  
didn't we do that in the beginning? By then it was too late, it didn't matter.  
We set ourselves up to be hurt. Maybe we needed it. It's something we did to  
ourselves. We can't blame anybody else. We made it happen.  

LR: Once we knew who was stealing we didn’t let them back there. We never  
had the opportunity to confront anyone on the spot. How could we? We suspected  
but we couldn't prove anything and it got too emotional. We took it so  
personally.  

LF: There was a lot of stuff stolen, and yes, I am bitter.  

LF: We could have avoided a lot of it if we had been prepared - better  
organized. Why did we think for some reason that we were so blessed that no  
one would steal from us?  

“We set ourselves up to be hurt. We  
can't blame anybody else. We made it  
happen.”  

LR: I just can't accept that women who I considered my friends were ripping  
me off. I might be able to justify ripping off some corporation, but I  
could never rip off Big Mama Rag or Woman to Woman (feminist bookstore).  

LF: You just have to know intellectually that everyone isn't like you and  
then accept it and write it off. What we still have to accept is that it's  
over. We learn from that and move on. We don’t make the same mistakes again.  
It's over. We just had to go through it.  

LR: I agree with you on a philosophical level, but on an earth-plane level  
it still pisses me off.  

In unison:  
If you were to start a bar again what would you do differently?  

LF: I wouldn't start a bar again.  
LR: I would never mix politics and business.  

LF: Yes, I would keep my politics totally separate. You could still advertise  
and donate kegs of beer. You could do your politics as an individual  
separate from the bar.  

Maybe just give anonymous donations.  

LR: But the bar took so much time we never did anything else. It was hard  
on our relationship. We didn’t get to go to movies or parties or picnics or  
things that everybody else was doing. There just wasn't time for anything but  
the bar. Nobody in their right mind would want to live like that.  

LF: It was a real bad choice for me because I tend to drink too much and  
there I was surrounded by liquor.  

LR: Bars are just real unhealthy places. Or maybe our personalities were  
just not right for the bar business.  

LF: Yes, between Linda wanting to give everything away and my tendency  
toward over-indulgence, what chance did we really have?  

LR: Well, we did support women and we did generate money for the women's  
community and in a way that is what we set out to do. The day the bar opened  
was a day of supreme happiness for me. The day we closed for the last time  
was even happier. It was the biggest relief off of my mind.  

LF: The last day was like a celebration. In a way we were really proud of  
what we did, but also happy to be free of it.  

“We just wanted to provide an atmosphere  
that would be comfortable for all women  
regardless of where they were politically.”  

LR: We gave a lot of ourselves and that was important. I'm not ashamed or  
sorry. I know we made a lot of mistakes, but I'm proud of what we tried to  
do. The women I gave money to, the ones I brought food to, the ones I gave  
rides home and everything might have cost us financially, but I can say that  
I think that we did a good job. We gave a lot of ourselves and that was im-  
portant.  

LF: We helped raise a lot of money for the feminist community.  

LR: I doubt that I would ever consider involving myself in other feminist  
projects. I'm much more interested in animals. I worked as a probation coun-  
selor for years and in the feminist community in Texas and here in Denver.  
I've been out as a lesbian and a feminist for 20 years. It's like I've had it  
with people. I might help individuals, but I want to work more with animal rights.  
I would be really upset to see either Big Mama Rag or Woman to Woman  
close. But I'm afraid that I might be permanently burned out.  

LF: I would really like to get involved in something. I just don't know  
what exactly.  

LR: The closing of the bar meant me finally being free. Being free to say  
what I want, free from needless hassles, and free from the pain.  

LF: For me it was like a rebirth.  

LR: It meant being free to socialize with whoever I pleased, being free  
to say "fuck off" instead of serving another drink and smiling.  

LF: The bar was hell on our relationship. We talked about bar hassles all  
the time. From the time we got up until we finally got to bed, it was what  
are we going to do about this or that and really being hassled about real  
emotionally draining things so that when someone would hassle us about the  
color of toilet paper we had in the bathroom... Now we go to the park and  
talk about more important things.  

LR: We spent 12 hours a day, 7 days a week working in and hassling about  
that bar. Another thing that really hurt was when women who seemed to sense  
that we were having problems tried to come between Linda and me - to play  
us against each other. Women have very little respect for relationships.  

For some it seemed like a game to see if they could break us up.  

LF: The responsibility of the bar and the worry of it because it was not  
just at 245, it was like having a baby. A sick baby. It was like having  
a sick baby that you get up and worry about all the time, and are  
consumed with worrying about it, and we knew all the time that it wasn't  
going to make it. And we just struggled and tried to convince ourselves  
that it could make it and that we could keep it alive. And we would hunt  
for money to perpetuate it. We knew it wouldn't happen, but we were so  
emotionally involved that we just couldn't let go. We just finally had to  
let it die.