Women Organize Against Nukes

Bonnie Parker

On October 14, 1978, approximately  
90 women participated in a coalition  
of women organizing against nuclear  
power in Boulder. Twenty-five of them  
spent the night on the railroad tracks  
at Rocky Flats Nuclear Weapons Plant.

The purpose of the gathering was to  
bring women together from existing  
anti-nuclear and feminist groups to  
discuss joining forces in some way if  
only to share ideas, approaches and  
woman-energy. The day was loosely or-  
ganized by women from the Rocky Flats  
Truth Force, Boulder Mobilization for  
Survival, Colorado Springs Anti-Nu-  
clear Alliance and independent lesbian  
and/or socialist feminists. Most of  
the women attending came from either  
Boulder or Colorado Springs.

The morning began with a circle:  
introductions and personal sharing.  
Women in the anti-nuke groups talked  
about their experiences as women in  
predominantly male groups; other women  
talked about personal experiences with  
male violence against women and rela-  
ted these experiences either to work-  
ing in strength as women or to working  
in general against nuclear violence;  
feminists from Colorado Springs read  
a statement they had drafted (see end  
of this story) calling for an autono-  
mous women's coalition in the anti-  
nuclear movement. As the day proceeded  
women gave workshops on the history of  
women in our economic system, women's  
spirituality, the effects of radiation,  
the feminist health movement and "sat-  
yagraha," the Hindu philosophy of non-  
violent resistance. At noon, we shared  
sack lunches and watched a film on  
Rocky Flats called “Hot Spot."

Feelings by the end of the afternoon  
were positive; the day had been pro-  
ductive, energizing, but short. We  
had barely scratched the surface of  
the issues. People felt it was pre-  
mature to set up any structure for an  
on-going organization, but the need  
was felt to repeat the experience. A  
date was set: December 9 in Colorado  
Springs (611 N. Royer). Colo. Springs  
women made it clear that there would  
be dinner and places to spend the  
night for out-of-towners.

Day changed to evening and we drove  
out to the tracks where a tipi is set  

up for those activists who have been  
occupying the tracks since April of  
this year. There was some confusion  
and dismay around the presence of two  
men who apparently strayed onto the  
scene earlier that day and hoped to  
have a party. Women from the truth  
force made it quite clear to them that  
this night was for us.

And it was. Radiation levels may be  
high on the tracks, but so were we.  
High on each other, the day we'd  
spent and the full moon. We ate din-  
ner, gathered in a circle to talk  
about the history of the occupation,  
the process of decision making by  

consensus which had operated through-  
out the occupation, and some of the  
principles which had been arrived at:  
i.e., to be part of the occupation,  
one must take civil disobedience  
training, no drugs or alcohol on the  
tracks, etc. When it got cold, we  
crowded into the tipi and sang wo-  
men's music until sleep caused us to  
part. Some women slept in the tipi or  
the tent but most stretched out three  
by three between the rails of the  
track, faces turned to the moon all  
through the night.

The next morning was radiant. We  
shared breakfast, a brief circle and  

Anti-nuke Statement

As feminists, in recent years, we  
have devoted our energies to creating  
women's space, reclaiming our bodies,  
rediscovering and elaborating a non-  
patriarchal culture, fighting vio-  
lence against women, exploring rela-  
tionships among ourselves, working  
collectively, living communally and  
raising our children without sexism.  
The energy has been for and within  
the "women's community."

Is there a relationship between  
feminism and the anti-nuclear move-  
ment? We are a small group of women  
in Colorado Springs who think there  
is. We would like to be part of an  
autonomous women's coalition to stop  
the use of nuclear energy and the  
production of nuclear weapons  
BECAUSE

-as mothers and co-mothers we are  
conscious that our children will reap  
the consequences of the nuclear mis-  
takes presently being committed.

-we see nuclear power as a form of  
violence against the earth. We are  
coming to see the earth as mother and  
sister; we see the land being vio-  
lated as women's bodies are violated.  
We want health and safety for our  
bodies and our earth.

-we see connections between our opp-  
ression as women and the nuclear opp-  
ression, insidious and overwhelming.

Our lives are affected by the system  
of male dominance enforced by threat  
of violence to us, to our children.  
Nuclear power is a monstrous exten-  
sion of that use of violence to con-  
trol. The feminist process of shed-  
ding passivity to take back control  
of our lives is the same process we  
can use to secure a nuclear-free  
future.

-we know that there is no good nat-  
ional plan for the storage or dis-  
posal of nuclear waste. This is no  
surprise as we have seen other ener-  
gy sources misused, with profit as  

a priority.

-we believe the U.S. is technically  
advanced enough to offer each citi-  
zen SAFE employment. There is no rea-  
son to have to choose between risk of  
contamination and unemployment.

-in Colorado, we are opposed to ura-  
nium mining and to the Rocky Flats  
nuclear bomb factory as environmen-  
tal hazards. We are particularly con-  
cerned about birth defects (16 out of  
1000 in Arvada as compared to 10 out  
of 1000 in the rest of Jefferson  
County) due to radiation.

-we see this issue as an internation-  
al one not only because the use of  
plutonium in industry and weaponry  
is spreading but because the dangers  
of a nuclear plant and its wastes do  

not respect national borders. So we  
want to join with sisters in other  
countries organizing against nuclear  
power.

-security for the world's peoples  
will not be guaranteed by nuclear  
energy but only by turning our ener-  
gies to what has already interested  
feminists: developing a healthy re-  
lationship to the earth, to our bod-  
ies; learning to live together, work  
collectively, raise children in a  
new consciousness. . .

-and because Karen Silkwood is our  
sister.

Living Your Socialist Feminism

The following was presented as part  
of a panel entitled "Living Your  
Socialist Feminism," given by the  
Boulder Socialist Feminist Collective  
at a conference on Socialist Feminism  
at the Redfeather Institute, Liver-  
more, CO, May 27-28, 1978. Each col-  
lective member chose to address a  
specific area to relate to the theme  
of the panel. Many of the ideas ex-  
pressed here were worked out collec-  
tively. This article is the second  
in the series, the first being run  
in the September issue.

In the course of an intensive in-  
ternal exploration of our group and  
our politics, we discussed the effect  
of our socialist/feminist politics  
on our living situations, and the way  
our lifestyles in turn affect our  
politics.

Because the "means are also the  
ends" for us politically, we searched  
for the "best possible" of living  
situations, those most completely  
reflective of a progressive feminist.  
However, we were unable to develop  
or identify an ideal living situation  
and came up instead with continuums  
of both form and of content. For ex-  
ample, living alone in an apartment  
is one end of the form-continuum  
which embraces total communal living  
at its other end.

We realized that our inability to  

prescribe the ideal situation for a  
feminist/socialist also reflected  
another of our group's basic out-  
looks - namely that it is not the job  
of the "left" to set hard and fast  
rules for other people's behaviour,  
but rather to point out the conse-  
quences of people's activities and  
to help them make connections.

While extremes of the continuum  
may be clearly counter-productive  
for progressive people, (for example,  
a millionaire living alone in a huge  
mansion maintained at the expense of  
thousands of working people) most  

everyone else will fall somewhere in  
the middle of the continuum. We re-  
cognized that different people work  
and organize best in different living  
situations depending upon their class  
and cultural backgrounds, as well as  
their present needs, circle of  
friends, etc.

We also felt that a good living sit-  
uation, while requiring a consider-  
able amount of energy to maintain,  
would enrich our lives and our poli-  
tics in return.

In formulating a continuum of the  
possible forms of living situations,  
we have identified the following:  
single people living alone or raising  
their children alone, living in cou-  
ples - both heterosexual and gay,  
group living situations, (where much  
can be learned about compromise, al-  
though decisions are still often  
hierarchically or at least not coll-  
ectively made) collectives, (where  
decision making and problem solving  
appear through consensus) and com-  
munes (which pool everyone's resources  
and embody various forms of decision  
making).

In order to fully understand the  
above continuum, however, we overlay  
it with a distinction between form  
and content. For example, while the  
form of commune looks quite “revolu-  
tionary" (in its most general sense)  
the content of such a living situa-  

tion may be an adaptation of the most  
repressive of institutions we encoun-  
ter in the isolated nuclear family.  
Communes offer everyone rigid sex  
role stereotyping where the "women-  
folk” remain virtually barefoot and  
pregnant in the kitchen while the  
men handle all the heavy machinery  
and the heavy decision making.

We want to encourage each person  
to look at her living situation crit-  
ically. Is this what I want? Does it  
serve my needs? Am I living here be-  
cause I was brought up to assume this  
lifestyle uncritically? We feel that  
the more closely we can integrate our  
politics with our own lives, the more  
meaningful our political outreach to  
other people will be. Our living sit-  
uation should reflect our politics  
and our priorities, but this content  
can take many forms.

If privilege gives some of us a  
wider range of choice than others,  
we should use our opportunities wise-  
ly. Those with more choices have a  
higher degree of accountability to  
themselves and to others. Women who  
have enjoyed very little privilege  
and choice in their lives can still  
look at their lifestyles critically.  
They can ask, "How can we organize  
together with others in our situation  
to force this social system to open  
up more choices for us?" Their lives,  
too, can reflect their politics.