voices from our lives  
“I Never Was In So I Must Have Been  

(Reprinted from Our Lesbian Lives  
Tape Collection, taped at the Coming  
Out Stories Panel--Lesbian Feminist  
Liberation, June 21, 1981...Lesbian  
Herstory Archives News 7, Dec., 1981)  

I'm Mabel Hampton and I'm 79 years  
old. I was an orphan from the time I  
was a month old--my mother died. I  
never met my father until I was 19  
years old. I didn't meet him then, I  
heard about him. So, I was brought to  
New York by an older aunt, and she,  
naturally, was very strict. I ran away  
from her when I was eight years old.  

personal herstory  

I didn't have any money at all. I  
went to school on Eighth Street and in  
this school there was a girl, a white  
girl, and she had long, beautiful,  

enough to lie so I told a perfect one.  
I said, "My aunt brought me over here  
from New York and she told me to sit  
here and wait until she comes back."  
That stuck with me for more than 14  
years,  

that tale. So she said, "I'll go  
and see if I can find your aunt." I  
said, “Very well." The boy went after  
the cop and the girl went after the  
aunt. And when she came back, she had a  
sandwich. She said "You hungry?" I said,  
"Uh huh." I always was very small. She  
had a cape, I'll never forget it was a  
Red Riding Hood's red cape, you know.  
And she put it around me and gave me the  
sandwich. I stood there and looked. She  
said, "My brother's coming with a cop."  
Now I didn't want to deal with no cops.  
No, no, no, no. So I turned around.  
Another girl came around the corner with  
a woman. She said, “This your aunt?" I  
said "No." "Well, it's getting late,  

curly hair. And I myself, fresh as I  
was even then, I was stroking the hair,  
pulling the hair. So she gets mad and I  
told the teacher and for telling the  
teacher I slapped her face. So the  
teacher brought my aunt and uncle in  
and said "Why did you do it?" I said  
“Well, I been used to caressing the  
girls when I was in school, so what  
about her?" "You can't do that, Mabel,  
you can't do it." So my uncle says,  
“All right, I'll fix it." When we got  
home--he was a minister--he whipped me  
from amazing grace to floating oppor-  
tunity. Really whipped me. So I get mad.  
Next day going to school I ran away. I  
know they wouldn't find me, at least I  
hope not. This woman came up to me and  
said "Who are you? Are you Mrs. Jones'  
little girl?" I said "Yes." So she said,  
“Here's a nickel." So I took the nickel  
and went down in the hole in the ground  
where I seen somebody else going. That  
was the subway on Eighth Street. I lived  
at #52. So I put this nickel in and went  
on in the train. After I sat there a-  
while I was thinking "I went to school,  
I know right from wrong."  

When the train stopped everybody got  
out so I followed the crowd. And when I  
got out I began to walk, walk, walk,  
walk, I guess I walked about four or  
five blocks. That was Grove Street,  
Jersey City. That's where I landed. And  
I seen the kids swinging and I hadn't  
much play because I had to help my  
uncle. He was a minister and I had to  
help him go around in back alleys and  
front alleys and every other alley and  
sing and the people would throw the  
money at him. I didn't like it. So when  
I seen the kids playing I said I'm go-  
ing on in and get on the swing. I went  
on the swing, swung around. All of a  
sudden it began to get dark, see, be-  
cause it was 3 or 3:30 when I got out  
of school. These two girls come up to  
me and said "Where do you live? Who are  
you?" I said, "Well, my name is Mabel  
Hampton." They said, "Yes. Where's your  
mother?" Well, I'll tell you I was old  
Page 18 — Big Mama Rag, August, 1982  

‘Mabel Hampton and Denver Dog'  

D. Edel/Lesbian Herstory Archives 7  

Mother said that you should--maybe this  
lady knows where your aunt is." I said,  
"She do, maybe she do." So this woman  
took me home. I looked down the street  
in the meantime and saw the boy coming  
with the cop. So you know I got out of  
there real fast. I was down to Fifth  
Street, Jersey City. I don't see no  
more of the girl, I don't see no more of  
the cop, nobody. This woman had been in  
the beer garden drinking beer and this  
girl had found this woman and told her  
there was a little colored girl lost.  
They were Italians. So she says, "Well,  
I'll go and see what I can do. Maybe  
I'll take her home tonight and find her  
parents the next day." I knew they would  
never find anybody at all. So they gave  
me food, I was hungry, and they gave me  
a bed. I said to myself, “I'm going to  

jump at this, I went to school."  

‘They asked me to tell the tale again.  
Well, I had the tale down perfect by  
the time they asked me. "My aunt  
brought me over here and she told me to  
stay here until she comes for me." After  
a week or so they put me in school.  
After they put me in school, I went to  
school year in and year out. I had a  
grand time with the girls. And I knew  
then that I liked women because I did  
not like the men because my uncle was  
cruel to me. And anytime somebody's  
cruel to you, you don't care for them.  
I don't care who it is, man or woman.  
So I stayed there, they sent me to  
school and I just had a lovely time.  
More girls--oh, there was Viola and  
Ruth and all of us. And I began to like  
the girls real nice. We would go to  
different little places, you know. And  
then it happened I began to grow up  
then, naturally. For 14 years, natur-  
ally, you got to grow up. So I had one  
special girlfriend and then I met a  
woman. See, I began to run to New York  
and I met a real woman. I mean she was  
a real woman. She lived in the life for  
7-11 years. So I fell hook, line and  
sinker for this woman. I didn't know  
what it was all about but I fell for  
her anyhow. My girlfriend's mother,  
she says, "Mabel don't bother with  
women. The woman is older than you. You  
nothing but a kid." I said, "I'm 17, 18  
years old. You're not talking about a  
kid.”  

Her and I was in the show in Coney  
Island. She danced all over the place.  
Those days she signed up with the side  
shows, like different freaks and things  
and they have girls dancing. So this  
woman, I never will forget, I was sit-  
ting at the middle of the table and  
she was sitting at the end, all of a  
sudden it struck me that I loved this  
woman. And I know now, I got it down  
pat, I just loved her. And she looked  
at me and I looked at her. So my girl-  
friend said, "Mabel, why won't you eat  
your breakfast?" I said, "I'm not  
hungry." Look, I forget the lady's  
name, but I loved her. So later on  
that day I had a chance to meet this  
woman. She was from--I think she was  
from Chicago or something. But she  
told jokes and she had to sing and like  
that. I'll tell you the truth I was so  
crazy over the woman why I couldn't  
even speak. I'd look at her and she  
was just like candy, you know. She was  
a lesbian. And I mean she was one be-  
cause she knew all the answers and  
everything else. So that night, I spent  
the night with her. Then she tells me  
all the story. She says that she loved  
me and she was a lesbian. She said,  
"But you are young and you don't know  
what it's all about." Well, I didn't  
want anybody telling me I didn't know  

what it was all about. I had been going  

voices from our lives  

Out... | Always Was With The Women. ”  

that day; went home that night. Nothing  
fast moving. I said, "Oh, my stars  
this is something new." 1932. Two or  
three days later she came back. My  
girlfriend says, "Mabel, you're the  
freshest thing. Every time I looked  
around you have a different woman." I  
said, "me, not me, no." I said maybe  
it's this one. Lillian said she was in  
the life, she lived with her girlfriend  
And naturally she knew about me because  
Jackie and all the girls I was in ca-  
hoot with then, because I was on the  
stage. They had their girls. And I was  
all right. She came back a week later  
and I asked her did she want to stay  
with me. We got along nice. I won't  
tell you what happened. We got along  
perfect. Everything fitted to a tee.  

I said would she come and live with me.  
And she said "all right but my niece."  
I said "you sure it's your niece?" She  
said "yes, it's my niece. I have a sis-  
ter too." I didn't pay no attention be-  
cause I had no people. I had no one at  
all but myself. And nobody to tell me  
anything. And I wouldn't let you tell  
me anything; I knew all the answers.  
She came to live with me. And that was  
in October, 1932. We stayed together  
until four years ago when she passed  
away. So you can count how many years  
we lived together. Of course, tongue  
and teeth falls out. But we didn't  

fall off because it takes two to make  
monogamy. You keep your mouth shut you  
find you get along much better. I had  

a good time on the sly you know. When  

I got home I was the perfect husband.  
Now, is there anything you all want to  

Laurie white/Big Mama Rag ask me?  

catch the car?" I said "I'm gonna catch  
the streetcar." So she says "All right  
I'm going to too." I looked her up and  
down and said to myself goodness grac-  
ious this is a good looking chick. I  
said I wonder if she's in my life. Be-  
cause you see I had danced on the stage  
and knew all the answers. So she says  
“What your name?" I said "My name is  
Mabel, Mabel Hampton." “What's yours?”  
She said "Lillian Foster." I said to  
myself, that's a pretty name. So the  
streetcar came. (Inaudible)...Lafayette  
Theatre. I said "that's where I'm at,  
Oh, she said, "all right." So she gave  
me her address and all and I went home.  
I began thinking about that good look-  
ing chick. I decided I'd call. A couple  
days later I called but she wasn't home,  
I left word. Two days later I called  
again and the landlord answered. When  
I called this time she was there. "I  
thought you forgot me. I don't like  
people to forget me." She said, "Oh,  
no." Because I figured all of us was in  
the same cahoot together. So I asked  
her if she would come to my house the  
next day and have dinner. “Oh, yes."  

So she came. And you know I put on the  
Ritz. I knew how. I cooked up a livin'  
breeze. Because I knew how. So she came  

Q: Were there lesbian clubs that you  

went to?  

Oh plenty of them. I belonged to the  

Garden of Joys, up on the hill was  

the Garden of Joys. I danced up  

there. They had the girls up there.  

And there were other places I went  

like Lillie Walker's--Madam Walker's  

daughter. She had a beautiful place  
up on the hill and I used to go up  
there and have a ball up there. But  

I didn't do anything to my home. My  

home life was different. Okay.  

Q: I wonder if you could tell me more  

about the dancing. You said at one  

point you danced with another woman  
at a place where there were freaks  
and stuff.  

Wait a minute. What did she say?  

She want to know when you were danc-  

ing in Coney Island. What kind of  

dancing did you do there?  

A: We danced the two-step. Any old  
thing, you know. The people would  
pay their quarters to see you dance.  
And I had a little costume I had on.  
And girlfriends. I'll tell you a  
story about that. I and this girl,  
was she charming, and I didn't--af-  
ter I left the show I don't see her  
no more until about--I think about  

MORE ON PAGE 23  

Big Mama Rag, August, 1982 - Page 19  

32 BF