Gay Community Center of Colorado

Big Mama Rag Vol. 6 No.

‘Censorship’ Loses as Recall Vote Fails

By Clair Kaplan and Kathy Riley

At a Nov. 20 special membership
meeting of the Gay Community Center
of Colorado (GCCC), 98 out of 210
eligible voters voted to retain Cara
Heller and Gerry Gerash on the Board
of Directors of the center.

The special meeting was in response
to a recall effort that was organized
by a conservative faction of the
center.

Heller and Gerash were facing a
long list of charges which many peo-
ple saw as a political purge attempt.
By raising issues of sexism, the boy-
cotts of Coors beer and Florida or-
ange juice, and by raising questions
about fundraisers offensive to les-
bian feminists and politically pro-
gressive gay men, they were accused
by organizers of the recall effort
of being “judgmental and exclusion-
ary" to other elements of the gay
community, namely drag queens, bar
owners and the "Imperial Court."

Sponsors of the recall effort needed
a 2/3's majority for a successful re-
call. The vote for Heller was 31 in
favor of recall and 66 against; for
Gerash it was 20 for and 78 against.
Cara Heller spoke for a brief time
reading from a statement reproduced be-
low, stating her reaction to the recall
issue. She subsequently burned her
GCCC membership card and walked out of
the meeting.

"There Ain't No Such Animal: a short
Statement from an alleged ‘radical
ball-breaking bitch’”

Please keep in mind as you read
this that the women's movement has no
sense of humor.

Consistent with the spirit and in-
tent of the charges brought against
me I have this to say for myself:

It has been brought to my attention
that I, as holder of the exalted
office of President of the Board of
Directors of the GCCC and wielder of
absolute authority over the poor, op-
pressed men that surround me, have
flagrantly abused the power and pres-
tige conferred on me by my office and
gender.

Despite the long history of women's
oppression of men, my brothers have
trusted in me to reform myself and
lead them to enlightenment. They
have selflessly devoted themselves to
my service, denying themselves their
own dignity, their identity as men,
even their very right to exist. In
return I have acted totally without
compassion or sensitivity, egotistically
demanding that they refer to me
and other members of my sex by the
repugnant term "woman" rather than
the more familiar and convenient
"girl" or "lady." I have even been
so arrogant as to insist that they
use the form "he or she" instead of
"he," thus causing them to suffer the
agony of self-denigration with every
sentence they speak.

Of this behavior I am ashamed, and

I regret that I have allowed myself
to contribute to the further oppres-
sion of these already downtrodden men.
I now wish to atone for this grievous
sin. As penance I send myself to the
desert of this female-dominated so-
ciety, there to contemplate my trans-
gressions and to educate others about
the appalling oppression of men.

Gerash prepared a lengthy rebuttal

to the charges, saying he viewed them
as a strategy to eliminate certain
points of view—including feminism—
from the center.

He maintained that the survival
of the center depends on the ex-
pression and interaction of all points
of view.

While one of the charges against
Gerash and Heller was that they were
poor fundraisers for the center, the
printing and mailing costs of the re-
call allegations amounted to $400.
The tab was personally paid by sev-
eral sponsors of the recall effort.

The GCCC, which has rented space
at 1436 Lafayette, Denver, since
last August, was formed to meet the
needs of the gay community in a
“non-threatening, non-judgmental and
non-exclusionary manner." Currently
the center has about 250 members, of
whom about 90% are male. According
to Phil Nash, the salaried coordinator
of the GCCC, women's membership
has been slightly increasing since
the recall in response to the atten-
tion it generated among feminists.

Services the center provides in-
clude a hotline, coming-out group,
meeting space, library, referral
file, and a monthly newsletter. The
board of directors is chosen by
election of the membership (anyone
who pays $10/year dues), or by elec-
tion of the board of governors
(which is composed of representatives
of gay businesses and organizations.)
The board, as set up in the center
by-laws, is to be composed of seven

different to-Lite Campaign Underway

State-paid Abortions under Attack in Colorado

Deborah Taylor

Colorado is one of ten states still
paying for abortion. How long Colora-
do will continue to pay for abortions
depends on the activities of the
Right-to-Lifers and the pro-abortion
forces and the political scene and
legislature in Colorado.

The federal government used to pay
55% of the cost of Medicaid abortions.
Since the Hyde Amendment passed Con-
gress last fall, the federal govern-
ment has withdrawn its support. Now
instead of 45%, states have to pay
100% of the cost of Medicaid abor-
tions for poor women. The estimated
cost to Colorado next year is
$200,000; however, it would cost the
state more than four times this
amount if the babies were carried to
full term.

All of Colorado's neighboring
states have stopped paying for Medi-
caid abortions. The women in these
states have few resources for abor-
tion, so many come to Colorado. For

example, the Boulder Valley Clinic
estimates that 5% of their abortion
patients come from Nebraska and Wyo-
ming.

Right-to-Lifers in Colorado have
started a petition saying in effect
that “no state money in Colorado
should be used to pay for abortions."
If, as is expected, they obtain the
required 66,000 signatures, they will
put this on the 1978 ballot as a
referendum.

Right-to-Life has a paid, full-time
lobbyist in the State Legislature
who has been effective in black-
balling pro-abortion legislators. In
addition to trying to stop state fund-
ing of Medicaid abortions, Right-to-
Life will be pushing the legislature
to call for a constitutional conven-
tion where an amendment would be in-
troduced banning all abortions. Nine
states have already issued a call for
a convention, with only 25 more
states needed to call for a conven-
tion.

Governor Lamm is pro-abortion. The

people.

According to Phil Nash, five of
the seven have resigned since Novem-
ber as a result of tensions surround-
ing the recall effort. Three of the
five were elected by the membership
and will be replaced by a vote of
the membership, while the other two
will be replaced by the board of
governors. The present board of dir-
ectors is asking for people to run
for the board, stating that petty
charges will not be tolerated as a
basis for removal.

The fact that the recall failed
and that most people saw it as a
political purge means that the cen-
ter will probably continue to be a
place where political issues can be
raised and discussed. Had the recall
won, the center would have moved
towards being nothing more than a
social organization for privileged
white gay men and some women. Still,
by its nature, the center will prob-
ably never be a political organiza-
tion: political, in the sense of an
organization that takes stands on
issues, acts on them and makes con-
nections to the oppression of other
people.

The recall was defeated on civil
libertarian grounds—opposition to
censorship. In voting against the
recall, the membership took no stand
in support of Heller's and Gerash's
stance on sexism and other issues.
Gerash even said in his speech that
while he wants to raise issues and
educate through the center, he does
not necessarily expect or even want
the board to adopt his positions.
The way the center is now set up,
it will not go through the process
of developing politics, but will con-
tinue to assert that its basis of
operation rests with being open to
everyone.

A politically conscious center
which acts on its politics is incom-

patible with a center that wants to
be “open to all segments of the com-
munity," regardless of whether those
segments are willing to deal with the
ways they oppress others. The logi-
cal, and possibly absurd extension
of this basis of unity is that a gay
nazi group has as much right to the
center as anyone else, even if its
presence would alienate almost every-
one else. To some, these are not ab-
surd possibilities at all. One man
stated during debate on the recall
that he would gladly accept money
from the Ku Klux Klan if it was
offered without strings. This is
politically “non-exclusionary"; yet,
even if such an unlikely thing were
to happen, it would in fact, exclude
all but the most politically reac-
tionary from the center.

The actual charges against Gerash
and Heller were divided into three
categories, the first of which al-
leged that the two failed to do a
good job on fundraising. One charge
in that category said that Gerash

State Social Services Board has voted
unanimously to include Medicaid abortions
as part of its proposed budget
for the coming year. The Board will
submit its budget proposal to the
Joint Budget Committee of the State
Legislature sometime this spring.

The Joint Budget Committee has one
known Right-to-Lifer—Senator Ted
Strickland. The other five members
appear to be pro-abortion; however,
if Strickland prevails, the JBC could
send this controversial part of the
budget to the legislature for debate
and vote.

The Colorado legislature has a Re-
publican majority in both houses.
Last year, one anti-abortion bill,
sponsored by Senator MacManus, came
before the legislature and it was
voted down by only three votes in
the Senate.

Women are encouraged to visit or
write their representatives stating
our need for state funding of abor-
tions. Especially important are the
Senators who voted for the MacManus
bill last year—Don Sandoval and
Paul Sandoval (Denver), Don Harding
and Bill Hughes (C Springs), Ted
Strickland (Westminster), etc.

A coalition of people in support
of women's right to abortion is
forming in Denver. So far the group
consists of women from NOW, the Na-
tional Abortion Rights Action League
and individuals. They will begin to
meet in January. If you are interested
in learning what they are doing
and want to help out, please call
Bonnie Kopoulos at 321-5743 or the
Abortion Referral and Counseling Ser-
vice at 832-2293.

(Note: If you are a poor woman,
you can still get a Medicaid abortion
in Colorado. If you find you are
pregnant, contact the welfare office
in your county. Any pregnant woman
is entitled to welfare (AFDC) if she
meets the financial requirements of
welfare. The approval process can be
quick, especially in Denver and
Boulder counties.)