The Velvet Hammer

Judy Barlow

Linda Ryan started the Velvet Hammer as a women's bar in September 1976.  
Linda Foley joined her one month later. The bar was moved to a larger build-  
ing on July 15, 1977. It was closed on March 15, 1979.

The following is a discussion with Linda Ryan and Linda Foley about how the  
bar started, how it functioned, how it affected them and how it failed.

“I couldn’t, with good conscience, serve  
drinks to women when it was obvious  
that alcohol was contributing to their  

problems.”

Linda Ryan: It started for purely idealistic reasons. When I moved to Den-  
ver I felt the atmosphere of the women's bars here just were not healthy for  
most women. Certainly not for feminists. I felt that women needed a place  
where they could communicate, where they could bring their children. I have  

raised two children and I understood how difficult it is to come up with the  
money for a babysitter and still be able to afford to go out. I felt that it  
would be good for both the children and their mothers to have the children  
socialized into a healthy lesbian environment or women's culture. Those were  
some of the major reasons that I started the bar.

Linda Foley:

LR: There were a lot of problems at the first location - parking problems,  
bad area for women, women were hassled by the neighborhood people, we were  
threatened. Besides the rent for that little 400 sq. ft. bar was the same as  
the first mortgage payment on the new larger bar.

LF: We ended up with more than one mortgage and there was a lot of over-  
head. Things were always breaking and needing repair. And we had the same  
number of people bouncing around this large bar as we had packed into the  
small bar.

LR: Besides we wanted to have a restaurant and be able to get more enter-  
tainment, safe parking, better neighborhood, etc.

LF: Music was a big part of the old bar and we wanted to get more enter-  
tainers including the big feminist groups for the new bar. Feminist...maybe  
we should have just called the bar a women's space or pro-woman. That one  
word "feminist" caused us a lot of trouble. Women who were not yet feminist  
were intimidated by the radical feminists, and then there were the “liberal  
feminists."

Maybe they were stupid reasons.

LR: And there were some women who called themselves feminists who really  
were not.  
LF: It became alienating to less-educated and minority women. Everyone  

seemed to have a different idea of what "feminist" meant. We just wanted to  
provide an atmosphere that would be comfortable for all women regardless of  
where they were politically. We wanted to provide a space where they could  
be comfortable and grow.

LR: We became aligned with the left because of our own politics. We really  
knew intellectually from the start that it wasn't going to work, but emotion-  
ally we wanted it so badly that we would not see the obvious.

Big Mama Rag Vol. 7 No.

— A Difficult Lesson

LF: I still feel badly that we were never able to cooperate with some fem-  
inist groups. Like we tried to work something out with Virago where we could  
get together on bringing women's culture to Denver. We could really have done  

some professional things. We could have helped each other.

LR: We thought that with all Denver had it could have been a metropolis  
for feminist activities.

We saw the bar as being integral in this process. Besides providing  
the space, we helped raise money for the women's community. I think we envi-  
sioned ourselves more as a social center than as a bar. We wanted to change  
the whole idea of bars - to make it a positive place to grow rather than a  
place just to drink and forget our troubles.

LR: That hurt us, too. I couldn't, with good conscience, serve drinks to  
women when it was obvious that alcohol was contributing to their problems.

“I’m afraid that realistically a feminist  
business just doesn’t cut it.”

LF: Yes, Linda would cut off drinks, give away free meals, and it was  
taken wrong. Word spread that it was not a good place to drink and forget.  
Women were strongly encouraged to be accountable for their actions. Besides  
being uncomfortable for some, it hurt us financially by losing these women's  
business and also we made our profit by selling drinks. It was an unrealistic  
situation.

LR: Another thing that it took us a long time to realize was that probably  
80% of the women we dealt with regularly had drinking problems.

LF: A bar was probably just the wrong choice.

LR: We spent a lot of time and energy just seeing that women got home OK.

“Women who were not yet feminist were  
intimidated by radical feminists.”

LF: And instead of putting money in the bank when we had a little extra we  
would look for ways to get other groups going. Maybe we should have had bene-  

fits for ourselves.

LR: We just should have gotten a 50 x 50 room and catered exclusively to  
feminists.

With the kind of overhead we had, we had to be a swinging bar to make  
it and that never happened. Sure we had busy nights when we had bands, but we  
were paying for it.

LR: Women who entertained for free or tips in the small bar wanted a lot  
of money to play in the large bar.

LF: And if we made a lot of money at the door we would pay the entertainers  
more. Everyone was so broke that we felt guilty about taking too much money  
even though we knew that we needed it to survive.

LR: Financially it killed us. The money hassles got to be an emotional  
drain. It wasn't too bad until we got hassles from the women and no one was  
happy, least of all us. We wondered why we even bothered.

Alcoholism and Work

- Or Another Night Without Sleep

O.J. reacts with the phrases we've  
all heard from our parents. “Every-  
body's got to work"? "You can't ex-  
pect things handed to you on a sil-  
ver platter." I go into my rap on  
privilege, trying to give her a  
quick lesson with illustrious examp-  
les. She isn't a good student. Her  
mother taught her harder and longer.

Pat Greer

Clean sheet of paper. Midnight.  

Two hours of tape with four of us  
from LUNA talking about work and  
alcohol. And more. Money, capital-  
ism, the movement, our feelings come  
out, large political differences,  
scare, anger. I have to get up in  
the morning to go to work, running  

on a sleep deficit now, how am I  
going to make it another day? Remem-  
ber the writing Paula Williams did on  
work. One of the first things she  
says is that work rules our lives--  
tells us when we have to go to bed,  
how to dress, how to act. She feels  
differently from the women she works  
with, might as well be of a different  
species she says. The pain and an-  
guish of a bright, creative, sensitive  
woman with a degree in philosophy and  
history and no place to use her know-  
ledge and talents.

Play the tape for the eighteenth  
time--where did it get weird? I did  
it. I'm talking about the same  
thing that Paula anguishes over--  
the lies. Being a good girl, getting  
good grades in school, going about  
things as parents tell us to and be-  
lieving there will be a place for us  
in the world. Talking about women  
I know with college degrees working  
in restaurants and as secretaries.

No one telling us how hard it was go-  
ing to be.

Phil doesn't understand why she's  
here. She has no complaints about  
her work. She is happy working with  
kids, can see what she's doing, how  
she affects them, how they change and  
grow. She would fire some people she  
works with--they're stoned or loaded  
all day and just tell the kids to  
“go play". We're shocked, don't un-  
derstand, would probably fire them  
too. She makes $3.00 an hour. Left  
teaching in the public schools so  
she could be happy.

We all wonder if it is possible to  
be able to be who we are, make a  
decent wage, work at what we think  
is important and be happy. KT says  
she thinks it is impossible and no  
one disagrees. Silence for a long  
period.

D.J. is the center of attention for  
most of the evening, angry, defensive,  
feeling put down by the community for  
having a house, living in the suburbs,  
owning a washer and dryer. I try  
and lighten things up, jokingly say  
give me the washer and dryer if it  
makes you feel guilty. It doesn't  
help. She wonders if she should give  
everything she's worked for away. I  
worry--this isn't going right, we're  
not coming up with any analysis at  
all. It's beginning to feel like  
therapy. We try to help her, but are  
exasperated, want to shake her, want  
to understand that not everyone has  
had the opportunity she has, we've  
had, still have. I tell the story of  
arriving in Denver with my lover and  
$80 between us, my taste of poverty,  
I wonder if I have $80 right now. I  
worry more. Get into the albatross  
of my past. Think of the time in  
LUNA when I said I was worth more  
dead than alive. When this same  
woman said "NO" emphatically and re-  
minded me of my worth to her, and  

not in monetary terms. Remember how  
she helped me through a time when I  
thought I was a failure because at  

31 years of age I had no house, no  
real career, few possessions. She  
helped me come to the place where I  
realized that what possessions I did  

have didn't comfort me and having  
more things or more expensive ones  
wouldn't comfort me any more. How I  
finally allowed people who cared for  
me to nurture and love me through  
the hard time, how I at last realized  
that they were what was important,  
what really mattered, what was really  
meaningful. How no one ever told us  
how good life could be either.

We express our fears, fear of losing  
one another. There is a big gap, a  
serious difference. D.J. says if she  
was still drinking she'd go out and  
get drunk. We all forget that if we  
were still drinking we would have  
been drinking all through the meeting  
and probably had a brawl. And we  
probably wouldn't care or question  
or act on anything, because we'd be  
numb. Our dreams of a better world  
would all be washed away and forgott-  
en, discredited and lost. We wouldn't  
even know each other.

They leave and I cannot sleep, toss  
and turn and worry, worry about KT  
who is suing her former employer.  

How will she ever get another job?  
How will she live? What would happen  
if I got sick and couldn't work?  
Worried about D.J. Afraid she will  
drink, I fear that the lies, the  
myths, the questioning will be too  
much. But I know she's strong, and  
she'll be all right and I think I’ll  
save that tape and play it for her  
next year.