14

Big Mama Rag Vol. 7 No. 5

The Demands of Women:

“Horizontal hostility." Florence
Kennedy once said in a visit to
Colorado that this was the biggest
stumbling block to the growth of
the women's movement. She defined it
as the negative energy vented by mem-
bers of the movement on each other
as a direct result of the "vertical
oppression" that comes down on us
by the powers that be outside our
movement, and against which we feel
powerless.

Look around you. Are the group of
feminist activists you could count
on a few years ago getting smaller
and smaller? It seems that the women's
movement is, indeed, losing members
much faster than new women are join-
ing in the struggle for radical social
change.

One reason for this exodus from
activism to private reflection has
been named. It is being called "dis-
illusionment." Disillusionment with
what, however, isn't clear. Is it
disillusionment with each other?
Disillusionment with the incredible
task at hand of replacing a system
unresponsive to the needs of people
with one that will not benefit any
individual or group of individuals
at the expense of any other individual
or group of individuals? Do we, in
fact, agree that this is our "incred-
ible task" at hand? Are our reasons
for coming to the initial self-defini-
tion of "feminist" even valid any-
more?

One of the things that has been un-
ique to the feminist movement, as op-
posed to other major political move-
ments, is that we not only challenge
our oppressors, but we have challenged
our own members in the area of our
personal lifestyles and relationships,
not to mention, of course, our politi-
cal ideology. The demand that we
“practice what we preach" is a good
one, however, when facing a vastly
complex set of issues, many of which
we undoubtedly have confusion about

Discussion

how to best deal with, do we "point
the finger" or adopt a genuine spirit
of questioning about personal account-
ability?

There are many questions. Another

area of questions concern Big Mama

Rag, herself. Why does the paper con-
tinue to report on local, national
and international news of importance
to women? Why continue to make the
paper accessible to women through
distribution, coverage and as an out-
let for their ideas? Why continue to
report news in a political context
when it seems obvious that women are
not inspired to activism at this
stage of movement history?

One way in which the women of Big
Mama Rag choose to express continued
commitment to feminism is through the
publication of a newspaper which will
inspire, initiate and focus dialogue
among women, as well as the practical
distribution of news information.
The cover of the paper this month
is a departure from the usual photo
or graphic celebrating the lives and
struggles of women. Instead, there is
a listing of 13 demands, demands which
remind us what it is we are working
toward.

We have to keep what we want in
sight, to keep defining what we want
and developing it. Knowing what it
is we want gives us power and to ex-
press it allows us to clarify what it
is we have in common. It also allows

us to examine the content of our dis-

agreements as opposed to the continued
questioning of each other's motives.

But won't the listing of these de-
mands alienate women who aren't
"There" yet? Unless we are honest
about what it is we want, how can
anyone ever get "There"? The whole
idea of "not alienating" women is
very condescending and does not be-
lieve women can be radical.

"Never underestimate the power of
a woman" is a saying feminists created
a few years ago, but one thing we are
often, ourselves, guilty of. How can

we tap the power of women if we lie
about our needs and desires?

The importance of demanding free
childcare or an end to privilege based
on race or class does not lie in the
ability of our present system of
patriarchy/capitalism to grant these
basic requirements, but in the content
of the demands. We have to remember
that the reforms our present system
makes in answer to the demands made
upon it are things that can be given
without causing a change or disruption
within its structure. The situation
with abortion rights clearly shows
that what can be “won" or given can
certainly be "lost" or taken away.

Putting the demands of our movement
in revolutionary terms is important
so that we won't be coopted into ac-
cepting reforms which can only help
those women with the privilege of
an "acceptable" skin color, pocket
book, or sexuality. Again, witness
what has happened to abortion rights.

The prominent strategy around get-
ting abortion rights for women has
changed from the direct demand of
"free abortion on demand" to a more
polite terminology of “the right to
choose", as if the very word "abortion"
is too hard on the ears of law-
makers. Politeness did not win the
initial Supreme Court ruling granting
abortion rights to all women.

We need not be polite about such a
basic requirement that women have
control of our bodies so that the
choice to have or not have a child is
clearly a "choice". There is no free-
dom when there is no choice.

Liberation News Service distributed
a graphic which clearly points this
out. It reads: "Questions a rich
woman must answer to get an abortion:
cash? or charge? Questions a poor
woman must answer to get an abortion:
were you raped? victim of incest? did
you report the incident within 60
days? fill out the reports? have you
gone through counseling? would you
suffer severe physical damage without
one? parental consent? over 16? etc.,

etc., etc." Look at who is free
and is not free to "choose".

Making demands communicates to
women that feminism lives and that
those of us involved in the women's
movement are serious in our desire
and efforts to see all women free.

It also communicates that our needs
are not being met within the present
system and begins to define the work
that must be done in the establish-
ment of conditions within which all
people can live decently.

Most important, by making demands,
we can also begin to define the com-
mitment we must make and the demands
on our own time and energy to bring
about true liberation.

Hopefully, the function of feminism
has been to create social change, not
social life; friends and lovers are
certainly good rewards, but not
the purpose of feminism. That would
be the true source of disillusionment.

Our Demands

We demand control of our reproduc-
tive process:

Everyone has the right to raise a
child if they so choose, and to be
given support, including economic
support, for this responsibility of
great value to society. Removal of
children from particular groups of
people-- lesbian mothers, Native Am-
ericans, those on welfare, those in
unconventional lifestyles, handicapped--
is wrong. Likewise, it isn't
necessary that everyone must, or
should, be parents and their choice
to not rear children should be re-
spected.

Every woman has the right to free
abortion; the availability of abor-
tion is essential to our health and
freedom. Women also have the right to
be free from forced sterilization;
third world women, particularly, have
been sterilized against their will
through trickery, through poverty be-
cause of their race or national ori-
gins.

Big Mama Rag Talks About Money,

Who We Are

Big Mama Rag is a collective of women, having grown in size from two wo-
men (Connie and Sue) at the time of the community meeting in March to now
include Fran, Judy, Lisa and Vicki. We are all white women; Judy is the only
one who started calling me a pervert; six months later we were both married. I married
a man who had been attracted to men, but wouldn't admit he was gay. We got
married in '71, I had a child in '73 and an affair with a woman college teach-
er in '74. I came out then and got involved first with the gay community and
worked there for about 2 years before I knew the women's community even exist-
ed. All this time I was a housewife in suburbia-- I was married for five years.
(I'm 28). I was reading Big Mama Rag and fantasizing about all these bull-dyke
truck drivers who must be putting out the paper; I never thought I'd be work-
ing on it. I got real disillusioned with the gay community because there was
no room for feminism, so I left and joined the women's community. I didn't get
really deeply involved until the "Blue Bird Five" action in which I got arrest-
ed, went to jail and had plenty of time to think. After that I got involved
with BMR; started doing national/international news, a lot of reading and dev-
eloping political thought and came out as a socialist feminist 2 years ago.

Fran Day: My story is somewhat different than everyone else's. I'm 36; I went
through the traditional childhood and early marriage. I got married when I was
19 and was married for years. I got a divorce and my world really changed
then-- I went through a period of celibacy and became more in touch with who
I am and became more political. I joined the women's movement, got active in
NOW. I helped with a NOW chapter that tried to be more radical than other
chapters; that met with a lot of resistance, so I decided that wasn't working
for me and joined the radical feminist community. I went to Woman to Woman and
got involved there, started a column for BMR. I was on the Woman to Woman col-
lective for about 14 years and knew some day I would join Big Mama Rag and did
so two months ago when Big Mama Rag needed me. I was also involved in the civ-
il rights movement, the anti-war movement and did defense committee work for
the "Blue Bird Five."

We are predominately working-class women; all of us work at full-time,
"straight" jobs. The following discussion includes all the collective members,
except for Lisa who was called away on important business and was unable to
participate in this talk about the paper, money and the movement; she will be
a participant in future discussions.

Constance Perenyi: I am twenty-four years old and have been politically
active/aware since the age of 14. My first identification as a feminist dev-
eloped as I learned about the oppression of women in art-- both as artists and
as objects. I taught classes on women artists at Woman to Woman Feminist Cen-
ter two years ago, have been writing for BMR about that long, and joined the
collective nine months ago. I am a lesbian and an artist and currently care
for myself financially by doing support work for anti-nuclear activities.

Sue Goding: I have been politically aware for most of my life. Just in the
last three years have I begun to struggle collectively for political change.
I am a 25-year-old white lesbian and have worked on BMR for 1 year. I drive
a bus.

Vicki Piotter: I am twenty-four and have been politically active for almost a
decade. I came out as a lesbian when I was 16 and started working with femin-
ist issues at that age. I've been in the Denver women's community for about
4 years, was a founder of Woman to Woman Feminist Center, a founder of the
Women Everywhere Radio Collective and have been involved in different commun-
ity actions. My association with the paper spans four years and I just rejoined
the collective last month. I currently am employed as a clerk with the post
office.

Judy Bartow: I started out in the anti-war movement in '68. I was frustrated
by the "free-love" male leaders. In '69 I had my first exposure to the women's
movement in Chicago, and was pretty much frightened by it. I had an affair
with my female roommate, a one-night stand, woke up the next morning and she

Big Mama Rag: Her Definition in Relation to Money

Vicki: I look around and see that there just aren't enough people fighting for
basic total change in the economic/political/social system, or that people are
even aware that things can be overhauled. One reason I have for being on the
collective of Big Mama Rag is very selfish-- to try and reach women so that
I'm not out there fighting all by myself.