Page 6

Big Mama Rag Vol. 3 No. 5

Prepared, Educated Childbirth Shows the Joy of Birth

Photo by Carol Lease

Jo and Gail Delaney and son

Carol Lease —

It isn’t impossible for a woman to go through pregnancy and childbirth unaware of what is happening to her mind and body, but it is a difficult and unnecessary experience for her to go through. Two people who have discovered that prepared, educated childbirth is “fantastic” and the way to have a child are Gail and Jo Delaney, who live in Boulder with their four children and teach a “natural” childbirth course through the Community Free School there. A “natural” childbirth is any spontaneous, vaginal delivery

but not necessarily a prepared, educated delivery.

The common belief concerning childbirth is that women should deliver their babies while heavily drugged, strapped down, and ignorant of what their bodies are doing, in pain, dependent on a doctor.

“Delivering my first child was a very unhappy, negative experience,” says Gail. “I didn’t know what was going on. I was afraid, which just made me more tense, which intensified the pain and created a horrible cycle. I never wanted to go through that again.”

“They wouldn't let me see her for 8 hours after the baby was born,” responds Jo. “She was in tears and felt awful. She said ‘never again!’ I never got any positive vibes from my parents about birth. I knew that there had to be a better way to give birth."

It was through some women in the La Leche League, an organization that fosters breastfeeding, that Gail found out about prepared childbirth. At first she was skeptical: “Since they had little or no pain and since they seemed so turned on about it, I thought that they were the exceptions. But I went to a class and learned the breathing and read books. And when I had my second baby, I was prepared for it and it was great.”

Jo agrees. “She was bubbly after that birth. So turned-on. That experience was completely different - very positive.”

In 1932, an English doctor, Grantly Dick-Reed, introduced a method of concentrated relaxation during labor through his book, Childbirth Without Fear. He believed that most women approached childbirth with a great amount of fear and that the fear caused tension which then caused pain. His solution was to eliminate this fear through education. About the same time, Fernand La Maze, a French doctor, believed that women could ease labor pain by responding to labor contractions with pre-learned controlled breathing. As contractions intensified, so would the woman’s breathing and therefore the relief of discomfort.

The exercises that are learned for prepared childbirth help women breathe in such a way that their bodies will receive the oxygen necessary to function most efficiently while in labor. The controlled breathing allows the muscles of the body that are not being used to relax and sends energy to those muscles that are working. Concentrating on the proper breathing response to muscle contractions places a woman’s attention on doing something, instead of always thinking about the experiencing pain and thereby diminishes its effect.

The Delaneys feel that it is not necessarily the fault of doctors that most women don’t have positive birth experiences, but rather the fault of the medical schools whose primary purpose training in obstetrics is for difficult births. Only about 5% of all births are difficult. The rest are normal and don't require the use of an excessive amount of drugs or forceps to facilitate delivery.

Forceps are used in delivery to terminate prolonged labor when the mother or the baby is endangered. The doctor uses the double-bladed instrument to pull the baby gently out of the mother’s body. However, too often the forceps are abused by using them as a matter of convenience for the doctor. Also, the use of regional block anesthesia has made women unable to use muscular action needed to deliver the baby, thereby requiring a forceps delivery. It is uncommon for a prepared, unanesthetized woman to need a forceps delivery.

“Doctors find it easier to cope with an unconscious woman,” says Gail Delaney. “Then they can have routinized births like on a conveyor belt rather than having to deal with each woman individually. But women have caught on to prepared childbirth and are teaching the doctors now. A woman should be determined but use tact when looking for a doctor to cooperate with her in a planned childbirth.”

“The fact that an obstetrician receives from $300 to $400 for his/her services must also be a factor that doctors take into consideration in seeing the woman's point of view,” says Jo.

Doctors have convinced American women that the only way to have a baby is to keep their mouths shut and to do as they are told. But more and more women are challenging this by asking questions about their bodies and by confronting doctors. One example is the question of performing an episiotomy on a laboring woman. An episiotomy is the making of an incision in the area between the vagina and the anus to enlarge the opening through which the baby will pass. This procedure is routinely done in the United States usually because the woman is anesthetized and cannot feel when to stop pushing and because doctors are too hurried to massage the vaginal opening which could then stretch to very wide proportions without tearing and allow the birth.

Episiotomies are sometimes done so that a woman’s vagina and pelvic floor muscles will not stretch too much. Doctors claim that this can cause problems later, such as uterine prolapse, which is when a woman’s reproductive organs begin to slip down through the pelvic floor. This occurs in women who have had many deliveries and can be avoided by exercise. The real reason that doctors perform unnecessary episiotomies seems to be that a looser vagina will interfere with a man’s sexual pleasure during intercourse.

Another common practice during delivery is to have the woman lying on her back, which causes the uterus to press on a major blood vessel that is involved in supplying blood to the uterus. This makes it harder for the woman to breathe, inhibits her blood circulation, and may harm the baby. “Home delivery is great. But a woman should have a doctor or somebody to help. (In Colorado, a midwife must have a medical degree.) It’s a personal decision,” says Gail. “It’s not like in Europe where there are traveling emergency units available to midwives who deliver over half of all babies at home. Special cases, such as when multiple births are predicted or when the woman has had difficult deliveries, are delivered in a hospital with an attending doctor.”

In this country, there is no such system for home deliveries. Midwives are illegal in most states. Women are forced to go to strange, uncaring, non-supportive hospitals and incur tremendous expense and suffer needlessly to perform a completely natural act. Women who deliver babies are treated like children and as if they were sick.

“Prepared childbirth makes a woman aware of what is happening to her during labor. She will probably have fewer problems because her body won’t be tense due to the breathing exercises and the fact that she will be concentrating on them and not the contractions. She'll be more able to cope with anything that might happen and make intelligent decisions,” says Gail.

“It’s ideal to have her partner there, but not necessary,” she continues. “But you need to have someone there to help. Someone who is supportive and knows what is going on too.” Although not all hospitals allow someone in the delivery room, some do. And those that don’t will have to be changed. Jo Delaney feels that being present at the birth of a child allows a man “to enjoy a pretty mysterious, unknown part of life. For a husband and wife to be together at the time of birth is a super hype to a relationship. We love teaching these classes and encourage women who are expecting a child to try prepared childbirth.” For more information on the subject, call the La Maze Association for Childbirth Preparation at 388-1385.

INEZ GARCIA: SHE KILLED HER RAPIST AND WAS CONVICTED Guest writer this month: Sandia

This edition of BMR is focusing on women and health. Understandably, most of the articles concern issues related to the particular physical and mental information that women need to know about their bodies and the facilities available to them in our area. But to assume that the question of health must be relegated to such a narrow focus would be erroneous. When the society we live in is sick, and when that society dictates the terms of right and wrong (social health), then our own personal well-being is jeopardized.

Too often the system is attacked in general terms and the exact nature of its pathology undefined. However, there is a specific example of the sickness of this society that may well turn your stomach as it did mine. That it may turn your politics and attitudes as well is the point of this article.

Inez Garcia, a 30-year-old woman from California, was recently raped. Her reaction to that crime against her person and dignity as a human being aroused in her a response that any woman under the same circumstances would find justifiable: she killed him. Inez has been convicted of second-degree murder.

Immediately what floods into our brain is how is that possible? Women treated as property by this society and defined that way by the terms of marriage, name, money - are not allowed to defend their ultimate property, themselves. You ask, what are the mitigating circumstances?

Inez did not kill him immediately after the rape, in the heat of passion would be the legal phrase. As if passion and the intensity of our fear and anger diminishes over time. Inez had not reported the rape to the police at first, as so many women do not, because of the ensuing shame that follows—one would not be ashamed to be robbed or beaten, but it is interesting that when the essence of women is violated, a woman is made to feel indecent.

Thus there was no “proof” of rape as determined by our society, and need we add that that determination has been made by lawyers and judges who have been mostly men. Requiring the presence of semen as one of the few accepted criteria for rape conviction is like asking for Hiroshima to show only its outward destruction and not the scars that its people felt for years afterwards in their hearts and feelings.

During the trial, the issue of rape was not allowed as evidence because rape had not been proven; yet the rape was the provocation. More than that, it brings up the question of self-defense. A male juror reflects the ultimate crime behind the system’s attitudes and actions. First, he noted that self-defense wasn’t a viable position because “he’s not trying to kill her. He’s just trying to screw her and give her a good time.” If this remark is sick, another comment is proof of the insanity of the situation: “When I leave here, I'll have less fear of raping a woman now than I did before. At least I know if I get shot she wouldn't get away.” When asked if he really meant that, he replied, “I wasn’t joking... I was thinking of all the men out there reading it. I told them that.”

It is the implications of this man’s statements and the court decision that should make every woman’s blood curdle. If this case becomes precedent, then male acceptance of rape and the sickness it represents will become the basis for law. More, it will become License.

The complete vindication of Inez Garcia is necessary to the restoration of health in this society. It is not her problem alone; it is a battleground for all women, an Armageddon where the values of each of us as free persons are at stake. Admittedly, the prognosis is poor, but the soundness and health of the social body is the concern of all of us.

A defense committee for Inez has been set up. Send her your money if you can, your psychic strength if you cannot: Inez Garcia Defense Committee

c/o Stacy Falton

722 Alcatraz, Apt. 101 Oakland, California 94609

1 The Daily Californian, October 8, 1974, p. 12.