more-on page

Public Assistance Slavery

Susan Duvall, of the Warren Village residents council, said of HB 1193, "In a half-baked effort to reduce the numbers of people...(on welfare)...you are going to perpetuate the welfare state." She said the proposed program "ignores the skills and aspirations of the ADC mother..." and "assumes she is totally dependent on welfare for income." Ms. Duvall does illustration work occasionally. If 1193 passed, she would "again be having to pursue a dead-end job," without being able to develop the skills she has. And on $3.35 an hour, Ms. Duvall says, "You can't support even one kid."

This writer testified at the hearing: I said, 1) that it's unrealistic because it's supposed to be funded from existing Federal & State money. With all the cutbacks now and more ahead, it's stupid to think any kind of program that will actually help people to find jobs can be run. 2) That the sponsors of the bill portrayed possible clients of the program as inarticulate, shy, not able to get through an interview. I said I am articulate, skilled, white, and I can't find work. What is somebody who isn't skilled, etc., going to do? 3) The Weld County program has a dropout rate of 44%. Some of these folks quit the program and found work. But most of the dropouts are untraceable, said the director of the job diversion program.

I suggested places to find the "untraceables"—in jail, hustling on the streets, in drug & alcohol rehab programs. Last night, a woman suggested other places to look for the people who slip through the cracks in the system: women who withdraw into their homes, eat less, depend on their families. Families that split up, put their kids in temporary foster homes, because they can't afford to raise them.

Everyone who spoke against the bill was agreed: Work, 2? is not fair, and it is not really to help poor people but to let the State wash its hands of poor people. HB 1193 died in committee two days after testimony, by a 5-4 vote. But workfare in Colorado is far from dead. It can easily resurface in the form of amendments tacked on to other bills. If interested, call your State Rep to keep track of it.

People who want to protest this program should go to the State Board of Social Services, 1575 Sherman, Room 711, in Denver, & other counties. They could then come up with another "1193."

SO SHOW UP, TELL THE BOARD

CONDITIONS

a magazine of writing by women with an emphasis on writing by lesbians

“CONDITIONS is highly recommended for academic libraries and is essential for all collections of lesbian/feminist writing.” —Library Journal

“There is no magazine I look forward to more eagerly than CONDITIONS... CONDITIONS is essential reading.” —TILLIE OLSEN

Subscriptions: $11/3 issues; $6 “hardship” rate; $22 institutions; $15, $25, $50 supporting subscription; $4.50 single issue.

Indicate with which issue your subscription should begin. Card will be sent with gift issue or subscription. CONDITIONS: FOUR and subsequent back issues still available.

CONDITIONS P.O. Box 56 Van Brunt Station Brooklyn, N.Y. 11215

CONNEXIONS

CONNEXIONS/PTS 4228 Telegraph Ave. Oakland, CA, 94609

(415) 654-6725

1982 at 9 AM, pack the room and tell the Board your views. At that meeting the SBSS will discuss the Weld program and how and if it could be adopted.

BRING YOUR KIDS,

OOPS!

Last month in "New Prison Labor Scheme Busts Unions," the Cudahy Meat Packing Plant was misspelled. This plant, located in Phoenix, closed down last summer, firing 400 union workers. It reopened 60 days later, using prisoner laborers making just about minimum wage. This Cudahy Plant is the same company here in Denver, that sold itself to itself, and fired all its workers for not accepting half their former hourly wage from the "new" company. There is currently a boycott being called by their employees of all Bar-S/Cudahy products, bacon, hot dogs, lard, etc.

feminist bookcenter

2023 E. Colfax, Denver (303) 320-5972

Books by, for and about women Information and Referral Switchboard Library Non-sexist children’s literature Lesbian Literature

Posters, Periodicals

Connexions presents the world from a woman's perspective:

eNEWS

a ANALYSIS a INTERVIEWS

translated from the international feminist press.

SUBSCRIBE NOW! Annual sub: $10