ef 9088 14

Witches’ Retreat

Susan Houstle

Over 75 women attended the second annual Tucson Women’s
retreat on November 2 and 3. The weekend was sponsored by Women
in Tucson Celebrating Halloween and was held at the YWCA camp out-
side of Tucson. Many new faces were seen as well as a contingent of old
friends from Albuquerque.

Saturday began in the “Ceremony Room” where all the women sang
songs, drew energy from each other and evoked the memory of sister
witches from the past and present. During lunch, women wrote down
their fantasies, which were used as the planning core for the weekend.
The fantasies were broken down into common interests: women in the
country/feminist retreat, healing recreation, theatre, arts, music, a
coffee house, a restaurant, and a newspaper. Women interested in
bringing the various fantasies to reality met together. Several ongoing
groups were formed as a result.

The rest of the afternoon was spent playing volleyball, football, and
softball, hiking around the desert, and just getting off on being with
sisters. Three women played chamber music to a large group of ad-
mirers. That evening there was a potluck dinner and then a dance. The
dance was highlighted by the first performance of the Tucson Feminist
Mime Troupe. They did two skits, one about the competition among us
and the other about our struggles with non-monogamous relationships.

After breakfast on Sunday, the women got down to concentrated
work on how to bring the women’s community together, dealing with
organization and alienation. It was decided that there would be a coor-
dinating committee with one representative from each of the newly
formed groups, plus coordinators responsible for maintenance,
bookkeeping, getting together a calendar, staffing, communication, and
grants and public relations. In order to avoid the hierarchical values of
our patriarchal society, one woman envisioned the coordinating com-
mittee as the hub of a wheel comprising the various groups.

Dealing with alienation was a much more difficult task. Women who
had stopped relating to the Tucson Women’s Center talked about the
feelings that they felt had forced them to this action. The main problems
seemed to be differences in points of view and a feeling of elitism they
received from the women who did relate to the Center.

There has also been a serious communication problem. The women
also talked about why the Center was not reaching new women, why
this split existed, different consciousnesses, and class and race
differences.

Despite the differences, many of them still unresolved, there was a
definite feeling of unity and energy for overcoming self-made and
society-made barriers that were keeping the women’s community from
making their fantasies reality.

FOR YVONNE

I smothered you with my needs
you retreated from me with yours,
we met on a wave of insanity

in the midst of an internal storm,
it broke in a fury over our heads
and left us alone and apart

and on separate shores. CORRIE

Big Mama Rag Vol. 3, No. 6

Sisterhood

What's

a
Stake?

Becky Ferguson,
Ellen Litman,
Howie Newman

The Matrix, at 1030 N. 4th
Avenue, a part of Tucson
Awareness House, is concerned
with drug abuse prevention and
community outreach programs.
The three staff members, Ellen,
Becky, and Howie, try to serve the
entire community in a variety of
ways; we are open to
suggestions from the communi-
ty on other ways that we can be
useful. Our services are all free
of charge.

Currently, Ellen and Becky are
facilitating three women’s
consciousness-focusing groups
at the Matrix. One of the
priorities here is to aid in making
a woman's group available to
every woman in the Tucson
community who desires it.
Therefore, the Matrix will be ser-
ving as a clearinghouse for
women's groups. This means
that our phones (622-5203 and
844-7413) will be available for
information, that the Matrix
building (a converted firehouse)
will be available for space, and
that Ellen and Becky, along with
a group of other community
women who have had ex-
perience in women’s
consciousness-focusing groups,
will be available to facilitate
groups for the initial three or
four meetings and to serve as
backup personnel. We hope to
soon compile a list of resources
to use for such groups. Howie,
who has several years' ex-
perience in a men's
consciousness-focusing group,
is also willing to help coordinate
such groups for an introductory
period. Additionally, there are
mixed communications groups
at the Matrix and we are
enthusiastic about starting
others here.

On Tuesdays, at 3:30 p.m.,
there is a study group for women
on women and literature. The in-
itial inclination is to study
women authors, from Sappho
on, throughout the history of
literature, although the direction
of the group will be determined
by the members. On Saturday,
December 7, from 2:00 to 6:00
p.m., at the Campus Christian
Center (715 N. Park), there will
be a workshop on street self-
defense for women, emphasizing
realistic and immediately
useful tactics.

Also, the Matrix frequently
conducts panels, workshops, and
ongoing groups on drugs, alter-
nate lifestyles, sexuality, self-
awareness, etc. for schools and
other civic and social service
agencies. We also have com-
plete facilities for pottery work.
The Matrix is here to serve you;
however, you have to initiate the
process. Stop in or call us, Tues-
day through Saturday, 10:00 to
6:00 p.m., at 622-5203 or 884-
7413.

Head?

Barbara Bird

(Ed’s note: Barbara Bird is a
psychiatric social worker who
prefers to identify herself as a
feminist consultant. She is a
partner in Alternatives for
Women, a feminist counseling
and consulting firm, and teaches
a women’s studies course for
Pima College.)

Most of us probably assume
that we know what the concept
“mental health” means. But try
formulating a written definition
and see how far you get.

One of the difficulties is that
the field of mental health is
dominated by professionals,
most of whom have been trained
under a medical model. The
result is that “mental health”
becomes the absence or lack of
mental illness. This may seem
like an oversimplification (it is —
intentionally), but a close look at
most definitions of mental
health will probably reveal that
the same dimensions are used
as to define mental illness. For
example, “poor ego functioning”
is often used as an aspect of
mental illness and “ego
strength” as an aspect of mental
health.

One consequence of this type
of definition is that mental ill-
ness can depend on the fre-
quency and duration of the
craziness. Also to be considered
is how the person handles her
craziness, and the extent to
which her everyday functioning
is impaired.

Another thing to consider in
discussing mental health is that
most professionals in the field
are men (or women whose train-
ing is based on sexist theory),
and the majority of patients are
women. This clearly represents
a stacked deck. As a result, most
definitions are masculinist and
anti-female.

I encountered an interesting

More on Page 15