8  
Kate Sharp  

Socialist, feminist, anthropologist and author, Evelyn Reed recently participated in a panel discussion at Metropolitan State College in Denver on the subject of woman's evolution. Other persons on the panel included Sarah Nelson, archeologist; Dan Vesey, anthropologist; and Lorna Moore, biological anthropologist. About 100 persons were in attendance.  

The evening began with Evelyn Reed capsulizing the theories in her book, Woman's Evolution. She began by exposing the myth, held by many anthropologists, of woman's innate inferiority. She called the traditional anthropologist’s systematic refusal to acknowledge women's contributions to the evolution of humankind “psychological brainwashing” and a “one-sided travesty of history.”  

She talked about the traditional view of human nature. She said this view holds that it is “natural” for men to control women, that man is ape and woman is sub-ape, that man is “nothing but an animal with a few tricks,” that both humans and animals are always aggressive, and that human nature never changes. She then stated that capitalist rulers justify imperialist wars by saying that men are always aggressive, and that men use the belief that women are inferior to justify their treatment of women.  

Humans and Animals  

At this point, Reed relayed her own theories on the evolution of humankind. She said that the production factor is what divides humans from animals, stating that society began when humans started producing tools for labor activities. She said that labor created humanity and that culture, language, thinking, etc., grew out of humankind’s development of tools. The main cultural difference between animals and humans, Reed stated, is that animals cannot change their environment and that humans, on the other hand, can change natural products into things for their own use. Reed continued with the statement that it was woman who liberated man from an animal existence. She said that it was females who realized that a cooperative environment had to be created and that it was females upon whom the survival of the species depended. She based this theory on the fact that it was females who, during that near-animal point in humankind's evolution, provided for persons other than themselves by virtue of their being mothers. Men at that time were condemned to a solitary existence and women trained and educated men into cooperation.  

Reed pointed out the differences between her theory and the theories of traditional anthropologists. She said that traditional anthropologists claim that women were burdened by pregnancy and that the community was dependent upon man’s hunting, as opposed to woman's cooperative, organizational and production skills.  

Her theory is that the foundations of society developed by women producing and not by men hunting or fighting to protect themselves from vicious animals. She further pointed out that it was women who developed cultivating, cooking, architecture, carpentry, pottery, the domestication of animals, etc., while men were out hunting and fighting. In other words, it was women who established stable life in society.  

Competition  

Reed talked awhile about fighting. She said anthropologists usually overlook what fighting includes. Animals, she said, fight by competitive rules (fight when deprived of needs), and not by warfare. She pointed out that this is how early man fought and that man could not afford to continue this competitiveness. Cooperation, not competition, was essential to humans and it was woman who subdued man’s primitive nature. She said it was woman who established taboos against cannibalism and animalistic behavior and who created the clan system. Primitive man fought out of both fear and ignorance of life and death. Early man thought that all death was caused by enemies and had to establish clear definitions of who was enemy and who was not. Man often committed cannibalism out of ignorance and it was woman who established cannibalism taboos.  

It was woman who saw the need for and established an “interchange system,” a system whereby the necessities of life were exchanged between humans and where friendship developed.  

Reed pointed out that primitive society was collectivist and egalitarian. She further pointed out that tribal collectivism eventually evolved into class societies and that the present prevalence of capitalism would inevitably have to evolve into socialism.  

Evelyn Reed ended her talk by saying, “The more we know about our past, the more we can know and change about the future.”  

Vesey Confusing  
The next person on the panel was anthropologist, Dan Vesey.  

Vesey’s presentation was somewhat confusing and incoherent. He started out by stating his points of agreement with Evelyn Reed. He agreed that women have always produced most of the world’s food and that patriarchy and class developed at the same time. He agreed that in primitive societies women are in charge of agriculture and men are in charge of hunting, and lastly, he agreed that in early eras of mankind, woman was not oppressed.  

Vesey then said that his points of disagreement revolved around hunting. He said that individuals forage and always have the capacity to feed themselves. He said that foraging is what woman did in humankind’s early existence. He believes that man, on the other hand, killed large game for the purpose of communal eating, saying that it was man who first realized the need for and developed communality, (even though earlier he said, “Early civilization was dominated by intense forms of agriculture.” He assumed, apparently, that women did not share the goods they cultivated.)  

He said also that the matriarchal clan is missing in contemporary hunting and gathering groups but did not state that perhaps these societies are going through the evolutionary “tribal collectivism to class societies” transition that Reed had mentioned.  

Vesey concluded, however, that there is no biological argument for male superiority.  

Nelson Speaks  

The next person to speak was Sarah Nelson, an archeologist. She started out by describing the two most prevalent perspectives on humankind’s development and on women’s roles to be found in archeology. First, she said, was the theory that Homo erectus adapted to winter by hunting and that through this process he created culture. She said the second was the theory that man started hunting (and developing culture) because he lived an “eat or be eaten” existence. Yet neither theory accounts for women and both assume that man learned to cooperate on the hunt. Nelson said that both theories also stated that man's brain developed through the act of developing hunting skills, at the same time subtly implying that woman was intellectually inferior because she did not hunt.  

Next, Nelson told the group that there was some archeological evidence that showed the existence of hunting adaptation but that there was very little evidence of big game hunters. She said that most cultures ate primarily vegetables. Big game adaptation, she pointed out, occurred mostly in Europe and hardly anywhere else in the world, yet Europe is where a great deal of archeological research has been done. She further stated that progress in fields such as pottery, agriculture, etc., did not occur in hunting societies.  

She concluded by saying that archeological evidence as a whole is much too complex for anyone to say by precisely which route we've gotten to be where we are.  

Moore on Biology  

The final person to speak was Lorna Moore, a biological anthropologist. Moore told the group that there is biological evidence to support male dominance but that the theory of dominance is imposed from the observer's mind by virtue of the way he interprets the evidence. She said that traditional biologists will say that a study of primates proves that sexual behavior is connected to social reign. These scientists believe that high-ranking males have the privilege of choosing their female mates. Moore, however, believes that this choosing process is purely reproductive selection and not social.  

Moore continued to speak on biological evidence and woman's evolution. She said that early human females resemble present-day females more than early males resemble today’s males. She explained that this is because there is a “female model” throughout humankind's evolution. She said that females have greater all-round fitness and cited genetic evidence to prove her point. As further evidence, she stated the fact that female mortality is lower at all levels of a human's development, including the time spent in the fetal stage.  

She said there is much evidence to show that there is a matriarchal base in primate society and that female primates pass on rank to their daughters.  

The final part of the program consisted of a question and answer period. Since many of the questions are also included in the following interview, the question segment of the panel has been omitted.  

The Changing Role of Women and the Evolutionary Process  

The women could not hunt for food because of the hazards of cannibalism, and they could not hunt for mates because females had to liquidate the old fighting among males to get access to females; that had to be set aside.  

BMR: What you are saying then is that, as a part of this communal or cooperative base, rules were set up in this early society that segregated the men and women on the basis of cannibalism. Could you explain more thoroughly the relationship between hunting, sex, and cannibalism?  

ER: Now the anthropologists thought wrongly that the segregation of the sexes was a segregation of family sisters and brothers and was due to the fact that they wanted to eradicate incest. I couldn’t go for that theory 25 years ago; I had a hunch it was cannibalism and that turned out to be the one. The cannibalism theory has to do with the fact that earliest hominids could not distinguish between themselves and other animals or half-animals. Since they couldn't distinguish biologically, they had to set up artificial distinctions, socially. The women did this in the totemic system. They arbitrarily established totemic kinship among the whole group of those who lived and worked together — sisters and brothers. They couldn't mate and they couldn't hunt within the community because it was too dangerous. So, of course, that threw all hunting on the outside and later a new kind of relationship had to come into existence between those who were kin and those who were non-kin.  

BMR: Then it was the aggressive element, which was predominantly male in that early society, that forced women to ban hunting and sex within their own community because it might lead to cannibalism?  

ER: Oh, yes, because we had this problem. Apes are vegetarian, so something new entered human life that doesn’t exist among the primates, mainly the hunting and killing of flesh for food. This new element in human life had to be mastered. They had to understand what was edible and what was not. Males, in the division of labor between the sexes, were the hunters and killers and eaters of flesh foods. Women still retained, and in this respect you could even say were backward, the old vegetarian diet of the primates. So, the women invented the totemic system and laid down the totemic rules and taboos that go with it so that there was a clear demarcation between what was edible and what was not. It just so happens... and this confuses the record, that they included among what was not edible a number of animals that were also sacred and in the outside world, or non-kin. There were also a number of humans who were regarded as animals. So it took a long time, you see, to make this fundamental distinction that all humans belong to one species and all animals belong to animal species. That's at the heart of the problem. It had to be conquered and it was totemism and taboo that conquered it. Both males and females were in segregated sectors. The females and young lived in one sector; and the males, their brothers, lived in another. Most people think this was a segregation of family kin, which it was not. It was a social segregation of the sexes. It had nothing to do with incest. When a million years had passed and all the problems had been solved with regard to the hazards of life in the early period, then the sexes could begin to live together.  

BMR: Some feminists today are asserting that these biological problems are still in effect — that men still do have this innate aggressive tendency, that it has not been curbed, that there is a necessity for a woman-run society to curb that instinct, or at least for some sort of separation of the sexes for self-preservation.  

ER: Now we come up to the phenomena of modern society that the feminist movement has brought forward and is clearly considering, and I consider that tremendous progress. But feminists have to look at it historically, otherwise we are going to go off into sky blue yonder. At the point that the sexes did come together in primitive society, they had a very weak kind of mating or marriage system. They couldn't relinquish the old relationship between the clan sisters and brothers, so in effect you had a divided family — two fathers, so to speak — the mother's brother from the old system and the mother's husband from the new.  

Here, I might say, and a lot of people ask me, how did the patriarchy come into existence when women were at the peak of their power. Most of them think it was because men assaulted women, put them down with armaments and then took them over and made them captors. That's not the way it came about, although there was some fighting, as we can tell by the myths of the Amazons and others, on the part of women who didn’t want to move into this new and exploitative society. The collision was really between men, between the mother’s brothers of the outgoing order and the husbands and fathers of the incoming order. The force that broke the deadlock was private property. In the beginning, private property was progressive. As a matter of fact, it was progressive for a period of time, unleashing the productive forces of society upon which we progressed, because it’s better to put men to work even as chattel slaves than it is to cut out their hearts to some barbaric gods and demons. The moral being that all progress comes with a price.  

We're going to have to do that now because we are in a dilemma today. Along with the class struggle, which you are raising, is the sex struggle, because the sexes have been alienated from one another from the very time that patriarchal, private property came into existence. Women were dispersed out of the big, collective social group they worked in. They were dispersed as wives in private families. That's the patriarchal system.  

BMR: When you say it was a fight between the mother's brothers and the husbands, it sounds to me like the women had already, in some sense, lost power. Otherwise, why weren't they telling the men to knock it off?  

— photo by Kate Sharp  

ER: Here you forget that they didn’t plan their society. They were driven into their social arrangements from the very beginning. It was the women who were driven, for the sake of survival, into creating a social system. It was not a conscious thing. We are the first people in history to be conscious of social change and the one that's coming ahead. Moreover, the men who took over didn't understand this either, 6000 years ago. They were driven into breaking the deadlock on the fetters of the old system, when a new system had to come into existence. For all the punishments we have taken as a result of this new system, it still was progressive. It advanced us up to the age of capitalism and scientific enlightenment. That’s what its general thrust was. But they were not conscious of it. Today we are in the last stage of class society — the decadent form of capitalism when everybody like myself understands that what's wrong is that this system has got to go and we've got to get a new, socialist, egalitarian system.  

Now, the alienation of the sexes is one of the expressions of the fact that this society has outlived its usefulness, because the alienation has become deeper and sharper since the industrial revolution. So has the class struggle. So, what does this alienation of the sexes express? It's coming forward in wholly new, independent kinds of ways which is, in a sense, something new in history — the turning of the two sexes towards their own sex, rather than intersex. Once a result comes into history, it has its own life and its own movement. It can proceed into, as at present, unknown realms which one can speculate on but which we do not have sufficient information on as yet. That's the way to look at the evolutionary road.  

BMR: What about women who are now saying that women are biologically superior, innately kinder and non-aggressive?  

ER: Well, I have no objection to that. Women were the advantaged sex in the beginning and probably have retained some traits from their earlier behavior pattern. Women still are the mothers, and as the mothers, have modified all those, you might say, animal jungle traits. But what we have today is a man-made social jungle — totally different. Therefore, it's wrong to say that women turning to other women, as they are today in solidarity, is a repeat of what happened back then. That's wrong because that was a different kind of thing. Today we have a new kind of problem and a new result from that problem and women are turning together, in my opinion, through a need and drive for huge social solidarity. Whatever sexual relations women have with other women is secondary to this.  

More on Page 11