ES |

Peeeeoscssseecsesess

GOOD. NUKES

21

Is There Time to Fight Back and Learn to Survive?

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 16

Contamination effects are intensified through concentration of radioactive elements in the food chain. Thus, the environmental radiation levels of radiation monitored and reported may be a minor part of the actually absorbed dose taken in by breathing, eating, and drinking contaminated air, food, and water.

Doses also tend to accumulate in certain body parts rather than being distributed throughout the whole body. This means that the chance of certain parts of the body becoming contaminated above safe levels is much greater.

THYROID

beta (gamma), 8 days

SKIN——____

sulfur-35
beta, 87 days

beta (gamma), 5 yrs

OVARIES

Reproductive Organs are attacked by all radioactive isotopes emitting gamma radiation

emits can cause birth defects, mutations, and miscarriages in the first and/or successive generations after exposure

ruthenium-106

gamma, 245 days
barium-140

gamma, 12 days

potassium-42

beta (gamma), 12 hrs
cesium-137 (and gonads)
beta (gamma), 30 yrs

FROM NO NUKES BY ANNA GYORGY SOUTH END PRESS

In addition, many studies by researchers, including the Canadian Atomic Energy Commission, have now shown that protracted exposure, far from being similar to a short medical X-ray, is perhaps 20, 50, or 100 times more serious for every milli rad given to the individual.

Due to all these factors now known, a recent study at Heidelberg University in Germany estimates the total health impact of nuclear power may have been underestimated by as much as 10,000 times.

radon-222 (and whole body)
alpha, 8 days
uranium-238:
alpha, 10,000 yrs
plutonium-239 (and thorium)
alpha, 24,000 yrs
krypton-65 (and?)
beta (gamma), 10 yrs

/SPLEEN

polonium-210
alpha, 138 days

KIDNEYS

ruthenium-106
gamma (beta), 1 yr

beta (gamma), 243 days
strontium-90

beta, 28 yrs
yttrium-30

beta, 64 hrs
promethium-147

beta, 2.62 yrs

phosphorus-32
beta, 14 days

carbon-14 (and far)
beta, 5,730 yrs

WHAT WE CAN DO
Exposure

Avoid medical X-rays as much as possible, especially when there is the possibility of pregnancy.

Avoid working in a radioactive job or industry - and ask if there is any question. They may not tell you that you are transporting radioactive materials, or that there is a research reactor in the university.

Avoid known uranium dumps, nuclear plant areas, and nuclear waste disposal sites (such as Denver and Grand Junction).

Diet

According to the experience of some survivors of Nagasaki and Hiroshima, a macrobiotic diet seems to contribute to curing and/or preventing radiation effects.

Dietary practices that promote and accelerate radiation sickness include:

- excessive liquid intake

- excessive consumption of simple (white) sugars

- excessive consumption of fatty acids as well as animal protein

- excessive consumption of chemically fertilized and processed foods

- excessive consumption of tropical and semitropical vegetables, fruits, and fruit juices

- eating food cooked electrically or with microwave ovens.

Foods which counterbalance or discharge radioactive elements from the body include:

- organically grown whole grains, vegetables, beans, and seeds

- foods rich in minerals and vitamins B, D, E, and K, such as seaweed, hard leafy vegetables, root vegetables.

The compound sodium alginate, present in most sea vegetables, is a naturally occurring, nontoxic, acidic polysaccharide that is able to discriminate between healthful minerals and radioactive elements. It binds heavy elements in the intestines and converts them to insoluble salts, which are then excreted from the body.

- unrefined sea salt (be careful to avoid overconsumption)

- miso and natural shoyu soy sauce: miso is processed from soybeans and cereal grains together with sea salt and a digestive-aiding lactobacillus bacteria. Miso is produced in a paste form, while shoyu soy sauce is a liquid form processed from similar ingredients. Both of these fermented products are beneficial in establishing and maintaining good intestinal flora, as well as a strong and slightly alkaline bloodstream - physiological conditions that are helpful in preventing and curing radiation sickness. Miso also contains a substance called zybicolin which is effective in detoxifying and eliminating heavy radioactive elements from the body. (from Natural Ways to Survive a Meltdown, Leon and Jacobs, East West Journal, June, 1979)

Educate yourself and others about nuclear facilities in your area.

Join with other concerned people in local and/or national organizations in stopping the nukes. A few to begin with:

Rocky Flats Action Group
1432 Lafayette Street
Denver, CO 80218
832-4508

Colorado Women Against Nukes
447-2129

Boulder Mobilization for Survival and Rocky Flats Truth Force

1315 Broadway

Boulder, CO 80302

443-0887

Uranium Information Network
2239 East Colfax

Denver, CO 80206

321-6588

National Mobilization for Survival
1213 Race Street

Philadelphia, PA 19107
(215) 563-1512

Greenpeace Foundation
2029 East 13th Avenue
Denver, CO 80218
355-7397

Anti-Nuke Politics As A Feminist Issue & Vice Versa

On April 29, 1979, there was a mass rally at the Rocky Flats Nuclear Weapons Plant, 16 miles from Denver, to protest the production there of plutonium triggers for bombs. The following is a letter submitted to the Rocky Flats Action Group, the primary organizing force behind the action in April. It was signed by 31 women.

To The Rocky Flats Action Group:

We would like to congratulate your organization for mobilizing large numbers of people to the events of the weekend of April 27-29. Most of the members of our organization attended the events and participated in various ways in mobilizing for them. We hope to continue working toward a nuclear-free society. We think such a society will have to be a worker-controlled society, not run by people whose business it is to organize things for the elite but for the welfare of all.

At the mass rally of April 28th, we were especially pleased with the presence of such speakers as Marian Stamps of Chicago, and representatives of the American Indian Movement, who called our attention to the fact that the struggle against nuclear power is not just one of young white students and intellectuals, but is part of a larger struggle against a government that serves the interests of the exploiters in our society.

The specially oppressed or colonized peoples both inside and outside our borders, and organized workers, are those who have historically led in this larger struggle. Yet one of the featured speakers at the rally, Dr. Helen Caldicott, created the impression that we who were attending the rally (overwhelmingly white North American intellectuals) were destined to "save the world"; furthermore, the workers at Rocky Flats were singled out as the "murderers" of our children. Such attitudes were echoed in several other speeches at the rally. In fact, no one was invited to speak who could have linked our struggle effectively with those actually being waged around the world both against imperialism and internal colonialism. We understood that members of the coalition suggested inviting Ricardo Romero, a Chicano who has for years been a leader in land struggles in the San Luis Valley and in solidarity struggles on behalf of Puerto Rican independence. This suggestion was rejected.

We realize that the Action Group's orientation has been toward nonviolent struggle. Many of us share this orientation, tactically, without assuming that all struggles against imperialism at all times and places can remain non-violent indefinitely in the face of increasing violence committed against the people. We believe, in fact, that many of your own group are committed to pacifism not on religious grounds but on tactical ones. Exclusion of speakers who truly represent the oppressed sectors of our society and world, who suffer the most not only from the effects of uranium mining, bomb testing, and material deprivation, but who are most likely to be attacked with nuclear weapons is, in our judgment, a serious error on the part of the coalition. Those whose orientation is toward the cultivation of love as a weapon can make their case (as Dr. Wald did), but we are all in this together, and the most deprived sectors of the working people in the United States and of the world, for whom the risks of participation in particular social movements are greater than for those of us who have various alternative means of securing a living, must be heard at our demonstrations. Our demonstrations must reflect a politics that welcomes and includes them, not one that extols new forms of the "white man's burden," at their expense.

We are also concerned that the Action Group, while welcoming the participation of women in the anti-nuke movement, be watchful of mistakes that can unfortunately damage the ability of women involved in the women's movement to be able to work with you in a mass movement against nuclear energy and nuclear destruction. Many of us have past experience with mistakes similar to what we are seeing now, that created tragic weakness and disunity in the anti-war movement. In the hopes and interest of a stronger and more unified mass movement, we have several brief criticisms to offer here.

We feel that in a successful mass movement we all must be continually striving to expand our political understanding, and that those of us who are politically dedicated but perhaps less aware of the oppression of women, minorities, and working-class people, must put out an effort to learn from those people whose politics can truly help build a movement for all people. Specifically, we would like to offer some constructive criticism of two people who spoke and sang at the rally.

Helen Caldicott's otherwise very moving and informative speech, unfortunately, had some statements (several mentioned earlier) which left many of us with an overall sensation of a bitter taste in our mouths. Her statement that the struggle against nuclear danger is, for us as women, the only struggle, certainly cannot help to build unity with feminists. We assume that the organizers have ultimate responsibility for what is presented to the crowd at the rally. This particular statement could have been foreseen because the same statement was made in her speech at the Holly Near concert.

More distressing, and of far greater concern to us than Helen Caldicott's political naivete (or - we hope not - anti-feminism?) was the inclusion of and performance by Bonnie Raitt. The lyrics to her songs were a vulgar insult to feminists, both heterosexual and lesbian. We feel strongly enough about her performance to say that we feel an apology is due to the large and organized women's community in Colorado. More importantly, we would like to see demonstrations of a sincere desire to eliminate sexism from all anti-nuke work, so that mistakes like this do not recur and divide us. Mass rallies have to provide us with a "lowest common denominator" of what brings us all together, to provide energy and renew commitment. Many of us were aware of shock, anger, and disappointment that rippled through the crowd during Bonnie Raitt's songs. Native American people left the audience and formed a separate circle, and later there were statements made about the use of alcohol on stage and the role of alcohol in the oppression of native peoples.

Holly Near and Fred Small were far better advocates for the cause of human liberation, not mere survival; there are others of their caliber who could have spoken to the real issues at hand, rather than simply serving to draw the attention of the press to the demonstration. While Bonnie Raitt may have served to bring some people out to the rally, we would like to point out that her choice of songs also caused people to go home with some varying degrees of frustration, anger, and confusion.

We would like to meet with you to discuss the contents of this letter. We hope that our criticisms can be heard for their constructive intent, and we request that this letter be read at a meeting of the Rocky Flats Action Group.

Yours for a nuclear-free future,

Members and friends of the Working Women's Action Group