Sexism in Grade School

by Bobbe

The East Denver Kiwanis Club is  
bringing into Teller Elementary School  
a program for the 4th, 5th & 6th  
grades. The Kiwanis, an all male  
group, is presenting 23 men to talk  
about their different jobs with the  
children. Each grade, composed of  
girls and boys from 9 - 12 years old  
is going to interview the men about  
their jobs.

Teller's principal, Gwendlyn Borgman,  
saw nothing wrong with letting  
the program in the school. She said  
that the school has tried to get wo-  
men to come in and talk about their  
jobs and interests, referring to a  
HEW funded project called Operation  
Community Talent. This program asks  
if there are phases of one's occupa-  
tion that can be shared with children,  
if so, what is the occupation? It  
asks if one could share aspects of  
one's culture and ethnic heritage; it  
asks for specific areas of interest  
and lists, among other things, macra-  
me, nature studies, pottery, Indians,  
terrarium making, animals, poetry and  
stitchery.

Two women and their three daughters  
talked with Ms. Borgman about the  
Kiwanis program when they heard of it.  
When questioned if she didn't feel  
that the program furthered sexism,  
she replied, ". . . that the Kiwanis was  
an all male organization and I don't  
know if their rules allow women."  
When told that it didn't matter what  
their rules were, that the school had  
a responsibility to decide what pro-  
grams the children should have, she  
said she would have the school's coor-  
dinator talk with the Kiwanis and get  
back to the mothers.

Paul Carlson, a retired army chap-  
lain, is head of the East Denver Ki-  
wanis Club. Asked about the program  
being presented at Teller, he said he  
was proud of the program and that all  
Kiwanis were men and fathers, and  
that they were not going to bring any  
women into the program - they didn't  
have to and they wouldn't. They  
wanted the children to know that men  
cared about them, as children saw  
women all the time in roles as mothers  
and teachers and were influenced by  
them. Carlson is now counseling mar-  
ried couples but did not understand  
the importance of the title Ms. and  
thought that Miss or Mrs. was ade-  
quate. Reminded that the title Mr.  
or chaplain did not in any way indicate  
his marital status, he didn't consider  
that important and thought women were  
proud to be known as wives or mothers.  
He did not seem to understand that  
girls had to be given choices of  
directions before they came of age to  
go into the working force.

Both Borgman and Carlson suggested  
that the two mothers who had raised  
objections to the Kiwanis program  
start their own program and bring  
women in to talk of their jobs, and  
they are going to do just that, bringing  
in women in the trades and professions.

Feminists have an obligation to  
their daughters, sisters and younger  
women to tell them, to remind them  
that feminists do exist and have a  
long history of existence and achieve-  
ments. Younger women must know that  
they have a choice: to follow trad-  
itional roles and be stifled or to  
follow feminists and struggle. We  
must convince them that the struggle  
is good.

where we’re at

Our day-long retreat Jan. 22, which was highlighted by Bobbe's waffles,  

has brought some changes to the Big Mama Rag collective.

We've restruc-  

tured, in a way that we hope will allow women with varying levels of time  
and energy for the paper to participate in the hassles (and yes, rewards!)  

as fully as they'd like.

Under the new structure, each of the 10 task forces listed below will  
meet as its work requires and will choose one of its members to attend  
weekly staff meetings, where overall decisions about the paper will be  

made.

Representatives to the weekly meetings - which will continue to  

operate in a collective manner - are asked to attend consecutively for at  

least three months.

We're hoping that the 3-month commitment will ensure  

the kind of continuity needed to put out a paper, and develop our politics,  
while at the same time get away from the year-long commitment to weekly  
meetings and a time commitment equivalent to a full-time job that used to  

be asked of collective members.

Seven women, besides the current collective, came to the Jan. 22 meeting;  

the new structure is the result of all of our ideas.

Some came to a meet-  

ing for the first time; others have already been making it possible for the  

paper to get out every month.

So, a thank you and welcome to Pandoura Car-  

penter, Dona Calacone, Karen Martin, Corinne Coston, Judy Barlow, Susanna  

Smith, and Lori Bradford.

Whatever time or interest you have in BMR - whether it's spending 2 hours  
a month at a mailing party, organizing a benefit, or learning photography  
and layout - let one of the contact people listed below know about it. Or  

come to the special meeting we've set aside for all new workers - Feb. 9,  
at 7 pm. at Bobbe Ross's apt., 1661 Adams St., 2nd floor.

PRODUCTION TASK FORCE (coordinates monthly layout of paper).  
Susanna Smith (388-3850) or Pandoura Carpenter, 1364 Gilpin (no phone).  
CULTURE TASK FORCE (assigns and edits columns and reviews for "BMR on  

culture" pages).  

Mary Wadding (744-9759) or Dona Calacone (333-6321).

PHOTOGRAPHY/GRAPHICS (assigns and/or does artwork, photography, including  

cover photo).  

Karen Martin (333-6758) or Deb Taylor (355-8209).

FINANCES (keeps books, pays bills, warns rest of staff) Corinne Coston  
(831-9117) or Mary Wadding (744-9759).

FUND RAISING (organizes fundraisers)  
Lori Bradford (388-8678) or Judy Barlow.

OFFICE (handles mail, correspondence, subscriptions, general shitwork and  

office staffing)  

Bobbe Ross (322-6119) or Clair Kaplan (321-7467).

LOCAL NEWS (assigns, edits local and regional stories; compiles monthly  

calendar) Sue Goding (333-7656) or Bobbe Ross (322-6119)  
Kathy Riley (837-8405) or Sue Goding (333-7656).

ADVERTISING (hustles ads).

DISTRIBUTION/MAILING (coordinates local distribution in Denver and Boulder  
and mailing parties) Lori Bradford (388-8678) or Pandoura Carpenter.  
INTERNATIONAL-NATIONAL NEWS (compiles hot briefs, scans incoming feminist  

papers and news services for news; then edits stories)  

Judy Barlow (388-8678) or Clair Kaplan (321-7467).

APOLOGY from last month:

to our landlord, Bill Johnson.

In last month's  

Where We're At we talked about doing some office renovation, provided "the  

landlord doesn't get too pushy about the October rent."

We didn't mean to  

imply that Bill is pushy, particularly since - as he gently reminded us - we  

owe from last August.  

It was meant to be a comment on our ever-tenuous fin-  
ancial situation.

We've since paid up another 3 months worth of rent, but  

we thought we'd take this opportunity to thank Bill for his very non-pushy  
approach to rent collection, and his ability - as our upstairs neighbor -  
to tolerate our noisy comings and goings at bizarre hours.

Big Mama Rag Vol.6 No.2

Scraps From Macia’s Table

Chocolate Waters  
Friends, Rokaids, Countryducks--Lend me your money ... Better still, send a  
non tax-deductible check.

Question I am often asked: “Where the fuck is that column you used to do for  
Big Mama Rag?" Answer: "Where the fuck is Big Mama Rag?" (Those of you who  
are interested might consider turning to the "Where We're At" column instead  
of this one).

Weirdos at the P.O.--In a not-too-recent correspondence with Albatross maga-  
zine (yes, I admit my association with those commie-pink-o bird lovers), I had  
stamped a bright purple gay liberation lambda symbol on the back of the enve-  
lope with the notation, "Don't worry; the P.O. probably doesn't know what it  
means." Penned in large capital letters beneath this notation were the words,  
"YES WE DO!" (Do you think the Readers Disgust would be interested in this  
for their "Life in these United Sticks" feature?)

"Here's something you might want to disregard"--A directive to law enforcement  
agencies in the Rocky Mountain states was recently sent out by the Colorado  
Bureau of Investigation which read, "Fortunately, the message we asked you to  
disregard was not sent. Thus, we ask that you disregard the message we sent  
asking you to disregard the last message." (Free For All)

Clean in any Language--Francoise Giroud, former Minister of Women's Affairs in  
France, passed a note to Mme. Saunier-Seite, the state secretary for universi-  
ties, during a French cabinet meeting one morning. The note read, "Did you,  
Dear Alice, imagine cabinet meetings could be so boring?" Replied Mme. Saunie -  
Seite, "Yes, Dear Francoise, because I've always observed the inexplicable  
childishness of men." (Parade, 1/22)

Many thanks to all of you who helped make the Dec. 3 celebration of my new  
book, Take Me Like A Photograph, so successful (sure this is partially a plug  
for the new book - do you think I'd pass up the chance for a bit of free ad-  
vertising?) Nevertheless, widespread community response has prompted a four-  
evening show at the Touchstone Theatre at 1035 E. 17th Ave. on Jan. 28/29 and  
Feb. 4/5. Outrageous comic Blaze (Armpit) O'Brien will again be hysterically  
funny (or she's fired) and Wood (former woman, uh, that is Woodwoman now Wood)  
will be singing about such noteworthy topics as carnivorous eggplants gobbling  
up Chicago. Pat (Token) Wagner, who is of questionable ethnic descent, will  
both sing and recite poetry while kissing my neck on stage. Her original hit  
song “You Could've Been My Always But You'll Be My Never Now" will be a high-  
point of the evening (perhaps). I, of course, will be reading my poetry and  
hanging from the rafters in my usual quiet, unassuming manner. Call 831-1299  
for more pertinent (and more truthful) information - or consult your local  
clairvoyant.

And please remember that news clippings, shameless gossip, love letters, post-  
age stamps, money orders and 21-year-old Chivas are all welcome and should be  
sent to me c/o Eggplant Press, P.O. Box 18641, Denver, CO 80218.

Until next time:  
Kiss a Seagull,  
Chocolate

P.S. "Chutzpah" to you all.

feminist center

* School Catalogue out March 1st  
* Women's Film Event March 3rd  
* New Books: Plain Brown Rapper by Rita Mae Brown;  
Journal of Solitude and Small Room by May Sarton  
Women Artists 1550-1950  
2023 E. COLFAX Mon-Sat  

Denver, CO 80206