culture  
struggle—  

BIG MAMA RAG Vol.7 No.5  

Compromised Women in the Arts Month  

Constance Perenyi  

The month of May was proclaimed as a celebration of Colorado Women in the  
arts. Kicked off by a gala opening at the Arvada Center on May 5, the cele-  
bration was punctuated by continuous events "showcasing" women's talent,  

both in the fields of visual and performing arts.  

It was well planned, and  

probably conceived in the best of intentions; but as the month ends, I won-  
der what the real purpose of the planning was. In fact, I am left with far  

more questions than answers.  

From the beginning, May was fraught with political problems and gross in-  
consistencies. The show at the Arvada Center was originally intended as an  
exhibit broadly based in Colorado; but as is common in an urbanized state,  
many of the artists selected represented only the metropolitan area. Admit-  
tedly, the jurors met the challenge of narrowing the large field of appli-  
cants from 1290 to a manageable 120. (Perhaps even that was too many, or  
possibly the Arvada Center was the wrong choice because the space was  
crammed and many of the pieces were poorly displayed).  

While I have some real problems with the selection process, and even ques-  

tion whether jurying has any part in a true celebration, I am particularly  
concerned with the philosophy, or lack of such, that I found in the show. I  
arrived at the opening to find Coors beer being served. When I protested,  
I was told that Coors had supplied phones and materials to the organizers  
in exchange for serving their poison the night the show opened. That Coors  
is trying to buy its corporate way back into Colorado through the cultural  
scene is not shocking, but the planners' "What could we do?” attitude is.  
There are other resources available, and what I find especially objection-  
able is that each woman accepted into the show was required to contribute  
$12 to help defray expenses. It seems a robbing Peter to pay Paul exchange.  
Ranging from basic oversights to blatant discrimination, political prob-  
lems were the rule rather than the exception during the month. Some women who  
made important contributions at the Arvada Center were largely ignored, both  
in the program listings and in media coverage. And there have been horror  
stories of anti-feminist practices at the Changing Scene Theater, the main  

focus for performing arts in May.  

To cite these problems is only to scratch the surface of the grave inade-  
quacies that characterized the month. And that is why we must question the  

whole concept from the beginning.  

I am starting from the back of my mind and working forward. In one of the  
galleries on the highly publicized May 14 tour, I noticed an announcement  
of "The All Non-Women Not Necessarily All-Colorado Art Show." Very funny,  
and how predictable - the show, accompanied by a manifesto that proclaims  
"Art has no gender," grew expectedly out of a collection of wounded male  
egos. But, as I think about it, I realize that the structure of the May  
celebration was a set-up. To have threatened male artists means that we, as  
women involved in the arts, have played the game by at least some of their  

rules.  

To me, that fact does not spell success. Actually, the month made me feel  

that the cause of women's art, in a feminist sense, has been put back sever-  

al years. In reading the catalogue from the Arvada Center, I was dismayed  

to find the familiar refrain of “Women's art can be as good as men's."  
Catherine Chafee's interview with the jurors reminded  

Fran Day:  

Have you been to Woman to Woman  
Bookcenter lately and seen the many  
new books for children? These books  
have been carefully selected for  
their non-sexist, non-racist portray-  
al of people. The need to combat  
the debilitating influences of so-  
ciety is crucial. One way to do this  
is to expose children to literature  
that is fair, healthy and psychologically  
sound.  

Roll of Thunder, Hear My Cry  
Mildred D. Taylor  

Dial Press  

$1.95/paper, for ages 9-15  

Set in Mississippi during the De-  
pression, this is a story of preju-  
dice and discrimination. Cassie Lo-  
gan, her three brothers, her parents  
and her grandmother fight to keep  
their farm and their sanity. The  
children suffer the humiliation of  
attending a separate, inferior school  
and using worn out books. They walk  
to school while the White kids ride  
on a bus which splashes the Black  
children with mud at every opportunity.  
Cassie's mother is fired from  
her teaching job and her father is  

shot, and suffers a broken leg in a  
fracas with White folks. A neighbor  
boy is framed, almost lynched and  
taken to jail. This book tells of one  
turbulent year in the lives of the  
Logan family, a terrifying year with  
night riders and the burning of Black  
people.  

Mildred Taylor, who lives in Boul-  
der, Colorado has captured the terror  
of what it meant to be Black in the  
South during the Depression. She has  
also captured the determination,  
pride and courage, and family love  
that enabled Cassie and her family to  
survive and maintain their humanity.  
Newbery Award Book, 1977.  

Jo, Flo and Yolanda  

Carol de Poix  

illustrated by Stephanie Sove Noy  
Lollipop Power  

$1.95/paper, for ages 5-9  

This is a story about female  
triplets - how they are alike and  
how they are different. Although  
they look identical, they have diff-  
erent interests and aspirations.  
Non-traditional models - female ath-  
lete and photographer, working mo-  
ther and cooking brother.  

Children's Books  

Combatting Racism  

It makes me want to cry out, repeating Lucy Lippard's question, “Why are we so afraid to be other than men?"  

The first catch is professionalism. In order to be shown, a woman must  
attain a certain level of technical skill. Fine, but for those of us who  
are eager to compensate for a discredited past, technique can become an end  
rather than a means to expand personal imagery. If a woman artist is "good"  
she can sell her work just like a man can. She can also sell herself into  
the slavery of art-world expectations and paint herself right into the  
corner of hard-edged consumerism. That is defined as success. That also is  
a divisive wedge - it separates women's art from personal expression, and  
it keeps women from working together, from validating an alternative  
aesthetic.  

The fact that the Arvada Center show was juried, and that the gallery  
tour gave a limited sampling of women's work exemplifies the role that  
professional aspiration played this month. The message that came from the  
Center jurors was clear - women who want to be accepted into the art  
world had better learn 1) to present themselves professionally, and 2) to  
filter feminist (and personal) content through some sort of process to  
make it acceptable to the establishment. There is an implicit distinction  
between art and non-art here - and that after all is a judgment with  
which women artists have had to contend for centuries. Obviously, many  
women who make art in Colorado were not chosen to share their work - does  
that mean they are not artists? Or, as the jurors suggested, that they just  
were not "professional" enough?  

In the traditional art world, only the fittest are allowed to survive.  
Now, women are pushing this prerequisite on each other. Clearly, there is  
still the problem of who gets to make art. How many women represented this  
month support themselves? How many have other resources that allow them  

time for art-making? And how many, in order to support themselves with their  
art, have abandoned feminist content to make their work a commodity?  

Womanspirit #14, 1976  

Because there is so much compromise in the art world, I am troubled by  
the contradictions of this month, and I question my own involvement in the  

"celebration." I was lucky (?) enough to show one of my pieces at the  
Arvada Center, and like many artists there, I felt my work was badly hung.  
I considered withdrawing my contribution over the Coors incident, but de-  
cided against that when I realized my piece was one of the very few that  
was directly feminist in content. Still, I am uncertain of my decision;  
and while I suppose that the inclusion of my work should be an honor, I  
have a number of ambiguous feelings to work out before I again submit  
anything to be shown in public.  

One thing that has become painfully clear is that such a loosely defined  
celebration conceived on a large (yet small) scale has built-in restrictions.  
I kept reminding myself that this was women in the arts month, not feminists  
in the arts month. Yet, I am far from satisfied. Again, I see the need  
for separatism. If working within any kind of system means working against  
women, as it does time and again, then we need real alternatives, not just  
token celebrations. I feel as if we're supposed to wake up "equal" on  
June 1 - we have had our month, right? Wrong... The month of May was not  
even a beginning - in fact, I fear that for some women, it may have been an  
end...an end to the pursuit of something better for ourselves...an end to  
the self-affirming assertion that we are different than men and that our  
work does not have to be judged by their values.  

I am convinced that we have to turn inwards for recognition - that we  
have to stop trying to prove ourselves to an antagonistic world that will  
never give us what we need anyway. We have to stop worrying about how many  
people we are going to reach and how we can make ourselves acceptable to  
them. And we have to stop playing by external rules. Our real support  
comes potentially from women who share our dreams, and ultimately from  
within ourselves as we work towards self-realization.  

Haunted by the challenge issued to a friend of mine, I respond to "What  
is it that you women want anyway?" with the simple answer that I want more  
than what the world has to offer me right now. And, for a while, that may  
mean getting less because I refuse to be appeased by the paltry recognition  
of a month like Colorado Women in the Arts. May was often a celebration  
staged for the benefit of the art scene - in many ways, it had nothing to  
do with the real reason women have to celebrate. And that reason is that  
we have each other.