PRICELLA PUMPS/STAR BUCKWHEAT  
COMIC BOOK >  
Barba Kutzner  

Common Woman Press 1976  
order through Persephone Press  
RFD1, Box 98A, Monticello, NY  
12701 $1.00  

Theresa Schook  

Comics have revolutionary poten-  
tial. The artwork for a comic book  
need not be polished nor the dia-  
logue brilliant. Most important is  
the Message. Comix are, or should  
be, a people's medium without the  
constraint of sales volume that dic-  
tate the message in Marvel or DC  
Comics.  

Two male comic series that aptly  
underscore this are the Killraven  
series (now defunct due to lack of  
sales quota) and the Howard the Duck  
series. Both comics dealt with and  
were severely critical of the pre-  
sent system. As a result, Killraven  
no longer exists, and Howard the  
Duck had a nervous breakdown, with  
an internalizing of the social ills  
he had been fighting.  

The feminist press comics, there-  
fore, are very important. The fem-  
inist press prints stories that tell  
the truth about us. Pricella Pumps  
is a real person--"typical American  
post-adolescent woman, full time  

FILM: THE INCREDIBLE SARAH  
Starring Glenda Jackson  
BIOGRAPHY: MADAME SARAH  
Cornelia Otis Skinner  
Houghton Mifflin Co. 1967  

Gayle Novack  

This is a review of a 1977 movie,  
The Incredible Sarah, starring Glenda  
Jackson, and of a 1967 biography of  
Sarah Bernhardt, Madame Sarah, by  
Cornelia Otis Skinner. The reason  
for reviewing these two portraits of  
Sarah simultaneously is the all-too-  
disappointing difference between "Hol-  
lywood" and the delightful reality of  
Sarah Bernhardt's actual life.  

Sarah Bernhardt was an actress and  
a celebrity whose career spanned 61  
glorious years until her death at the  
age of 79, March 26, 1923. But Madame  
Sarah speaks best for its author and  
its subject:  

"Who was Sarah Bernhardt?" asks  
Cornelia, "Who, in her prime, was  
known as the Eighth Wonder of the  
World, and even in her declining years  
as the greatest personality France has  
had since Joan of Arc? Who, in every  
civilized city of the globe, was re-  
ceived with more frenzied enthusiasm  
than kings and military heroes in her  
own day or Presleys and Beatles in  
ours? Who had emperors kneeling at  
her feet, crowned heads showering her  
with jewels and adoring mobs throwing  
their jackets on the ground for her  
to walk on? Whose publicity through-  
out her long career...was so vast,  
one computation expert figured out  
that if the newspaper reviews and  
magazine articles written about her  
were to be pasted end to end, the  
streamer would reach around the earth,  
while a pile-up of her printed photo-  
graphs would equal the height of the  
Eiffel Tower? Who was Sarah Bern-  
hardt? Who was Napoleon Bonaparte!"  

Indeed. Sarah Bernhardt was a  
strong, determined woman who was al-  
ways firmly in control of her life,  
her career, and those of many others.  
The producers of The Incredible Sarah  
must have desperately hoped or dis-  
astrously assumed that everyone who  
had seen or read of or even heard of  
Sarah Bernhardt was either dead or  
had taken a vow of silence. The fact  
that Reader's Digest was the executive  
producer for the film is a clue to  
its snail-paced mediocrity. Glenda  
Jackson looks as if she's trying to  
do a Nelson Eddy imitation, and fail-  
ing; that's the best thing I can say  
about the quality of the acting. Ms.  
Jackson's costumes can, at best, be  
described as "pretty." (The men's  
costumes are gorgeous, with lavender  
as the predominating accessory color)  

The real Sarah was a fanatic for  
historical authenticity in her cos-  
tumes. For a role set during the  
Byzantine Empire, "she journeyed to  
Ravenna (Italy) and stood long hours  
in the Church of San Vitale studying  
the magnificent mosaics...and made  
sketches of every robe, every fold,  
every detail of ornamentation. When  

a she returned to Paris she had com-  
pleted in detail a dressmaker's de-  
sign for each outfit...Her wardrobe  
alone cost more than the average  
production."  

The Incredible Sarah would also  
have its audience believe that the  
Divine Sarah's life offstage was all  
tacky love affairs and temper tan-  
trums. Partially true, but Sarah's  
life was the theatre, and no mention  
is made in the film of her unswerving  
dedication. "When she was directress  
of her own theatre and by then in her  
fifties, it was nothing for her to  
rise at seven, confer at eight with  
costume and scene designers regarding  
a forthcoming production for which  
she would subsequently rehearse her  
company at the theatre for three  
hours, eat lunch in her dressing room  
with a few chosen members of the cast  
(usually sitting on the green carpet  
of her floor and calling the repast  
a 'pique-nique'), play a matinee, re-  
turn to her house...where at six  
she'd receive her daily salon of  
close acquaintances, go back to the  
theatre for an evening performance,  
eat supper at home with friends, then  
study a new role until three or four  
in the morning."  

As for her much-talked about off-  
stage lifestyle--"Victorien Sardou,  
who wrote so many of her biggest hits,  
declared, "If there's anything more  
remarkable than watching Sarah act,  
it's watching her live."  

One of her famous idiosyncrasies  
was the menagerie she kept. "Alexan-  
dre Dumas experienced his introduc-  
tion to the Bernhardt zoo one summer  
afternoon when he called bringing  
with him the one and only copy of a  
new play he had just completed. While  
waiting for his hostess to appear, he  
became aware of a curious crunching  

and, looking in the direction  
which it was coming, beheld a  
serenely eating his boater hat  

apparently savoring every straw.  

At a whistle from somewhere out back,  

the beast bounded from the room.  

Dumas' relief was short-lived. A gray  
parrot suddenly landed squawking on  
his shoulder and started biting off  
the buttons of his waistcoat. It was  
stopped only by the leaping en-  
trance of two gigantic collies, one  
of whom grabbed the precious script  
of his play while the other hurled  
joyous paws onto the terrified man's  
chest and started licking his face  
with an impact so violent it knocked  
Dumas back onto the divan with a fall  
in which he knocked over a large vase  
filled with water and peonies. At  
this awkward moment, Sarah appeared,  
diaphanous and golden, in a white  
gown...her hair catching the sun-  
light.' Seeing the wreck her pets  

had made of her caller, she went into  
gales of laughter so uncontrollable,  
she toppled down onto the couch be-  
side him. This was the somewhat dis-  
ordered beginning of the twenty year  
friendship there was to be between  
Bernhardt and the author of The Lady  
of the Camellias." (Known to most  
mule-minded Americans as Camille.)  
Sarah Bernhardt and her brilliance  
and her art are gone, lost to us.  
The Incredible Sarah does not even  
manage to convey a shadow of her pow-  

er and magnificence. Cornelia Otis  
Skinner, however, has given us what  
will probably be the most thorough  
and fascinating insight into the  
great actress' life. Read the book;  
don't waste your money on the movie,  
and remember Sarah's words on her  

“own "remarkable and frightening vi-  

tality. ‘Life engenders life,’ she  
would say, ‘energy engenders energy.  
It is by spending oneself that one  
becomes rich.'”