STRUGGLE  
A Feminist Analysis Of Rape & Racism  

Authors' Note: "Now I'm afraid of  
every black man that I see..." As  
members of a Denver group working on  
the problem of violence against women,  
we have heard more than one woman make  
a similar statement in the course of  
accounting an attack upon her. The  
statements set us to thinking about  
ways in which our own racism affects,  
and sometimes poisons, our attempts  
to combat attacks upon us. We do not  
pretend that the following column is  
all inclusive. We, the authors, are  
white women and we are writing pri-  
marily for our white sisters about  
the racism which we each share with  
the rest of white America. We real-  
ize that this racism is our problem  
and that we have the responsibility  
of vigorously combating it. We hope  
that this article will spark its read-  
ers to further thought, discussion,  
and study of this complex and diffi-  
cult problem.  

Eileen Bresnahan,  
Bobbe Ross, and  
Kate Sharp.  

In attempting to develop a coherent  
analysis of the problem of violence  
against women, the complexities of  
the issue rapidly become apparent.  

The First Amendment questions alone  
are enough to make even the most con-  
fident of feminist theoreticians have  
second thoughts. Add to this subjects  
like prostitution and woman battering,  
not forgetting to include an adequate  
economic analysis, and you often find  
yourselves in something of a theoreti-  
cal morass. Further muddying the wa-  
ters, particularly in predominantly  
white groups, is the problem of ster-  
eotyping. We all know of the common,  
media-perpetuated, stereotypes of the  
victims of this kind of violence -  
lovely little assumptions about how  
she conspired to bring the attack up-  
on herself - but what we don't often  
think about, and certainly must, are  
ways in which we stereotype the per-  
petrators of these crimes against us.  
Is the average rapist really a black  
male? We have no way of knowing for  
sure, statistics being as unreliable  
as they are, but common sense, coupl-  
ed with a rudimentary knowledge of  
population demographics (i.e., less  
than 20% of the U.S. population is  
black), should tell us that this as-  
sumption is highly unlikely. Still,  
it continues to be made, fueled by  
the few stories we have stored away  
of women who were raped by blacks (do  
we even note race if the rapist is  
white?); and fed by the white racist  
tendency to believe that all blacks  
look alike unless we happen to know  
them well. So a white woman raped by  
a tall blond white man does not sub-  
sequently tell her friends that she  
is wary of every white man that she  
sees on the street; but a white woman  
raped by a tall, light-skinned black  
man is very likely to become terri-  
fied of every black man that she en-  
counters, individual characteristics  
being lost in the emotional shuffle.  
Every black man becomes, to her, a  
rapist. In addition, we indulge in  

a number of other common assumptions  
such as:  

Woman-battering occurs most fre-  
quently in black, third-world, and  
working-class homes.  

Incest only happens among the men-  
tally-deficient and Southerners.  

Gang rapes are the province of the  
third-world.  

The big problem with brown and  
black-skinned men is that they are  
“over-sexed."  

Are any of these things true? If we  
separate logic from emotionality and  
racism, the answer must certainly be,  
"No." Yet these dangerous assumptions  
continue to flourish, both in society  
at large and, sadly, among women who  
work in feminist groups.  

The pegging of black men as rapists  
is a particularly ugly slander in this  
ugly crowd. (It is with this charge  
that we will concern ourselves, as the  
others parallel it.) This slur has  
been used successfully by American  
society since the Reconstruction to  
keep both black men and white women  
in their respective “place.” (Mention  
is rarely made of the fact that black  
women have been fighting off white men  
since long before the Revolutionary  
War.) Angela Davis, writing in The  
Black Scholar (April, 1978), states  
that unless the historical roots of  
this myth are understood, it can nev-  
er be torn down.  

The myth had and has a lot to do  
with the determination of both North-  
ern and Southern capitalists to hold  
on to their power. One important way  
in which these men retained their sta-  
tus was to divide the working class  
against itself through the promotion  
of racism, and this continues today.  
By the end of the war the capitalists  
already had many years of experience  
in the strategy of divide and conquer.  
Northern businessmen had been fighting  
union organizing since the 1840s, and  
their Southern counterparts knew that  
the trade union movement was no friend  
to them. As told by Richard O. Boyer  
and Herbert M. Morais in Labor's Un-  
told Story (United Electrical, Radio  
and Machine Workers of America, 1955)  
"...When President Lincoln called for  
volunteers the entire membership of  
trade union locals enlisted in single  
groups, knowing well that there would  
be no free trade union movement if  
the slaveholders triumphed." Boyer  
and Morais quote a New York labor  
newspaper, The Iron Platform, as stat-  
ing in November of 1862 that if slave-  
holders won the war, "all laborers,  
white or black," would be “and ought  
to be slaves." It went on, "there is  
one truth which should be clearly un-  
derstood by every workingman in the  
Union. The slavery of the black man  
leads to the slavery of the white man."  

After the Civil War anyone who had  
served in the army of the Confederacy  
was stripped of his civil rights.  
Since women were not at that time en-  
franchised, this effectively meant  
that only black men could vote or  
hold public office. This potentially  
gave Blacks considerable power - a  
power which the capitalists were quick  
to exploit and defuse. A post-war re-  
cession was affecting the economy and  
"as employment increased in the North  
with the cessation of war contracts  
and with demobilization," weakening  
the trade movement, "...Southern plant-  
ers, intent on saving their system by  
replacing slavery with peonage through  
debt and vagrancy laws, had instigat-  
ed mass killings of Negroes..." (from  
Labor's Untold Story). Carpetbaggers  
urged black men into office and de-  
ceived them; white Southerners used  
fear, lynchings, and organizations  
such as the Ku Klux Klan, which was  
born for the express purpose of ter-  
rifying the black family into the nar-  
row confines of the slave mentality as  
well as for union busting.  

To further quote Angela Davis from  
The Black Scholar, “When black men  
were slaves, they were not labeled...  
rapists...there was not a single pub-  
licized accusation of rape during the  
entire Civil War. It was Frederick  
Douglas who pointed out that this al-  
leged rape instinct would certainly  
have been activated at a time when  

Big Mama Rag, Vol.7, No.1  

white women were unprotected by their  
male guardians who had left en masse  
for the front.  

In the immediate aftermath of the  
Civil War, the specter of the black  
rapist had not yet appeared on the  
historical scene. However, the lynch-  
ings, reserved during slavery for  
white abolitionists, were proving to  
be valuable political weapons. Be-  
fore lynching could be consolidated  
as a popularly accepted institution,  
however, its savagery, its horrors  
had to be convincingly justified.  
These were the circumstances which  
spawned the myth of the black rapist,  
for the rape charge turned out to be  
the most powerful of the several at-  
tempts to justify the institution of  
lynching. Lynching, in turn, comple-  
mented by the systematic rape of black  
women, became an essential ingredient  
of the strategy of terror which guar-  
anteed the over-exploitation of black  
labor and, after the betrayal of the  
Reconstruction, the political domina-  
tion of the black people as a whole."  
("Rape, Racism and the Capitalist Set-  
ting"; Angela Y. Davis; The Black  
Scholar; April, 1978).  

Indeed, further proof that rape was  
more often an excuse for lynching than  
a cause of lynching is offered by a  
pamphlet published by the National  
Association for the Advancement of  
Colored People. The History of Lynching in the United States, the  
pamphlet documents the history of  
lynching in the US from 1889 to 1918.  
During this period, as reported by  
Susan Brownmiller in Against Our Will  
(Simon and Schuster; 1975), 3,224 per-  
sons were killed by lynch mobs, 2,838  
of them (seven eighths of the total)  
in the South. 78% of the victims were  
black. Sixty-one women were also a-  
mong those lynched; fifty of these wo-  
men were black. (Surely these women  
were not assumed to be rapists.) “Of  
the white men lynched, 8.4% had been  
accused of ‘rape and attacks upon wo-  
men...' Among the blacks the percent-  
age was 28.4. The NAACP cautiously  
summed up, '...[it is apparent that  
lynchings of Negroes for other causes  
than the so-called ‘one crime’ have  
for the whole period been a large ma-  
jority of all lynchings and that for  
the past five years (1914-1918), less  
than one in five of the colored vic-  
tims have been accused of rape or “at-  
tacks on women."'  

Brownmiller also tells us that  
Southern women finally organized in  
response to the rape propaganda.  

MORE ON PAGE 5)  

RNC  

AR  

Titled: "Thirty Years"