Porta

International Abortion News

Em Italy

Belinda Sifford

At the end of June a group of fem-
inists and sympathetic health care
workers took over a ward in Rome's
largest hospital, the Policlinico.
The ward was supposed to have been
used to provide abortion procedures
until the hospital director went
back on his promise. Women then
moved into action and put the ward
into working order. They operated
the abortion clinic for three months,
withstood two police raids and fin-
ally were forced out by a third pol-
ice attack.

How could this happen in a country
which has just passed an abortion
law hailed as the most "progressive"
in Europe?

While the western press has bent
over backwards to praise the law and
show its smooth implementation in
this country surrounding Vatican
City, feminists, radicals (members
of the civil libertarian Radical
party, a group in the forefront of
the abortion struggle) and some
leftists have once again taken up the
abortion fight. Their predictions
about the law were right: It will
not make safe free abortions a real-
ity. Here's why.

In theory, the law gives a woman
the right to abort within the first
90 days of pregnancy, but in practice
she must have nerves of steel to fight
her way through bureaucratic red tape,
medical intimidation and indifference,
church pressure, and, in many instan-
ces, small town prejudice. As the
law states, prior to requesting an
abortion a woman must have a doctor
certify her need to abort. Should
a doctor refuse such certification,
the woman must find another doctor
or go home to "rethink" her decision.
The law mandates a one-week waiting
period before the woman can return
to the doctor, who at this time must
give her the certification. The
requirements for physician approval
and a waiting period reflect the pol-
iticians' view that women lack the
ability to arrive at such a decision
on their own, and that a doctor's
opinion has greater value than that
of a woman who wishes to abort.

The bill has other negative
aspects. First, women under 18 must
obtain written permission from a
parent or guardian, which in effect
means that they are forced to seek
illegal and expensive clandestine
abortions or obtain them outside the
country. Second, abortions can only
be performed in hospitals, not in
doctor's offices or any outpatient
clinics. Given the conditions in a
typical Italian hospital—notorious-
ly overcrowded, understaffed, and mal-
functioning—it's easy to see the
potential problems.

Finally, the law provides the right
for anyone to refuse to participate
in abortion on the grounds of con-
scientious objection. Whereas the
military excuses conscientious objec-
tors (COs) from service only after a
review board determines legitimate
motivation, no such control has been
written into the abortion law. Most
hospital administrators are Christian
Democrats (members of the conserva-
tive Vatican-backed ruling party of
Italy) and are signing the CO list
being passed around each hospital.

Most doctors are under pressure to
side with the hospital administration;
in fact, their careers are threatened
should they do otherwise. Doctors
depend on an administrative blessing
for practicing the type and quantity
of work they desire. Once agreeing
to perform abortions, it is insinu-
ated particularly in private hospit-
als, that these are the only proce-
dures they'll be doing. Throughout
the country only a small percentage
of ob-gyn's are performing abortions—
2 out of 10 at one hospital, 7 out of
18 at another, 2 out of 21, and so on
down to those hospitals where not a
single doctor has consented. And to
top it off, doctors are limited by
law to allotting only 5 to 25 percent
of their time to "minor" procedures
such as abortions.

Unfortunately, conscientious object-
ion doesn't stop with the administra-
tors or the ob-gyn's: the reception-
ist at the admitting desk, the nurse
on the ward, the lab technician and
the anesthesiologist in the pro-
cedure room can all be COs. The
anesthesiologists are particularly
important because practically all
abortions are D&Cs: the doctors
refuse to buy the equipment necessary
for vacuum aspiration abortions.
(Such a requisition would implicitly
commit them to permanent abortion
delivery.)

With most abortion facilities re-
quiring at least an overnight stay
(a profitable excess!), even a hos-
pital cook can join the list of COs
by refusing to assist in the abortion
service, thus causing further delay
and confusion. Pope Paul added to
all this by forbidding nursing nuns
from working in state and private
ob-gyn wards where abortions were
being performed.

The result is that major urban
hospitals are carrying out 7 to 25
abortions a week. For most women
this means waiting an anxious three
to six weeks for a procedure date and
when this date arrives, finding that
no doctor is available, and being
told to return another day. To add
to this, those doctors in the ward
or others "passing through" may be
verbally abusive: "So, it's another
slaughter of the innocents today."
is just one example.

What choices do Italian women have?
Now that office abortions are specif-
ically outlawed, a private practit-
ioner charges upwards of $1,000, a
price which supposedly compensates
for the risk of a suspended license
and the eight-year jail sentence
established for violators of the law.
Women's groups that operated clande-
stine abortion clinics prior to
the enactment of the law have stopped
for fear of reprisals so they continue
organizing package trips to London
instead.

Back street and self-induced abort-
ions still exist. Since the passage
of this "progressive" law, at least
three women have died from improperly
performed clandestine abortions. One
of these women had medical certifica-
tion, but was so tormented during her
weeks of waiting that she tried to
self-abort with a sharp instrument,
ultimately perforating her uterus and
hemorrhaging until she bled to death.

When one newspaper rhetorically asked
why another of the three hadn't sought
a legal abortion, its answer was, "In
a small town, ask for certification
(probably from the one doctor in town,
a person seen by everyone) fearing
negative public opinion."

The political parties that backed
the law have done nothing to actually
put it into practice. Women, however,
have. All over the country debates,
meetings, leafleting, sit-ins and con-
frontations with hospital administrat-
ors, doctors, and public health off-
icials have taken place. In July, a
national coordinating committee of
feminists was set up to assist the
numerous nationwide protests.

The occupation of the Policlinico
was of major importance in uniting
women. To date this hospital remains
the only one in Rome that has perform-
ed abortions for a significant number
of women. During the occupation sev-
eral Policlinico doctors, often after
their regular shifts, did abortions
with the assistance of a few volunteer
nurses, hospital workers, and the
feminists themselves. They admitted
patients, obtained supplies, steril-
ized the rooms and equipment and pro-
vided post-op care. The hospital ad-
ministrators repeatedly promised to
put on paid staff to replace the peo-
ple participating in the occupation,
but such staff failed to materialize.
The administration also failed to
produce a list of COs which the women
wanted in order to investigate and
bring charges against those doctors
denying women the right to a safe,
legal abortion while performing il-
legal, expensive private abortions
on the side. What finally led to the
expulsion of the Policlinico occup-
ants was their appearance in other
wards of the ob-gyn section and their
discussions with female patients
about the kind of overall care they
should be getting.

Also of national importance was the
recent conviction of Dr. Ethel di
Gregorio, a gynecologist from Ancona.
Dr. di Gregorio had signed the list
of conscientious objectors at her hos-
pital, yet she was willing to perform
abortions at her office. She had in
other words falsified her CO status.
For the first time in Italian history,
several women's groups were able to
present a class action suit in the
name of Italian women, protesting di
Gregorio's action. Mysteriously, the
hospital's list of COs disappeared
once the charges were brought, so
the eventual conviction was only on
her performance of illegal office
abortions.

Ironically, the law has been succ-
essful on two fronts: exposing the
medical profession for the hypo-
critical, privileged class that it
is and uniting women to fight more
aggressively for the kind of health
care they want. They are demanding
not only better medical care, but a
say in creating it. Providing safe,
free abortions is only the initial
battle.

The Peruvian government has recent-
ly closed down all state contraceptive
services in response to pressure from
the Catholic Church. This move en-
sures that only wealthy women, who
can afford private medical consulta-
tions, will have access to contra-
ceptives.

ALIMUPER, Action for the Liberation
of the Peruvian Women, calls this move
"an infringement of the rights of
Peruvian women who are victims, once
again, of masculine power." They
say the suspended services were
"strictly voluntary and low cost",
and that they were funded by the
United Nations. 

The church authorities on the con-
trary claim that Peruvian women were
being "pressured into using birth
control through propaganda." Accord-
ing to the National Institute of
Statistics, 37% of deaths in Peru
each year are of children under the
age of one.

There are over 85,000 abortions
a year and many of the women who have
them end up in the hospital with com-
plications. This situation can only
get worse if services are not restored.

ALIMUPER is calling for protests
against this restrictive measure to be
sent to President Francisco Morales
Bermudez, Palacio de Gobierno, Plaza
de Armas, Lima, Peru.

Spare Rib

Big Mama Rag Vol. 8 No. 2

In Brazil where abortion is also
illegal, a recent study by a Sao
Paulo doctor shows that around 3.4
million abortions are carried out
every year. It estimates that about
a quarter of all Brazilian women of
child-bearing age get pregnant once
a year, and half of these seek abort-
ions (for most women contraception
is not easily available). Some
600,000 women end up in hospitals
every year suffering from infections
as a result of unhygienic abortions.

Abortion is illegal in Mexico, but
more than a million abortions were
performed there last year, according
to a report by Mexico City’s police
medical advisor. This is a 40%
increase on 1978. He condemned "un-
scrupulous doctors" working in private
clinics who supplement their incomes
by doing back-street abortions and
falsify medical certificates when
women die, and he urged increased
vigilance by the authorities to pre-
vent these malpractices. He says he
is against legalizing abortion be-
cause it "goes against human dignity."

In West Germany

Three years after the legalizing
of abortion in West Germany, the
Catholic Church has re-opened the
anti-abortion polemic with an extreme-
ly vicious attack comparing the lat-
est abortion figures of 73,500 for
1978 to the Nazis' genocide against
the Jews. This statement, made by a
deputy of the right wing opposition
Christian Democrats, was publicly
supported by a German cardinal.

West Germany's present abortion
law is one of the most restrictive
in Europe: a legal abortion must
fulfill a number of conditions and
cannot be carried out after the third
month. The Christian Democrats sup-
ported the law when it was introduced
by the ruling Liberal-Social-Demo-
cratic coalition, although only after
a more liberal proposal had been
withdrawn. This renewed attack is
seen as a move to the right by the
Church hierarchy, and as an express-
ion of support for the Christian-
Democrat, Franz Josef Strauss, as
candidate for Chancellor in next
year's parliamentary elections. If
abortion is used as an election
issue, it will mean a hard fight for
women defending the already inadequate
legislation.