Big Mama Rag Vol. 6 No. 1

Linda Reehter, a woman who lived

| and worked in the Denver feminist
community for several years, died
Nov. 30 by suicide.

We mourn the loss of our sister
and our co-worker, whose energy made
a difference in both Big Mama Rag

.and Woman to Woman Bookstore.

We also offer our support to the
numbers of women in this community
who have been meeting to share their
feelings of sorrow over Linda's death
and to explore ways of developing
resources for women who are suicidal.
Women interested in working on those
resources should contact Women Against
Psychiatric Assault (WAPA) through
Woman to Woman.

‘Bluebird 5’ Trial Starts Jan. 17

Women are urged to fill the courtroom
Tuesday, January 17, when jury
selection begins for the trial of the
Bluebird 5.

Proceedings start at 9 am in Court-
room D, Room 124 of the Denver City
and County Building.

Feminists packed the courtroom
Dec. 22 when lawyers for the five de-
fendants introduced several prelimin-
ary motions, including a motion to
suppress evidence obtained by police
at the time of the arrest.

The five were arrested Oct. 31 near
the Bluebird Theater, an East Colfax

porn movie house, and are charged with
destruction of property. The Bluebird
had been spray painted and plastered
with leaflets outlining a feminist
analysis of pornography and calling
on women to organize against economic
and political oppression. If the five
are convicted, they face a possible
$300 fine and 90 days in jail.

The defendants chose to reject the
plea, stay together, and go ahead
with a trial based on feminist issues.

Earlier in the week, the Bluebird
5 Defense Committee organized a press
conference. Both the print and broad-
cast media gave extensive coverage to
the upcoming trial as the first in
Denver in which feminist principles
would be used to defend women who
fought back against violence against
women.

Another surprise in the court
session came when Patty Price asked
witnesses to identify Crystal Arp, the
only defendant he claimed to have
seen putting up posters on the Blue-
bird. But instead of identifying Arp,
witnesses pointed to another woman sitting
right next to her.

After the motion to suppress evi-
dence failed, the city attorney of-
fered the defense a chance to plea
bargain: charges would be dropped
against everyone except Arp, who would
have gotten “deferred prosecution."

That meant charges would be eventually
dropped against her if she stayed out
of trouble until the time of the
hearing.

Lawyers for the five are Ruth
Buechler, Patty Price, Sandra Rothen-
berg, Jeannie Busacca and Phil Cocker-
ille. At the Dec. 22 session, most of
the morning was spent cross-examining
one of the arresting officers who had
been called to the stand by the city
attorney.

The defense strategy was aimed at
showing that the evidence taken from
the defendants’ car was illegally ob-
tained because no search warrant had
been issued. However, the judge ruled
that there had been probable cause for
arrest and that the evidence was ob-
tained legally.

That the city attorney was clearly
unprepared for the day's hearing was
obvious at one point when the defense
asked for (and was granted) discovery
(that is, the right to obtain a list
of witnesses, any statements made to
police by the defendants and any other
evidence the prosecution intends to
present.) The city attorney said that
he did not intend to produce evidence
found in the car. Later, however, he
admitted that he had talked to Officer
James for only 20 minutes and was not
aware of just what evidence there was.

The defendants are Crystal Arp,
Bobbe Ross, Judy Barlow, Lori Brad-
ford and Ms. Carpenter.

IWD Coalition Forms

Last March Denver women produced
a remarkable demonstration for Inter-
national Women's Day, which is cele-
brated as a working class holiday
throughout the world every March 8.
The evening celebration included a
dinner, women's music and the film,
Salt of the Earth and theater. It
was the first time in Denver that
lesbian and heterosexual women and
representatives from the Chicano com-
munity had worked together for Inter-
national Women's Day.

Out of the demonstration, women
formed the Working Women's Action
Group. They felt that more had to be
learned, more action in the community
had to be taken, and since that time,
more women have joined the group.

The group is planning for another
coalition this year to organize a
demonstration and other activities
on March 4. Individual women and
women from organizations anywhere in
the state are encouraged to attend
planning meetings which will begin
in January. The focus of the coali-
tion will be to integrate women's
issues with other social issues,
especially racism and imperialism
and the struggle of the working class.

Big Mama Rag is planning to take a giant scissors step over the January dol-
drums—a condition we figured we could skip, since we had them previously in
September, October, November and December.
This month we're hoping to do some much-needed reorganization.

We're still looking for feminists who would like to use the money we've raised toward a
typesetting machine ($3200 in, with $4000 to go) as a basis for setting up a
typesetting business collective, which would operate as an independent polit-
ical project.

We're still tossing around ideas about how such a collective
would work, so if you're interested, let us know.
We'd like to set aside some time at our next community meeting to talk about it.

The meeting is open to
all women, and will be on Thursday night January 26th, at Woman to Woman Feminist Center, 2023 E Colfax, at 7 pm
and suggestions on the paper.

Please plan to come and share your views

We are also going to be setting aside a day to talk about the content of the
paper, fundraising and the great labor-saving ideas that we started to devel-
ope at our weekend retreat last fall.

Last month we gave farewell hugs and kisses to Deborah Tayler who is finally
feeling guilt-free enough to leave the paper after a record 18 months of survi-
val. (Doctors assure us that recovery will take no longer than half that.) And
by then we may be able to leave the colorful cavern once in a while to visit her
in the mountains, where she's hoping to line up a place to live part-time.

(Not that we didn't try to encourage her to do what she thought best. We just
thought all those little "What have you done for the movement today" signs we
fastened up around the office would keep us in her heart and mind a little longer).

We are planning a special issue on women in prison. We are welcoming articles
from women in prisons and from women working politically with prisoners of the
legal system. Especially, we would like to hear from women in Canon City.

Last but not least, you'll notice that BMR is a little smaller this month—12
pages instead of 16. Not that we lack for energy or good stories. The problem
is money, considering that the months of January and February will be pretty
lean in terms of ad revenue. The money we raised from our September benefit en-
sured our survival this past fall and enabled us to pay some accumulated back
bills. Yet, as we are not yet taking in enough each month through sales and
ads to pay our monthly operating expenses, fundraising is a continuing issue.
We would love to find a woman who would like to work on organizing benefits
for us. We'll be discussing the money issue more at our community meeting.
Hope to see you there!

If only the landlord doesn't get too pushy about the October rent.

WOMAN
to
WOMAN
Feminist Center

- 3 new titles from Daughters
- 'Of Woman Born'— in paperback

- Womanschool winter catalog
2023 E. COLFAX Mon-Sat
Denver, CO 80206 320-5072

To order add $0.50/book handling.