A Working Class

Perspective:

One Woman’s Personal Account

INTRODUCTION

There are some things that have to be said about class issues and they have to be said now. Some of us are getting hurt, a lot of us are getting angry, and it has to stop. What is happening is that middle- and upper-class sisters are loving heavy trips on working class women. I want to deal with that problem, and there is a lot to say about it. Most of it is painful, and some of it is easy. I am very grateful to Big Mama Rag for expressing an interest in class struggle and for allowing working class women the chance to be heard. Few others have listened at all.

I have decided, after a great deal of thought about it, to remain anonymous, for several reasons. First, I would be personally embarrassed for anyone to make special exceptions for me because of my struggles. Second, the purpose of this article is to reveal some of the gut issues of class struggle, not to air my personal grievances against an unjust society. Other opinions on the class issue as it relates to Feminism are wholeheartedly welcomed.

The only way I can deal with this issue is to draw on my own experience and consciousness. For me, this begins with an analysis of my childhood and what that has meant to my life.

I was plenty aware of class status when I was a kid, because we didn’t have any -- or if we did, it was at the very bottom. I grew up poor, the oldest of 4 children, in small midwestern farming towns. My father was a salesman and he never did very well until I was in high school and he and my mother started teaching school. Until then, we moved around a lot, like about once a year or more often. My mother worked at odd jobs, took in laundry and mending, and went to college part-time (when we had the money) while we were growing up, so that eventually she could bring in more money for our family. My mother was definitely from a working-class background, and my father was probably lower-middle-class because he was a preacher's son, even though his parents often struggled for survival, too.

Our family struggle while I was growing up was a determined one. The only real security we had was our love for each other, and even that grew thin at times, when we got really desperate. I never had enough to eat, and I remember there was at least one long stretch where all we had to eat was bread and milk, and we were glad for that. Often I had nothing to eat at school, even though there was hot lunch, because we couldn't afford it. We never went on welfare and I think the reason was either that we never knew it existed or if my father did know, he was too proud to have accepted it. It seemed there were a lot of times we nearly starved to death or thought we would, and I know we kids at least would have been glad for anything, no matter where it came from.

My parents had firm moral convictions and a firmly ingrained Puritan work ethic. Things like lying and stealing were punished severely, and I went through one long phase of stealing where I was black and blue all the time. There was never any play until the work was all done, never any liquor in the house, and we all went to church on Sundays unless somebody was sick, which was pretty often. Even so, we had a lot of fun making up silly games and just talking about things. No matter how bad things got, we weren't going to let it get us down if we could help it. These were some of the attitudes I grew up with that influenced me greatly.

But there were other influences at work, too, that were much more devastating in their effect, and much more insidious. Being poor meant mostly shame. I never had new clothes, except when my mother would “make something over” for me. My clothes were often too big or too little, and never in style. (I vaguely knew about style, but it never mattered much whether I did or not because we couldn't have afforded it anyway.)

As a child, I never understood why other kids wouldn't play with me and why their mothers wouldn't allow me to go to their kids’ houses. I knew it had something to do with our poverty, but I knew we weren’t “white trash” either. This enforced isolation had several effects on me. It hurt me deeply and probably forever, made me angry, made me feel ashamed and somehow “not good enough.”

I fought back with street words and often with my fists. I compensated in school by working hard and getting straight A's, and thereby won at least partial respect from my teachers. But I had practically no social life as a child. We moved too often, for one thing. And everywhere we went, I was avoided, ridiculed, and generally disliked for no reason that I could see. I remember being terribly confused at these cruel reactions from my classmates. In my own eyes and in the eyes of my family, I was a bright, sensitive, imaginative child who cared very much about other people. It was hard to understand why the love I gave so readily was returned with so much hostility, lies, ridicule, and fear.

At times I toughened myself. Other times I cried. Most of the time I was shy and defensive. I played with animals, who responded easily, made up games for myself and fantasies where I was a princess and all the other kids would treat me nice and bring me presents, and I learned nature. The out-of-doors was the only world I felt at ease in, because the sky and the earth and the silent growing things did not cast me out for any reason, let alone reasons I couldn't understand.

Sometimes my intense longing for friends, companionship, and conversation made me so desperate I would set out to “be accepted or else.” I would “show them” that I could “be somebody” too. And I would try to fix myself up as clean and neat as possible and politely ask somebody to come over to my house. And maybe they would, but mostly not. I would try so hard to be liked by them, I would do anything they wanted, even stupid, demeaning things. But it never really worked the way I always imagined it would.

I remember once someone I liked very much wanted me to steal some money for her out of the teacher's desk. She said if I would, she would buy me some candy after school. I fought with my conscience half the morning, and my conscience lost. I stole the money, thinking that at last maybe this was a way somebody would be friends with me. After school, we went down to the grocery store, and she said to pick out whatever I wanted. I chose carefully and took a long time (I hardly ever got to eat candy), while she was getting impatient and said to hurry up. I did, and we went to the counter to pay for it. She paid for hers, and then came a moment of revelation I will never forget as long as I live. She told the storekeeper that I was going to pay for my own, put the rest of the money in her pocket and ran out of the store yelling, “Sucker!”

I was so horrified and embarrassed that I dropped the candy and went outside and cried. I remember thinking how I had trusted her utterly and never once imagined that she could do anything so mean and cruel. I felt betrayed and cheated, and right then, in those first hot waves of anger, I began to see the source of all the injustice and cruelty. The real source was money, because money was power, and I had none.

As a child, I saw quite clearly a world where there was no entrance for me. So many times I wanted to scream, “How do I make you see that I am a person worth listening to, worth loving? Why can’t you put away your self-importance and recognize my right to human dignity?” But I wouldn't have known how to say it then, and I was laughed at so often that I only felt it would be useless.

I was taught by my parents that the only way to overcome all the problems facing me in my life was to go to college, and I was convinced at a very early age that a college education was the only answer to an otherwise certain future of desolation and

More on Page 3

——

Analysis

Part 1

Why this personal account is important Although the trend is beginning to change, the women we hear from most are women from middle and upper class backgrounds. What about the real majority of women in the country -- the workers (and women who were raised in lower and working class families)? While one woman's struggle, as told here, does not purport to be representative of all working class or poverty backgrounds, its validity lies in the fact that her experiences, attitudes, and pain are a bond she shares with other working class women and which she does not share with women from other class backgrounds. We seldom hear what that feels like or how those experiences work in interaction among women. We know that experiential differences can keep us apart without us consciously realizing it. (Think for a minute who your closest friends are and what kind of background they have. Chances are, if their backgrounds are similar to yours, that you will see the truth of that statement.) We have to learn what there is about class attitudes and differences that keeps us apart, so that we can work to change things in ourselves that are destructive, and so we can understand and work with one another. This personal account is not just somebody's “sob story.” It should be the starting point for serious thought about what's going on in the feminist movement and why so many women feel excluded or alienated.

Women as a Caste

Just as problems among women from different class backgrounds create tension among us, we have to realize that this is all part of a larger oppression of women as an inferior caste in the patriarchal structure. Any perspective on class issues in the feminist movement must have as a reference point the fact that women are oppressed first as women and secondarily for their class background, among other things, such as their race or sexual preferences.

Some of the Problems

In thinking and talking about class and caste issues, women will be criticized for creating schisms in the women’s community. The problem is that they are already there.

Another problem is that in looking at value systems, we tend to make broad generalities, categorize and classify, in order to reach some of the causes of class problems. In the initial stages, we may fail to recognize that through raised consciousness, some women have managed to overcome the values, restraints, and/or oppression of their class backgrounds, and I think that is beautiful. But on the other hand, it’s very easy to think, “Well, they're not talking about me because I’m an exception,” and too often that’s just a cop-out. What

More on Page 3