‘Technical Difficulties’

Plague Radio

Kate Sharp

Last month BR printed the story
of the Women Everywhere Radio Col-
lective's fight to keep its weekly
feminist show on KFML Radio. We
reported that contracts assuring the
collective's control of the show un-
til the first of the year and assur-
ing the group's free advertising
time were in the offing.

A meeting was set up in early July
between KFML station manager, Don
Zucker, and the collective to solid-
ify these contracts. At this meet-
ing, the collective was told that the
agreed-upon terms would be written
up by the next week and that the
group should return on a given date
of that week to sign them. On that
date one of the collective members
called to make sure the contracts
were ready, which they weren't, and
was given another date to come in.

This same process of calling and
being given another date to come in
has continued through late August.
The Collective has still neither
seen nor signed a single contract
from KFML.

Also, at this meeting certain spe-
cific irresponsibilities on the part
of KFML staff toward the Women Every-
where Show were discussed. (At least
an attempt at discussion was made on
the part of the Collective. Zucker
insisted that he didn't want to hear
the complaints. He simply wanted to
"make a clean slate" and "forget what
happened in the past and start fresh
tomorrow.") Since the most common mis-
hap is of KFML staff not being able
to find the show (although it is al-
ways in the same place each week) it
was decided that it should be put in
a new "same place" that would sup-
posedly make it easier for the DJs
to find.

Also, an important concession was
made on the part of the station. It
was agreed that the Collective could
work as late as it needed to during
production time, and if the group
hadn't completed its work by the time
the station closed, those working on
the show could let themselves out the
back door when they were finished.

Although Women Everywhere has won
its fight to keep the show (at least
through December) as well as a couple
of concessions, the group has had to
put up with quite a few unpleasant-
nesses surrounding its show since both
the meeting in June assuring contin-
uation of the show and the meeting
in July discussing KFML's irrespon-

sibilities surrounding the show.
During only the months of July and
August the following incidents have
occurred:

- the show was aired an hour late
because the DJ could not find the
show,

- the credits and last song were cut
off a music show because the DJ
thought it was running too long (al-
though Zucker had insisted upon lis-
tening to and okaying all shows be-
fore they are aired - see August,
1976 BMR).

- the final song was left off an-
other show because the DJ didn't
realize the show was not over.

- one week the show was not aired
at all because the tape was "inad-
vertently" being used as a doorstop,
holding the back door of the station
open.

- on August 8th an old May 9th tape
was played for about 10 minutes until
the correct tape was found (which was
in the new decided-upon place).

- following a show on prostitution,
a DJ remarked, "That show made me
hot to trot here this afternoon," and
then played a cut from the Rolling
Stones' "Black and Blue" album.

- the show's theme song has been
played when specific instructions on
the tape box have asked that it not
be played. (When the group does the-
matic music shows the theme song in-
terferes with the show format and is
left off.)

- Women Everywhere tapes have been
erased after airing although various
KFML staff have been informed that
the group keeps all its tapes.

- and lastly, following the promise
that the group be allowed to let it-
self out of the building upon comple-
tion of production, this agreement
was reneged upon without notice and
the women had to come back twice in
one week to complete a show they
should have only had to work on once.

At any rate, Women Everywhere does
have control of the show for the mean
time, although it has neither the pro-
mised contracts as yet nor a show
that always gets aired the way it
was planned. In order to avoid re-
peated "technical difficulties" in
the future, the Collective's next un-
dertaking will be to try and gain
control of its own on-the-air engin-
eering. Several members of the group
are already FCC-licensed, and have
previous on-the-air experience, so
the battle will continue in further
negotiations with the station.

Protest At Woman ‘76 Fair

Peggy Hickox

Approximately 1,000 Denver women
attended the Woman '76 Fair at
Currigan Hall last month. The fair,
which was extensively publicized, was
organized by a small, private group
of women. Publicity for the fair
stated that the proceeds would go to
the various participating groups to
benefit their activities. In fact,
the money made from the rental of
booths ($50-$100 per booth) plus any
money from the $1 admission went to
the fair organizers. The only money
returned to participants was from
products groups might choose to sell
at their booths.

Among the events scheduled for the
weekend as “of interest to women"
were fashion shows, as well as work-
shops on such topics as make-up,
maids, and landscaping. Although the
organizer, Regina Duffey, specifical-
ly solicited feminist groups and ex-
pressed the hope that the fair would
reflect all aspects of women's lives,
the generally high cost of booths in
addition to political disagreement
with many of the events caused some
grassroots feminist groups to boycott
the fair in protest. Two groups, BMR
and Woman To Woman Feminist Bookcen-
ter, refused to advertise their organ-
izations at the fair.

Of the 100 booths that did partici-
pate, the majority represented insti-
tutions or businesses which had no
direct connection with women but were
there to promote their particular
service or company. Some of the
groups overtly discriminate against
women in their daily business prac-
tices, such as Coors and banking in-
stitutions.

Denver feminists protested the e-
vent peacefully by presenting a play
which questioned the relationship be-
tween business and the women's move-
ment and by distributing a statement
to fair visitors which pointed out
how the fair exploited the women's
movement.

The play, “Dorothy and the Wiseman
of Ooze," satirized the way that token
women--advertising and business exe-
cutives, wives of influential men,
and secretaries who go along with
their bosses--are used to keep other
women oppressed. Unfortunately, the
players had to compete against a fa-
shion show, complete with a loud P.A.
system blaring from the "official"
stage. For those who missed the play
it will be repeated this month at the
3rd Annual Women's Festival.

The statement--which was endorsed
by BMR, Woman to Woman, the Feminist
Federal Credit Union, Associated Wo-
men Student-Metro, Associated Gay
Students-Metro, and the Boulder Fe-
minist Theater Collective--raised a
series of questions concerning the
fair's goals:

- what, for example, does the United
Bank of Denver do for women?

- why was Coors Beer, which is being
boycotted for its discriminatory hir-
ing of women and minorities, allowed
to participate?

- and why were groups which encour-
age anti-woman prejudice, i.e. Right
to Life, invited?

The leaflet further questioned the
implied upper middle class values of

events such as fashion shows and work-
shops on maids and landscaping, al-
More on Page 13

struggle

a continuing forum

AGEISM AND CHILDREN
Terra

Ageism in relation to children is so ingrained in our culture that most
people accept as natural and even exemplary the status of people under 18
years of age. From a children's point of view being young is, “...having
adults talk about you in front of you as if you weren't there...not being
allowed to get angry, sulk, boss other people or tell someone to do dishes
like adults do...going to a department store to buy ice cream and not being
given the same courtesy as the adult customer ahead of you." (from Country
Women, August, 1974). While childhood is often glorified as the best years
of life, that glorification may be due to adult dissatisfaction with jobs and
lives more than any exceptional qualities of childhood.

Dealing with children as an oppressed class has difficulties beyond
those of consciousness about ageism. While there will always be a class of
children, the class is an ever-changing one - an individual child will not
remain a child for her entire life. All of us have experienced childhood,
which makes us experts - but only in regard to our own particular child-
hood. We may experience childhood as adults in relation to children, but
that view is from across the boundary of ageism.

Defining childhood is difficult also. Usually childhood includes life
until one leaves the nuclear family to be on one’s own. Within the span of
years between birth and economic independence there is a wide range of levels
of knowledge and responsibility, both chronologically and between individ-
uals. Infants require almost constant supervision, while children just a few
years older do not, in most cases. The oppression of ageism is perhaps the
real definer of childhood: a child is someone who does not receive respect
and responsibility because she is young, rather than because of displayed
lack of ability to take care of herself.

The Creation of Childhood

Childhood has not always been separate from the rest of the life cycle
(see work by Phillip Aries). Few linguistic distinctions were made regarding
age. Children did not have special games or ways of dressing, and partici-
pated directly in the life of the community. They worked as apprentices
with adults to learn skills and socialized with them in the recreations of
the whole community. Child prodigies were not uncommon. This was before
the rise of capitalism, which resulted in larger numbers of people with
a wealth to pass on to heirs, and thus increased importance of the family
itself.

With the further development of capitalism the nuclear family evolved:
The family lost to industry its function as a producer of goods and services.
Children became the sole product and primary justification for the family.
Within its small-scale authoritarian structure (which was dictated by a
sexual division of labor and the necessity to sell labor) children came to
be exposed to the truths of absolute tyranny and the power in physical
strength and economic control. With the advantage of size, their legislated
economic dependency, and the social custom of parental ownership of off-
spring, children have been left in a very vulnerable position. Lacking leg-
itimate physical/economic/social power, children learn to perform like pets
and manipulate adults emotionally to get what they want.