FEMINIST LAND TRUST IN  
COLORADO.

There now exists a collective of  
women from Colorado and Arizona  
whose main interest is, tentatively,  
one hundred and twenty acres of arable land in Colorado. It's outside  
Colbran, in the vicinity of Rifle  
and Grand Junction. Sixty acres of  
the land is irrigated hayland. There  
is pasture. It can support fruit-bearing trees appropriate to the  
region: apricot and apple. It is  
presently a working farm; its owner  

teh nae bare  
ie Vithay A  

inconvenienced with the commuting  
between Denver and his farm. Adja-  
cent to the property is a National  
Wildlife Reserve, which we hope will  
facilitate hiking and camping workshops. Every other kind of workshop  
is envisioned as well; all creative  
women are invited to help build a  
woman's space once the land is secured.  

The object is land for women forever. Financial obligation rests  
with the Trust, no one individual.  
The collective is now wading through  
the legalities of forming a non-profit corporate trust as an open collective,  
and finding it is not as difficult as it seems. There are a  
variety of women helping, a realtor,  
investors, and of course, the collective of fifteen. Right now,  
some of the collective members  
are living in Durango, others  
in Phoenix.  

The main goal now is fundraising  
and the search for investors, both  
for operating expenses and towards  
payment of the land. Energy and ideas are needed as well as donations.  

Any woman who is interested in helping or in just finding out more is  
welcomed to call Mia Albright (602)  
967-6177; Donna or Sue (602) 966-  
0039; or Kathy, Mary, Sharon and  
Karla (303) 259-1367. The land  
trust is still in the planning  
stages so it is useful to attend one  
of the weekly meetings for all the  
details; the meetings rotate house  
to house; call for location.  

news, analysis, interviews & poetry  
$5.00 yr. ($10.00 inst./overseas)  
$1.00 single issue  
THE TIDE COLLECTIVE, 1005 Ocean Ave.  
#B, Santa Monica, Calif, 90403  
(213) 839-7254  

Colorado  
Anthology  
Needs Poets  

Kathy Riley  

Colorado women poets are encouraged to submit entries to Woman-  
thology, a planned poetry anthology by, for and about women.  

Theme of the book centers around  
how each poet views her own process  
of acquiring self-knowledge and  
power over her life, how she sees  
that struggle tied to the lives of  
other women, and how she views the  
process of creating the She in this  
society.  

Publishers and co-editors of the  
book are Kathy Riley, a member of  
the BMR collective, and Janet Yench,  
a Littleton School bus driver who  
will soon publish a small volume of  
her own poetry. Both of them see  
the book as a way to make publica-  
tion more accessible to women who  
cannot afford or don't want to self-  
publish, and as a way to bring fine  
women's poetry to public attention.  

Each poet whose work is included  
in the book will be expected to con-  
tribute $25 each to the cost of the  
book. (Tentative size of the project  
is 150 pages, perfect bound, con-  
taining the poetry of about 50  
women. Illustrator of the book is  
Leslie Aguillard, an artist and blue  
grass musician.  

Contributors will receive 10 cop-  
ies of the book and an equal share  
of any book sale earnings, after ex-  
penses.  

Writers are asked to submit up to  
five poems and a short autobiography.  
All submissions and inquiries should  
be accompanied by a stamped, self-  
addressed envelope. Deadline for  
entries is March 15, 1977, with pub-  
lication planned for summer.  

Entries should be sent to Woman-  
thology, 890 E. Oakwood Avenue,  
Littleton, Colorado 80121.  

NEWIEROMOUYIN,  

two new albums  

proudly presents  

BeBeKRoche  

danceable Latin, jazz, rhythm and blues  

an album of poetry by Pat Parker and Judy Grann  

and distributing two new albums  
Casse Culver: Three Gypsies  
Berkeley Women's Music Collective  
Also available  
Meg Christian: I Know You Know  
Cris Williamson: The Changer and the Changed  
Kay Gardner: Mooneircles  
All albums $5.50 plus 55 mailing each, from Olivia Records.  

Dept. 8, PO Box 70237, Los Angeles, CA 90070 Also on sale  
at feminist and record stores  

colorado distributor: Annie Ewoldt.  
1233 Ogden #312, Denver, Colorado 80218  

832-7633. Call or write for information.  

“painfully courageous” — Small Press Review  

“literally beautiful and exciting” — Women’s Press  

“a worthy edition to any feminist library” — Big Mama Rag  

“strong and savage” — Booklegger  

“warm and icy cold and fantastically funny” — Albatross  

“raises essential questions we all need to confront . . .” — Chomo-Uri  
“an absolute joy to read” — Lesbian Connection  

To the Man Reporter from the Denver Post:  
Lesbian Feminist poetry and humor by Chocolate Waters.  
Send $2.75 plus 30¢ postage to the author c/o Big Mama Rag,  

1724 Gaylord, Denver, CO 80206.  

— struggle  

a continuing forum  

Janine Carpenter  

One of the primary demands that has been made by the current women's  
movement is a woman's right to defend herself against physical attack.  
Since the beginnings of this movement scores of projects oriented around  
this demand have been established. Women's karate classes, rape crisis  
centers, self-defense workshops, educational campaigns, crisis lines, doc-  
uments, and demonstrations...the list goes on. But one aspect of self  
defense has only really emerged as a topic during the last few years and is  
still surrounded by confusion and controversy—that is the right of women  
to practice armed self-defense; to use guns.  

The issue surfaced on a serious level with the case of Inez Garcia, who  
shot to death the man who had raped her. She was found guilty of murder  
and we all got a real clear lesson in how women who fight back are going  
to be treated by the Man. It was the fact that she armed herself that  
really shook the big boys up, and we were left with choosing to continue  
with hatpins and fear or follow Inez's example in such numbers that we  
couldn't be stopped. As a movement, we have not yet made that decision.  

Guns are a serious topic and I am not mocking the real reservations many  
women have. But it is important for us to understand why the patriarchy  
wants us to have these reservations. It is also important for us to under-  
stand the class and race privileges that can figure into attitudes towards  
guns.  

First of all, going all the way back to the beginnings, it is more than  
interesting to note the gender divisions involved in building civilization.  
Women, because they were responsible for most of the food production, pro-  
cessing, and preparation, as well as most everything revolving around the  
home front, invented just about everything. (Don't believe the Mighty Hun-  
ter myth—if our ancestors had tried to live on what the Mighty Hunter had  
brought in, none of us would be here today.) Women were responsible for,  
among other things, architecture and the tools associated with that trade,  
tanning, weaving, the textile industry, every facet of agriculture, and the  
discovery of fire. Men, on the other hand, founded metallurgy, and used  
that science to invent weapons. They used them not so much for the Mighty  
Hunts as for a takeover of power—from women. (From Evelyn Reed's, The  
Evolution of Women, Ch. 4, "The Productive Record of Women.") Here we are  
thousands of years later and men still have the weapons and they still use  
them to maintain power, whether it be an individual attacker with a gun or  
a government with a fleet of bombers. They spring from the same root.  

There are certain behaviors demanded of women by the patriarchy. Among  
them are weakness, passivity, an ignorance of technical and mechanical pro-  
cesses. We are told over and over again that certain skills belong only  
to men and we should rely on them for strength. While the women's movement  
has done a good job of exposing this trash on most levels, our alternatives  
have not been explored or dealt with enough.  

One of the most publicized alternatives presented to us has been the mar-  
tial arts. This has certainly been a positive step, and I'm not trying to  
discourage any woman from learning that kind of self-defense. But there  
are drawbacks. There are groups of women who get left out of this situa-  
tion—the physically handicapped, older women, children. (Many women can  
only take advantage of karate classes if they are free or provide child-  
care, which varies from city to city.) Another problem is that this method  
isn't really effective until after years of training, although each lesson  
does help. Another major problem is that there are many situations where  
the chances of using karate are effectively slim—one woman against a group  
of men, an armed man, a woman with children, etc. There are, of course,  
other methods than karate and other weapons than guns. But, as written in  
the Women's Gun Pamphlet, "I am always a believer in weapons; hat pins,  
screwdrivers, clubs, switchblades, machetes, etc. But most women are not  
as skilled in fighting with such objects as men are, and it seems to me  
that the least effort a woman has to make to defend herself, the better off  
she is. It's too easy to freeze or hesitate out of fear—fear of the sit-  
uation and fear of hurting anyone—and weapons can be taken away. Most  
weapons, except for one that is rather hard to take away and can be used  
from a distance with the least possible effort—a gun. I've discovered  
that a gun makes the most sense. (A gun is also cheaper than a black belt.)  

Recognizing this, the next step is to break out of the patriarchy’s  
chains and analyze the fears behind arming ourselves. Again, from The Wo-  
men's Gun Pamphlet, "the first difficulty in obtaining gun consciousness is  
that most women are taught that guns are out of their realm of reality—  
like high paying jobs and self-respect. And that is part of the male pro-  
paganda—that women be afraid of guns—because men are afraid of women and  
a woman with a gun in her hand is indeed a wonderful fright."  

One group of women that were traditionally able to get out of some of the  
myths were rural women. Partly because survival was such a clear and basic  
issue, but more importantly because survival depended on men demanding that  
the role of country women be that of the strong capable nurturer. Our sur-  
vival in a hostile male environment must be as important to us as survival  
was to the pioneers.  

One criticism of the current women's movement that has not been adequately  
explored is it is primarily white and middle class. The discussion of guns  

More on page 14