6

Women in Russia

Big Mama Rag Vol.8 No.5

New Feminist Publications Emerging

On December 10, 1979, the first
feminist publication from an Eastern
European country appeared in Lenin-
grad. Titled Almanac: Women In Russia,
the clandestine publication was writ-
ten by a group of intellectuals and
artists who, due to censorship in the
Soviet Union, have not been allowed to
publish a second issue.

While reading the essays of the
Almanac, one is struck by the differ-
ence between the mildly expressed the-
oretical items on the one hand, and
stark descriptions of actual work-
day and prison conditions on the other.
However, it is difficult to make a
judgment of the text in light of our
relative ignorance of conditions in
the Soviet Union.

Some of the articles describe the
heavy workload of Soviet women. As in
other industrialized countries, while
men pursue only their jobs and are
otherwise generally occupied with
drinking, women have to work double
shifts. During the day they hold down
their full-time jobs, usually at les-
ser positions than men, and in the
evenings they take care of the house
and the children. The women spend a
good part of their time standing in
store lines, and mothers have to take
care of sick children at home, since
children are apparently poorly cared
for in the childcare clinics. The men,
however, boast of official equal rights
for women, while leaving them
to deal with these problems alone.
Given this situation, the women (or at
least a few of the Almanac authors)
tend to see men only as troublesome
and unnecessary parasites.

Mysticism and an emphasis on women's
"sorrow" are prevalent in the Almanac.
An essay by Tatiana Goritceva epito-
mizes this feeling. Here the Virgin
Mary is described as the "purest embod-
iment of men and women", as “the only
pure one, the only one that knows no
vulgar voluptuousness, no physical
voluptuousness." It is difficult to
determine whether the essay is meant
as satire or whether these theories
are shared by the authors and are a
reaction to government treatment of
Christians. The editors put forth
neither anti-capitalist nor far-reach-
ing feminist goals, but instead harbor

a great many illusions about parlia-
mentary government and capitalism. This
is indicated in a passage in the in-
troduction, where the woman question
is presented as being nearly resolved
in Europe, especially in France where
four women sit on the cabinet, and at
least that many participate in the
European Parliament.

The Almanac has received enormous
publicity in the Western European
women's press, in spite of the fact
that its content has little in common
with the women's movement in the West.
Neither the criticism of the undemo-
cratic handling of the authors by the
Soviet authorities, nor the call for
solidarity with the persecuted Almanac
women are sufficient explanations for
so much attention. But the Almanac
does fit well into the political land-
scape of anti-communist sentiments and
criticisms of Stalin. At the same time,
it nurses bourgeois feminism and the
thesis that the patriarchal oppression
of women is independent of different
societal and economic systems.

The following is an excerpt from a
book concerning women in Soviet prisons.
It was translated into French by the
same publishing house which published
translations from the Almanac. The
style and content of the text are si-
milar to the ideas presented in the
Almanac. The book is based on inter-
views with two women - Zoe, 23 years
old, and Valeria, 20 years old - and
was compiled by an author who also
contributed to the Almanac. The author
prefaced her work by saying: "These
conversations provided the material for
my text. I would ask that the reader
not consider their remarks as ‘false
information' intended to slander some-
one, but rather as an account of a
private conversation, a noting of per-
sonal and subjective opinions and
"rough" judgments.”

A number of statutes are used to de-
fine the activities of the young wo-
men found in prison. The charges usual-
ly read like the following: "Wanders
without aim from neighborhood to

Women in Portugal
The Six Years Following The Revolution

It is not because of any specific
event that we now talk about Portuguese
women. Six years after the revolution,
it is time to stop and think about
the recent developments in Portugal
and specifically, to ask ourselves
what has happened to the women who actively participated in the 1974 revo-
lution. One may mention that the coun-
try was run for a few weeks by a woman.
But Maria de Lourdes Pintassilgo did
not become the head of the fifth post-
revolutionary government because she
was elected by the people or because
Portuguese men are especially open to-
wards women. She was willing to take
the job since the men who had been
assigned to that position did not want
to tire themselves before the December
1979 elections. So then what has hap-
pened for women during the last six
years?

During the last years of fascism,
numerous Western European and U.S.
industrial companies settled in and
around Lisbon, and provided jobs for
women. The companies profited from
the cheap labor, the women being un-
educated and unskilled. After a short
time, they were trained on the job.
With five years of exploitation, the
women became completely exhausted, but
the employers did not have to worry
about finding replacements.

In 1974, workers demanded higher
wages, paid vacations and paid over-
time. In the South, women occupied
deserted farmland and started cooper-
atives. Women helped to organize much
needed health centers where the first
abortions were performed, even
though the anti-abortion law of 1886
was still in effect. Women also start-
ed counseling centers giving them the
opportunity to get to know each other
and discuss their problems. After
numerous demonstrations, women finally
succeeded in legalizing divorce, but
abortions are still illegal.

In 1974, the French-owned SOGANTAL
factory was occupied by its 40 women
workers. When they took control over
production, it was not only a success
for the women involved, but also for
the entire working class.

When one of these women in Lisbon
was asked years later if the politi-
cal struggle had changed her life as
a woman, she answered, "Of course. It
completely changed my life as it did
for many other women. Some dropped
out early because they couldn't stand
up to the pressure from their husbands
and families. You can't wipe out old
values, moral prejudices and taboos
in a day. And if you try to, you will
most likely be excluded from the family.
And the family is so important for the
Portuguese.

"It is very unusual for a Portuguese
neighborhood in Leningrad; leads a
life of vagrancy and parasitism; lives
off public charity; refuses all social-
ly useful activity; only took a job
in order to escape."

Zoe’s Story

"The 38 people in our cell began a
hunger strike, demanding that the ad-
ministration improve the prison condi-
tions. Normally, they pay no attention
to such strikes - but this time it
was the whole cell. We demanded the
following: that the cell be aired;
that the cell's rations be increased
since there were three times too
many people in it; that the nurse come
more than once every three days; that
we have more than one shower a week;
and that we receive better treatment
from the guards. We were determined to
show that this wasn't a whim of a few
delinquents, but a strike provoked by
the indignation of all.

I was suspected of being one of the
instigators and brought to the Work
section, then put in solitary confine-
ment. According to the regulations,
you can only be put in for five days.
I was given a paper to sign, stating
that I would be in for five days
(as a disciplinary measure). Although
you're supposed to sign, I refused
since I knew my signature would allow
them to make my overall sentence
longer. After my five days, I was re-
turned to my cell. But conditions
remained the same.”

Valeria’s Story

"I was put into solitary for the
same kind of reasons. It was 40° be-
low zero (centigrade) and on top of
that they turned on the ventilation in
the cells to prevent conversations.

We were fed every other day, and
weren't even given bread on the second
day. After my sentence in solitary was
up, I ended up in the hospital, com-
pletely exhausted. The hospital is a
cell like any other, except that the
diet is a little better and you have
medical care.

After my prison term was over, when
I finally went home, I was seriously
ill for a month and a half, with a
constant fever and nightmares about
prison. My family had to constantly
call the emergency services for me.
All this in spite of my age and a
strong constitution - it was the re-
sult of physical and psychological
exhaustion from prison."

Q: Why do women go to prison? What is
the population of women in prison?

A: We met mainly young women there. A-
bout 80% of the women were under 30.
A lot of them were convicted of parasi-
tism (for having been without a job
for several months). Many are there
for not having a "fixed residence.”
The charges of "refusal to care for
self" and "refusal of medical care" are
also frequent. There are also Soviet
gypsies, convicted of robbery and the
like.

Q: How do women become without "fixed
residence”?

A: Some, especially the young ones, at-
tempt to escape registration. If you’ve
left your place of registration
(that is, where they assign you a job
and housing), you lose the right to
find yourself registered work else-
where. And often, people can't and
don't want to go back home to the pro-
vinces. So they stay in the city, with-
out work. You try and find work and
get registered, which isn't easy. If
the police pick up someone without re-
gistration, they give them a warning.
Three warnings and you can get up to
one year in prison for vagrancy. There
are also the "train women", who some-
times manage to live several years in
the train stations. They make friends
with travelers, hoping to get some-
thing to eat or a place to spend the
night. Some "do business" with their
bodies, often they turn to drink. What
it amounts to is a question of survi-
val...

Q: And what does the charge "refusal
to care for self" mean?

MORE ON PAGE 25

my freedom. So I left him. I have to
admit that this separation was not
easy for me. It took a lot of courage
and strength.

"Also I became a member of MES
(Movement of Left Socialists). But I
soon discovered that the men of MES
are very progressive in theory, but
in reality they act very differently.
Their behavior towards women has not
changed at all.

“There were also problems in the
political discussions. Often I could
not follow them, although I was fam-
iliar with the problems being discus-
sed, because the language was so alien
to me, so removed. That made me feel
insecure, and I felt inferior because
I was a worker. Despite all that, I
did not give up courage.

"It was not until the coup from the
right in November 1975 that I really
felt discouraged. After the coup, many
of the reforms were stopped, the left
was purged, the health centers were
shut down. Many of the factory and
land owners who had left the country
after the revolution in 1974, returned
to Portugal and reclaimed their "pro-
perty." Many worker-controlled factor-
ies and farm cooperatives were given
back to their former owners, sometimes
by force.

"And now, four years later, the fear
and insecurity in each of us is typical
of the general situation. Since the
coup, conditions for the working class
have deteriorated. In the factories,
"disagreeable" people get fired.
People are afraid of losing their
jobs, they are intimidated, and that
shows on all levels. And politically?
We have suffered setbacks and many
people gave up. Maybe that will pass.
I am still determined to fight for my
own interests and for other women."

(Reprinted from Newsfront International,
translated from Courage, a West
German monthly, January 1980)