letters home to mama

Responses to Franchild

(Editor's note: BMR's editorial on
"Just What Can Feminists Afford" will
appear next month.)

Greetings:

I really liked Marina Franchild's
article Just What Can Feminists
Afford? and want to purchase the
April and May issues so I'll have my
own copy. So I'm sending money and
hoping you can do that.

Do you suppose she'd mind, or would
you, my reviewing the article for our
paper here in Sonoma County: Runes?

Thanks,
Jane Sipe
Santa Rosa, Calif.

To BMR:

Marina Franchild's perception of her
"feminist duty" is strange indeed.

Her two-part article, "Just What Can
Feminists Afford?," presents what is
in effect, if not intent, a ludicrous
and venomous attack on four lesbian
feminists, and she attempts to justify
the attack by calling it political
discussion.

Regrettably, Franchild is not the
first person, nor will she be the
last, who seems determined to publicly
impugn the motives and to attempt to
undermine the credibility of those in
the movement she does not approve of.
In the final analysis, the Franchild
article reveals little about Charlotte
Bunch, June Arnold, Patty Bowman, and
Bertha Harris, but much about the dy-
namics of trashing within the move-
ment. Thoughtful analysis, respectful
disagreement, and principled criticism
can serve a legitimate purpose. Thinly
disguised attempts at discrediting
substance through personal attack
serve no good purpose.

Inside BMR

COLLECTIVE

¥ culture: Dona Calacone
Finances: Corinne Coston, Lynn
Office: Dona Calacone
Local News:
Advertising: Sue Goding
National/International:
Production Coordination:

CONTRIBUTORS

Judy Barlow,
Lynn, Susanna Smith, Corinne Coston

While the length alone of the Fran-
child article precludes a comprehen-

sive response, I do wish to make a
few comments.

It is quite probable that many, if
not most, of those reading the Fran-
child article have not read the
January 2, 1977, New York Times art-
icle, Creating a Women's World, in

which Lois Gould interviewed Bunch,

Arnold, Bowman, and Harris. Therefore,
many do not know to what extent their
remarks have been taken out of context,
blown out of proportion, misrepresented,
or otherwise distorted. Additionally,
Franchild has attacked those four
lesbian feminists primarily on
the basis of that interview; there is
a de facto denial of the political
history of the women.

I find it astonishing—and ridiculous
that anyone could challenge the right
of the four women to present their
views on lesbian feminism, and to
challenge that right by saying they
are "closet lesbians." Charlotte
Bunch has, for example, contributed
years of work on the development of
lesbian feminist theory and analysis.
I am amazed that anyone could accuse
her of being a) a closet lesbian;

b) anti-lesbian; and c) elitist and
opportunistic. Not content with
misinterpreting virtually every re-
mark attributed to Bunch in the
interview, Franchild proceeds to
pose an outrageous set of questions
that more than hint that Bunch
might be an agent. Arnold, Bowman,
and Harris are variously accused
of insensitivity, using privilege
to oppress women, catering to the
establishment, and worse.

The accusatory tone is excessive
in Franchild's article; the demands
absurd. I, for one, have no need

Susanna Smith, Sue Goding

Vicki Piotter, Bobbe Ross, Pandoura, Jan Mellard, Bev Renick, Constance
Perenyi, Paula Williams, Sarah Elizabeth, Karen Martin, Wendy Steele,
Gabriella Uhlar, Deirdre Reilly, Karen Peterson, Jane, Ronna Keil

Kathy Riley, Andrea Chesman, Deb Taylor, Clair Kaplan,

The cover is a picture of Ronna Keil in whiteface, taken by Karen Martin.

Big Mama Rag is a feminist periodical published monthly for women by

Big Mama Rag, Inc., a non-profit corporation.

Manuscripts and artwork

may be submitted to 1724 Gaylord, Denver, CO 80206. Deadline for material
will be announced each month in Where We're At. Please enclose a stamped,

self-addressed envelope with all manuscripts.
We reserve the right to edit all mat-
erial accepted for unsolicited material.
No responsibility is accepted for length.

Subscription rates are $6 per year for individual

subscriptions in the U.S., $10 in Canada, and $12 to institutions. BMR

is free to women in prison and in mental institutions.
It is available at the New Alexandria Library
and is also available on microfilm through

This publication
the Lesbian Women in Chicago
Bell and Howe. We are in-

dexed by the Alternative Press Center, P.O. Box 7229, Baltimore, Maryland 21218,

Wednesday 1-3 pm; and Thursday 5-7 pm.

available from Sue 333-7656.

Office hours at BMR are Monday 10 am - 1 pm and 7-9 pm;

Advertising information is

to review Charlotte Bunch's former
job description, nor shall I condemn
Daughters, Inc. for mailing books
through the U.S. Post Office.

I do not find Franchild's assertion
that she “did not enjoy having to
write all this" convincing. Frankly,
it sounded as though she wished,
minimally a public tar-and-feathering
of the four women interviewed
because they do not measure up to
her somewhat puzzling standards. I
also found her “off-with-her-head"
attitude towards Lois Gould strident
and extreme. It all seems frighten-
ingly reminiscent of previous
public trashings of other movement
women.

I would agree with Marina Franchild
that issues such as racism, classism,
heterosexual privilege, etc., need to
be raised and need to be discussed
and confronted in our movement. Wo-
men like Charlotte Bunch have been
raising such issues for years. I do
not feel betrayed by Bunch, Arnold,
Bowman, and Harris. To the contrary,
I am but one of many lesbian feminists
who have valued and respected (and
continue to do so) the political
and artistic contributions made by
the four women—and by Quest: A Fem-
inist Quarterly and Daughters Inc.

In sisterhood,
Kay Whitlock

Note: Copies of this letter have been
sent to Charlotte Bunch and to Daughters Inc.

Questions?
Write Us

Dear Sisters,

Hi! Was pleased to see your

latest issue of BMR and want to

give you support for all the work
you continually do.

However, I was disappointed to see
no coverage of Rita D. Brown. I

had sent you an update a while back.
Perhaps it got to you too late for
publication, or perhaps it didn't
get to you at all. So, I'm enclosing
additional copies of info with
hopes some or all of it will appear
in the next issue. If there is
some other reason why the info isn't
being printed, please contact me.
Thank you,

Dale Weiss

Eugene, Ore.

(Editors note - BMR is in the pro-
cess of researching and writing an
original article from first-hand
interviews that will appear next
month. Thanks for writing and
look for our article in July of
1978)

Big Mama Rag Vol. 6, No. 6

Open Letter

To All The Women Of Denver:

Well, you missed all the workshops
presented by the women's groups of
Denver at Woman to Woman Center. There are 15-25 women, of
course, who would take offense upon
reading that statement because they
attended the workshops. (To you 15-25
women, please disregard.)

Yeah, I said 15-25. Where were the
rest of you? OK, I know you work all
day, doing whatever you all do; you
work 400% harder than any man just
to stay alive, and at the end of the
day it's really hard to drag your-
self back out for another meeting.

One of the goals of the oppressors
of women is to keep us working so
hard that we're too tired to meet
with our sisters, therefore we can't
cause too much interference with
"the way things are." Then, there
are those of us who are going to
meetings and are overwhelmed by the
amount of energy the movement—the
revolution requires.

I want to tell you the workshops were
the meetings you shouldn't have missed.
We learned in Basic Feminism I that
the oppressors work to keep us divided.
The workshops were the first attempt to
bring the women of Denver together. We
talked philosophy, politics, feelings—
like anger, frustration; we laughed
& moaned - we criticized. We talked
action. One womyn said “we're all get-
ting to be friends"? Most of all we
learned from one another. It was an
infant step but it was sure exciting.

The womyn who came and those who
presented are the heart of the revo-
lution in Denver. I hear some of you
groan. Well, if that frightens you
come to the next workshop and groan
there.

MORE ON PAGE 11

HAPPY HOUR: 6 to 8 pm weekdays with
MIDNIGHT SPECIAL 12 pm to 1 am Fridays
and Saturdays.

SPAGHETTI NIGHT: Every Wednesday,
all you can eat for $1.50. Check out
the pool tournaments.

Tues-Fri: 5 pm to 2 am
Saturday: 4 pm to 2 am
Sunday: 4 pm to midnight.