IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

hot briefs...

Hotel Stonewalls

Women from 23 organizations picketed the St. Francis hotel in downtown San Francisco, bringing attention to management's refusal to respond to employee demands for adequate security in the hotel. The groups were supporting the demands of a worker's safety committee founded in the hotel following the rape and robbery of a room service waitress. The committee had made proposals ranging from an option for women employees to wear pants on the job instead of the mini skirts now required, to self-defense classes, and two-way radios for employees who work alone at night. Management has been adamantly resisting these demands.

-Union Wage

Coal Mining Women

More than 11% of new coal miners hired last year were women, the highest percentage since women were first hired in 1973. Following a series of lawsuits, the coal companies agreed to hire more women. The increases have come at a time when the industry is in a downturn, and thus women's organizations hope for more dramatic gains when coal production picks up. "When women constitute 50% of all miners hired in a given year," the Coal Employment Project, an anti-discrimination organization, said, "we will know that we have won the war with the coal industry management."

~The Guardian

Missed the Point

The federal government has finally come up with guidelines which will direct chemical companies on how to protect workers from reproductive hazards without excluding women from certain jobs. The guidelines set up elaborate rules for whether women, men, or both sexes should be excluded from certain work sites. What the guidelines fail to do is order chemical companies to remove the hazards altogether, so that neither women, men, nor unborn children are endangered. Chemical companies claim that it is impossible—that is, too expensive—to cut down worker exposure to chemicals.

Pill Producers Protected

A Stockholm, Sweden court has found a manufacturer of birth control pills not liable in the death of 28-year-old Anita Lindstrom. Lindstrom died of a blood clot in the brain in 1968 after she had been taking the pill manufactured by the Schering Company of West Germany. Her family claimed that Schering was negligent in not letting pill-takers know its product might cause blood clots. The Stockholm court refused to award damages, ruling that while birth control pills in some cases can cause blood clots, there was no proof that Schering's pill actually caused the clot that killed Lindstrom.

~Boston Women's Health Packet

Equal Rights/Unequal Pay Propagation Propaganda

Linda Jean Miller of Upper Marlboro, Maryland makes $115 a week—$5,980 a year. Her former husband earns $15,000 a year. But for eight hours last March she was in jail for falling behind on her child support payments. Robert Woods, a circuit court judge in the Washington suburb county, ordered her to jail because she was $2,000 behind in her weekly $30 support payment to her husband who won custody of their two children when they divorced. Miller said she was "shocked" by her stint in jail and said she fell behind on the payments because she didn't make enough money. The judge who ordered her release told her, "The Equal Rights Amendment means rights, but it also means responsibility."

-New Women's Times

Moon Masque by Lois Mailou Jones, 1971.

Under His Thumb

Women in Vancouver, BC staged a protest when folk guitarist John Fahey "blessed" the city with a performance. What did they not like about this well-meaning entertainer? Quotes from John, like the following which appeared in the text called “The Best of John Fahey": "You must create an intimate relationship with your guitar. Getting over your fear of it is much like a romantic sexual conquest. It is no mere poetic metaphor when some songs refer to a guitar as though it were a woman. Mastering a guitar is really very similar to mastering a woman, and when you fail to master it, like when you fail to master a woman, you have the same feelings of humiliation and violence."

ULTRA Sexist

Broadsheet, a feminist magazine from New Zealand, regularly points out examples of sexist advertising in their feature entitled Hogwash. Here's just one: "No one likes changing tires! And punctures always occur when you least want them... when it's wet, or at night, or when you're in a hurry, or when you've left your jack at home. ULTRA SEAL means no worry, getting yourself uptight, or your clothes in a mess. Ideal for your wife's car too. No more waiting on lonely, dark country roads for a helpful male (or goodness knows what these days) to come along and change the tire. ULTRA SEAL is the best insurance against flat tires we know."

Ain’t Gonna Marry

Nancy Drew will be 50 years old next month. Drew was the hero of millions of flashlight-under-the-covers readers who closely followed each of her mystery escapades. Nancy's creator, Harriet Adams, who is now 87 years old, said, "Fifty years ago Nancy Drew was considered independent. Today she is considered liberated." The author added that Nancy will never get married because Ned Nickerson, Nancy's suitor, can't corner her long enough to ask her. And, says Adams, "I don't plan to give him the opportunity."

-Hersay

Californian Robert Graham is upfront about the controversial social experiment he supervises in the backyard of his estate near San Diego. "My slogan is," says Graham, "the more intelligent you are, the more children you should have." The goal is simple: solicit sperm donations from male "geniuses," present them to “intelligent” women for artificial insemination and presto—create, as one newspaper dubbed them, “super-babies." Graham notes that the motivation driving his project is to facilitate "more offspring of our most creative men." The LA Times disclosed last month that three Nobel prize-winning men have contributed to Graham's sperm bank. Dr. William Shockley, one of the three donors, endorses the project heartily, saying it is important to "increase people at the top of the population."

-The Guardian

Sexist Sperm

Meanwhile, on the topic of male genius and Nobel prizes for such creative men, Lilith, the Jewish Women's Magazine, had this to say about Isaac Bashevis Singer, who recently won the Nobel Prize for Literature. "Singer's formula (in his books) seems to read: men serve God; women serve men." They quote from his book Shadow of a Crib: “Who can understand the feminine soul? Even an angelic woman shelters within herself devils, imps and goblins... It is all part of the perversity so characteristic of the female's nature." Lilith says for Singer, the natural perversity of women lies chiefly in female sexuality, which he seems to regard as a natural "flaw" in women that poses a constant threat to men. They must ever protect themselves against it. Big Mama Rag says, "Spare us his sperm."

Patriarchal Logic

Scientists, oil companies and the Canadian government are planning to force-feed polar bears capsules of crude oil. The bears will later be slaughtered. The point of the experiment is to determine whether or not oil spills are dangerous to the bears' well-being.

-Through the Looking Glass

Danger Drug

Researchers at the University of California School of Medicine at San Diego report that the drug DES has been found to cause premature birth and death in infancy to the grandchildren of women who were prescribed that drug to prevent miscarriage. The research reports that among the DES-exposed women, 40% of the babies born were premature, and 25% of the babies died. Of the women who had never been exposed to the drug, none had babies who were born prematurely and no infants died.

-Hersay

Typists’ Toxin

One chemical which is found in a number of products used in offices is Trichlorethylene (TCE), which, in high concentration, can cause unconsciousness and even death. It is contained in stencil fluid and liquid paper, the thinner for Liquid Paper made almost entirely of this solvent. TCE is a toxic substance especially hazardous in areas where ventilation is poor—a problem common to many offices. TCE produces symptoms similar to being drunk: dizziness, confusion, irritability, loss of muscle control, nausea, vomiting, drowsiness, and headaches. TCE was shown to cause liver cancer in animals and is now suspected of causing cancer in humans.

-Kinesis

4 * » *

= ts i
<¥e, Cte OW es YES gNS> s4r8

-Workers World

Quick to Knife

The latest horror devised by the male medical profession is prophylactic mastectomies. These words mean that some surgeons are removing healthy breasts from women, in case in the future they might get breast cancer. Dr. Rueben Snyderman, head of plastic and reconstructive surgery at Rutgers Medical School, suggests prophylactic mastectomy for women with premalignant lesions, cancer in the other breast, or “for those who are emotionally crippled because of constant fear of cancer development." After mastectomies, women frequently have breast reconstruction, a procedure which itself is very risky.

-Broadsheet

Save Our Breasts

A last-minute amendment to a bill dealing with the issue of patients’ rights in Massachusetts has brought breast cancer management under state law. In addition to general provisions on the right to informed consent, the amendment singles out breast cancer by stipulating that “in case of a patient suffering from any form of breast cancer, the patient has the right to complete information on all alternative treatments which are medically viable." Physicians objected to the law on the grounds that it eliminates the flexibility needed by doctors in addressing the emotions and interests of the individual woman. Jane Spilka, representing the committee that tacked the breast amendment onto the patients’ bill of rights legislation, said that it had originally been introduced as a separate piece of legislation "on behalf of radical mastectomy patients who had become politicized over reports of unnecessary mastectomy."

-Boston Women's Health Packet

Consumed By Abuse

Gastric stapling, described as the "last hope for the obese” by the New Haven Register, is a procedure in which the body cavity is opened and a row of staples inserted into the patient's stomach. The operation reduces the stomach's capacity for solid food from 2 quarts to five tablespoons; any larger intake causes great pain, with a risk of tearing the staples open. 80% of those seeking gastric stapling are women. The New Haven Women's Center Newsletter said that women's oppression in patriarchal society punishes women who physically deviate from men's ideal. Only men are allowed to consume; women are supposed to be consumed. The newsletter also said there is a direct relation between atrocity "cures" for obese women and the generalized violence against women sanctioned by patriarchal society—men who beat women to make them behave can be compared to doctors who operate on women to make them "behave" around food.

-New Women's Times
BISPUNT

-Broadsheet