Sexism in Children’s

Fran Day

The public schools in the United  
States spread sexism in many ways;  
one of the ways is through the litera-  
ture that is found in the school li-  
braries and on classroom bookshelves.  
Sexist literature not only makes val-  
ue judgments on the basis of sex but  
introduces and reinforces stereo-  
types that purport to characterize  
"differences" between girls and boys.

CRITERIA FOR DETECTING SEXISM

Numbers: Are girls and boys re-  
presented in equal numbers? Numerous  
studies conclude that females are  
grossly underrepresented in the pic-  
tures and content of all areas of  
children's literature. "The ratio  
of books about boys to books about  
girls is nearly four to one." (Little  
Miss Muffet Fights Back) A ratio of  
11 to 1 was found in the pictures in  

a study of award-winning picture books.  

The females that are included are sel-  
dom cast in starring roles: they are  
often token or unobtrusive. Support-  
ers of this situation defend it by  
claiming that girls will read anything  
but boys avoid stories that have girls  
as the main characters. Boys have  
been taught to devalue girls. How-  
ever, both girls and boys enjoy read-  
ing about heroines and heroes who are  
active, inventive, and whole. There  

can be no justification for omitting  
girls from children's literature; no  
excuse is warranted for a practice  
that contributes to the crippling of  
half our youth. Girls must be fairly  
represented numerically.

Activity level: Are girls and  
boys presented as whole persons with  

a full range of activities portrayed  
for both? Studies show that much  
greater physical, intellectual, and  
emotional strength are attributed to  
males in children's literature. Girls  
are cast in passive, submissive roles  
while boys are depicted as active, in-  
dependent, and inventive. Illustrations  
and content present the sub-  
ordinate, less valued role of the fe-  
male while stressing the adventurous,  
admirable role of the male.  
Even those rare books with an intri-  
guing heroine often either make it  
clear that she is the notable excep-  
tion (all the other girls in the book  
are "normal") or push the heroine  
through a contrived metamorphosis in  
which she succumbs to the demands of  
womanhood and relinquishes her spunky  
ways to become a "proper young lady."

Children's literature must portray  
nonstereotyped girls who are indepen-  
dent and confident, who meet challenges  
with courage and competence and who  
are interesting individuals seeking  
their own unique personhood.

Occupation: Are women depicted in  
a rich variety of occupational roles?  
Studies show that most children's  
books portray women in one of two  
ways: 1) as housewives and mothers,  
ministering to their families' needs,  
or 2) as semi-professionals engaged  
in a limited range of occupations tra-  
ditionally considered appropriate for  
females. Noticeably absent are women  
politicians, executives, scientists,  
doctors, lawyers, construction workers,  
pilots, etc. In short, positions  
associated with power, prestige, or  
wealth are held by men. This narrow  
depiction of female occupations sug-  
gests to girls—sometimes subtly, but  
often blatantly—that they are limited  
solely on the basis of gender as to  
what jobs they might do.

Occupations must be gender-free;  
women should be depicted in a wide  
variety of occupations. Fathers and  
mothers should be shown in their roles  
as parents with shared responsibility  
for care of the children and house;  
this portrayal as parents should be  
balanced with the other facets of  
their lives. Single parents, child-  
free couples, lesbian couples, unmar-  
ried adults, co-parenting groups, and  
other alternative lifestyles should be  
represented in a positive manner.

Language: Is language used to en-  
hance the concept of personhood?  
Language has long been used as a tool  
for imprisonment in sex-role con-  
straints. A spinster is often an ob-  
ject of derision and pity; a bachelor  
is to be envied. The universal pronoun,  
until recently, has been “he"; however,  
studies have indicated that children  
do not understand the generic "he";  
to them it means males. Language that  
indicates bias should be avoided; it  
should operate to communicate equal  
valuing of both sexes.

IMPACT OF SEXIST LITERATURE

That children's literature may  
encourage the development of sexist  
attitudes is well worth determining.  
The impact of literature "upon the  
development of all young children  
seems to be very clear in the current re-  
search on the formative years. There  
is a great amount of research that  
shows that literary materials can de-  
velop and shape attitudes of children  
toward themselves and others." (Yawkey)

One of the key ways that girls  
learn to undervalue themselves is  
through the books they read. Litera-  
ture is influential in the condition-  
ing of girls and boys regarding their  
traditional and expected gender roles.  
Children, through their reading,  
assimilate attitudes which have nega-  
tive, narrow connotations regarding  
the female role. These false, meager  
and derogatory images of females are  
detrimental to the healthy develop-  
ment of young readers of both sexes.  
Sexism in children's literature im-  
poses restrictions on girls in the  
development of their aspirations, and  
thus, their self-concepts. Their  
attitudes toward themselves are dis-  
torted and limited by their sexist  
environment which includes the books  
they read.

WHAT PROGRESS?

Analysis of recent educational  
professional journals and documents  
indicates an increasing awareness of  
sexism in children's literature. Num-  
erous articles have appeared criti-  
cizing the print environment and call-  
ing for change. Has the growing  
criticism of and awareness of sexism  
in children's literature produced a  
metamorphosis in the books that are  
being published? The answer is, of  
course, NO! "There were no signifi-  
cant differences observed between old  
and new picture books." (Yawkey) In  
spite of all the studies and discus-  
sions, the publishers have made al-  
most no changes. Little or no pro-  
gress has been made toward non-sexism  
in recent children's literature. A  
few exceptions exist; these rare  
books are often described and praised  
in articles dealing with sexism in  
literature for children. (Editor’s  
note: The children's books at Woman  
to Woman Bookcenter have been select-  
ed because they are non-sexist.)

COMBATTING SEXISM

How can we combat sexism in chil-  
dren's literature? In light of the  
great inequalities to be overcome,  
we need an aggressive stance on this  
issue. Feminists propose that we  
concentrate on books featuring strong  
females in order to compensate for  
the existing injustices. Some educa-  
tors are worried about going too far  
and becoming too extreme. But it is  
imperative that children have choices.  
Society has exerted such a strong in-  
fluence on sex-role behavior, that  
it is extremely difficult to say  
whether a certain role is a person's  
true option or whether that person  
has simply been socialized into  
thinking that it is.

Concern about the quality of books  
written for the main purpose of pre-  
senting non-sexist literature has  
been voiced by children's literature  
specialists. However, a book can  
certainly possess both literary qua-  
lity and an accurate, fair portrayal  
of females. Another problem centers  
around the fear of censorship. Femi-  
nists do not advocate censorship;  
they simply demand the adoption of  
non-sexism as one of the criteria for  
the evaluation and selection of lit-  
erature.

Unfortunately, many schools can  
not "afford" to replace their book  
collections. They must make do with  
the sexist books they own. It is up  
to educators and parents to provide  
the disclaimers and counter-activi-  
ties. Thus, the prevalence of sex-  
ism must first be recognized by the  
people who work with children. Materials  
are being developed to ac-  
quaint adults with sexism and tech-  
niques for combatting it. There is  
a tremendous amount of resistance;  
school administrators are a part of  
the patriarchy and as such, resist  
any changes that might jeopardize  
their positions.

Individual and group response to  
bookstores, public and school li-  
braries, authors, and publishers is  
needed. Let them know what you  
think about individual books. Task  
forces and community groups have  
pressured schools and made some  
gains. District and state policy  
statements and guidelines have been  
largely ineffective; they are often  
used to gloss over the actual exis-  
tence of sexism.

CONCLUSIONS

Changes in children's literature  
will not solve the whole problem of  
sexism; sexism is too deeply engrain-  
ed in our society. However, litera-  
ture for children should be one of  
the many areas that contribute to  
the healthy development of our youth.  
Literature should convey the concept  
of personhood; it should recognize  
and respect the human qualities of  
people not demeaned or distorted by  
sex-role stereotyping. Specifically,  
girls need to experience through  
literature that females have the  
right to develop into whole people  
in their own right; that they have  
the freedom to explore and make  
their own unique decisions. Girls  
should be encouraged through their  
reading to develop to their fullest  
physical, intellectual, and emotion-  
al potentials.

It is the obligation of all who  
work with children and/or books  
(publishers, authors, educators,  
parents, etc.) to agitate for a bias-  
free print environment for our youth.  
Our combined efforts can help pro-  
vide the impetus to correct the  
maligned image of the female in lit-  
erature for children. Until the  
patriarchy is overthrown, and sexism  
is completely eradicated, it is es-  
sential to push for the changes  
outlined in this article.

(Editor's note: Fran has been re-  
viewing children's books that are  
available at Woman to Woman Book-  
center for eight months. See the  
culture page for these reviews of  
non-sexist children's books.)

REFERENCES:

Feminists on Children's Media.  
Little Miss Muffet Fights Back.  
Yawkey, Margaret.  
"An Analysis of Forum."