Dead Flowers at Issue

Local Witch Sues Ex-employer for Discrimination Against Creed

Kate Sharp

Kathy Estes is a Denver woman who believes in and practices Wicca Craft. In October of 1972 she lost her job as cashier at the Brown Palace Hotel over her beliefs. Estes filed a complaint with the Colorado Civil Rights Commission that stated she had been discriminated against on the basis of creed. Her complaint and her demand to be reinstated and to be given back pay from October of 1972 were eventually heard by a Denver hearing examiner in March of 1976.

Estes' lawyer, James Wilson, opened the hearing by recapping the events surrounding the termination of Kathy Estes. The facts in the case are that another cashier at the hotel, Grace Johnson, received a number of pressed flowers through the mail, all of which arrived in envelopes that had no return address and contained nothing other than the flowers. The receipt of these flowers greatly disturbed Johnson who proceeded to contact her son. Johnson's son, in turn, turned the envelopes over to Robert Meeks, Director of Personnel and Security at the Brown Palace Hotel. Meeks then proceeded to ask all employees at the hotel to write out a job description, and compared the handwriting on all these documents with the handwriting on the envelopes.

Through this analysis he came to the conclusion that it was Estes who had sent Johnson the pressed flowers. Meeks called Estes into his office for an interview during which he questioned her as to whether or not she practiced witchcraft and also advised her to terminate her employment at the Brown Palace. Estes became irritated at this discussion, stormed out of Meeks' office, cursing him, and eventually filed a complaint with the Civil Rights Commission.

Your Witness

Lawyer for the Brown Palace, Robert Morris, then proceeded to add a few details to the story. Most notable of them was that Meeks had ruled the two handwriting samples identical on the basis of an “unusual looking small letter e” that was to be found on both the envelopes and Estes' job description. Morris then concluded that if Estes was going to claim that the hotel's actions were illegal, it was his duty to disprove that witchcraft is a creed by definition of Colorado statute.

From this point on, a number of witnesses were called and questioned by both lawyers. First was Meeks, who basically confirmed the facts as had been stated by both lawyers. Wilson also asked Meeks if he had gotten authority from the hotel management to terminate Estes solely on the basis of handwriting similarity. To this he replied affirmatively. Lastly, Wilson asked whether or not the tone of his interview with Estes could have led her to believe she would be terminated even if Meeks had not specifically terminated her at the time. To this Meeks also replied affirmatively.

Professional Analyst

The next witness was one of two expert witnesses presented in Kathy Estes' defense. Andrew Bradley, a professional document examiner, testified that in his belief, the address on the envelope containing the flowers and the job description written by Estes were definitely not samples of the same handwriting. Wilson asked Bradley about his qualifications as a handwriting analyst, to which Bradley replied that he had 155 hours of document examination and handwriting comparison courses and was presently teaching document examination at Community College.

Wilson asked Bradley why he did not believe the two sets of handwriting were the same. To this, Bradley gave long, involved and very technical testimony about the spatial, angle, and style differences between the two handwritings. Lastly, Bradley answered questions regarding the “unusual looking e” that Morris had mentioned. Bradley said that one in every 100 persons writes a similar e and that it was not enough evidence to make a similarity case on.

The next person on the witness stand was Grace Johnson, the woman who had received the pressed flowers in the mail. Wilson's most notable question to Johnson was, “What exactly is wrong with receiving pressed flowers in the mail?” To this Johnson replied, “Well, I just never received any such thing before.” There was some additional questioning that established that it was a well-known fact at the Brown Palace that Estes practiced witchcraft. And finally, Johnson testified that there had been no ill feelings between her and Estes prior to the pressed flower incident.

The next witness in the case was Kathy Estes' second expert witness, Sarah Cunningham. Cunningham is a high priestess, teacher of Wicca Craft at the university level, and author of a book on witchcraft called The Book of Law. Cunningham gave testimony on witchcraft as an established religion. She testified that her temple had been licensed as a legally incorporated church in the state of Oregon. She explained that witchcraft predates Christianity by 3,000 years and that it has a long history of strong moral principles.

Cunningham was then questioned by the lawyer for the Brown Palace. Morris asked if there was any legitimate place for hate spells or revenge in witchcraft. To this Cunningham replied that there definitely was not. She further added that, “The Law of Wicca is service unto Mankind and love.” Morris then asked if there was any significance to the receipt or sending of “dead flowers” (a term Morris insisted upon using throughout the hearing). To this Cunningham made the only humorous remark in the entire hearing. She said, “I've never heard of them having any ritual uses in Wicca Craft but I think they’re sometimes sent to show affection.”

Whose Flowers?

At this point Kathy Estes was brought forward as her own witness. Wilson's first question to her was, “Did you ever send Grace Johnson an envelope full of pressed flowers?” To this Estes answered simply, “No.” Additional questions were asked regarding the aforementioned meeting between Meeks and Estes. Again it was established that Estes’ practice of witchcraft and Meeks’ belief that it was Estes who sent the flowers that were the central issues at that meeting. Lastly, it was established that the only reprimand that Estes had ever received regarding her performance on the job was for having been late a few times.

Morris, lawyer for the Brown Palace, then asked Estes a few questions. Most of his questions involved a newspaper interview Estes had participated in a few days prior to the hearing. Morris read the article that included statements about Estes’ use of witchcraft and her family’s history in witchcraft. After reading the article, Morris asked if all the statements in the interview were accurate. Estes replied that they weren't and testified that she had contacted the Denver Post to try and have the misquotations corrected. Estes cited a few of the misquotations including the Post’s statement that her mother was satanistic. Morris asked Estes if she ever utilized witchcraft to get what she wanted. To this she answered yes, but said she didn’t believe in hurting anyone.

After all testimony was given, the hearing examiner asked both lawyers to write briefs which he could examine along with the testimony. He asked for briefs examining the questions of whether the complainant quit or was terminated, whether or not witchcraft falls under the definition of creed, and whether or not witchcraft was involved in Meeks’ decision to speak with Estes. A final decision on the hearing will most likely not be made for another five to six weeks, after which time the hearing examiner will have read all the transcripts and briefs and come to some sort of decision.

Committee Confident about New Trial

the phone. After they called, I got my gun and decided to go after them. I called my brother-in-law and told him what I was going to do. He tried to talk me out of it and I just hung up on him and went after them. I found them fighting again. Jiminez turned around and threw a knife at me, but I was just a little bit faster than him or else I would have been six feet under. When I shot at Jiminez, Luis kept coming after me and I kept shooting at him. Luis got away while I was shooting at Jiminez.

I got into the car and went to Alicia’s house and the police came there. When they took me to the police station they checked me for everything except rape. At the beginning I didn’t tell the police I had been raped. I did tell the chief of police and the people who were booking me that they tried to get fresh with me, they did something to me, because I couldn’t come straight out and say I was raped. I just tried to hint it.

Then they took me to the county jail and threw me in there as though I was a wino. I was all beat up but they didn’t check me for bruises or anything. When I tried telling the matrons that I had been raped, they told me they weren't there to hear my problems, they were there to hold me in custody. When they finally took me to the doctor, they said it was all in my mind, if I stopped thinking about it it would go away. LNS: How did other women get interested in your case? Did they just hear about it?

We got Charles Garry as my lawyer and while I was waiting for the trial to begin I went to live with his secretary and her two little girls. One was 5 and the other was 11. The little girls had been raped by a man when they were 1 and 7 years old. Their mother told me about the experience they went through. When they were raped their mother was next door and she heard them crying. I met many people who had been raped and have gone through the same thing and I saw that nothing was being done about it. There have been a lot of women who have been raped and they just encourage these things to keep on happening by keeping quiet and not saying anything. So they convinced me to publicize my case.

S.R.: It started a reaction. A whole lot of women have been starting to talk about their rapes. Before they were too ashamed. When Inez and the defense committee would talk on the radio or write articles, we'd get six-page letters from women, “I’m 50 years old, and I got raped once 20 years ago, and I’ve never told anybody but I’m telling you.”

When I was in prison, I got mail that I couldn’t keep up with, from women that never spoke about their rape, old women. Years and years just carrying that — that they'd been raped and they never told anyone. When they heard about my case, they wrote to me and they told me.

LNS: Did they feel encouraged by your action?

They felt that I had helped them in the sense that they could talk about it, either to me or to other people; they felt that I had helped them or I had freed them, that’s the way they said it. A lot of the women have the wrong idea — they want to tell me how strong I am, but they don't realize that they're just as strong as I am by them writing and telling me their problems too. Some of them have gotten involved in different rape groups and decided to become involved in helping to fight rape, in whatever way they can.

More on page 14