more letters home

Women’s Racism Khomeini Crimes

Sisters--

Here's my three bucks for six months! I'm glad that you're getting back into the local and statewide things more in the near future.

Sorry to say that I missed your last issue but I'm glad that you had articles on racism in this issue--it is of much concern to me and at times is very disturbing. When I find myself very angry about a certain racist incident I read Lorraine Bethel's "What Chou Mean We, White Girl?", or, the Cullud Lesbian Feminist Declaration of Independence (Dedicated to the Proposition That all Women are Not Equal, I.E. Identically Oppressed)."

It helps me to reaffirm my faith in "real Third World sista love between real Third World sistas"....

..-And, as Juana Maria Paz wrote, "It was time before, It is time afterward." Racism is a disease, but many women who are racist will not admit it to themselves or anyone else--and that is where the healing process must begin.

It saddens me to see this disease so widespread in the Women's Community--We must work individually and collectively to eradicate this problem which separates us.

It is time Now.

In Sisterhood & Love,  
Jane Rodriguez

6)

Praise  
For Pentagon  
Coverage

Dear Big Mama Rag:

I am reading your paper for the first time and have just finished Sara Atatimur's article on the Women's Pentagon Action, which I attended. It is a fine and insightful article, honest and intelligent. I would like to thank Sara for writing it, and BMR for printing it. I look forward to seeing more of Sara's work.

Sincerely,  
Linda Atkinson

Dear Big Mama Rag,

Although by writing this letter Khomeini's hirelings may be informed of my "dissent" by the regime's spies (Khomeini's supporters) on the campus might take revenge on my family in Iran, but I feel that revealing Khomeini's bloody suppression of the people and leaving it to the public judgment is the least I can do to commemorate the death of 3,500 martyrs executed by Khomeini's firing squads the past four months.

News media's silence on Khomeini's crimes has paved the way for his anti-popular regime to extend its brutalities. Besides increasing the number of political prisoners and executions, the physical abuse and savage torture of "dissidents" is claiming more and more victims.

Of these victims, because of Khomeini's reactionary views towards women, women dissidents are being particularly abused and inhumanely mistreated.

There are quite reliable reports from Iran indicating the barbaric treatment given to women by the regime's ruthless guards.

"Undressing girls on the streets, in front of the public, beating and injuring them."

"Kidnapping opposition women, subjecting them to gang rapes. Many cases of rape of imprisoned women have occurred. There have also been reports of rape of women prisoners on the eve of their execution."

“Executing pregnant women, such as the case of 8-months pregnant women executed by firing squads."

"Harrassment and beating of mothers (and fathers) of political prisoners who go to the prisons in the hope of visiting their loved ones."

These and many more crimes committed by Khomeini saddens every human's heart. I appeal to all the international human rights organizations and all the freedom-loving people to hear the voice of the Iranian people who are only guilty of fighting "Khomeini's barbarism" by any possible means.

Fatemeh Ahmmadi  
An Iranian Student

-Liberation News Service

Greek Women Want Information

Hello!

We wrote to you from Greece. I read about your magazine at this magazine, "Open Road."

We are a small group of ten women in Greece. We study philosophy at the University of Athens. We want to make an independent magazine about the women's liberation movement.

We ask you to send to us if it's possible information about the women's liberation movement in your country. Please send to us as much information as you can. HELP US!!!

Thanks in advance with love and struggle.  
Hariklia Tressou  
Hrisostoyou Smirnis 90  
Moschaton

Athens, Greece

Oppressed Oppressing Oppressed

Dear Big Mama Rag,

I am writing because I am confused by Juana Maria Paz's letter. The letter was written in connection with several articles in Big Mama Rag dealing with racism and anti-Semitism. In her letter, Juana Maria Paz describes an experience involving Jewish and non-Jewish women. It is clear that she is angry about this experience. What is not clear is how she feels this experience has influenced her thinking about anti-Semitism and her relationships with Jewish women.

Unfortunately, there are many oppressive people in the world. Most of us who have been in the women's movement have been badly hurt at one time or another by other women. Often these women have used some ideology to justify their actions. If the offending women are not from any identifiable cultural group, one tends to conclude that some women are jerks and go on to other things. If the women who have angered us belong to a particular cultural group, or even if one or two of those women are of a particular cultural group, then one has a tendency to make generalizations. When something happens to us and we are angry at "X" whose cultural background we cannot define, then the action registers in our mind as the action of an individual. If "X" is from a specific group, the implications of the action become enlarged. One no longer thinks "that jerk"; but now thinks "that ---- jerk" and connections of cause and effect are made. However, sad though it is, every group, regardless of the power the group has as a whole, has within it individuals who are oppressive to other individuals.

It is important to remember that there is enough oppressive behavior in the world so that women in all groups can learn to oppress each other. What is difficult is to learn how to behave any other way and how to defend ourselves when we feel oppressed. One of the best defenses is, perhaps, a clear interpretation of that oppression with regard to its cause and its effect upon us. There are problems of institutionalized privilege, and lack of, that we have as women of specific groups. These problems of institutionalized racism including anti-Semitism, of classism, homophobia, ableism, etc. are of no less importance in spite of the fact that some of us (or all of us at one time or another) within these categories exhibit behavior which is less than perfect and at times even obnoxious and inexcusable.

Susan Korn

Big Mama Rag, February, 1982 - Page 19