Big Mama Rag Vol. 7 No. 11

Saying ‘No’ to the Benevolent Doctors:

Kate Sharp

Probably the most prevalent of dep-
endencies in this country is a dual
dependency which takes the decisions
about health and well-being out of
our own hands, places them at the
"mercy" of neglect, and eventually
hands them over to the medical estab-
lishment. We are simultaneously dep-
endent upon a lifestyle of ill-health,
and upon the medical establishment to
patch things up when things have gone
too far.

Doesn't it make more sense to become
an expert about the body you spend
every hour of every day with than to
hand over responsibility for that body
to someone who spends an hour with it
only when it malfunctions (and as a
spectator at that)? In order to become
such a necessary expert you must know
intellectually and intuitively just
what that body needs to operate at
optimum efficiency. You must compre-
hend a few basic facts about the body
(i.e. that it needs good nutrition,
regular exercise and relief from
stress) and you must learn to listen
and respond to your own unique set of
physical needs.

-Women's Press

Fascinating Nutrition

The subject of nutrition is a com-
plex yet fascinating one. As we all
know, we cannot live without food,
and cannot live well without good
food. Good nutrition involves supply-
ing the body with necessary vitamins,
minerals and protein. Specific infor-
mation about the nutritional content
of certain foods and about the bene-
fits of specific nutrients is readily
available and should be explored.
However, the most important rule of
thumb for ensuring good nutrition and
good health is—keep it low on the
food chain, keep it natural, and keep
it varied.

Let us explore this nutritional ad-
vice more closely. First of all, it
is best to stay away from things that
once ate other things as much as
health and conscience will dictate.
Arguing purely on the basis of health
(although certainly, substantial moral
arguments can be made as well), eating
animals means that not only are you
eating whatever chemicals have been
injected into animal flesh, you are
also eating whatever chemical residues
the animals have collected in their
bodies from eating heavily chemically
treated food themselves. In addition,
let us not neglect the issue of high
cholesterol levels in animal fat. Nor
should we ignore the issue of over-
consumption of protein—a condition
responsible for a myriad of ills from
pyorrhea to gout. Put succinctly,
there is real wisdom in keeping your
teeth off of things that once self-
propelled. If vegetarianism seems an
impossibility, at least try lowered
meat consumption, or the elimination
of red meat.

Keep It Natural

The concept of avoiding foods that
have been “tampered with” is not new,
but bears reiterating. Raw foods main-
tain more of their original nutrients
than do their cooked, canned, frozen
or otherwise altered counterparts.

Yet all raw food and no cooked makes
Jane a bored epicurean (not to mention
the fact that some foods cannot be
eaten if not cooked). Our rule of
thumb applies here as well. Keep cook-
ed foods as natural as possible. Watch
out for chemical additives and food-
stuffs that have had the living
daylights refined out of them. Refined
or white flour and sugar do little but
supply the body with empty, useless
calories. (Too many of us will pass
up a baked potato at dinner because
we feel guilty about all the calories
we consumed in a Snickers bar at mid-
afternoon). Besides the nutritional
benefits of natural eating, unrefined
foods are higher in fiber content.
Fiber is important, remember, because
it moves the daily constitutional
along at a more expedient rate. This
is advantageous because it prevents
decayed matter from storing in the
intestines, thus helping to prevent
GI tract disorders including cancer.
I assure you, with vegetarianism
the daily constitutional is daily.

Not much, after all, can be said for
foods that have had the misfortune of
intimacy with the food processing
industry—an industry which financial-
ly benefits the few at the expense of
less than optimum health for the many.

Spice It With Variety

The final triad of our rule of
thumb is—keep it varied. This is ex-
tremely important because foods vary
greatly in their nutritional content.
To assure oneself of a balanced diet,
insist on variety. Variety, too, will
prevent eating from becoming boring—
culinary boredom being the first step
in retreating back to nasty eating
habits. As long as your eating is var-
ied and supplemented with a good mul-
tiple vitamin and iron supplement you
should be assured of good nutrition.
Two other things are important, how-
ever. One is to listen to your crav-
ings (once you have weaned yourself
off of known nasties) because they are
often an indication of what your body
needs. And two, check the value of
your specific diet against information
in a detailed nutritional sourcebook.

And now for a word about protein as
it relates to vegetarianism. Put simp-
ly, protein is necessary in sustaining
life. However, in this world there are
both complete and incomplete proteins
(foods containing all or some of the
necessary amino acids respectively).
Unfortunately, vegetable matter is
made up of incomplete protein. Incom-
plete proteins lack total protein us-
ability and must be made complete by
the introduction of those amino acids
that are missing from the given incom-
plete protein food. All this mumbo-
jumbo may sound all too tedious, but
actually it is quite simple to under-
stand. Incomplete proteins can be made
complete by complementing one another.
For example, grains (wheat, rice, oats,
rye, corn, buckwheat, etc.) and
legumes (beans, peas, lentils, etc.)
complement each other and thus form
complete proteins when they are eaten
at the same meal. Legumes when eaten
with seeds (sunflower, pumpkin, sesame,
etc.) and/or nuts (almonds, cashews,
pecans, peanuts, walnuts, etc.) com-
plement each other. Dairy products con-
tain complete proteins and are high in
amino acids especially complementary
to grains. Eggs are very good complete
proteins in and of themselves. One
thing should be noted, however, about
the use of eggs and dairy products.
Just as the killing of animals for
food is viewed by many as inhumane, so
too can be viewed modern methods of
keeping and treating dairy cattle and
egg producing poultry. It should be
noted that one can live quite well on
vegetable protein alone or with mini-
mal dependence upon eggs and milk pro-
ducts. Many good vegetarian cookbooks
exist, and trying out new vegetarian
recipes can be quite an adventure. Be
especially alert for recipes that com-
plement incomplete proteins.

Benefits of Exercise

The second factor in our formula for
good health is that of regular exer-
cise. The physiological benefits of
exercise are many. Regular exercise
lowers the heart rate, blood pressure
and blood cholesterol level. It makes
the respiratory and circulatory systems
function more efficiently, builds
muscle tone and reduces body weight.
In addition, exercise nourishes nerves
and body tissues, increases muscle
flexibility and even helps in the re-
duction of acid in the stomach. Emo-
tionally, exercise is energizing, re-
juvenating, and invigorating. And, as
a very pleasant “side-effect,” regular
exercise assures one of night after
night of excellent sleep. In short,
exercise helps the entire body to func-
tion as it was designed to function.

Exercise opportunities abound. Don't
be seduced by expensive exercise pro-
grams and spas. Such things are not at
all necessary for getting into shape
and may help to undermine an attitude
of self-reliance about health. But do
find some energetic friends with a
football or volleyball. Read up on and
try a few aerobic and calisthenic
routines. Take advantage of free recre-
ational resources in your area. Buy
some running shoes and start running.
Take a yoga class. Join a women's
athletic team. Do something! Take that
initial first step, or increase your
athletic involvement if you're already
getting regular exercise.

It will not be easy at first to de-
termine your exercise needs if you've
been basically sedentary for a while.
The body does not always take kindly
to abrupt changes—even for the better.
But the benefits will not be long in
materializing. Just as with eating,
however, variety in exercise is also
important to fight off boredom. Keep
your exercise regimen varied, challeng-
ing and designed to make your body
feel its optimum best. Be sure to in-
clude strengthening, stretching and
endurance type activities. A little