eM pitt

het Riieis

Jobs Unhealthy

A study by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health shows that one out of every four workers suffers from an occupationally related disease every year. But only 10% of those illnesses are officially reported by employers as being connected to the job.  
— Survival Kit/LNS

Todd and Woods Convicted

Dessie Woods and Cheryl Todd, the two black women who were accused of murder and armed robbery when they shot a white salesman who tried to rape them, were found guilty by a jury in Hawkinsville, Georgia, last month. Woods was convicted of armed robbery and voluntary manslaughter, and Todd of being an accomplice in the alleged robbery. Woods’ lawyer has called the verdict “outrageous and unbelievable,” and plans to file motions to set aside the verdict and acquit the women on grounds of insufficient evidence.

FBI and Women

A 1970 FBI memo reveals that Women: A Journal of Liberation, out of Baltimore, has been closely scrutinized by the Bureau. The FBI admits to having monitored the paper's finances, leadership, and activities. The women themselves say that in addition, they have been followed, their houses watched, their mail opened, and their phones tapped.  
— The Militant

Health Shoes?

Dr. Thomas E. Sgarlato, a podiatrist, concludes from a study of Earth Shoes that one person in four shouldn't wear them because of undue strain on the calf muscles.

Windshield Wipers

The windshield wiper was invented 73 years ago by a woman, Mary Anderson, of Birmingham, Alabama. Although her wiper was operated by hand from inside the car, the principle hasn’t changed much since it was patented in 1903.

No Mothers Allowed

The infamous Miss America Pageant has been barred to unmarried mothers. The previous rule provided only that every contestant “must be single and never have been married or had her marriage annulled.” The new rule, which stipulates that entrants “must not be and never have been pregnant,” is aimed at eliminating women who have had abortions as well.

Two years ago the pageant organizers felt compelled to amend their bylaws to bar men from entering the contest.

Media Index / Directory

Media Report to Women has compiled an Index/Directory, available for $6 from them at 3306 Ross Place NW, Washington DC 20008. The annotated Index lists all the material covered in past volumes of the Report, listed by subject matter. The Directory lists individual media women and women’s media groups.

Knuckles Rapped

Two students at Penn State were suspended for their part in an incident where a woman was drugged and raped while unconscious at a pre-game frat party. The university frat organization took away the frat’s party privileges for three months, but rumor has it that the punishment isn’t being enforced.  
— Eva C. Whitley

Film Festival

The second International Festival of Women’s Films will be held in New York City from September 13 to 26, 1976. The festival will premiere new works by well-known women directors and will introduce many new women filmmakers. For more information, write to Festival of Women’s Films, 36 W. 62 St., New York, NY 10023.

Do We Need Them?

Women interested in parthenogenesis research (finding out about the possibility of being able to reproduce without men) should write to Liza C. May Chan, 620 W. 116th St., Apt. 74, New York, NY 10027.

Sugar Hazardous

Brown sugar contains vitamins and minerals. Refined sugar contains only calories. High refined sugar intake increases susceptibility to numerous diseases including diabetes, bowel disorders, appendicitis, and hemorrhoids. The American Chemical Society says refined sugar should be sold like cigarettes with a health warning on the package.

New American Movement

Women Prisoners

Amnesty International has published a list of 252 women who are in prison in 25 countries. These women are detained in violation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights to which the governments who arrested them subscribe. They are hoping to encourage individuals to write letters to officials involved in protest of these arrests. If you want a list of the prisoners and detailed information, write to Karen Swaine, Amnesty International, 200 W. 72 St., New York, NY.  
— LNS

Dangerous Red Dye No. 2

Manufacturers of Red Dye Number 2 have won a second stay of a Food and Drug Administration (FDA) order banning the use of that widely used food coloring. The FDA took the action against the use of Red No. 2 because “there is no study in sight that is likely to give us unequivocal assurance of the safety of Red No. 2,” according to FDA commissioner Alexander Schmidt.

No countries banned the use of Red Dye No. 2 after experiments in the Soviet Union linked it to fetal damage and cancer. Further studies using laboratory animals have supported these findings. And in 1972, the World Health Organization recommended restrictions on Red Dye No. 2 that would virtually eliminate its use.

In what Anita Johnson of the Health Research Group (HRG) in Washington, D.C. called “industry tactics of obstruction and delay,” implementation — and even official publication — of the FDA's January decision to ban further use of the dye has been blocked by a group of the dye’s manufacturers, the Certified Color Manufacturer's Association. The Association was granted a stay on technical grounds related to the FDA's procedures in issuing their decision.

In 1973, about 1.1 million pounds of Red No. 2, $2.9 million worth, were sold in the U.S. One of the most widely used food colorings, the dye can be found in candies, beverages, cereals, pet foods, chewing gum, canned fruit, vinegar, ice creams, snack foods, pill coatings, pudding mix, icings, salad dressings, cold meats, and hot dog coatings. In addition, Red No. 2 is an ingredient used in producing over 200 other food color additive mixtures.

Although the FDA ban will prevent manufacturers from adding Red No. 2 to any foods, drugs, or cosmetics, the FDA does not intend to recall any products containing the dye that are already on the shelves.

Manufacturers have complained that the other red dyes available to them don’t give as satisfactory results as Red No. 2.

Survives Ban

Red No. 40, which most will switch to, is more orange, Red No. 3 isn't soluble in water, and Red No. 4 is approved for use in Maraschino cherries only. According to an FDA official, Red No. 40 costs twice as much as Red No. 2 and “many food industry representatives believe that discontinuing the use of Red No. 2 will reduce the marketing appeal of their products because the coloring effect No. 2 produces is hard to duplicate.”

“I don't think that the food supply needs a red dye,” said Anita Johnson of the Health Research Group. “It just dresses up crummy food. Consumers should know the color of their food. Cherry soda is just water and a bunch of chemicals, but the manufacturers couldn't sell it unless it was a bright attractive color.

“Right now, I would prefer Red Dye No. 40 to Red Dye No. 2, but two years from now, Red No. 40 could turn out to be a poisonous disaster.”  
— LNS

00 SOARS HISTORIC

COMPROMISE IS REACHED.

008.

30\AH3S SMIN NOLL Y838N

TVs Injurious

In 1974, 14,000 known color television-related injuries were treated in hospital emergency rooms. Most of the injuries were from the “instant-on” sets, which have a tendency to explode 30 minutes after being shut off.  
— New American Movement

Lesbian Legal Conference

A conference of lesbian legal workers will be held in Chicago, April 9-11. For information send a stamped, self-addressed envelope to Atty. R. Hanover, 54 W. Randolph St., Chicago, IL 60601.

Union Woman Dies

Jean Maddox, a lifelong union activist and fighter for working women, died on January 20 of cancer, after a long illness. She was a founding member of Union W.A.G.E (Union Women’s Alliance to Gain Equality); she taught a series of classes on union organizing and negotiating contracts; and was elected “Woman of the Year” by the California Commission of the Status of Women.

Women’s Classes Disallowed

After 5 years of having all-women’s classes in its program, the Women’s Studies College at the State University of New York at Buffalo has been forced to open admissions to men. The University administration attacked the educational validity of an all-women’s program, and refused to allow the College to continue with it on the basis of a dubious interpretation of sex discrimination legislation (Title IX). Despite legal and student support, the Women’s Studies College has been forced to allow men into the classes as an alternative to closing them down.

Hysterical Surgery

In recent testimony before a House of Representatives subcommittee on the incidence of costly, unnecessary surgery in the United States, Sidney Wolfe of the Health Research Group in Washington reported that a woman has a 45.3% chance of undergoing a hysterectomy by the time she reaches age 70. This is only for fee-paying patients; for others, 16%.  
— LNS

Women’s Clinic Threatened

The Tallahassee Feminist Women's Health Center has filed suit against several local physicians whom Center members believe have conspired to put the clinic out of business and deny care in their community. According to the suit, the local physicians have pressured three doctors to terminate their employment with the center, and some of them say they would deny backup treatment — for women in emergency situations.  
— Pandora/LNS

Inez Exhibition

Eight Bay Area illustrators and photographers are showing their work in an exhibit entitled “Inez Garcia's Struggle for Justice, 1974-1976” at the Full Moon Coffeehouse, 4416 18th St. (at Eureka), San Francisco. Admission is free.

A FEMINIST NEWSPAPER

$4 PER YEAR U.S. $4.50 CANADA & FOREIGN  
FREE TO PRISONERS IN JAILS AND MENTAL HOSPITALS

WOMEN'S PRESS

P.O. BOX 562  
EUGENE OREGON 97401

DIVORCE ADJUSTMENT SEMINAR

Fully facilitated sessions for women only on jobs, children, finances, relatives, child support, new relationships, etc.

For information call 344-6611 (weekdays) or 321-8537/755-8397 (evenings and weekends).

Talking to others in the same situation helps.

Consciousness Raising Institute