Big Mama Rag Vol. 8 No. <

Why I Became: An Anarchist

(The following article is on the sub-
ject of anarchism as a political stra-
tegy. Very few articles have emerged
from women around why they have been
drawn to the anarchist movement. We
are printing this in hopes that it
will stimulate discussion and under-
standing about anarchy. We are uncom-
fortable with the ideas that anarchists
have presented to us that change will
occur through the practice of non-oppressive structures rather than through
confrontation by means of a mass move-
ment of the structures and institutions
that oppress us.)

Sharon Grisor

I am an anarchist. Not a bombthrower,
not a black-caped, fuzzy-eyed malcon-
tent, extremist, but a person who
seeks freedom from submission. The en-
tire world at our birth is ours to be
created in harmony with our needs but
obligations are soon imposed as ideals,
such as patriotism, duty to the state,
the worship of God and submission to
authority. Our early years become the
province of the family and throughout
the remainder of our lives domination,
hierarchy and a respect for systems of
ownership deprive us of a sense of
human self.

Anarchism to me encompasses con-
sciousness, individual liberation,
living a revolutionary lifestyle and
developing interpersonal relationships.
However class and disadvantage are
equally important. The kind of nonmal-
igned anarchism I believe in is con-
tingent upon collective consciousness
and group commitment. Contrary to
common misconceptions anarchism does
not reject, but is a theory of organ-
ization: free organization. To me this
means individuality can be compatible
with communism (anarcha-communism). In
organizational terms it means solidi-
fying thought, balancing individual
initiative with collective action
through the creation of structures
which enable decision-making to rest
in the hands of all those in the group.
The autonomous organization - whether
for trade, consumer, producer or
commune - becomes the creative base
on which a free society is built.
Federated into networks, regardless of
how massive the coordination, the
collective body maintains its self-
governing and molecular nature.

But at the heart of the anarchist
critique of the authority principle is
the state. Anarchists know that hier-
archy and passivity can only be demo-
lished by the dissolution of power
itself. History has shown us that where
ever the state exists domination and
oppression is self-perpetuating. That
unless its power is destroyed social
injustice is transferred to the domi-
nion of a new group as witnessed by
every revolution thus far: Russia,
China, Cuba, Viet Nam...

However there are no historical de-
signs on anarchism. No beginnings nor
ends. Lest anarchism not become another
fixed ideology, a free society needs
the will to change and develop accord-
ing to the present dynamic: Revolution
begins in the historical moment of
each rebellion and in the utopic real-
ization of a free community as self-
management becomes a reality in the
face of obedience and submission.

But the desire to be and live freely
must first be self-activated. That
source of creativity, the feeling and
resilience necessary to be human, will
inexorably vary with the force of the
individual, their background and the
period in time. For some, members of
political parties and centralized po-
litics, it had been the inflexibility
and anti-idealism of Marxism. More
recently, ecological concerns, parti-
cularly among young people, are the
responsive factor. Affected by the
catastrophe of economical domination
over nature and the potentiality of
alternative technology, a sense of
balance with nature has transcended
many to anarchism. Others evolving
from the counter culture movement be-
came anarchists. In pockets of the
women's movement, the liberatory fac-
tor of anarchism has also occurred by
sex. It is not always possible to pre-
cisely trace the internal spirit of the
individual, but I do believe my own
source of development as a feminist
ultimately tied my linkage to anarchism.

I was affected by the upheaval of
the '60s nonetheless, not profoundly.
While I was concerned with social in-
justice and while each day capitalism
and imperialism crept into my vocabu-
lary, I was not able to fully act and
realize myself as a rebel who desired
nothing less than freedom. The fervor
of the days meant demonstrations,
long discussions with friends and ver-
bal confrontations with foes. I thought
more, tried to unravel the layers of
conditioning and acted to change my
lifestyle as best I could. But I was
not ready to transform my conscious-
ness; revolution did not represent a
way of life.

Then as with millions at the end of
the decade, when the country was swept
by a tidal wave of women's liberation,
I too jumped into its storm. The social
impact I knew would never leave me
quite the same. But wavering, I suppose
between cautious and radical feminism,
I ambivalently found myself legalizing
a marriage a year or two later. By the
early ‘70s a post-college era meant
that the revolution was over for him,
while, as far as I was concerned, the
advent of the women's movement meant
that the revolution just began. Anta-
gonisms, in this case, weren't restric-
ted to merely the competitive polari-
ties of the sexes but the exterior
world of politics as well.

A divorce in time recovered my peace
of mind. My newfound autonomy and its
accompanying confidence gave me a
stronger self-image. All earlier sensi-
bilities of radical feminism that I once
assumed I embraced went through a pro-
cess of redevelopment. Free of an emo-
tionally oppressive relationship, I
grew stronger. Now it became truly pos-
sible to translate my personal dissat-
isfaction as a woman into class-con-
sciousness - an inner resiliency to
accept that my liberation necessitated
revolution.

But soon something even more politi-
cally profound happened. A regaining
of relationships with women. Through
the interdependence and noncompetitiveness of those friendships - the
importance of which had too easily
escaped me in the past few years - a
culturally female anarchism came into
fruition.

I may have not realized then as
Cathy Levine put it in the Tyranny of
Tyranny, “that the small group is the
solution" but my experience thus far
led me to believe that the “small
group had been more than a reaction"
to male politics and to personal ex-
periences of male domination. Al-
though I did not have a conscious an-
archist critique to the wide attention
in the women's movement - given the
Tyranny of Structurelessness, which
advocated that women build a large
organization and mass revolutionary
movement. I had known that, for in-
stance, the subjective techniques of
the small consciousness raising group
not only sparked my mind and soul but
involved an invaluable feeling for
democracy. In reflecting upon a defin-
ed form for equally serious personal
issues of our lives (5 minutes
per each woman), the subsequent
sense of fair conscience which natur-
ally responded to one another gave me
a vivid understanding of my previous
disinterest in the impersonalization
of mass organizational tactics in
which suppressed male feelings obliter-
ated individuality. So too, I under-
stood my early detachment from main-
stream feminist politics of leaders,
laws and parliamentary procedures.

But given that women's domain has
traditionally been more personal than
men, economically and culturally con-
fined by the smaller, more immediate
context of family and community, and
thus inclined toward cooperation, the
natural social gravitation of many of
us toward an intimate egalitarian
setting was, I know, largely responsi-
ble for the perceptions I acquired
of my own oppression and ideas that I
developed of human liberation. The
face-to-face accounts of humiliation
validated instincts I had which were
always distrustful of leadership, al-
most disdainful of domination and in-
quisitive of the certainty of author-
ity.

Some five years later as my politi-
cal as well as social rapport with
women further developed, I acquired
the will to confront other women, at
times, seceding from reformist tenden-
cies and separatist attitudes which
seemed irrational rather than autono-
mous; if necessary, acting upon my
own initiative.

However, I managed to overlook some
self-criticism. While my sophistica-
tion for the political world at large
widened, radical feminism nonetheless
remained my political identity. As
such, women's oppression and its
origins were central to my interests.
I believed then, as I do today, that
it is fundamental to all other oppre-
ssions. But very often, I realize now,
I would sell myself short of many an
analysis, that I couldn't otherwise
explain, by the expediency of it as
male. Although I didn't participate
in the matriarchist or women's spirit-
uality movement, I believed that with-
in the phenomena of women's liberation
the fragmented rebirth of her herstory,
the wealth of newly printed theory
and her moral superiority, THE univer-
sal answer lay unfolded.

While trying to discover the univer-
sal answer the role of capitalism and
the need of conceived theories played
a part. I had read little to nothing
of anarchism. My contact was limited
to brief attendances at a few Hunter
College conferences. Other than a
resistance to the vote, I didn't feel
a clear enough identity. However, my
encounter with other feminists in
male circles of socialism was short
lived. I was immediately uncomfortable
with the language and the complexity
of the dogmas.

The most pondering, I thought, was
the definition of women's oppression
through an extension of a Marxist
analysis. Marxism not only subsumed
feminism when it reduced reproduction
to the production process, but dis-
closed a fundamental contradiction in
theories. How could the alienation of
a woman who has been excluded from
industry not be dissimilar to the es-
trangement of a worker from the pro-
duction process? How could a feminist
accept a revolutionary theory which
rejected that women's oppression cut
all class lines? When confronting
other women, those with whom I felt
some sense of feminist communications
with, on just how they reconciled the
inconsistencies of Marxism and femi-
nism, the response was evasive, if
not mute.

Before too long, much in advance of
my later familiarity with Murray Book-
chin's works on the modern revolution-
ary potential in a technological so-
ciety, it became apparent that modern
revolutionary potential in a techno-
logical society, it became apparent
that traditional class struggle ceased
to have revolutionary implications in
a contemporary society. If anything,
we lived in times of a cultural rather
than an economic crisis when revolu-
tionaries refused Marxist categories.
The emergence of the counter-culture
summoned an alternative means to me
to be declassed. Life had become too
spiritually and socially impoverished
in a modern, commodity-fetish society
to seek more materialism. It was here
that I felt the most uncomfortable;
the reduction of humanity to proletar-
ians as necessary to the Marxist
theory of materialism (as the driving
force in human affairs) and the means
to human emancipation. While my middle
class background made a proletarian
association difficult, as a woman, an
industrial worker was undoubtedly
foreign to identify with. But more
worrisome, how could my feminist
visions of a harmonious and humanly
integrated society accept the power-
lessness of proletarianization as an
indication of socialist development?
How could anything good come from such
spiritual and physical alienation?
Were there no other forces in life
other than material that would account
for our liberation? Does the develop-
ment of oneself not matter? Such ques-
tions I learned were very awkward to
ask Marxists. All aspects of human
conflict would immediately be reduced
to the mode of production and social
classes.

Marxists, I finally unraveled, con-
ceived of socialism arising from an
ever greater concentration of capital
and centralization of the means of
production into fewer and fewer hands
until a crisis of capital accumulation
occurred. When the full potential of
capitalism had been exposed, when the
working class had been robbed of more
and more of its labor, brute necessity
would drive the working class to seize
the means of production. Thus, accord-
ing to Marx, capitalism could be ra-
tionalized, even worse by a people
who were told to accept their indig-
nity, their proletarianization, as a
sign of social development. Social
relationships consequently remain
unchanged. Nor does the composition
and even the structural organization
of society really alter itself.

As if the crisis theory were not
a degradation of humanity, a negation
thesis of a temporary dictatorship
and transcendence is despicable, let
alone enfeebling. A "temporary" dic-
tatorship of the proletariat, which
is eventually scheduled to evolve
into a classless society, it is be-
lieved by Marxists, is a necessary
stage of capitalism in the journey
to socialism. A "communist dictator-
ship" evidently was not just the fear
of apolitical America, the jargon of
the red scare and the educational
coercion of my childhood in the '50s
but the serious dogma of Marxists.

However, contradictions within the
women's movement became quite evident.
The apparent growth of cooptation
through the funding of Levy Brothers,
Rockefeller and the like was disturb-
ing to me. While I understood the
emergence of women's businesses as a
form of autonomy within a capitalist
society, the fact remained, such al-
ternatives were far too few for too
many. Yet I wrestled with my own
guilt in the pursuit of foundation
grants for a women's public radio
program.

Soon the movement divisiveness creat-
ed by the Swinton/Alpert case ulti-
mately put my confusion at peace. The
bite of its repercussions found me
absorbed by Swinton's defense and the
ideological discussions that followed.
Inadvertently Ti-Grace Atkinson,
neither an anarchist, nor as a critic
of Marx, a socialist at the time, was
a prime factor in my ascent to anar-
chism. Her intensive discussions en-
tailing the state and the FBI, sexism
of the male left, and radical feminism
without a theory to answer her oppres-
sion, had a profound effect on me. At
this point, the danger of not drawing
a disparity between the sexism of the
FBI and the left had become quite
apparent. But personally something
more penetrating occurred. In Ti-Grace's
rigorous workshops I did not succeed
in making theory constructs, but I did
take a conscious step forward in my
radical feminism. Undoubtedly, I learned,
the worst of MAN is the state.

Thereafter, if inarticulated at the
time, I viewed the state as not only
the protector of capital, but one of
modern day emergence. Only a social
theory which would abolish all forms
of political power seemed then logical
- an end to the triple domination of
patriarchy, state and capital.

But it was not until after reading
Emma Goldman's autobiography that I
merged my final connection and true
commitment as an anarchist. Unlike the
pen of most political men; hers was so
full of passion, beauty and definitive
logic. As her biographer, Richard
Drinnon, said, she spiritualized po-
litics. How often is it that activists
combine art and politics? Her bound-
less love for liberty widened my mind.
Love and freedom were in fact synony-
mous to Emma. But more than all else,
I was moved by the strength of a wo-
man, the U.S. government called the
most dangerous in the world, whose

MORE ON PAGE 17