Sandy Hagen To Appeal Conviction

On September 13, 1979, Sandy Hagen was convicted of first degree manslaughter and second degree criminal possession of a deadly weapon, stemming from the shooting death of Gilbert Rivera, age 34, on August 5th, 1978, in Brooklyn, New York. On October 19, 1979, Judge Sybil Kooper sentenced her to seven years on the manslaughter charge, and four years on the criminal possession charge, the sentences to run concurrently. Her indictment read: "The defendant, on or about August 5, 1978, in the County of Kings, knowingly and unlawfully possessed a loaded firearm, with intent to use unlawfully against another." Sandy's version of what happened on August 5, 1978, refutes this charge.

According to Sandy, at approximately 5:45 am on August 5, 1978, she returned to the apartment after partying. She walked into the bedroom and turned on the lamp. Rivera, a "former" lover of Debra's, was in bed with Debra. According to Sandy, Rivera immediately leaped out of bed, appearing intoxicated, and struck her on the head, holding something in his hands; Sandy fell backwards against the wall. As he attacked her again, she kicked him in the knee. At this point, Sandy realized that Rivera had dropped a gun; they both scrambled for it, but she reached it first, and when he came at her again, she fired, but he continued to come at her, and she fired again. Sandy remembers only firing twice (the autopsy report, however, says that there were three gunshot wounds: right temple, left side of the chest, and a set of entrance, exit wounds with re-entrance.)

Debra apparently did not intervene in the struggle. (For more information see Vol. 8 No. 1 of BMR.)

Shortly after the incident, Sandy surrendered to the police. At her trial, the prosecution claimed that Sandy had shot Rivera "out of jealousy"; Sandy denies this, and she also denies that any premeditation was involved. Sandy had keys to the apartment, cancelled checks for the utilities, and the landlord knew she was living there. Sandy insists that she had no romantic interest in Debra, and that she was in the process of reconciling with a former lover when the incident occurred. Sandy claims that she shot Rivera in self-defense.

Early in March of this year, William Hellerstein was appointed to be Sandy's attorney during appeal. Many people think that Sandy did not get a fair trial the first time around and that her case, if appealed successfully, has the potential to “make law."

Under New York's Penal Law, there is a defense of justification to a charge of murder. The law (Penal Law, Article 35) provides that a person may use deadly force if he reasonably believes another is about to use the same on him, unless he can retreat with full safety, although there is no duty to retreat if attacked in one's residence.

The provisions of the law employ the masculine gender pronoun, and New York State's laws specifically provide that when the masculine gender pronoun is used, it must be read to include the feminine as well. Judges, who have the duty of charging juries on the law to which they must apply the facts of the case, traditionally read the language of the statute. In Sandy's case, the judge charged the jury in the language of the statute which employs the masculine gender pronoun.

However, in the 1977 case of the State vs. Yvonne Wanrow, the Supreme Court of the state of Washington reversed Yvonne Wanrow's conviction on the grounds that the trial judge, in charging the jury on the law of self-defense, employed the exact language of the statute (virtually identical to New York's), using the masculine gender pronoun. The Washington court found this in error, denying Wanrow equal protection of the law, as the jury would apply the standard by which they would judge.

In March 1979, RAM organized a statewide rally in the capital city of Albany with the theme "Welfare Budgets are Killing Our Children." Over 2,000 people from all over the state attended the rally and mock funeral mourning with children who had died (from freezing to death and other causes) while on welfare.

On March 27, 1980, 2,000 recipients and supporters again marched in Albany to demand a grant increase. The atmosphere was festive but militant. Children carried small balloons marked “Shrinking Welfare Grants" past the Governor's mansion and sang and chanted. The march concluded with a rally on the Capitol steps, which were flanked with two giant helium balloons stamped INFLATION soaring above the crowd. After the demonstration, groups of recipients talked with the legislators about the need for a grant increase.

These two rallies, the largest welfare rights actions in the country since 1972, are mirrored by smaller demonstrations organized by some of the 30 welfare rights groups that have sprung up around the country in the past few years. The Massachusetts Coalition for Basic Human Needs has held demonstrations at the State House as well as at local welfare centers. Recently, Cape Cod welfare recipients were arrested as a result of a sit-in at the Massachusetts Department of Public Welfare. Demonstrations from a welfare rights group in Rhode Island confronted armed state troopers at the State House in Providence where they ended their May 1979 march.

Today's protests are the continuation of a 15-year history of struggle over welfare rights. Before 1969, most states gave public assistance in the form of specific payments for rent, clothing, furniture, and other specific necessities. For years, most people on public assistance were not given information on their right to such grants, and so did not receive them. Due to the success of the National Welfare Rights Organization (NWRO) in the '60s in educating people about welfare rights and direct action methods of obtaining them, however, the number of people receiving all their legal grants increased dramatically. That directly contributed to a nationwide rash of legislative changes setting grants at a predetermined "flat" amount. The change occurred in New York in 1969, at which time the legislature used the U.S. Government Bureau of Labor Statistics "Lower Living Standard" as a starting point to determine dollar amounts for the new flat grant.

From the “Lower Living Standard," the legislature subtracted all money for books, recreation, gifts, and food away from home. Then they deducted more by under-budgeting for transportation, utilities, and food. Finally, they cut this amount by an additional 12%, arguing that a welfare family of four (mother and three children) would need less food, utilities, and clothing than the "typical family of two adults and two children."

The New York grant was raised 12% in 1974 to adjust for inflation (calculated at 1972 prices) and has not been raised since, although inflation has pushed prices up nearly 100% since that time. Though the situation varies from state to state, welfare grants everywhere are being similarly eroded. And welfare recipients—80% of whom are women with dependent children (the rest being mostly disabled and elderly)—are feeling the noose of poverty being ever tightened around their necks.

Despite this massive erosion of benefits in real dollars, it is still very difficult to get state legislatures to approve even partial catch-up increases. Proposition 13-type measures (or the threat of them) have hit hardest at social service funding. In the meantime, the media frequently chimes in with the sponsors of such bills to inflame white working and middle-class anger at "welfare fraud," and serve to draw attention away from other spending, such as military appropriations and tax giveaways to corporations.

As inflation continues to diminish the already meager welfare benefits, the resurgence in welfare organizing may become even more marked. Many activists are talking about the need to replace welfare with a guaranteed annual income, which would rise automatically with inflation.

Bunny King

Bunny King, a mother in Franklin County, Massachusetts, recently lost a court case requesting that her two children be returned to her under the guardianship laws of that state. Ms. King had previously given custody of her children to Maggie Patenaude because she had become seriously ill and, according to Dr. Norman B. Pike of Greenfield Surgical Associates, was in jeopardy of dying.

In refusing Ms. King custody of her children, Judge Sanford Keedy stated: "...the environment in which she proposes to raise the children, namely a lesbian household, creates an element of instability that would adversely affect the welfare of the children." Ms. King's lawyers, Wendy Sibbison and William Newman, consider this decision an abuse of the guardianship laws because in order to remove a guardian, it must be proven that the need for the guardianship no longer exists. The guardianship was originally imposed due to Ms. King's ill health, and it was proven in court that the illness which brought on the need for the guardianship no longer exists, and therefore the need for the guardian no longer exists.

Ms. King says, “The purpose of the hearing was to prove that I am physically and emotionally fit, which we did." The judge in his decision did not find Ms. King unfit or incapable of caring for her children, except through his interpretation of lesbianism.

These rulings of being an “unfit mother" based solely on lesbianism are being overturned in many states across the nation. The Franklin County Lesbian Alliance, which is raising money for an appeal, states: "Discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation through the abuse of the guardianship laws should be of concern to all parents."

Donations can be sent to Franklin County Lesbian Alliance, P.O. Box 235, Deerfield, MA 01342. Please make checks payable to Bunny King Defense Fund.

Reprinted from Mom's Apple Pie.