international

Israel's War Against Palestinian Peoples

Rose

I appreciated Cypress' article about why she no longer calls herself a Zionist. It's true that Jewish people have been taught a "beautiful lie" about Israel, that the peace-loving state was formed from unoccupied desert land and that military force is only used to defend against Arab aggression. Every year each student in my Sunday school planted a tree in Israel, being told that we were helping plant life into a desert. And what about the highly emotional movie, "Exodus"? The emotions of most Jewish people have been firmly welded to Israel. My mother told me, "Before anything else, you are a Jew. That is why you must never forget Israel. As long as Israel is safe, we Jews are safe. But if anything happens to Israel, no Jew is safe anywhere."

The truth about what the Israelis have done to get control of the land of the Palestinians and maintain control is that they have slaughtered these people and terrorized them. The book Our Roots Are Still Alive describes how Israeli terrorist groups like the Irgun (Begin's group) raided and killed the people of entire villages in Palestine and announced on loudspeakers in all nearby villages that the same thing would happen to them unless they evacuated their homes. The Israelis brought bulldozers to Palestinian villages and leveled them, always driving the people off their land. The Palestinian people were brutally driven from the land they and their ancestors lived on for thousands of years. The land of Palestine was not all desert. People lived on the food they grew.

The Israelis justify stealing the land because it is promised to the Jewish people in the Bible. This book, the Bible, written over 5,000 years ago, is a political instrument which has suppressed peoples' control over their lives, especially women's control over our lives. Ironically, also included in this most oppressive book is the story which says that the Jewish people and the Arab people are descendants of the same father, Abraham.

This war against the Palestinian people is not just on Israeli hands. Equally responsible are the Western allies, especially the US. I saw a documentary at last year's Jewish Film Festival, called "Who Shall Live". It contained interviews of Jewish leaders during WWII and even State Department officials. As soon as Hitler came into power and made clear his hate campaign against Jewish people, the US government shut down its immigration quotas and made it nearly impossible for Jews to leave Europe. I'm not just saying that the US refused to expand its immigration quotas because it didn't want more Jews. I'm saying that US immigration shut its quotas down to a trickle, knowing full well the Nazis' much announced intentions regarding Jews. Hitler was willing to let the Jews leave, but no one would have them. During the war, a few Jewish leaders put pressure on the US to at least bomb the railroad lines to the concentration camps. Continual bombing of those railroad lines would greatly slow down the murdering. But the US government would not listen, even toward the end of the war when American bombers were all over Germany. In fact, the Zionists were very opposed to pressuring the US government. The Zionists claimed that being too forceful would encourage anti-Semitism against Jews in America. The Zionists tried to get the main organizer of the American Jewish resistance deported. (Due to having been tortured by shock treatments, names and dates slip out of my memory. I realize that in the future I'm either going to have to take notes or else buy a small tape recorder. I wish I was being more specific with these details.) Israel is responsible for its actions, even though many Israelis are Holocaust survivors full of rage that there is no safe place for Jews. However, also responsible are those whose hatefulness against Jewish people have caused the creation of the state of Israel. It is painfully ironic that the Israelis feel they are fighting back against anti-Semitism (or rather anti-Semitism against Jews, since Arabs are also Semitic). Although the Arabs are pictured as the enemies of the Jews, is it the Arab people who have spread anti-Jewish hatred over the world? No, it is the Christian Church under the control of the ruling class, who has been the one major, undeniable influence in the minds of the people of the Western world to hate, to blame, and to "punish" Jewish people. It is the Christian Church who has over and over repeated its message in its "religious" training: that the Jews killed Christ and are to blame for the suffering of the world, that the Jews took all the joy from life by killing their savior. Over and over, this message, ever and over the Christian Church, both Catholic and Protestant, has encouraged its followers to murder Jewish people. In the history of Europe, whenever the frustrations of poverty and oppression made the European people angry, the Church has always provided a Jewish target, in order to divert the people away from striking back against the ruling class.

So who must we as Jews go to and demand land from, demand reparations from? Not the Palestinian people, who are poor, oppressed people, who have done no more than fight for their homeland. The Catholic Church, however, owns more land than any other group or individual in the world. Yes, I believe the Jewish people have a right to be angry, to fight back against anti-Semitism against Jews, but the people Israel is fighting are not our enemies.

Zionism and the very existence of the state of Israel is based on the genocide of the Palestinian people. (I use the word genocide, knowing full well that many Jewish people object to using that word. What other name can you call it when a people are being massacred and driven off their land?) Israel has placed itself on the side of all the fascist governments of the world. Israel is doing the US's dirty work, by selling weapons to the fascist dictatorships in countries like El Salvador, Argentina, and Guatemala. Jewish people must look past their sentimental attachment to the "Jewish state" and withdraw their support of this war against the Palestinian people. We must confront the real forces of anti-Semitism against Jewish people. I write this 5 days before Christmas, with the smothering Christmas "spirit" surrounding me. It is the Catholic Church and the Protestant Churches who are historically and continually the major influence of hatred toward Jewish people. It is the Christian churches and the ruling classes who Jewish people must confront. The PLO says it wants a Palestinian state where Muslims, Jews, and Christians can all live in peace. The PLO does not make hate statements against the Jewish people. Read Our Roots Are Still Alive and see why the Palestinian people are fighting so determinedly in their struggle for the liberation of their land.

Big Mama Rag, January 1984 ~ Page 9