making the news

Union Conference:
6 ‘Inspiring’ 9

by Kay Doherty

One hundred and six women from a dozen
states and representing more than twenty
five unions met in Amherst for an intensive
week-long exchange of experiences and
ideas. The third annual Northeastern sum-
mer school for union women was held this
year at the University of Massachusetts
campus from July 30 to August 4th. The
wide-ranging seminars and workshops were
guided by a staff of 20 women from 5
universities, a variety of union officers and
the Canadian Labor Congress.

From registration Sunday afternoon until
graduation Friday afternoon we barely had
time to breathe. After being welcomed and
given a brief history of the union school, we
divided alphabetically into 5 groups and
briefly introduced ourselves. This was the
first of several opportunities to meet as
many people as possible. Later in the week
separate meetings for all public service
employees, members of each international
union and women from the same state or
region were scheduled.

Morning seminars concentrated on areas
of concern to all union women. Some of the
issues discussed included: the increasing
number of women in the work force and its
impact on the economy and on unions; some
of the causes of inflation and unemployment;
discrimination within unions; the growth of

IS SKIN CARE YOUR THING?
CLASSES STARTING SEPT. 11TH

COMPLETE TRAINING IN EUROPEAN SKIN
CARE METHODS

Co-ed Classes Day & Evening Sessions
Carole Patton or Monique Ridea at 266-1806

conservatism and its effects on unions; the
ERA, Proposition 13, and more. After a
break for coffee the small groups reconvened
for lively ninety-minute discussions of
strategies for dealing with these issues
within our own particular unions.

The constant exchange of ideas and
perspectives among women from such a
wide variety of ages, backgrounds, and
union service was exhilarating. Angela had
been active in her local of the United Auto
Workers only a short time and now was
having problems with the politics of her
newly-elected position on its executive
board. Helen had two decades of service
holding several union offices and was now in
her second term as president of her local of
the Glass Bottle Blowers Association. Mag-
gie had also served in many positions on the
local level of the American Federation of
State and County Municipal Employees and
was now serving on the state board of her
union. Ruby went back to work as an aide in
her local school, decided to get her degree,
and was now becoming active in the Newark
Teachers Union. These brief introductions
give only an indication of the broad range of
experiences and perspectives shared.

In the afternoon, participants could
choose from a dozen practical topics, from
union contracts, grievances, health and
safety, and politics, to personal development
in leadership skills, public speaking, and
career planning. The newsletter workshop

presented us with a six-page publication of
our week's activities on Friday morning.
Speakers offered the whole group histori-
cal, political, and personal perspectives on
union women. Gloria Johnson of the
International Union of Electrical Workers
described the history of discrimination and
how it has changed in the unions. Anne
Sullivan, now in her seventies, related her
experiences in organizing millworkers in
Massachusetts and the Northeast during the
depression years. Opal Townson of the UAW
gave a moving account of her attendance as
a union representative at the International
Women’s Year Conference in Houston.

The clerical staff at our host school,
U Mass Amherst, had recently been unionized
and the two principal organizers, Jude
Kinney and Jane Fleishman came to share
their experiences with us. Susan Troy
described the Women in Construction
project as she is attempting to implement it.
Some of the presentations were part of the
planned program and others evolved out of
the needs and skills of participants.

According to Cornell University’s Bar-
bara Wertheimer (author of We Were There
The Story of Working Women in America),
trade union schools have been around in one
form or another since the 1920s, but they
were organized mainly for men. Bryn Mawr
held a conference for working women in 1921
which included both union and non-union
women. Later Hilda Smith got the WPA to

train unemployed teachers to train unem-
ployed workers. Both the AFofL and the CIO
had their own workers' education bureaus
before they united. Thirty-seven universities
now offer labor extension courses.

This unique summer institute for union
women is the brainchild of the Task Force
on Programs for Union Women of the
University and College Labor Education
Association. Three sessions were held this
summer in the mid-west, the south, and the
northeast. By next summer, they hope to
add a fourth school on the west coast.

Typically, there is very little money
available to run the schools. The universities
pay for the phone calls and correspondence
of their particular staff members and donate
facilities for cost if they are a host school, as
U Mass was this summer. Some schools will
pay travel expenses for planning sessions
but many women have to pay their own
expenses. The same is true of the partici-
pants. Some unions paid part or all
expenses, some gave time off. But many
women had to pay all their own expenses
and come on their own time.

During this intensive week we learned a
great deal of facts and figures, saw two
wonderful movies (Union Maids and With

Babies and Banners), and listened to some

inspiring speakers. But the majority of us
benefited most from the chance to meet so
many women, to share our experiences, and
to find that, in spite of our diverse back-

grounds, we had so much in common. 

An all-day conference for all interested
union women is now in the planning stage
to be held at the Boston Teacher's Union
on November 11th. Interested women
may call (617) 288-2000 for further infor-
mation. 

Movies mentioned above or any other
educational material about unions may
write to AFL-CIO, Education Dept., 815
16th St., N.W., Washington, DC 20036.

Also, anyone interested in the two

JOB PLACEMENT SERVICE AVAILABLE

ESTHETIC TECHNOLOGY COMPANY, DISTRIBUTORS AND EDUCATORS TO THE SKIN CARE
PROFESSION, 739 BOYLSTON STREET, BOSTON, MA (ACROSS FROM LORD & TAYLOR)

MUSIC SCHOOL

MUSIC EMPORIUM, 2018 MASS. AVE. CAMB,

Offering classes and private
lessons in Guitar, Mandolin, Fiddle, Dulcimer and Voice. Fall Semester begins
September 25. For information and brochure

School of the Museum
Evening

classes begin September 18 and meet twice
weekly, 6:30 to 9:30, for fifteen weeks. Each
course carries 3 semester hours credit. For
more information call 267-1219 or write: Con-
tinuing Education, 230 The Fenway, Boston,

of Fine Arts

MA 02115.

Anatomy, Calligraphy, Ceramics, Drawing,
Foundation Design, Graphic Design, Jewelry
and Metalsmithing, Painting, Photography,

Lithography, Intaglio, Soft Sculpture,
Sculpture, Silkscreen, Watercolor, and Wood.

The School of the Museum of Fine Arts admits students of any race, color, and national or ethnic origin.

REPAIR

tion,
Available,

Learn APPLIANCE

PLUS AIR COND
& REFRIGERATION

Full-time Day Classes Begin-
ning September 5, 1978. Ongoing Registration in Refrig-
eration — Air Conditioning —
Appliance Service. A Great
Opportunity for Women too!
Learn by Doing! Budget Tui-
tion — Financial
Placement
Assistance — For Brochure Call
617-787-2820 or Write:

NEW ENGLAND APPLIANCE

ACCREDITED BY N.A.T.T.S.
LIC. COMM. OF MASS.
DEPT. OF EDUCATION

Women!

Are you spending enough time on yourself?

Treat Yourself to Our:

Three Running Tracks —
Handball and Squash Courts
Two Gyms, Locker room & Showers
Slimnastics & Dance Courses
Organized Fitness Classes
Pre-School Gym/Swim Program
Babysitting Service
All available to you at the
New Cambridge Family Y
820 Mass. Ave., Cambridge
Call 876-3860
Reasonable Rates!

As little as 45¢ a day!

Equal Times September 11, 1978 7