Throughout the United States a national  
campaign is underway against the union  
movement and union militants, a campaign  
launched by the U.S. government and big  
business. This campaign is fed both by  
growing U.S. military involvement in Central  
America and by economic cutbacks at home.  

National Labor Relations Board figures show that  

in 1981 alone over 10,000 workers were illegally fired  
for their union activities. This is in addition to the  
“wholesale firing of 12,000 members of the Professional  
Air Traffic Controllers Organization (PATCO) by the  
Reagan administration.  
In thousands of plants that do business with the  
Pentagon, this campaign is spearheaded by the  
Defense Department's Defense Investigative Service  
(DIS), a government witch-hunt agency.  

The government, through DIS, works with giant  
corporations such as General Electric, Lockheed,  
Martin Marietta, and McDonnell Douglas to spy on,  
harass, and victimize union activists and to interfere  
in the internal affairs of the labor movement. DIS  
admits keeping files on at least 10 million workers and  
their families.  

The aim of DIS is to weaken and divide the unions.  
In plants across the country, the government has used  
DIS investigations to fire union activists and to  
intimidate workers from taking part in union  
activities.  

Many of the first victims of this antilabor campaign  
have been socialists and other politically active  
unionists. These initial victimizations seek to establish  
a precedent which can be used to extend these attacks  
and to intimidate all union activists. It is the rights of  
the entire union movement and every worker that are  
at stake.  

The Sally Goodman Case  

In late 1982, the government, with the connivance  
of Martin Marietta Corporation, launched a campaign  
of harassment against the United Auto Workers  
Local 766 and its members at the Denver, Colorado,  
plant.  

Martin Marietta is a major weapons producer with  
billion-dollar contracts to make the MX missile and  
other military hardware. Over the last year, there has  
been a dramatic increase in company victimization of  
the local’s members. With a membership of 1,100,  
Local 766 was forced to fight more than 400 grievances  

in 1982. In the first quarter of 1983, 100 more had to  
be filed.  

Government joins attack  

The government then joined this stepped-up anti-  
union campaign, when DIS launched a “security  
investigation” of Sally Goodman, an activist in UAW  
Local 766. DIS agents threatened to revoke the  
“security clearance” required by the Pentagon for her  
to keep her job as an electrician. Such “national  
security investigations” have been used historically by  
the government and employers to victimize union  
militants.  

Within a week, these DIS agents began harassing  
Goodman’s friends and co-workers, asking them  
about her private life and political views. They tried to  
make her co-workers reveal their political ideas and  
personal activities, and refused to allow their union  
representatives to be present during these  
interrogations.  

Goodman was not accused of breaking any laws, of  
violating any procedures, or indeed of any specific  
actions at all. Instead, DIS threatened Goodman’s job  
because of her political views and personal life. Their  
“charges” were that she is a supporter of the Young  
Socialist Alliance and the Socialist Workers Party,  
and that she is gay.  

Goodman’s activist record  

Goodman has been a union activist for the two and  
a half years she has worked at Martin Marietta,  
helping to build solidarity with striking coal miners  
and PATCO, and organizing her local’s participation  
in the campaign to make Martin Luther King’s  
birthday a national holiday.  

Goodman, along with others from the plant, was  
well known as an active supporter of Eileen Thournir,  
also an electrician at Martin Marietta, who ran for  
U.S. Congress on the Socialist Workers Party ticket.  
The “investigation” of Goodman began at the height  
of Thournir’s election campaign. Supervisors had  
warned several of Thournir’s and Goodman's co-  
workers not to associate with them.  

The union had also had to file several grievances  
against the company’s refusal to allow Goodman to  
attend union meetings held while she was working  
overtime.  

By accusing Goodman of being a socialist and a  
lesbian, DIS and the company feel it will be easy to  
isolate her and pick her off. But if they get away with  
this victimization, they will be in a better position to  

threaten and intimidate all workers.  
UAW Local 766 backs Goodman  

The UAW local is standing behind Goodman,  
defending her right to retain her job, express her  
political views, and live her own life free from  
company-government spying. Soon after the invest-  
igation started, the union filed two grievances  
protesting the harassment of Goodman.  

One grievance insisted upon the right of union  
members to have a shop steward present during any  
government interrogations. The second one protested  
the investigation itself, pointing out that it constituted  
harassment by the company of an employee because  
of her union activity. The grievance further demanded  
“access to all files and interviews conducted,” and  
“that the company issue a written apology clearing  
Ms. Goodman of any wrongdoing or illegal activity.”  

ACLU defends Goodman  

The American Civil Liberties Union is providing  
legal counsel for Goodman. They agree that the  
government’s antilabor investigation is illegal and  
unconstitutional. According to its own regulations,  
DIS is prohibited from prying into a worker’s  
political party affiliations.  

The government claims the right to investigate the  
personal lives of workers who are accused of being  
gay. It insists on the right to submit them to detailed  
interrogations regarding their sex lives, claiming that  
homosexuals are more susceptible to blackmail.  
Goodman and her union consider this an outrageous  
invasion of her privacy. In challenging the govern-  
ment’s “right” to ask her—or any unionist—anything  
about their private lives, Goodman’s fight will be  
important to all workers.  

An attack on women  

The attack on Sally Goodman is an attack on all  
women workers, particularly those who are now  
working in jobs traditionally closed to women.  
Accusing such women of being lesbians is a common  
tactic used by employers to try to divide female and  
male workers, as well as to break down solidarity  
among women. It is aimed at intimidating and  
isolating women who speak up for their rights as  
women and as workers.  

As one of only three women electricians at Martin  
Marietta in Denver, Goodman has been an outspoken  
advocate of women’s rights. She is active in the UAW