national

Government Reins On Our Sunset Years

Sandra Anthony

As a Claims Representative for Social Security, I got the news about the proposed Social Security cuts the same

survival

day the newspapers did. But somehow, standing by the printer, dashing back and forth trying to do too much paperwork for too many people with too few co-workers, tired out emotionally from endlessly explaining ridiculous regulations to desperate people, the news that things will probably get worse had a certain immediacy.

Health and Human Services Secretary Schweiker's dishonest rhetoric caught my eye because of the contrast with most administrative teletypes: “The crisis is inescapable. It is here. It is now. It is serious. And it must be faced...If we do nothing, the system would go broke as early as Fall 1982..." Pretending he can forecast economic events of the next 75 years, Schweiker worries about a projected deficit of 1 1/2% of necessary revenues.

How much of a "crisis" is a 1 1/2%, or $19 billion per year, expected shortage? The same newspaper that carried this story also carried an item about the House Armed Services Committee approval of a $135 billion military authorization bill for this year. Congress could easily vote to cut the military budget and put general tax money into the Social Security fund, instead of cutting Social Security benefits. Schweiker pretends to worry about the “tax burden" on workers. While taxes of 6.65% (the present rate) do hit the lowest-paid workers painfully, the proposal to cut the tax rate to 6.45% from now until the year 2019 (instead of letting it rise to 7.65% as presently planned) is such a tiny cut as to vanish. For the better-paid workers, say those earning $20,000 or so, the income tax hits several times harder than the Social Security Tax.

Social Security collects taxes and pays out benefits.

There is little money actually sitting around in "trust funds." (In fact, in recent years we've been told to call wage-earners "number holders" instead of "account holders" so you won't think you've actually got a Social Security “account" in Washington somewhere.) The idea of a "system" that "goes broke" is a language designed to hide the political situation, that Congress can vote appropriations by cutting other parts of the budget. Secretary Schweiker's "here, now, inescapable" crisis is media hype.

Of the hodge-podge of proposals, I'm going to mention only the five most significant, chosen by dollar impact, according to Administration estimates.

The biggest cut is the proposal to reduce the amount retired workers receive at age 62-64. Currently, workers who retire at 62 collect 80% of what they would collect at age 65. The Administration proposes to cut this to 55%, “thus strongly encouraging workers to remain in the workforce until age 65." They hope to save $17.6 billion between 1982-1986 in this way.

There are two ways this reduction would save money; by delaying payments to some (who delay filing until age 65) and by paying lower benefits to those who are forced to collect whatever they can at age 62. To call this "encouraging workers to remain in the workforce" is like making abortions illegal to "encourage chastity" or paying teenagers a lower wage to "encourage" employers to hire them. The fact is that millions of workers do retire early, either because they are laid off, because they are too sick to continue working, or, I suppose, because they actually choose to do something with their life other than work until the grave. About half the men, and two thirds of women, collecting Social Security Retirement benefits, retired "early" (before age 65). Most obviously, this proposal hurts women, who, for whatever reasons, have been applying for early retirement in high numbers. The cutback is also

Page 8 - Big Mama Rag, August, 1981

aimed at Blacks. The older you have to be to collect, the fewer Blacks will live long enough to draw benefits. For example, in 1976, there were 25,000,000 beneficiaries aged 60 and older (disabled, retired, wives, widows, etc.) but only 1,854,000 were Black -- far less than their share of the U.S. population. In

Older women will definitely be on the agenda of this year's White House Conference on Aging, after all.

That's according to Annette Smail, National Coordinator of the Older Women's Task Force of the National Women's Political Caucus. Although 10% of America's older women live in poverty, the government, in arranging the conference, neglected to establish even a single workshop to address these women's problems.

After considerable protest from women across the U.S., Smail says, conference organizers have now given in. Adds Smail, "If it wasn't on the agenda, we would have a Grandma's rebellion outside."

-Her Say

In the office I work in, servicing a poor Black neighborhood, several times as many people come in to apply for Disability as for Retirement. While cutting benefits for those who need them, Reagan's administration proposes to raise benefits for those who don't. Currently, there's an annual "earnings limit," also called the “retirement test." While Social Security ignores income of the rich (stock dividends, investment income), it sets a limit on work income for beneficiaries. Currently, people aged 65/71 can earn $5,500 and draw full benefits. Above that, they lose $1 for every $2 in earnings. The administration proposes to phase out this earnings limit for those 65 and older. (There's a lower limit for those under 65, which would be kept.) "Although this is estimated to raise Social Security costs by $7 billion in 1982-86, it is important to end the provision in current law that discourages

senior citizens from remaining in the labor force," says Schweiker.

Which senior citizens over age 65 want to remain in the labor force? Hotel maids and coal miners? No, it's doctors, lawyers, executives, and businessmen who probably voted for Reagan. I can't prove it, but suspect most beneficiaries whose earnings (past the age of 65) are causing their benefits to be cut, are white men pretending there's a "crisis" in order to deny benefits to worn-out 62-year-olds while allowing the businessman to earn $50,000 yearly to collect full Social Security at age 65 is cynical and inhumane. Clearly, this is the divide-and-conquer politics of the 1980s. Forget the poor and the minorities, they don't vote anyway, and when they do, they vote Democrat. Full speed ahead to line the pockets of the affluent, who voted for Reagan.

The proposed cuts in the Disability program are, proportionately, even worse. However, we all hope we'll never be disabled, and we aren't supposed to notice. They propose to change the definition of "disability" to use only medical criteria, eliminating age, education, and vocational factors. What does that mean? Currently, the 60-year-old with a 6th-grade education and a lifetime of unskilled heavy labor gets somewhat of a break. If he has a medical problem (such as a bad back) preventing him from doing his usual job, they don't expect him to re-enter the job market in a lighter field. But a 25-year-old high school graduate with the same diagnosis will be denied benefits, with the expectation that she can get a light job, perhaps in an office.

Reagan proposes to "equalize" things by making difficult-to-get Disability benefits even more difficult. This "minor" change in the interests of "fairness" is expected to save $7.7 billion in the next five years. Another change will make it harder to be “covered" for Disability; instead of 20 quarters of coverage in the ten years pre-

MORE ON PAGE 29