Big Mama Rag Vol. 7 No. 5

We're Holding Our Own, Preparing

Susan Goding

During the late 60s and early 70s there appeared to be more women active in the women's movement. The movement itself was burgeoning with new revelations, strategies, and groups.

So many of us had at last found the beginnings of a solution to our problems. What each of us had thought

(case worker) the government can “make the most intolerable jobs attractive. And for us at that time only the most intolerable jobs were available. Through discussion groups and sharing our lives with each other we began to realize how little control we had in determining the patterns and variations of our own lives. To live within these patterns, in those times, was an individual personality problem in adjusting to the woman's role we realized we all shared. Culture, society, and tradition had placed us in an impossible, oppressive position. It was an exciting and dynamic time. We knew changes were necessary and we were starting to figure out why.

At home we were expected to take care of our children, husbands, and elderly parents regardless and at the expense of taking care of ourselves. Married women's work was clearly defined as keeping the family unit intact; taking care of the household and picking up the financial slack the recession had caused. We were to get jobs and "help out" until better times then return to the home. Single women were, of course, to support themselves until we were married.

Those of us who had jobs had unstable jobs, temporary jobs, and earned minimum wage. Even supposed full-time, permanent jobs were so often part-time where we were "on call" full-time; after the work was done we'd be laid off until more work came in. In identical jobs with identical job descriptions we were paid less than the men we worked with and were laid off first and called back last regardless of seniority.

Women's labor needs were the last to be considered at home and in the business market. During the recession the contradictions in our roles became overwhelming. We were the reserve labor force for business and the family. In a time when business needs fewer workers creating a surplus of workers, consequently allowing business to keep wages low, women are needed by the family to find work.

We were caught in a double-bind. We were demanded to take responsibility for ourselves and our families and were denied satisfactory means to deal with that responsibility. For many of us the choice was welfare or low-paying, demeaning jobs. In our society where financial independence is the only “respectable” and acceptable situation (regardless of how accessible it is) a woman needing welfare was treated as a failure. The government is free to manipulate and apply pressure on us in the guise of "helping" us out of our "temporary setback" or with the excuse that it must guarantee that its investment is founded. With paperwork, repeated home visits, and specialized social service agencies (going to different offices all over town for each service, one office for food stamps, another to visit the ADC caseworker, another to visit the SSI caseworker) was untenable. Nothing less than a radical change in values, economic and cultural, was needed to destroy or expand these patterns. The women's movement offered the analysis and processes for change.

The women's movement concerns more than women's right to be self-supporting; however, the economic recession was the crisis that created the need for radical change. Revolution becomes a scary concept when we have even just enough, especially when our financial security is tenuous. As long as the economy is prosperous and we stay in the good graces of our employers we will have enough; rock the boat by confronting sexism and we put ourselves in danger of losing that security. Revolution is a desperate solution to a desperate situation.

Together we developed a feminist vision. We began to develop strategies to realize that vision. It was imperative that we develop systems to share information. Projects, such as newspapers, were started.

These projects were begun as part of the strategy to create change for ourselves. By creating forums for our ideas we would be able to reach many women and facilitate the changes we were working toward.

We became a growing and powerful community of women.

The economy began to become prosperous. Business needed more workers and began to call up women. We were re-integrated back into the workforce and the pressing contradictions eased up.

Some of our demands, such as equal wage for equal work, were adopted by law, giving the illusion of real changes. These laws did not change the work situations for most women. It did give us recourse to fight as individuals against discrimination.

Feminism became a new market for capitalism. With jobs and wages the community we had developed was able to support a line of "feminist" products.

The energy and analysis we had developed went horizontally. We worked on making women capitalists accountable to the feminist community. Sisterhood was powerful and we stressed unity with women at all costs.

We developed alternative religions, relationships, and lifestyles instead of methods to fight the power structure that made them so desirable. It was easier to work on changing each other; we did not want to rock the boat as long as we could pay our bills.

The feminist community became a social grouping rather than a political action group. Where before, confronting the institutions that give power to men over women and men who bought into that system was a vital strategy for producing methods for change, now with jobs we had more to lose. We needed to use our community for emotional support to continue working in the same capitalistic system; it has become a matter of economic security to avoid confronting men. We need to hold on to our tenuous jobs. We need the community to run back into for emotional support.

We are financially dependent on the success of capitalism in the world economy. During these times of relative prosperity no immediate crisis exists to create a need for a radical change in our lives.

How tied we are into the system is demonstrated by the jobs we have. Using the Big Mama Rag collective as an example, 4 of the 6 collective members have well-paid, secure jobs.

Our jobs are indicative of how false the reformist gains we think we have made in the labor market are. We are all committed to feminist change. We do not create any real changes at our workplaces despite constant confrontation and struggle with management and co-workers.

Vicki works at the post office. In less than 2 years working there her hearing has become noticeably poorer. The post office finds it more profitable to pay high wages to keep its employees rather than improve the working conditions.

Fran is an elementary school teacher. Her job is to instill cultural values in her students.

She is finding the contradictions between her job and her political work so great that she may not teach after next year. There is no way for her to teach her children feminist concepts working within the system.

Sue drives a school bus which carries students across town to achieve racial integration. Her job would not exist except in a racist society.

Judy repairs appliances for a large multinational corporation which has imperialist holdings in South Africa and elsewhere. She could leave her job and sell her skills directly to people needing them. However, to do that she would have to sacrifice financial security and health benefits. With a 6-year-old son and a long-lasting illness it would put her in a very difficult situation.

Lisa and Connie both work in low-paying alternative jobs. Both enjoy their jobs and working with their employers.

Lisa works in a health food restaurant and does carpentry part-time for a shelter house for battered women. As a carpenter, she works directly for the people who need her skills.

Connie is a secretary for the American Friends Service Committee. She was hired because of her political beliefs. The AFSC is a human rights advocacy and educational service.

Both Connie and Lisa work outside the system in that their jobs do not directly support the economic system. Their jobs do not sacrifice their needs at work for more profit (such as Vicki's), do not directly help maintain the racist, sexist inequalities of this culture (such as Fran and Sue), nor contribute to the profit of an imperialist corporation. Yet, we can work these non-alienating jobs at the expense of financial insecurity, health, and retirement benefits. Those are the rewards of maintaining capitalism.

There is no way to predict what crisis will create revolutionary conditions. Whether the crisis will be caused by resource shortages, nuclear disaster, or something else. What seems clear is that a crisis will happen and we must be prepared to take advantage of the crisis to direct the changes according to our feminist vision.

World power dynamics are changing. How these changes will affect us is difficult to determine.

We must continue to educate ourselves about the struggles of all women and all oppressed peoples. We must continue to analyze our oppressions and the power dynamics that perpetuate them.

Consciousness raising, feminist separatism, and criticism/self-criticism are tools we have been using to keep a feminist integrity. We must continue to use them and develop more tools and strategies.

For the same reasons that we began feminist projects they must be kept going. A feminist revolution is not around the corner but we can prepare for it today. Newspapers, action groups, and CR/study groups were formed to educate ourselves and other women and just as importantly as a means for us to acquire the skills we need for creating feminist change.

Our feminist newspapers keep communication open between us. Without communication networks we will each repeat the same mistakes and with communication we are able to share our successful strategies and analysis. Through our newspaper we can learn to articulate our demands in order to convince others of our visions.

By actively working to create feminist change in this hostile environment we will learn to confront and challenge the dominant culture and power structure.

In organizing political actions and projects we learn how to deal with power; we learn how to work together.

All of these skills are necessary for us to acquire if we are going to lead and direct revolutionary action toward a truly feminist world.