Big Mama Rag Vol. 7 No. 10

Anti-Abortion Fanatics Fight With Fire

(Abortion Rights Action Week was held
October 22-29th in cities across the

nation, focusing on the theme "Abortion,

It's Our Right.” Initiated by over 50
sponsoring organizations, the national
week of action called for the right

to safe, legal abortion, protection
from sterilization abuse, access to and
education about safe, effective contra-
ception and comprehensive sex educa-
tion. While it is important to show in
a visible, concrete way the depth and

breadth of support that exists for abor-

tion rights, it is also important to be
reminded of the momentum which is gath-

ering in support of religious vigilantes

who have successfully been burning away

at all women's right to abortion, as
the following report from the National
Abortion Rights Action League shows.)

Anti-abortion fanatics, bent on des-
troying women's legal right to choose
abortion, have unleashed a storm of
violence against abortion clinics and
contraception counseling facilities
across the country. These attacks,
which include burnings, bombings, and
threats against the children of clin-
ic personnel, show a systematic dis-
regard for human life and property.

This wave of domestic violence has
been going on for well over two years.
The nature of some of the recent as-

Types of Violence

Against
Women's Clinics
1B assaults
6 bombings
& threats
® arsons
® diversions

-Reproduction of a NARAL map

French Women Ask For Support

French women are facing the immedi-
ate prospect of the repeal of the law
legalizing abortion in France. That
law, passed in 1975, was voted on a
provisional basis for five years, and
is now up for review in the current
session of the French parliament.
There is a very strong right-wing
push for its total repeal. French fem-
inists, in fighting this attack, are
demanding that the law be further
liberalized, to allow access to a
safe, legal abortion for any woman,
no matter what her age, nationality,
or economic status.

On October 6, 15,000 women held a
national march in Paris under the
slogan "Our Bodies Belong to Ourselves."
The coordinating collective for the
October 6th march has sent out petitions
they have been circulating in France, and
have asked women in the United States to
sign it as an important testimony to the
internationalism of the Women's Movement.
The petition, reprinted below, can
be signed and returned to: Le collect
if de coordination de la marche du 6
octobre, BP: F.M.A. -370, 75625 Paris
Cedex 13, France; or mail them to
Women's Liberation- News and Letters
Committee, 2832 E. Grand Blvd., Room
316, Detroit, Michigan 48211, and
they will return all the signed peti-
tions together.

PETITION IN SUPPORT OF THE EXTENSION AND FURTHER LIBERALIZATION OF THE

FRENCH ABORTION LAW:

Because of our struggles, since 1975, abortion is no longer defined as a

crime by the law. But during these five years our bodies have remained:

- in a temporary freedom: the law was only voted for five years

- in a conditional freedom: we don't have the right to abortion after ten
weeks; a woman who is a minor can't get an abortion; you must have resi-
dent status in France; and, you must be able to pay

- under a monitored freedom: a woman must submit to dissuasive counselling,
and suffer from the power and arbitrariness of the medical profession.

On top of this, in the autumn, parliament is going to judge us, to size us
up, to evaluate our distress, to measure our obedience in staying in the
home to wipe away unemployment and repopulate France.

They want to lay down the law for us again.

For ourselves as women:

The right to abortion is an inalienable FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT of our freedom

to control our bodies, ourselves.

We want genuine access to contraception.
We want the complete and definitive DECRIMINALIZATION of abortion.

We want ALL THE MEANS necessary for the exercise of this right, for ALL,
no matter what our age, our nationality.

Everywhere in France initiatives are growing in number to express the de-

sire of women to decide for themselves when they will bring children into
the world.

In spite of our differences, it is as women that we are all concerned to-
gether; we will make sure that all restrictive, intimidating, and repres-
sive clauses and texts are removed from the law.

NAME ADDRESS

assaults against clinics proves just
how little is really meant by the
“right to life” catchphrase. Many of
these clinic raids occurred while pat-
ients were being treated.

Numerous death threats have been
issued against employees of a St. Paul
clinic, and they have received warn-
ings that their children will be kid-
napped or murdered. Apparently abor-
tion foes reserve all their concern
for the unborn, but care little for
the living.

While anti-abortion fanatics have
been successful in intimidating some
politicians, they have not succeeded
in obtaining any overwhelming weight
of public support.

Every major opinion poll shows that
the majority of the public favors the
continuance of safe, legal abortion.
But in spite of this, those who make
the laws and those who administer them
have dealt women such blows as:
-passage of the Hyde Amendment, which
denies federal funds to poor women in
need of abortion
-calls for a Constitutional Convention
to pass an amendment which would for-
ever outlaw all abortions
-adoption of so-called "informed-con-
sent" laws by several communities
which are intended not to inform but
to intimidate women needing abortion
and frustrate clinic procedures. This
law requires parental consent for teen-
agers seeking abortion and forces wo-
men to sign documents containing in-
accurate information about fetal devel-
opment and risks to their own lives
-the acquittal of six clinic disrupters
in Fairfax, Virginia by Judge Lewis
Griffith on the grounds that they be-
lieved they had to enter the clinics
to save lives

-Commonwealth Attorney Robert Horan's
order to the Fairfax, Virginia police
to ignore the clinic's calls for help
since Judge Griffith refused to pro-
secute cases.
The National Abortion Rights Action
League has compiled a report detail-
ing the hysteria of abortion foes in
such locations from Anchorage, Alaska
to Fairfax. The incidents illustrated
by the map and described in the stor-
ies below have all occurred. Six clin-
ic invasions happened the same day,
January 6, 1978, and were conducted
by a group which calls itself "PEACE"-
People Expressing Concern for Everyone.

St. Paul

St. Paul, Minnesota, Planned Parent-
hood Clinic- On February 23, 1977, un-
known persons broke into the Planned
Parenthood Administrative Offices,
soaked the floor with an inflammable
liquid and ignited it. The entire ad-
ministrative floor was destroyed; the
clinic on the floor below suffered
water and smoke damage as did the lib-
rary above. Damages: $250,000.

On February 15, 1978, a profession-
ally constructed bomb which had failed

to explode was found in front of a
plexiglass window at the clinic.

Omaha

Omaha, Nebraska, Ladies Center- In
the middle of the night of August 18,
1977, at least four bottles of gaso-
line were thrown through a clinic win-
dow and ignited. $35,000 worth of dam-
age was done to the clinic, and within
hours “several groups" and the local
newspaper received letters, one of
which read “you'd bomb a concentration
camp- why not abortion centers?"

Cincinnati

Cincinnati, Ohio, Planned Parenthood
of Cincinnati, the Margaret Sanger
Clinic, and the Women's Center- Al-
though the Planned Parenthood clinic
provides no abortions, only family
planning services, a man entered the
clinic in November 1977, and set fire
to a crib in the reception area. About
$4000 worth of damage was done to the
clinic.

The Margaret Sanger Clinic, a Plan-
ned Parenthood owned and operated fac-
ility which does provide abortion ser-
vices in Cincinnati, was the would-be
victim of a failed firebombing attempt.
The bomb hit a window air-conditioner
and did not explode.

A chemical bomb and packets of liter-
ature were thrown through a plate
glass window of the Women's Center in
February 1978. The bomb's key ingred-
ient was an acid so potent that the
clinic had to be closed for nine days.

Cleveland

Cleveland, Ohio, Concerned Women's
Clinic- During the night of February
15, 1978, the clinic was broken into.
All upholstery was slashed, phone lines
cut, centrifuge lines cut, and an io-
dine-like substance was thrown on
walls, floors, and ceilings.

Three days later, someone posing as
a delivery man entered the clinic in
broad daylight while the clinic was
full of patients, threw a chemical
blinder into the eyes of a technician
(she remained sightless for several
hours) and then threw gasoline over
the clinic's lab. The fire he then set
destroyed the entire clinic.

Akron

Akron, Ohio, Akron Women's Clinic-
An arsonist set fire to the bathroom
off the reception area on the evening
of March 1, 1978. Three patients were
in the recovery room. No one was hurt.

Burlington

Burlington, Vermont, Vermont Women's
Center- A firebomb was thrown at the
center May 15, 1978. The front door and
front porch were damaged.

Columbus

Columbus, Ohio, Founder's Clinic- A
firebomb thrown in the back of the
clinic on June 13, 1978 caused only

More on page 25.

Feminists Fly Over Pope

On October 7, 1979, national Pro-
Life day, approximately one million
people gathered to hear Pope John
Paul II give an anti-abortion mass in
Washington, D.C. The Abortion Rights
Movement of Women's Liberation organ-
ized a nationwide fundraising cam-
paign to fly an airplane around the
Pope's mass, trailing a banner saying
"Abortion Is a Woman's Right." The
airplane banner, flown from noon to
3 PM on Sunday, October 7th, directly
and visibly countered the Pope's anti-
abortion sermon with the message of

-Abortion Rights Movement
the majority of Americans across the
country who believe abortion is a
woman's right.

Women across the country funded

this effort. Local A.R.M. chapters,
feminists, and abortion rights activ-
ists have organized actions, includ-
ing picketing and leafletting, to
counter the anti-abortion masses held
in their communities. The protests
stress women's demands to control
their own reproduction without inter-
ference from the church.