culture...
One Role in Cultural Work - More with Holly Near

nd. I think there was a lot of sister-

mediocrity

get artist
hood and
it was just that. 9 :
that was good. It is also a place where we carry art saying, "We are
trying to educate ourselves and other people about such complex issues that we
have to do it brilliantly. We have to be so good that no one can dismiss us.

each other because
to each other. and

Plus we deserve the best we can get...

And when you have a group of women who say they'd rather go to
an industry concert because women's concerts bore them, you have to listen to
that and ask what is missing, and what women want to hear. And then decide whe-
ther what women want to hear you don't agree with, or whether in fact we haven't
been able to provide that to them.

Women's culture and the women's music network have a few major decisions to

I don't think we'll all have to do the same thing. Some women will be able
to do radical lesbian music that encourages the part of us that are separatists
and want to know what it would be like to live in a world without men. There
will be women who will continue to do music for the broader feminist community
to let women have an experience to know how it feels to be just with other wo-
men sometimes. There will be other women who will want to write about feminism
as it relates to women and men relating to each other. All those things will
have to be done. And not all of us will have to do all of it. There should be per-
mission for different women to do different things. Some women may decide it's
better to take some women's music out to the industry - and that will be scary.
You start to lose control over it, and then you say, “How much control do we
have over it anyway? Are we kidding ourselves?”

Weed: When you came out, did you feel that you were simply incorporating ano- Holly Near sings while Susan Freundlich interprets for the hearing impaired.
ther large issue into your political direction and your music? Or did it feel photo by Constance Perenyi
like a real radical break from your direction before?

Hert: No, it was not a change of direction, but something that made everything It's hard for me to predict when I'm going to write a song. I can't just sit
else I had done seem more clear. First of all, it made me get in touch with my down and say, “OK. Now I'm writing." It's almost like I need to surround myself
own oppression, which then made me relate to other people's oppression better. with an issue enough times so that the song just comes out. It's like I'm a
Whereas, before, I was somewhat of a missionary, being a white middle-class Am- channel. Other times I sit down and intellectually make the song happen and
erican. I always was guilt-ridden; no matter what the struggle was I could al- then it grows into itself.

ways take it back to my country, my class, or my color. I was always the one at The best kind of songwriting is when you look at the details of our lives.
fault, and it got demoralizing being part of the bad scene. Getting in touch The most beautiful and poetic songs come when the eyes of the songwriter have
with sexism and oppression of lesbians made me understand oppression from an somehow looks closely at something. You don't just say, “I want to be free."

internalized place; and then I felt like I went back into struggles around anti- You say why you want to be free, what is keeping you from it, and what you
imperialism and against capitalism and racism with a lot more compassion, from would do if you were free - not just generalities, but little details. Finding

a much more centered place. these details makes a song good because everyone in the audience will hear the
The other thing about it was that I was not making clear political decisions song and relate to it. You say something general and you leave the audience

because I didn't have all the information, and the women's community and the wondering if you really have that in common because there's room to doubt in

lesbian community brought me the information I needed to make good decisions. such a general statement.

And I'm sure what scares me is that here I am making decisions now, and I won- And then, you have to make sure that the song empowers the people listening

der what is just around the corner that I don't know now and that is making me to it. You can get up and talk about the evils of the world, but if you don't

make bad decisions. But I won't know until I know, right? But to be making help someone go somewhere with it, when you bring them down but not back up,

decisions about what the goals of political struggle are without understanding then it's like hitting them below the belt. When I go see a film or hear

sexism and homophobia means that you're making decisions in a void, because someone sing who only depresses me but doesn't empower me to rise above it, I

you're leaving two things out that are basic in people's lives. feel furious, like I've really been ripped off.

Weed: I would like to hear you talk about your songwriting process. Do you pick

an issue and decide, "I'm going to write a song about this"? 

Hert: I'm laughing because last night just before the concert I wrote a song The interview with Holly Near ended here as the rally finished. Perhaps the

in 15 minutes. That's not always the way it happens. words of one of her songs, as well as her advice to the crowd not to get
discouraged, best describe her presence at both the demonstration as well as

Weed: I thought that was really brave of you to go out in front of all those the movement in general:

people and sing a song you had just written. 

Hert: I really enjoyed it a lot. A song about anti-nuke stuff has been going A singer of songs,

on in my head and I didn't know what to say. How do you say something poetic A farmer of foods,

with words like "meltdown, nuclear, and radioactive"? They're such boring words. And a writer of wrongs,

So when this finally happened, I was very glad. from "It Could Have Been Me"

How can feminist women find a forum to show and sell their art without putting money back into a gallery system which oppresses both the artist
and the buyer? How can women reach other women with their art, and make sure that their work ends up in the hands of women? And how can an artist secure nontraditional show space while making sure that her show is publicized both within and outside of her own community? 

WOMEN’S ART NETWORK:

For many feminist artists, these art questions have presented a real challenge. First of all, there is the problem of isolation, and the real need that we have to share each other's art outside our own workspaces, and for some women, outside our immediate communities. If a woman decides she wants to sell her art, her options will most likely be limited to certain galleries. Beyond the initial, discouraging process of finding a gallery that will take our art with a minimum of personal and artistic compromise on our parts, there is the whole question of commission. Most spaces take a large (often between 30-50%) cut from the price of each work sold; and in order to cover costs of her own production, an artist must ask significantly higher prices than if she were to distribute directly. This keeps art where it always has been - on the walls of those who can afford it.

Out of these considerations, the preliminary outline for a local women's art group has developed. As conceived, the WOMEN’S ART NETWORK will function as an ad hoc committee each time a woman within the group, or who wants to work with the group, wishes to show her art. The process will be as follows: the NETWORK will secure an alternative space (outreach is now underway to compile a list of possible, available spaces that we can use for free, or for low costs). It must be centrally located, open and staffed as often as possible, and non-oppressive in atmosphere. As the dates of the show are set, the NETWORK will publicize the event. Each artist, as a working member of the group, will decide how she wants her show billed: as a women's only show or if they have agreed to before.

Instead of paying commission (a gallery is largely maintained by the artists who use its space), women involved in the NETWORK will be asked to make a contribution if they can, and if they have agreed to before. 

For more information, contact Constance Perenyi
Big Mama Rag
1724 Gaylord Street
Denver, Colorado 80206