Depo-Provera

The National Women's Health Network, Inc. (NWHN) recently established a national registry for women receiving Depo-Provera, a hazardous injectable contraceptive not approved as safe by the FDA for birth control. Depo-Provera, otherwise known as the birth control "shot," already has been shown to cause long- and short-term infertility, possible sterility, severe menstrual disorders, hair loss, excessive weight gain, and depression. Moreover, the Network has found that, despite new evidence linking Depo-Provera to uterine cancer in monkeys, it continues to be used, especially among poor, minority, and institutionalized women.

"The FDA has taken no action to alert physicians and the public to this new evidence,” NWHN director Belita Cowan said. "We are establishing this national registry in order to identify and to assist women who may have been injured by the drug."

Two women already have sued their doctors for injuries allegedly sustained as a result of taking Depo-Provera. Both women claimed they were not told of risks before being given the drug. A 36-year-old New Haven woman developed cancer of the uterus ten months after she started receiving the drug. She has filed suit against her gynecologists and the drug's manufacturer, Upjohn Co. A 25-year-old black Los Angeles woman experienced depression, hair loss, nervous tension, and weight gain while taking Depo-Provera.

Women who at any time have received a contraceptive by injection, or who know of others who have, should write to: National Women's Health Network, 2025 I Street, N.W., Suite 105, Washington, D.C. 20006.

"In the event that women bring lawsuits against their doctors or the manufacturers of the drug,” Cowan said, "the Network will provide assistance. In addition, the Network has sent letters warning the AMA and ACOG (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists) about the possibility of malpractice suits."

Nurses’ Charges Ignored

A grand jury had indicted anesthesiologist William E. Miofsky on charges of having forced fellatio on five unconscious women and a 12-year-old girl. The alleged victims were all patients undergoing surgery at Sutter Memorial Hospital in Sacramento, CA, where Dr. Miofsky was chief of anesthesiology.

Dr. Miofsky's sexual activities with comatose women - which possibly endangered them - were apparently noticed a full two years before he was forced to resign. Beginning in February 1977, several operating room nurses are said to have suspected that he might be putting his penis into the mouths of anesthetized patients under cover of surgical drapes. When William A. Schaeffer, the hospital's administrator, learned of the allegations in early 1978, he dismissed them as implausible.

Finally, a group of nurses filed a written report with Schaeffer asserting that Dr. Miofsky had committed oral copulation with the anesthetized 12-year-old girl last January 8th. Dr. Miofsky resigned January 12th after being confronted with the charges.

Prophetically, in February 1977, a study commissioned by the hospital found its board of directors resembled "an ‘old boys' club" with 9 of its 15 members doctors. The study noted that "the question of physicians at trustee level passing on evaluations done by themselves...is coming under increasing criticism."

The low status of nurses is being used to explain how Dr. Miofsky could go unchecked for so long, since their reports were apparently ignored. The California Nurses Association says the current probe spotlights "the general powerlessness of nurses," and it has joined several women's groups in picketing Sutter Memorial and demonstrating at the anesthesiologist's arraignment.

(Information from Medical World News)

Nurses from other hospitals are non-committal. Nurses who have worked for organizing believe that collective bargaining would bring an increase in base salaries from the current $6 an hour to $10 an hour or more. Nurses are also asking for better working conditions, a shorter work week, and more time to spend with their patients. (For background information see August 1979 issue of Big Mama Rag.)

Lesbian Conference

Plans for the conference, scheduled for September 28-30 at the Landmark Inn, are progressing.

Lucia Valeska, co-executive director of the National Gay Task Force, will deliver the keynote address Saturday morning. Valeska, who has been active in feminist, lesbian, and gay rights organizations for more than a decade, is the founder of the women's studies program at the University of New Mexico and an organizer of the Albuquerque, New Mexico chapter of the National Lesbian Feminist Organization.

Headlining the entertainment will be Gwen Avery, a blues singer and pianist who records for Olivia Records. She has performed for the past several years in the San Francisco Bay area and will be at the Michigan Women's Festival before she appears in Denver.

More than 50 workshops are planned to discuss issues on health, sexuality, relationships, politics, art, culture, jobs, and legal problems.

In recognition of lesbians' unique experiences, the conference encourages mutual respect for privacy and confidentiality of participants.

The Denver lesbian community is encouraged to help house participants. Housing will be available at the Landmark Inn, Colorado Boulevard and Cherry Creek Drive.

Registration for the conference is $5 for women on limited incomes, $15 regular, and $25 sponsoring.

An office for the conference is open from 9 am to noon Monday through Friday and from 10 am to 4 pm Saturday at 1553 High Street, No. 4, in Denver.

Volunteers and donations are still needed. To register or for further information, call 355-3732 or write P.O. Box 18767, Denver, CO 80218.

Girls

A young Black woman testified that she had been placed in solitary confinement with restraints on her arms and legs which forced her to lie on the floor with her legs apart for 24 hours. On two separate occasions, she was locked in solitary confinement for a total of 58 days.

Detention "warehouses" have become big business. In many instances, whole towns depend on them for jobs. Legislators consider the wishes of their constituents over the plight of unwanted children. That the suicide rate among youths 14 to 19 has increased 200 percent does not affect the number of votes that politicians receive. Many politicians are pushing for more detention centers (cleaning up crime). The people of the United States are paying with their tax dollars for the destruction of young people, for the treatment of neglected, runaway, and unwanted children as hardened criminals.

Recently, exposes have awakened some concern among the people. A three-year study concludes that children placed in institutions are victims of a massive failure of national policy.

While the Children's Express, the Children's Defense Fund, and the National Office for Social Responsibility have taken steps to expose the problem, it is primarily women's groups that are monitoring Juvenile Justice.

Reference: Goodman, Vera. "Juvenile Detention for Girls a Horror," The Women's Press for Women. (Summer, 1979).