State Abortion News

Hospitals Boycott Called

Constance Perenyi

CLINIC INVASION DAY

Quietly promoted by right-to-life forces across the country, August 9, 1980 was designated as Clinic Invasion Day. In Denver, at least one site, the Rocky Mountain Planned Parenthood Abortion Clinic at 2030 East 20th Avenue, was targeted by anti-abortionists for an early morning picket. The protest was small and went unobserved by local press; and to the best knowledge of the Planned Parenthood staff, theirs was the only Denver clinic to be “invaded.”

According to staff person Gail Diekman, Planned Parenthood received a note from the National Abortion Federation warning of the right-to-life plans for August 9th. (The Federation is a national organization devoted to the quality of abortion care in clinics throughout the United States, and is privately funded by contributions and membership fees.) Tipped off in advance, abortion clinic staff planned a counter-demonstration, which Diekman stated was effective because all the demonstrators had dispersed by 11:00 a.m.

Another staffer, Donna Burt, described the event as being very quiet and peaceful. No one from the clinic—employees or patients—were harassed by the small gathering, which Burt estimated at about fifteen people, mostly middle-aged women, a few men, and a child in a stroller. Counter-demonstrators were clinic personnel and friends who had been called in advance. They carried signs with slogans such as "Freedom," and "Don't Let The Government Rule Your Life," and they distributed leaflets defending Planned Parenthood's pro-choice stance.

Burt said that she had not heard much about similar protests in other parts of the country, although she understood that there had been “some noise" in the Midwest. All in all, she perceived that August 9th had been uneventful in most cities, just as it had been in Denver. Pleased with the counter-demonstration, she noted that the "pro-lifers" and the staff had mingled together in the picket, that they were not lined up against each other. And again, Burt reiterated that the interaction had been "very, very quiet."

STATUS OF FUNDING

With the June, 1980 Supreme Court decision to uphold the anti-abortion Hyde Amendment (see BMR, Vol. 8 No. 7), Medicaid funding of abortions for poor women is once again up in the air. Colorado was the first state to pick up the Medicaid tab after abortion had been legalized in the early 1970s; but in light of this summer's ruling, continued funding is certain to be challenged in the state legislature. When asked about this, Donna Burt responded that she has heard rumors that this issue will come up on the floor of the Colorado House as early as January, 1981. From what she has been told (presumably by people involved in the legislative process), she believes that the state will probably foot the Medicaid bills again—at least for the upcoming year. These are year-by-year appropriations which will become even more uncertain as right-to-life forces continue to exert political pressure on individual state legislators. But for 1981, Burt is confident that abortion funding for women on Medicaid will be secure.

ANALYSIS

No matter how quiet the August 9th Clinic Invasion Day was, no matter how long state abortion funds are guaranteed, we are aware that women's right to abortion is constantly under attack. The recent upholding of the Hyde Amendment is an assault on poor women that foretells of future attacks on all women—whether we can afford to pay for an abortion or not. As Burt observed, we all seem to live day by day, watching the state legislature, watching the mounting forces of the right-wing.

The right-to-life movement is well-organized and dangerous; "lifers" have money, and they have power. If the August 9th action is any indication of current tactics, they are keeping a low profile at this point; but this does not mean that their forces are diminishing or that their energies are flagging. If anything, it means that their battle is becoming more subtle, and potentially more acceptable to increasing numbers of "middle Americans."

As feminists, we can confront these tactics by making our voices heard whenever and wherever we can. At work, in our social groups, and in our political organizing, we can point out the dangers of the right-to-life movement and let others know that we stand behind the right of all women to free and safe abortions. The issue of abortion is relevant to all women, and it is clearly a “right” that none of us can afford to take for granted.

Suit Settled

Mildred Gibbs, a 30-year-old woman from Thornton, Colorado who sued the city of Thornton for $200,000 after she was strip-searched following an arrest for a minor traffic violation, has agreed to a $15,000 out-of-court settlement.

Arrested on February 10, 1980, Gibbs was first subjected to rough treatment by the arresting officer, and then was further shocked and humiliated by a strip-search conducted by Gail Skuckes, a civilian dispatcher, while a policeman watched through the window of her jail cell. (See BMR, Vol. 8 No. 2 for complete story).

Gibbs was represented by the American Civil Liberties Union in her suit, filed in April in Denver District Court. Scheduled to begin October 14, the trial site had been changed to Grand Junction because of pre-trial publicity.

Although there has not been a statement from either Gibbs or ACLU attorney Cassandra Sasso, the settlement has been confirmed by an attorney representing the National Insurance Association, the insurance carrier for the City of Thornton.

The suit filed by Gibbs prompted an investigation of Thornton strip-search policies and the subsequent suspension of Police Lt. Ronald Strachan, who, according to the City Manager, had issued a standing order that all persons be strip-searched before being booked into the Adams County Jail. Also, the officer who arrested Gibbs was “reprimanded” for letting the woman's 10-year-old daughter walk home alone after the arrest.

Susan Goding

The Denver Federation of Nurses and Health Professionals has called for a boycott against four Denver area hospitals. The Federation won bargaining elections for nurses and technicians at St. Luke's Hospital, St. Anthony's Hospital, Beth Israel Hospital and Rocky Mountain Osteopathic Hospital last winter. Three have refused to bargain; Rocky Mountain is showing up at the bargaining table, however the Federation feels they are not bargaining in good faith.

The Federation's bargaining goals include:

a) Responsible negotiations

b) Job security

c) Cost of living adjustments

d) Safe levels of staffing for patient units

e) Improved health services to Denver citizens.

"We have been ready to sit down at the bargaining table and negotiate our differences with management since last March," said Carol Robertson, RN. “The hospitals have to start taking our concerns for patient care and working conditions more seriously. We can't continue providing quality services to people when we are overworked and understaffed." St. Anthony's Hospital management is requiring nurses in obstetrics and orthopedics to work extra shifts or be fired.

The Federation is grieving the hospitals' illegal refusals to bargain through the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB). The NLRB has ordered the hospitals to bargain; however, three have refused. The NLRB is now preparing to take them to the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals in order to seek compliance in negotiations.

Local AFDC Mothers Vs. The Welfare System

Kim Womantree

On September 8, 1980, at 5 p.m. in Courtroom C-202 of the United States District Court, 19th and Stout Streets, a hearing on a class action suit by Denver mothers against the Colorado Department of Social Services will be held.

All persons who are now or will be receiving AFDC (Aid to Families with Dependent Children) are included in the class action. Lorraine Irish is the named plaintiff.

The plaintiffs charge that the Colorado Department of Social Services has been conducting their Monthly Reporting Experiment in violation of Federal and State laws. The Monthly Reporting Experiment meant that each AFDC parent in the Denver area has had to fill out a MSR (monthly status report) in order to get their next month's welfare check.

The plaintiffs charge that as a result of this program people were cut off welfare that needed it, that checks have come in late or not at all, the notice of cutoffs was not given soon enough, and that the whole experiment was conducted without legal authority.

This author knows several welfare mothers. One's check came late, and, when she called her welfare worker's supervisor to complain, her worker responded by cutting off aid. Another mother, when her Monthly Status Report was a little late, or some trivia was in error, was threatened with cutoff to the bureaucrats.

The defendants (Colorado Department of Social Services, et al) deny the charges.

The proposed settlement provides that:

A) AFDC checks will be processed with 50% greater frequency each month.

B) AFDC recipients will not be required to correct errors and omissions in person unless such corrections are of a grant changing nature and could affect the status of the applicant as a recipient.

C) Applications for AFDC that are complete and correct will be processed and the payments made without waiting for third party documentation (income proof; statements from landlords, utility bills, school reports) unless it is required by the Monthly Status Report and not submitted with the report.

While the case is pending, some changes in the MSR will already be in effect and AFDC recipients will get more notice before their benefits are cut off.

All members of the class get the benefits of the settlement whether they go to the final hearing or not.

The purpose of the hearing, according to the notice sent out to AFDC mothers, is to “determine whether the proposed settlement is proper, fair, and reasonable, and adequate, and should be approved by the Court."

ANALYSIS

What anyone with sense could summarize from all this is that the Welfare system hopes to get women off welfare by driving them through a hopeless tangle of red tape. "Changes" in the MSR won't be enough by itself to change the power relations between women and the bureaucracy; but it is a start. The fact that it is a class action suit, that it will directly affect AFDC mothers' lives in that they will have less hassles getting their checks each month; and most of all, just the fact of resistance to the bureaucrats, makes it a case all women, all feminists should support.

Some childcare will be provided in the corridor outside the courtroom.