hot briefs

Female Supremacy

Candidates for Japan's Women's Party, which advocates supremacy of women, say they are undergoing intensive karate training to prepare for fights with male members of parliament.

Risako Enoki, president of the party, says, “What is unique about our party is that we are not trying to achieve equality, but supremacy over men."

--Her Say

Oaths Shock Men

Women may be bricklayers in England, but only as long as they lay off foul language. A woman bricklayer was fired for using foul language in an argument with her male boss.

She appealed her firing to the Labor Tribunal in London, which upheld the firing.

Mock Funeral

Hundreds of New York City parents and workers held an elaborate and dramatic mock funeral for the city's Family Day Care program in late April.

The demonstration dramatized their opposition to the "freeze" on intake of new children into the program. The year-old “freeze” has already cut family day care programs by 1/3.

--LNS

More Bread

A threatened bread strike over an equal pay claim affecting 6,000 women workers in England was called off at the last minute when employers gave in to the Baker's Union demands.

The Union wanted to equalize the pay scales for women producing "morning goods," such as bread rolls. As this means upgrading, the big bread firms suggested the men go down a grade instead and take a cut in wages.

--Spane Rib

Insensitivity Award

New York State NOW has awarded Werner Kramarsky, State Commissioner of Human Rights, its first Annual Ethical Insensitivity Award. The Award was in response to a new ruling by the Division of Human Rights allowing Division employees to accept gifts valued at less than $25 from people having cases before or doing business with the Division...

--Spokeswoman

Female Satisfaction

Two studies on female sexuality at University of California and San Jose State University found that of two groups of women, 162 lesbians and 100 randomly selected women, only 18% of the random sample almost always experienced orgasm during lovemaking as opposed to 87% of the lesbians surveyed.

Kiss And Tell

Prostitutes in Madrid, Spain, have organized themselves into a union and say that unless they get proper medical care and nationalized brothels, they will reveal the names of top men in Government and business who use their services.

--Lesbian Connection

Pregnancy Benefits

Further Congressional hearings on a pregnancy benefits bill have been tentatively scheduled in the House for June 29th.

The proposed law would restore women's legal rights to receive sick pay and disability benefits while pregnant by closing those loopholes in the 1964 Civil Rights Act which allowed the Supreme Court last year to rule out pregnancy benefits for women.

AT&T On Welfare?

The biggest welfare recipient in the country is American Telephone & Telegraph.

According to the books, the company earned a record pretax income of $6 billion in 1976. Theoretically, corporations are supposed to follow a 48% tax rate on earnings. But AT&T used a variety of tax loopholes to evade all but 9.4% of the tax, thereby avoiding $2.4 billion in taxes. That's just $2.6 billion less than what President Carter hopes to save by slashing current welfare rolls.

--Guardian

Paper Folds

After five years of publishing, The Other Woman, one of Canada's oldest feminist newspapers, is folding.

Lack of money and woman power are the causes. As they explained in a press release, “We are down to three and disheartened." Donations to help pay back bills are needed desperately.

If you can send some money or want to buy back issues or T-shirts ($6 includes postage), write The Other Woman, Box 928, Station 9, Toronto 7, Ontario, Canada.

European Feminists

The first European Feminist Press Conference was held in Paris this March with representatives from England, France, Holland, Belgium, Germany, Italy, and Spain; and women's publications.

The women introduced their papers and exchanged views on their work and on their goals. The conference was an important new step in uniting European women's movements.

May saw a conference on "Women in the Class Struggle."

Male Incompetency

Eight women volunteer firefighters in Superior, Wyoming, resigned in disgust because the male volunteers didn't take the work seriously. One of the town's two fire trucks was almost lost when a male firefighter parked it downwind of a brush fire.

The women couldn't tolerate the inefficiency of the men any longer. The men thought it was a joke to fight fires, then go drink a beer, tell stories, and leave the women to clean up the trucks.

Too Bad

The next man without a country could be Syracuse truck driver Norman Kopp. Kopp says he's so disgusted with the Women's Liberation Movement in the U.S. that he's decided to give up his U.S. citizenship completely.

Kopp tried to surrender his citizenship recently in Syracuse, but officials there didn't want it either.

The truck driver was told he would have to travel to a foreign country first.

--Her Say

‘Natural’ Violence

A coalition of women's groups in Wisconsin has launched a drive to recall the Madison judge who ruled that rape of a 16-year-old woman in the hall of her high school was a "natural" response of a 15-year-old boy to the woman's provocative clothing.

The Madison City Council has voted unanimously to censure the judge and a state legislator will introduce legislation to have the judge censured.

The women's coalition wants the judge off the bench.

‘It's your own fault for being built that way.’

Wanrow Retrial

Yvonne Wanrow will be retried on murder charges. Yvonne was convicted in 1973 of killing a known child molester while she was protecting her children; that conviction was overturned on appeal. The State of Washington has now decided to retry her.

Susan Jordan, who successfully defended Inez Garcia, has agreed to represent Yvonne. The trial is set for September 26, 1977.

--Through the Looking Glass

House Women

There's something new in this year's Congress—the Congresswomen's Caucus. The Caucus is comprised of almost all women in Congress and is a way for Congresswomen to work together for all women.

Clothes Make The MD

Lillie Walker was thrown out of George Washington University Medical School two weeks before graduation and is going to court over it.

The 35-year-old black woman was expelled due to a failing grade in a psychiatry externship. One of the reasons given was her "clothing which was inappropriate," as were her expressions. It's probably that a large black woman, wearing long dresses and an afro, was too much for the all-white clinic where she was working.

Lillie will fight this under a Washington D.C. law which makes discrimination on the basis of dress illegal.

--Our backs

Abortion Demos

Over 10,000 people marched in London last month in a protest against a bill pending in the parliament which would allow police scrutiny of abortion records and impose restrictions on doctors who sign consent certificates for abortions.

Similar demonstrations went on last month in New Zealand and Quebec demanding abortion rights.

Joan Little

Joan Little is now on a work-release program working as a dental assistant. A dentist hearing she had been denied work-release because of no openings created the job especially for her.

Judge Bounced

Detroit Circuit Judge Neal Fitzgerald has been removed from a sex discrimination suit after he was accused of making anti-female remarks from the bench.

The case involved a suit against the all-male membership of the Boy's Club of Detroit.

Among other remarks, the Judge told the court that girls want to join Boy's Clubs primarily to meet boys, and that girls cry too much over nothing.

‘LESBIAN
TE

ANALYSIS INTERVIEWS
NEWS REVIEWS POETRY

The best feminist publication in the U.S., since 1971
The best feminist publication in the U.S., 1,700 circulating)

For analysis of the situation.
SHOULD be 16

Tenement aid and gay communities.
$10.00 institutions. $1.25 sample
For advertising and bulk distribution rates write

TIDE PUBLICATIONS
BS" —Staragus Ave. Los Angeles, CA 90034
(213) 839-7254