national

Oakland City Govt. Can Attack The Homeless

(Information for the following article was taken from the August, 1983 issue of ‘The Burning Spear, Box 27205, Oakland, CA 94602. Edited by Lone Baudgond.)

On July 18, 1983 an abandoned house, vacant for over 17 months, was seized by the Black Community Control Committee to house a homeless black family--Marilyn X and her 4 children. Upon arriving at the abandoned house more than 50 people immediately began to tear the boards from the windows to turn an abandoned dwelling into a home for Marilyn X and her kids. The red, black and green black liberation flag was raised on the rooftop of the liberated house.

There are over 600 abandoned houses in Oakland--some owned/controlled by the city--others by white "absentee" landlords--in a city where over 2,000 people were turned away from emergency shelter last week. The city sees the empty houses as a "problem"—as centers for “criminal activity; the city/state sees homeless people as a "problem", as "criminals"; psychiatry has defined 80-90% of the homeless as "mentally ill". The liberation of an abandoned house by the black community proved what the Oakland city government couldn't stand for...that homelessness could be solved in the city of Oakland.

The work of Black people, along with other Third World peoples, built this country and yet they remain the poorest people in this country. 1/8 of the black population is in prison or jail; one out of 4 Black men in this country will go to prison in his lifetime. Black people must fight for control in their own community because white people/the city own the property and profit in all communities. A 400 year history of black slavery and colonization—and also 400 years of Black resistance is continued in the city of Oakland when the Black community took action themselves to house the homeless, to connect racism, colonization, poverty and homelessness of Black people. After the city of Oakland said it would cost $46,000 to renovate the house and the Black community was doing it by organizing community support and militant action, the city/police had to move in to stop the work.

On July 20th at 7 a.m. a military assault was waged by the Oakland cops and the house now remains occupied by the police instead of homeless Black people.

Community organizing and struggle and confrontation of the city government has/will continue in Oakland. Demonstration/marches have been organized. African Peoples Socialist Party and the Black Community Control Committee have presented a "Comprehensive Housing Program for Black Community Control"—demanding an end to existing property relations.

We, women must support the Black Liberation Movement, the action of the APSP and BPCC to solve homelessness and we must act in opposition to a government that has in mind the genocide of Black people and keeping homeless people homeless or jailed and institutionalized.

At a press conference called by the African People's Socialist Party and Black Community Control Committee in Oakland, CA.-- Rick Ayers, Lawson T. Venson, Mary Hannah, Marilyn X, Omali Yeshitela, Omowale Kefing, along with other community members, made statements to and answered questions from the press. Statements about the police raid by Marilyn X, Mary Hannah, Opa Hamilton and Ilene Abrams follow: (for the entire transcript of the press conference write The Burning Spear)

Marilyn X

My name is Marilyn X. I went to the site this morning and five police, five police—they saw that I was pregnant, I had no sweater on—five police physically lifted me up, had me spread-eagled. My legs were open, my arms were open, they took me and they forced me into the ambulance. I was already tied down. Everybody was holding me on my arms and my legs. The police had no reason to pull my hair out. I have a bald spot on my head right now.

I was then held like I said, this new hold where they can take your two fingers without anybody seeing them and pull them back. I was still being held, and this is five police. I told them and they saw that I was pregnant. I told them that I would walk away, but they didn't wait for me to walk away. They had to take me off; they couldn't wait for me to go down two or three steps.

After they got me in the ambulance, I was strapped down. They took me to Highland Hospital. First they took me to the Maternity Ward. I have a private doctor, so I refused to see anybody else. Because I refused to be seen by any other doctor, they took me to the Psychiatric Ward. In the Psychiatric Ward, I was experiencing pains in my stomach, and I told everybody there. I was shackled—my arms were shackled and my feet were shackled. There was no reason for them to shackle me because I was not violent. If I was violent, I would have proved it in the Maternity Ward. If I was so violent, the nurse wouldn't have asked me to hold the temperature box, if I was so violent. If I was so violent, the nurse wouldn't have been able to take my vitals, my blood pressure, if I was so violent.

But when I got down to that Psychiatric Ward, they had to shackle me down. They did it against my will. I told them I wasn't going to hurt anybody, and I was experiencing what I thought were pains, but what I found out later were false contractions. When I told my doctor about these contractions, my feet were still shackled. There was a woman before, and she had a baby in a penitentiary hospital and they did not unshackle her feet fast enough. They didn't have to shackle my feet if my arms were already shackled. I asked them to unshackle my feet. I wasn't going to hurt anybody. They refused to do that. They left me in a room by myself, with me experiencing, now that I've found it out, false labor pains. They left me there. One nurse came in there to see about me, and I asked her, I said, "Please, please unshackle something on me." So she unshackled my arms and they still left me there.

CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

national

Black People But Cannot Attack Poverty Homelessness

Opa Hamilton

I was there this morning. I spent the night there, and I'd say between 7 and 7:30 this morning the police led their attack on Marilyn's house. All I heard them saying was, “Contain 'em, contain 'em." There were some of us that were outside, sleeping outside in a shelter. So they circled us and took us off to the sidewalk. Then they went up to the house and they said that they were the police and to get back from the door. They then rammed the door down. They took out the people from the inside. I couldn't see it too well, but the people were chanting and they were being really strong on the inside.

Then they told a couple of us to get some of our things together, so we were picking up a couple of our things. One of the other solidarity workers, which is what I am, a solidarity worker, was telling the police who were in the middle of this arrest of three other workers there, she was telling them to leave them alone and not hurt them. They came right up in front of her and did a two-hand choke right on her throat. They just choked her and she couldn't breathe. Then they stopped for a second and some of them were laughing and then they choked her again. There's an elderly woman who lives next door. At that point she went in and threw up, as she told me. So they arrested that solidarity worker.

Then Marilyn came up on the steps there. She was telling them that they were trespassing on her property, that she wasn't trespassing and it was her house. She said that she lived there, and was just being really strong. They didn't want to hear her, they didn't want to hear anything she had to say. Then, like she said, five policemen came and they grabbed her arms and her legs. They were really rough, and they didn't need to be. She was just talking; it wasn't like she was trying to fight anybody or anything, and she was pregnant out to here. So they carried her to the stretcher and they put her on the stretcher. They put straps all over her, and they strapped her down to the stretcher. They were pulling her hair, and they put her in the ambulance. They told us they were going to commit her. Then everybody was getting upset about that. Then one of the news stations, Channel 7, came by and the policeman who led the whole thing said, "We're just going to take her and make sure she's all right." This was after they told us they were going to commit her, and there was no reason to commit her. She was just standing on her own front porch and they were trying to evict her.

Ilene Abrams

We have been doing some investigation into the use of ambulances. We understand that an ambulance driver can't keep anyone in an ambulance who doesn't want to be there unless they're given what they call a 5150 order; or a psychiatric hold. If they have this order then they can transport the person as long as they have a police car following the ambulance the entire way, because ambulance crews are not police, they're only there to transport sick people to the hospital. We understand that they did not issue that 5150 order on Marilyn X until after she had already gotten to Highland Hospital. They did not have a police car following until they were within one block of Highland Hospital. The county radio told the ambulance drivers to keep the patient in the ambulance until the police got there, which is totally illegal for ambulance drivers. So basically, Marilyn was being kidnapped.

Mary Hannah

My name is Mary and I do want to tell you this: I am in this area, in the community where they came and took over this house. First I want to say that I am the mother of ten children and I have lived in a two-bedroom home with ten children. I know what it means to have a place to stay, room enough for your children to sleep without being lumped on top of each other, without boys and girls having to sleep in the same room.

When they came and did this, to me, it made me feel really good. Because even now, I would like to have my own home. I'm living in an apartment now, but I would like to have my own home. I've been wanting it for 20 years, and I still haven't ever received it. There's so many black kids living in awful places right now that need a home, which I have signed up to take on.

I really think it's a good thing for the community, with all these houses boarded up and people that don't even have places to stay. I've even let friends stay with me and my children because they don't have a place to stay. I really don’t think it's necessary for these houses to be empty like they are, and people do need a place to live.

Even at the place I'm living in now, which is housing, everything that we have to come up on, which I am on—AFDC—we have to pay out to fix up the house. It's not just fixing it, you have to pay for that stuff. If we had our own home and our own property, we'd be more than willing to do it.

This is something to challenge it and build towards something that we are doing for ourselves. I'm talking about the black people standing up and doing something for ourselves. But when we try to do something for ourselves, we're always being kicked out. If we all stick together and then get up as a group and as a community, then we can overcome this. One thing about it—we have to stick together. We looked for what happened, but we didn't look for it to happen as bad as it did on Sister Marilyn. But we had expected it anyway, because we knew what was going to come about. So it is.

But this is supposed to make us stronger, not weaker. If you had to raise 10 children by yourself, or even say five or four, you know what it means to be in a two-bedroom place with 10 kids in it and you're trying to survive with rats and roaches running all over. When you see the chance to get yourself a home of your own, well, you'd say hey, this is ours. You know, hey, that feels good. And I want to say I am definitely going to keep right on participating in it and give them as much support as I can because I want one myself.

Big Mama Rag, October 1983 - Page 15