IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Politics of Health Reprint

Friends

Terra

Life today is crazy. Profit, rather
than the fulfillment of the people's
needs, is the driving force. Hierar-
chies of power lead to hierarchies of
reward and lifestyle -- differentia-
tions which lead to greed and discon-
tent. With large concentrations of
population come more problems of in-
teraction, fear, and sensory over-
stimulation. Traffic jams. Meaning-
less, boring jobs sap energy. Rapes
increase. Rapid changes in technology
are echoed by rapid moral and life-
style changes, with resulting confu-
sion for many, and conflicts between
most.

Such a life creates or aggravates
certain needs. The need for personal
contact is aggravated by alienating
jobs, misinterpreted differentiations
between affection and sexual desire,
and the isolation of apartment com-
plexes. Emotional release becomes
more difficult to attain when we must
control our feelings towards bosses,
must be careful not to get too in-
volved in passing relationships, and
must speed from activity to activity.
The need to feel control over one's
own life becomes urgently important
after having been violated by rape or
robbery, or through having to do what-
ever we're told at work every day.

All of the changes happening leave
many with the need to reorder our
lives -- changing jobs, acquiring or
leaving lovers, or facing the death
of someone loved. All of these added
hassles put even more importance and
strain on the need to deal with our
interpersonal relationships. Some-
times it gets to the point of needing
to connect with some reality that we
can both live with, and still survive
with in today's world.

These problems may reach out-of-
control proportions because we do not
take the time or know how to be aware
of our feelings. We may be hectically
rushing or watching TV during all
our leisure hours.

Another reason a crisis may build
up is communications problems. Even
if we are aware, if we find it diffi-
cult to express what we think or feel
we are bound to have added frustra-
tion. Others of us may use inappro-
priate ways to express our feelings
which alienate us from other people
or land us in jail.

Being aware and able to communicate
necessitates an accepting attitude
towards the feelings and thoughts we
might have, and enough self-esteem to
risk criticism or rejection for what
we may say.

Another necessity to meeting our
needs is knowing of possible ways we
can feel comfortable fulfilling them.
This is why therapy is such a popular
solution to dealing with problems
today -- it is well publicized and
sanctioned by authorities in our
society.

Not believing that we can solve our
problems by ourselves or with the help
of friends (rather than professionals)
is a key to how therapy works, and
now it is often perverted. Although
studies have shown therapy to be no
more effective for "curing" people
than if they just live through the
problem, people believe that thera-
pists can help them more than other
people could.

Admitting that one has a problem
can be the first step to solving it,
by giving oneself necessary attention.

USE YOUR BRAINS!
BE A MAN, SON.
NO CRYING OR

SISSY STUFF!!

Admitting that one needs professional
help can mean two very different
things. One is that we are giving
our power to heal ourselves over to
someone else, that we will change
under the direction of someone else.
Or it could mean that we have decided
to get some new input which might
help us solve our own problem. Ther-
apeutic situations tend to be con-
ducive to the former attitude, how-
ever, since there is a mystique built
up around the professional therapist.
Also, someone who is asking for help
is in a vulnerable position in the
relationship by revealing a weakness,
while the therapist usually tries to
reveal only an image of knowledge and
strength.

So how can people deal with the
hurts, the emptiness, the confusion
in their lives besides going to ther-
apists?

The biggest asset in dealing with
problems (outside of one's own aware-
ness and strength) is friends. Being
with people who accept and respect us
really helps us to accept and respect
ourselves. Being touched, skin to
skin by someone we love may be the
most soothing remedy and the most
stimulating energy boost.

Friends are people we can share
both our joys and sorrows with, in a
reciprocal way, in many different
situations; thus turning to a friend
with a problem does not have to make
the whole relationship one of de-
pendency -- chances are that someday
that friend will come back for the
same kind of help herself. A problem
may arise when one's circle of friends
is small and a problem concerns sever-
al members. But while dealing with
interpersonal problems face-to-face
may be scary, it may be the most
honest and effective method.

Those that don't have friends --
that is a problem in itself which
might be dealt with by one of the
other alternatives. In a crisis when
a friend is not available, a crisis
referral line may be helpful as an
immediate step.

A variation on therapy may be an-
other way to attack a problem. Short-
term, specific classes where people
are taught skills to help them get
their needs fulfilled would avoid
heavy dependency trips and put more
of the responsibility on the indivi-
dual. There are such classes already
available for such skills as problem
solving, expressing emotions, asser-
tiveness, communication skills, and
special groups for transitions such
as divorce, mourning, and having a
new child. Specific classes would
also require that participants had
named a specific goal to work towards.

Another possibility is getting in-
volved in a community project. Po-
litical projects may offer new defin-
itions of an individual's situation
which may help externalize bad feel-
ings, showing the origin of problems
to be the oppressive environment.
Externalizing problems may become
dysfunctional however, if it results
in only complaining about being op-
pressed and not doing anything to
counteract it. In this form, it
can seriously drag down the project.

Such thinking may also become just
another way to avoid responsibility
for making personal changes. However,
when concrete changes are worked to-
wards, the actual conditions that
lead to craziness in us all are gra-
dually eliminated. Such work also
offers the feeling of accomplishment
and pride in knowing we can do our
part in making important things hap-
pen, returning control over part of
our own lives.

Also included by some political
projects is criticism/self-criticism
whereby interpersonal processes and
communications are discussed and
everyone has a chance to learn to im-
prove her skills in these areas. Such
a process would also guard against
personal problems impeding the pro-
ject.

Just becoming educated in feminist
theory and women's history may be
helpful to a woman's self-esteem. By
doing so we realize that our herstory
has been hidden and perverted and
that women can do and have done impor-
tant things since time began.

Consciousness-raising groups also
help redefine what may be personal
problems to some into social problems,
and thus make them something to be
fought together rather than alone.

CR groups usually make a point of
giving everyone the opportunity to
express her thoughts and feelings.
Thus they are also a good place to
practice communication skills.

Physical activity can be a good
way to release built-up tensions, to
promote health and the awareness of
our bodies. Physical symptoms are
important reminders that tension is
building up and that the situation
may lead to bigger problems if not
changed. In the meantime, and for
tensions that can't be changed (such
as a lousy but necessary job), activ-
ities like dancing, yoga, exercises
and massage help keep tension from
reaching the bursting point, and make
life more livable. The attitude
towards such activities makes a big
difference -- if viewed as another
thing that has to be done, or if a
competitive or non-self-accepting
attitude prevails it may be just
another added stress.

Another helpful skill to release
tensions is meditation/relaxation
techniques. It's possible to get
the relaxation without big expense or
unnecessary patriarchal spiritual
trips -- there are many books and
magazines describing techniques.
There are also classes and tape re-
cordings on relaxation techniques
available, and a woman-inspired tech-
nique called Womancraft. Such tech-
niques are not meant as an ultimate
solution, but as ways to release
tensions to a point where one may
more clearly deal with the situations
leading to those tensions.

Some women are gaining in self-
awareness and self-esteem by getting
into spirituality. Others gain it
through creative endeavors. Just
as there must be fifty ways to leave
your lover, there must be as many
positive ways to deal with problems
that would otherwise build up into
major mental health catastrophes.

Young Lesbian Faces Extradition

Deborah Taylor

Cecilia Gonzales is a 20-year-old
Chicana lesbian out on bail in San
Francisco. She is now waiting for
possible extradition back to Colorado
State Mental Institution from which
she escaped in May of this year.

Cecilia was arrested in August of
1973 in Colorado in connection with
a shooting incident when she was
seventeen. She pled not guilty by
reason of insanity to a charge of
murder which she did not commit.
Cecilia's lover was also involved
in the shooting, but Cecilia took
the blame because she felt that she
was better able to cope with impri-
sonment than her lover.

After five months in isolation in
a Colorado jail, Cecilia was final-
ly sentenced to an indefinite comm-
itment in the Colorado Mental In-
stitution in Pueblo.

She is not insane and has never
been convicted of any crime. During
her 2.5 years of imprisonment, she
has tried without success to get
her case back to court so that she
could leave the hospital.

As an open lesbian, Cecilia was
often strapped down and heavily
drugged.

Finally, Cecilia escaped in May
and came to San Francisco with her
present lover. She found an apart-
ment, got a job and began to est-
ablish herself in the community.
But she was arrested on July 15th
and unless interested people stop
it, she will be extradited back
to Colorado and forced to stay in
the mental hospital indefinitely.

The Women's Litigation Unit of
the S.F. Legal Assistance asks you
to write letters in support of Ce-
cilia addressed to Alice Lytle,
Extradition Secretary, Governor's
Office, State Capitol, Sacramento,
CA, but send them to the Women's
Litigation Unit so they can att-
ach them to the rest of their
papers. You can send money for her
legal defense to them also. Their
address is: The Women's Litigation
Unit, 1085 Market St, Suite 306,
San Francisco, California 94103.