bmn:

Sometimes you can't win for losing. The first of the
month Deb Luger officially joined BMR and the collective
was 5, the middle of the month Sue gave us notice—this is
her last month on the collective—and the collective will be
4, again.

Sue has been on BMR for 4½ years. She has given time,
money, effort and sweat to feminist projects in Denver, not
only to BMR; her input to this collective will be missed
(Sniffle!)

Deb has been a supporter for months and now that she has
joined the collective she is threatening to organize us,
which we need (yea). One of her last jobs as a supporter
has been to help organize a brunch on July 18th. The brunch
is open to women, children and men from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m.
and costs $7, more or less, children free. See ad on next
page.

Last production and mailing was amazing. Women we didn't
even know personally came over and helped. We were knee-
deep in enthusiastic workers. We hope everyone comes back
this month and in the future. We are always looking for
women to work with, just as we are always looking for women
to write or do graphics.

Just a reminder—there will be no September issue; August
and September will be combined. Our vacation is in August
and we are holding our breath, waiting for time to relax
and read mysteries and go dancing every night we can.

There is no copy in this issue that relates to the Anti-
Repression Conference that happened in Denver in late May.
We all went to the conference and we do have copy but we
are not satisfied with it. We aren't certain how to partic-
ipate in national liberation struggles from a feminist per-
spective in a principled way. We are in process, which some-
times is a lame excuse for copping out, but we feel we are
doing something the paper has never done before and we are
not going to pressure ourselves or let outside forces or
printing deadlines pressure us into actions we are not sure
of. We have done that in the past and have (and are) taking
criticism which we deserve, for not being alert enough,
knowingly enough and just sliding through. We hope to have
coverage on the conference in next month's issue and more
information on our process.

The contents of this month's issue, specifically the in-
clusion (finally) of Vivian's and Rebecca's articles (see
letters page, and pages 9 through 11) carries with it a
history of bad process and active anti-Semitism. In working
on the theme issues of Spirituality and Religion (March and
April 1982), we created a double standard—primarily coming
out of our confusion and struggle on the issue of Zionism,
pro and con, both in the stuff we received at BMR and in
reading the dialogue on anti-Semitism and Zionism that was
being explored in the feminist press, at large.

We allowed our own lack of information and analysis on
anti-Semitism, anti-racism, anti-imperialism, and Zionism
to silence the voices of Jewish women in the pages of the
paper, instead of creating a real open forum to confront
these issues and struggle towards a good analysis. We had
wanted Jewish women writing positively about Judaism to
somehow be accountable for all issues connected with Jud-
aism, specifically the Zionist movement and the politics
of the state of Israel. We, however, did not question other
writers about racism and anti-Semitism in connection with
women's spirituality—we didn't demand the same accountabil-
ity. Telling ourselves that we were holding articles by
Jewish women, who were identifying positively with their
culture, to "work on our own politics" was a cop-out, was
bad process/politics, was anti-Semitic.

We thank all the women that cared enough about BMR and
the politics of the paper to write in and confront these
politics. BMR certainly feels we have learned a lot from
this confrontation/connections. We are working to create
a space in our own collective process to contact people who
are both pro and anti-Zionist, pro-Palestinian, to read
Nice Jewish Girls (as was suggested to us), and not allow
“working on our politics" to silence voices of women in the
paper.

In addition, to comment on the insertion of the John
Brown Anti-Klan Committee call to the anti-Klan conference
taking place over the July 4th weekend in Chicago, again
requires criticism/self-criticism of our collective process.
BMR mistakenly agreed to insert their flyer without seeing
it first. We have several criticisms of the insert, but un-
fortunately because we forgot our collective process, that
can only happen after the fact. Our first problem was right
on the cover; the all-male graphic—then the very, very

MORE ON PAGE 18

oops

I don't know if it was my
error or yours, but the sec-
ond sentence in the last
paragraph of the article
"Passing on a Tradition of
Oppression" should have read, "By closely examining our
treatment by these writers, we might better understand
why many of us come to internalize the oppressor's
language..." The way it's printed "of these writers..."
changes my intended meaning and shows some possible sloppy
typing on my part.

Last month, the volume number listed on the cover of
BMR was incorrect. It said Vol. 11 No. 6, and it should
have said Vol. 10 No. 6.

Wall hanging by Constance Perenyi, cotton
fabric, batting, and paint. Story about the
artist on page 12.

cover: Mnatde BMR:

Where We're At...........-2
OCG Satan sures ae staarerelclware
International
Anti-Psychiatric
Conference

BEY cc 5 Sales oe oo se ele el
HPOCIBVALGL Ss. a. piclese slew sts sO, 7
National

Necessary Bread..........8
DUA RCL ar Kats, 5 aes ehatete-ota ew LE

American Held Hostage.....8
Spirituality/Religion
WiIDALSMsi0:es gis amines Op Oy aa
Movie Review.............12
Mothers Without Custody..13
Calendarz si. 25,
More On.. ease sine waded age
Classies & Ads........16,19
RESOUPOES saris. s so sie eerete ee O.

Collective: Susan Carr, Tori Stratford, Liz Lewis,

Bobbe Ross, Deb Luger

supporters:

Susanna Smith, Wendy Highby, Kim Womantree, Eden Stone

CONtributors: Becky Carr, Jacky Ferrand,

Alberta Gallardo, Judy Barlow,

Linda Lane, Kathy Lopata, Theresa Moore

Big Mama Rag is a feminist periodical published monthly by
Big Mama Rag, Inc., a non-profit corporation. Manuscripts
and artwork (please!) may be submitted to 1724 Gaylord St.
Denver, CO 80206. Deadline for material submission will gen-
erally fall between the 15th and 19th of the preceding
month. Please enclose a stamped self-addressed envelope with
all manuscripts. No responsibility is accepted for unsolici-
ted material. We reserve the right to edit all material for
length with the input of the author. Subscription rates are

$7/year (11 issues) for individuals in the U.S., $14 (in U.S.
funds) outside the U.S. or for plain brown wrapper, and $21
to all institutions. BMR is free to all women incarcerated
in prisons or psychiatric institutions. BMR is on file at
the New Alexandria Library for Lesbian Women in Florence, MA
and is available on microfilm (Vol. 1#1 Oct. 1972 through
July 1979) directly from Big Mama Rag for $60. BMR is indexed
by the Alternative Press Center, P.O. Box 7229, Baltimore,
MD 21218. Our phone number is (303) 322-2010

Page 2 — Big Mama Rag, July 1982