WHAT IS THE DENVER FEMINIST LIBRARY (DFL)

THE DENVER FEMINIST LIBRARY IS A NEW PROJECT, WHICH IS COMMITTED TO:

Facilitate information sharing.

An information sharing project must utilize all available means of finding out about

materials -- through networking we can bring the expertise of many women to this
library. This expertise can come from local women or women and/or projects from
other areas. It is also important that we return information to other projects.

This can be accomplished in the form of bibliographies of books in this or other
libraries on a topic of special interest; or new book lists; or providing space for

flyers about community events.

Provide tools necessary for research.

Author and title indexes for books are a first step in organizing written informa-
tion, but in addition we would provide a subject index for the books and periodicals
in the DFL. A reference collection, bibliographies of materials available in other
libraries or organizations nearby, and a comfortable place to do research are also
essential for doing research.

III. Establish an alternative library system.

A system to help gather and store information about our lives as radical women will
be created. We will develop a way to share materials with other feminist libraries
across the country.

Establish an archive of information about radical women.

The archive would preserve selected items representative of radical women's activity
and culture in and around the Denver area.

HOW DOES THE DENVER FEMINIST LIBRARY WORK

THE DENVER FEMINIST LIBRARY WILL USE VOLUNTEERS IN THE FOLLOWING WAYS:

The Denver Feminist Library Cooperative (DFLC) is an autonomous group of women
working on an alternative women's library.

The DFL will incorporate core group members and support group members to accomplish
its goals. The Library cooperative consists of a closed collective with 4-10 women (core
group). These women:
a) define the goals and objectives of the library;
b) are responsible for the day-to-day activities of running a library and
tasks such as outreach, finances, fundraising, and recruitment; and
c) they also coordinate the activities of support groups.