BMR Tells You Where To Go

Conferences, Concerts &

Places To Stay This Summer

Deb Taylor  
HAVE A GOOD SUMMER

East

THE EAST COAST WOMEN'S MUSIC FESTIVAL in Washington DC will be held Sept. 2-5. The festival will focus on East Coast performers, especially DC, both acknowledged and unknown. Call Anne at (202) 543-4129, Mary at 546-3579, 

SEE THE USA AND PASS THE ERA ON THE WAY.

or leave a message for Cantobria at 347-4700.

Otter:

NUTCRACKER SUITE, A KARATE AND SELF DEFENSE SCHOOL FOR WOMEN is having a summer training program, June 23-26. They are located in Western Massachusetts, and their four-day training will be in the country.

Meals: vegetarian and non-vegetarian. Complete gym including weights, sauna, and pool.

Preparation: At least eight months of study in karate, taekwondo, kung-fu, etc. Be prepared for 2-3 miles per day of running.

Training: Physical and mental endurance, punches, kicks, kata, free sparring and sparring techniques.

Workshops: Participants are encouraged to offer workshops in practical and philosophical matters.

Instructors: Pat Turney, black belt, Vechi Ryu, black belt, Marianna Kaufman, black belt, Tang Soo Do, Dana Densmore, black belt, Ja Shin Do, Marcia Klein, brown belt, Kenpo, Wendy Weinshel, black belt, Shorei Ryu.

Cost: $55 per woman. Scholarships and sliding scale available on a limited basis. Remember, sliding scale goes both ways.

Contact: Pat Turner, 56 Main St., Northampton, MA 01060, (413) 586-1296. Those who wish to offer workshops or who need financial assistance are encouraged to contact Pat Turney immediately.

A WOMAN'S PLACE, IN ATHOL, NY is a mountain retreat for women with 23 acres in the Adirondacks. It was organized by a collective of seven women. It has a house in which the collective lives, with a common dining room and library, four cabins that hold up to 30 women and a barn converted to a recreation hall.

There is a fee based on income to use the facilities. It ranges from $25/night (income above $10,000) to $13/night (income $5,000 and under) or $5/night (children under 12). These fees include two meals a day and full use of the facilities. Camping rates are $7.50/night with meals and $3.50 without meals. Limited scholarships are available. Women under 18 need written permission from guardians to stay.

The collective believes that such a place is necessary for women who are trying to make important changes in their lives. They believe they provide time, peace, and quiet to sort out questions, uncertainties, and options.

Weekend workshops held there and organized by the collective cover such topics as "Freeing Ourselves from Smoking", “Lesbian Role Playing", "Growing Older", etc.

Write to A Woman's Place, Athol NY 12801.

WOMEN'S WAYS RETREAT is set in the Berkshire mountains in New York. It has a large A-frame house, 10 acres for camping, and access to 90 acres of woodland for hiking. There is a rental fee to use the house, and for camping; a work exchange is possible.

Write Women's Ways Retreat, Andrews/Mulholland, RD1, Box 375A, Craryville, NY 12571.

WE ARE STRONG WOMEN'S COMMUNITIES in various beautiful parts of New England; Northampton Mass. and the Berkshires; Plainfield and Burlington, Vermont; Provincetown, Mass. Women's Centers, Health Clinics and Bookstores are usually good sources of information for places to stay, etc.

Midwest

SISTERS OF DIANA INC. in Tishomingo, Oklahoma offers space to women who want to work with other women in farming, general growing, and recreation. 

They have 70 acres for camping and/or year-round living. A community garden provides most of the food. The monthly rate is $5. They will be hosting the Land Conference. Write to Sisters of Diana, Inc., RR1, Box 42A, Tishomingo, OK 73460. (See below for information about the Land Conference).

LAND CONFERENCE: June 24-27. THIS FOUR DAY CONFERENCE is a gathering for women who have been working together in groups on land trusts or other land issues. It is not for individuals looking for groups to connect with, but a time for group representatives to share their skills and experiences and discuss directions and goals.

The land conference (June 24-27) will be part of a larger practice community and celebration lasting from summer solstice to full moon (June 21-June 30) on women's land in south Oklahoma. It will include workshops in legal skills, decision making, looking for land, and alternative technology.

Possible material outcome would be a newsletter and/or how-to-do-it booklet. Send $1 per day registration fee, and receive a packet and directions to the gathering. Write: Summer Conference, PO Box 1692, Roseburg OR 97470. (From Oregon Women's Land Trust Newsletter.)

WE WANT THE MUSIC COLLECTIVE is producing a second women's music festival near Mt. Pleasant, Michigan on August 25-28. Women who would like to per-

continued on page 6

struggle

One Lesbian Mother Custody Case

Cheryl

Phew, and Yippie: Ginny Yaseen and her lover Pam Keeley, with the support of the Rachele Yaseen Defense Fund, battled the homophobic Court system, Ginny's ex-husband, and money problems and won the fight to keep her daughter Rachele.

Another lesbian mother, with the support of her sisters and community has won. But what was won? Was a precedent-setting case won? Unfortunately no, because precedents are really only made in the higher courts, Appeals Courts, State Supreme Courts, and the BIG Supreme Court. Did we win a clear victory based on a lesbian mother's right to keep her child? Not exactly. Ginny's case was won without really dealing with the issue of lesbian rights. But we did win! That's the exciting, and confusing part of it.

It is clear that the Judge did know that Ginny was a lesbian and did not take her daughter away because of that. While that is encouraging, it doesn't have any real effect on how future lesbian mother custody cases will be decided. And there will be many more cases.

I realize that there is a tension between an individual mother’s right to do everything in her power to keep her child ("abduct" her from the other parent, go underground, play down her lesbianism) and the larger political issue of fighting as an outright lesbian and talking about lesbianism as the real reason why the Court or the husband is considering removing her child from her care.

This case, as with so many other cases, had a complication. Ginny, like most women and many lesbians does not have a lot of money. Where was she going to get the money to put on the defense she needed except from her sisters? Yet, doesn't that place a responsibility upon her and the Rachele Yaseen Defense Fund to try to speak for as many of us as they can? To address head-on the issue of lesbian rights?

Some facts are clear. 1) The Rachele Yaseen Defense Fund has been very successful in raising money, gathering witnesses and arousing the feminist community to awareness of this case. 2) If Ginny had conducted a "political" defense, she might have stood a greater chance of losing Rachele and thereby possibly making another anti-lesbian case.

But is it truly possible to conduct a non-political case? Once lesbianism is even whispered or hinted at in our homophobic society it stands out and remains in people's minds. To too many people, it stands out extremely negatively. The Judge, I am sure gave some thought and consideration to her lesbianism. Thank Goddess he was a fairly intelligent man who didn't get stuck in society's homophobic reaction. BUT THAT IS LIKE SAYING, WHAT A "LUCKY": We need desperately to educate society (and what are Judges but a reflection of the more conservative portions of society) about homosexuality and lesbianism in particular. What a better place to educate Judges than in the courtroom?

The tricky thing about custody decisions is that since the sole criteria in determining custody is “the best interests of the child", a Judge doesn't really have to say exactly why she/he granted custody to one parent over the other. A Judge can use such euphemisms as "better for the child's development", or a "better family structure". Granted that currently one has little power to make a Judge deal with the real issues of homophobia and the preference for the nuclear family, but that is all the more reason to present the Judge with “expert" testimony about the facts of homosexuality. To present him with information, rather than misinformation to base decisions upon.

I think that this is especially true in a case which is being fought and supported by the money of many women. If we are going to raise money for a project, billing it as helping to "set precedence for all lesbian mothers struggling to retain or gain custody of their children," then there must be an attempt to make the case larger than the individual woman's case. Easy words to say when one's own child is not on the line, yet what about other women who must fight cases brought solely on the grounds of their lesbianism without the support of a defense fund? It is a privilege, as well as a hell of a lot of work, to have a defense fund behind one's case.

Responsibility and accountability are key issues. Somehow, I would like to see the money and effort that went into helping Ginny and Pam be extended to other lesbians. Right now, there is another lesbian custody case going on in Denver. Donna Levy is still fighting to obtain custody of her lover's child whom she jointly raised from birth until the mother's death. Currently there is no organization helping her to raise money, and she has no choice but to acknowledge her relationship with the child’s mother.

She could not play it safe.

I am relieved and more than glad that Ginny's case was a success, and I admire the organizing skills of the Rachele Yaseen Defense Fund. I am wondering though how these can be extended to reach and help other women. It is a hard issue, and the Courts have their little catch-22's built into them. What would help? Civil Rights Laws for gay people would help somewhat.

more on page 10