Page 8

Big Mama Rag vol. 3 No. 4

Political Womanpower

Some Colorado Candidates

Answers from the candidates listed here have been compiled from a questionnaire distributed by NOW Political Task Force. Time did not permit interviews of those candidates who did not turn in the questionnaire.

Roseanne Ball, R-Senate District 5 - Ball believes that the State “does have a comprehensive program for those who need help. The WIN program appears to be good;” believes that child care should be available for all parents but “not at state expense for all, we should look closely and be willing to discuss certain conditions such as the low salaried worker...”; Supports the abortion decision; cannot answer the question on the women’s prison since “it is not under study and would surely need more solid facts before making a decision; the pregnancy compensation question needs “study”; supports all the rape reform legislation except the one that would redefine the term “spouse” so that its definition does not deprive the victim of protection under Colorado State Law.

Anne Thompson, R-Senate District 34 - “I firmly believe that abortion should be a matter of individual decision. I favor child care facilities, support state funding of family planning, and I am concerned about rape prosecution reform. Generally speaking, based on my previous experience in the General Assembly, I would say that each piece of proposed legislation must be viewed and studied as it is presented.”

Cathy Reynolds, D-House District 15 - Reynolds feels that the state can support totally small pilot programs of child care “but for any comprehensive urban the federal government will have to share at least equally in the expense; she feels that working parents should receive the benefits first “then others as space permits”; Supports the abortion decision; supports state funding of family planning; supports closing the Women’s prison and transferring its functions to the Denver area; feels that pregnancy should be included under the scope of unemployment compensation “only if pregnancy was the reason the employer terminated the work. Then it becomes discrimination”; supports all the rape prosecution reform proposals.

Laura Miller, R-House District 28 - “I support the establishment and encouragement of development of additional child care centers, with the State assisting those unable to pay full support, or any support. I support the decisions of the Supreme Court (regarding abortion, specifically -ed.) as the Law of the Land.” Miller supports the idea of state funding of family planning; has not studied the problem of the women’s prison closure; does not support including pregnancy and pregnancy related problems under the scope of unemployment compensation; supports the rape reform prosecution proposals except for the redefinition of the term “spouse” which the candidate has “not studied.”

Photo by Carol Lease

Nora Danielson, SWP [Socialist Workers Party], Governor - supports state funding for comprehensive child care “not only for state employees but for everyone. Parents should decide the policies, choose the teachers and the personnel. Child care should be a service provided by society not by only the parents.” The SWP candidate believes that abortion is a woman’s right and that the government shouldn't tell any woman whether or not to have a child. Danielson supports state funding of family planning but feels that the reasons the country (and the world) has so many problems is not because of overpopulation but because the USA doesn’t cooperate in a world socialist system with planned economy that would provide for all the needs of people, would assure good clean cities and wouldn't suffer from an “excess” of people. “It is a fallacy that problems can be solved by the number of people living in the world.

The real criminals aren't in prisons, says Danielson. It is complete hypocrisy that Nixon murdered in Vietnam, opposed abortion, amassed a complete assault on the civil liberties of everybody and that people who passed bad checks should be put in prison. The reason they did it in the first place is just to get by. Society thrives on poor people and they will fight to get back. In a socialist society there would be no prisons, people wouldn't need to steal a loaf of bread to survive. Rape is encouraged in our society by the way women are looked on as sex objects. And rape laws have traditionally been used by society to get to black and Chicano men. The problem won't be solved by easier convictions because that would just put more black and Chicano men into prison.

“Women should start fighting back in this society because women’s liberation threatens capitalist society and this society will do anything and everything it can to keep the movement a joke. Society should be run in the interests of the majority of the people not a few, the ones who control the wealth and own things for a living.

“Ideas of women’s liberation are just now becoming acceptable to women workers - women who are forming the CLUW here in Denver. Women are organizing and fighting for what they want.”

Joan J. Harrison, D-House District 50 - would support partial state funding for comprehensive child care facilities “hoping federal funds would be added in the near future. H.B. 1258, 1973 session, called for about $800,000. I presume this is low, but funding of the new functions needs to take into account some start-up time and probably better data on needs; all parents should be eligible for child care, Harrison believes; the candidate supports the abortion decision of the Supreme Court; supports state funding of family planning; feels uninformed on the issue of closing the Women's Prison, “my gut reaction would be to close Canon City in the interests of decentralization, allowance for families; does not support including pregnancy and related problems under the scope of unemployment compensation; favors the rape reform proposals.

Betty Ann Dittemore, R-House District 37 - supports state funding for comprehensive child care facilities “for those mothers in ADC;” supports the abortion decision of the Supreme Court of January, 1973; supports state funding of family planning “to a limited extent;” believes that the Women's Penitentiary in Canon City is underutilized and is in favor of closing it “if facilities are available;” Dittemore would “have to see statistics on resultant costs” before she could decide on including pregnancy and related problems under unemployment compensation; supports rape reform proposals, but would have to see the proposed redefinition of the term spouse.

Marcelline T. Verhoff - wrote no opinion to the first question; feels that just working parents should receive such child care; says that abortion “is a personal thing” for a woman to decide herself; supports state funding of family planning; agrees to closing down the women’s prison if it could be handled better, but “where will they be kept?”; would have to think more about the “interesting problem” of including pregnancy problems under unemployment compensation; believes that the state should pay costs of emergency care, related follow-up psychological care for victims of violent crimes, but not the burial costs.

Jean Marks, D-House District 33 - Marks strongly supports state funding for comprehensive child care facilities that should be available to all parents; she supports the Supreme Court decision regarding abortion; gives a “qualified yes” to the support of state funding of family planning; feels the Women's Penitentiary in Canon City should be closed, “I believe there are more educational, counseling, etc. facilities available here and the chances are greater that they would be closer to their families here;” supports including pregnancy related problems and allowing a limited time for pregnancy under unemployment compensation; supports the rape reform proposals but feels “the defendant’s rights must also be protected.”

Pat Schroeder, D-US Congress - U.S. Representative Pat Schroeder (D-Colo.) told a very warm and accepting audience at the August 29th general meeting that the real problem for women today is the economy, because “women are the first shut out, and women are going to have hard times ahead because the economy is going to have hard times ahead.” She said that we, as women, must become, “much more economically oriented,” which is going to become tougher as the economic scene unfolds.

Representative Schroeder cited current Department of Labor statistics showing a 35% higher rate of unemployment among women than men. Women earn 40% less than men yet, she said, women don't receive a 40% discount on the goods and services they buy. What we must fight, she said, is the old myth that women work not because they need to, but to pass the time away.

The women we must work hardest for—and NOW tends also to forget them, she said—are the young women who bought the American dream of the housewife’s role with husband and family and are now divorced or separated heads of households without job skills or the economic access to the good life. Representative Schroeder reminded her audience that our country has created this woman. We have convinced young girls that they don’t need economic skills, because, “if you're married, you don’t need a skill.” Our male-oriented society has taught our young women that “your main job is to troll and catch me.”

“We've got to figure out some way not to put people down,” she said, “but to allow them to participate. Why put down women who are 53% of our brainpower?”

Responding to questions on inflation, Representative Schroeder proposed a reduction of high interest rates which she feels would “bring the market back”: controls on food (“even though I have been a free trader”); better anti-trust laws; and an increase in the personal tax exemption (it’s only $150 more today than during World War II); and a drastic reduction in the defense budget (70% of the

More on Page 9