Picket Greets Hyde at Right-to-Life Dinner  
Abortion Rally Protests Cutbacks  

By Eileen Bresnahan  

One hundred and fifty women and  
supporters marched in Denver Sept. 24  
to protest cutbacks in abortion mon-  
ies. The march, organized by the ad  
hoc Colorado Abortion Rights Coali-  
tion, was aimed at drawing attention  
to recent setbacks in our struggle  
to regain control of our bodies.  

A rally followed on the steps of  
the state capitol at which one woman  
gave a brief history of the laws per-  
taining to abortion and a number of  
women spoke out on their own exper-  
iences with abortion, both legal and  
illegal.  

The protest focused on setbacks  
which affect the right of women on  
Medicaid to choose abortion. The first  
setback is the result of a ruling of  
the U.S. Supreme Court June 20. In  
this ruling the court held that states  
can deny women on Medicaid money to  
pay for their abortions. The Court's  
reasoning was this: there are many  

things Medicaid could conceivably  

pay for and only limited Medicaid  
funds; therefore, states may pick and  
choose what they will pay for.  

MORE THAN 150 WOMEN marched east down Colfax Avenue in Denver September 24  

amendment was unconstitutional, but  
when the U.S. Supreme Court refused to  
hear the issue, he vacated his re-  
straining order, allowing the 1976  
Hyde amendment to go into effect in  
August this year.  

Meanwhile, back on Capitol Hill,  
with the 1976 HEW appropriations run-  
ning out in September of this year,  
the Senate and the House both busily  
set out to pass new appropriations  
bills and new versions of the Hyde  
amendment.  

The Senate passed a version allow-  
ing money for abortion not only where  
the life of the mother is at stake,  
but also in cases of rape and incest.  
The House, true defender of the unborn,  
stuck to the current version: no money  
unless you can prove that you're going  
to die. Despite a number of confer-  
ences between both Houses, they have  
been unable to break the deadlock. The  
House argues that the Senate bill is  
so liberal as to be like no bill at  
all. They are afraid that all women  
would say that their pregnancies re-  
sulted from rape or incest and that  
the number of abortions would not sig-  
nificantly decrease.  

as part of a march and rally planned by the ad hoc Colorado Abortion Rights  

Coalition.  

- To the court it made no difference  
that withholding abortion monies af-  
fects only women: this was not seen  
as discriminatory because Medicaid  
does not, in fact, pay for everything.  

The logic of this decision was  
very similar to the earlier Supreme  
Court decision on maternity benefits.  
In that decision, the court said that  
a company which does not allow bene-  
fits for maternity does not discrimin-  
ate against women unless it pays for  
everything but maternity.  

The same logic goes for abortion:  
it is not discriminatory to withhold  
money for abortion unless states pay  
for everything but abortion. Obviously  
with this reasoning, it would be vir-  
tually impossible to prove any denial  
of money discriminatory.  

The second setback concerns the  
Hyde Amendment. This amendment to the  
Department of Health, Education and  
Welfare appropriations bill states  
simply that "none of the monies appro-  
priated in this bill may be used to  
pay for abortions, except where the  
life of the mother is in danger."  

This amendment has a rather long  
history. First passed with last year's  
appropriations bill, the amendment was  
blocked for most of the year by a New  
York federal judge. He ruled that the  

-~Photo by Deborah Taylor  

While any interference by the state  
in any woman's right to control her  
body is obnoxious and dangerous to us  
all, these two cutbacks in abortion  
funds to poor women are especially in-  
sidious. They deal with capitalism's  
need for an unskilled surplus labor  
pool, which the unwanted children re-  
sulting from these cutbacks will gain.  
The people who oppose Medicaid money  
for abortion are less concerned with  
unborn Christians than with tomorrow's  
dishwashers and busboys.  

The women planning the march and  
rally were faced with an incredibly  
complicated issue. Primary was the  

right of all women to control their own  
bodies. This facet was of special sig-  

nificance since most of the organizers  
and many of the participants in the  
march are lesbians.  

However, it is also relevant to  
government sponsorship of forced  
sterilization. And of equal impor-  
tance is government manipulation of  
poor women into becoming breeders of  
future laborers, while remaining so  
impoverished that they themselves con-  
tinue in the “menial” labor pool.  

Faced with the complexity of the  
issue, the women planning the march  
and rally decided to simplify things  

down to a demand on the government  

to stop the Hyde amendment. It was  
approached from the angle of the ob-  
vious discrimination against poor  
women and the government interference  
in personal self-determination. To  
this end women were encouraged to  
write to "their" senators in Washing-  
ton regarding the Hyde amendment.  

An interesting coincidence occurred  
in that Rep. Henry Hyde (R-Ill.) --  
the Rep. Hyde himself -- spoke in Den-  
ver the night of the march. About 50  
persons picketed outside the hotel  
where he gave his speech to Right to  
Life members attending a $20 a plate  
dinner.  

Some of the Right-to-Lifers were  
in their usual hyperemotional state,  
admonishing the picketers to quit  
picking on the “poor little babies."  
For added color, a real Catholic  
priest, complete with crucifix, knelt  
on the sidewalk in the middle of the  
picket and prayed for the collective  
souls of the demonstrators. And, of  
course, the hotel people called the  
police who arrived with a paddy  
wagon in tow.  

After an hour, members of the  
East Metro Denver NOW, who had organ-  
ized a picket for that evening, and  
a couple of members of the Socialist  
Workers Party who had led chants,  
asked everyone to go home. Their  
reasoning was that they wanted to  
end the picket while everyone was  
there, rather than have the crowd  
"dwindle away."  

However, about 20 other women,  
including the organizers of the march  
that afternoon, stayed. An argument  
started when the NOW sponsors asked  
everyone else to go home. Basically  
there was no agreement that NOW was,  
in fact, the sponsor of the picket.  
The organizers of the march had ad  
planned to welcome Hyde regardless of  
what anyone else planned.  

After a little shouting, those  
who wanted to stay, stayed, and those  
who wanted to leave, left. The picket  
continued for about another hour.  

Near the end, a police sergeant  
came over and put the picketers on  
their honor to be "good girls," and  
then the police left. They had been  
gone for about five minutes when a  
group of about 8 women suddenly felt  
the need to go to the ladies' room in  
the hotel -- which was conveniently sit-  
uated next to the ballroom where Hyde  
was speaking.  

Once in the restroom -- that having  
been easy -- the women decided to take  
a look at Hyde. Linking arms, they  
entered and chanted "Hyde kills wom-  
en." A few moments later, several  
large, male Right-to-Lifers descended  
upon them, swinging. Since they had  

Big Mama Rag Vol. 5 No.  

decided beforehand that there would  
be no violence, and to avoid a bust  
for assault, our heroes then beat a  
strategic retreat to the door, and  
escaped just as the police were  
driving up onto the sidewalk.  

ONE OF SEVERAL women who testified  
about her experience with abortion  
speaks on the steps of the Capitol.  
--Photo by Kate Sharp  

Unknown to the chanters, a woman  
had already entered the ballroom and  
sat down quietly with a coat hanger  
around her neck. She interrupted  
Hyde's speech to point out how women  
will suffer from illegal abortions.  
Hyde replied, "Oh, you're just one  
woman; what do you know?" to which  
the crowd cheered. Then, as if on  
cue, the group of eight burst  
through the door.  

There was no coverage of this  
event in the straight press, but  
great satisfaction was felt by all.  

(Editor's Note: Eileen Bresnahan is  
one of the organizers of the Ad hoc  
Colorado Abortion Rights Coalition.)  

VIRAGO PRODUCTIONS PRESENTS  

THE BERKELEY WOMEN'S MUSIC COLLECTIVE  

In concert Saturday, October 15, 8:30 p.m.  
Unitarian Church, 14th & Lafayette, Denver  
$3.00 donation  
Free childcare  

PRESENTING:  

A three-part women's program  

GROWING INTO LIGHT  

Beginning with:  

LIKE A ROSE, a film by Sally Banet-Page  
a feminist image of women in prison  

And featuring the speaker:  

BARBARA GRIER (Gene Damon), editor of The Ladder, co-editor  
of Lesbian Lives, The Lesbian's Home Journal and Lavender  

Herring; author of Lesbiana, bibliographer of The Lesbian in  
Literature, and co-founder of Naiad Press; speaking on: "THE  

LESBIAN MOVEMENT:  

Followed by:  

25 YEARS OF LITERATURE AND LIFE”  

Luna Tunes, disco classics in women's music  

ST. THOMAS', 2201 Dexter, Denver.  

$2.50 donation 7:30 p.m.  
Friday, November 11