more letters home

Enemy Cont.

or innuendo made against it? (For example, Susanna wrote in reference to RAAP's failure to show up for a KDKO Radio taping: "Seems it wasn't a big enough market." Was that a guess? A quote from someone at RAAP? If so, who?) Please, in your future coverage of any group, let us, your readers, have our news straight from the source. Really, we can recognize honesty or bullshit when we hear it.

Fairness in reporting is especially important when you are dealing with a group you don't like or are very critical of. It's the only way struggle can continue, the only way any kind of dialog can continue, the only way we can learn to change ourselves. Which is not to say we shouldn't confront practices in ourselves and others that are oppressive. It's just that we should remember the advice of Mao, who cautions that while we must be relentless against the "enemy", we should be gentle in resolving differences among "the people".

Kathy Riley  
Denver, CO

Illegal Actions

Dear BMR:

If nothing else, the recent actions by Direct Action, the Wimmins Brigade and the arrests of the Vancouver Five have put the topic of illegal actions on the agenda.

The 'left' has been forced to evaluate those actions of property destruction against the establishment and seems to be using a double standard at times. Such actions always engage the wrath of the state and the condemnation of the mass media. The same is true for any illegal anti-establishment activity like banned strikes, etc. But because destruction of property—especially bombings—are so sensationalistic, they strike attention regardless of the damage caused.

Many evaluate the bombings with the same criteria used to evaluate any other political activity, such as strikes, but use a much higher standard in forming their final judgment: i.e., Was the action popular? (Strikes are often unpopular especially when they inconvenience people). Did it help mobilize people? (Even strikes frustrate, burn out and demobilize people. The Canadian events seem to have certainly woken people up to the level of conflict possible). Was the action done by elitists? (D.A. and the W.F.B. didn't appear to be). Often people will stereotype a group that does illegal actions and lump them in the same authoritarian bag as the Red Brigades, Weather Underground, some sections of the German groups, etc. Yet a strike is rarely denounced for being from a hierarchical union.

All things being equal, progressives usually give uncritical support to a strike, an occupation or workplace sabotage, while bricking a window or blowing up the plant panics them.

Of the bombings in Canada last year, each received a different reaction. For lots of people, the actions struck a responsive chord because they were audacious examples of resistance from our side.

The WFB action was probably the most successful on the local level because it came at the peak of the impending failure of a large legal public campaign to rid violent and sexist porn from the Red Hot Video stores. Molotov cocktails in two stores demonstrated that a group using simple illegal means could be an effective complement. Also there was the pride and respect that the shut down of the two stores came from us and not from the authorities. Most of the women's groups involved refused to denounce the firebombings. It seems they didn't have a strict pacifist line.

The B.C. Hydro and the cruise missile manufacturer Litton bombings each caused millions of dollars in damage, made news around the world, freaked out the state, but didn't get a whole lot of support from the main ecological and anti-cruise groups involved in the protests against the two targets. Of course the unfortunate injuring of 7 people at Litton doesn't help our cause any. But regardless of the injuries, the actions upset the groups because of their strict pacifist line. Only certain approved actions of protest are legitimate for them.

Another funny argument from the non-violence people is that violence in the form of property destruction is wrong. Then if that's the case, actions by the admired pacifist Berrigan brothers and friends, such as wrecking draft files or hammering nuke warhead nose cones are violent. So is cutting a fence to occupy a nuke site.

Let's face it, destruction scares most of us. They call the question—do we act on all our revolutionary possibilities, or limit ourselves to the usual legal strategies? How intensely do we want to be involved? Do we want to escalate the level of resistance? How far are we willing to go? Are we at war? This is not to say that only bombings pose these questions, but they are one fast way to do so.

What's disturbing is how many people spout revolutionary rhetoric, read and print literature and posters of sabotage, riots, trashings and guerilla actions, but reject that application for themselves in the here and now. You begin to get the feeling that the more people don't ‘walk their talk’, the more habit forming their avoidance of practice becomes.

Politics is the art of power dynamics. Illegal activity is one way to spook the enemy and empower ourselves. The vast sea of laws, both written and conditioned in our brains are there to control us. But when we break the rules and resist on our own terms, then that control breaks down. It breaks psychological barriers for us, and often fucks up tactical control measures for them (as long as they don't catch us).

This doesn't mean that only illegal activity is worthy of radicals. No, simply stated, the illegal direction should be one of the varieties of resistance easily at our disposal.

In light of the arrests of the Five, it seems most of the evidence against them is wiretaps and roombugs. Some good advice being passed around is that this should remind us again to be extra careful and discreet about what we say, where we say it and to whom we talk to. Don't leave evidence on traceable items or have them hanging around. Also, the raid on the Bulldozer house in Toronto taught them to keep their address books somewhere else, or at least a copy. Set up a support network to assist in successfully keeping the activity and the participants out of reach of the law. Don't, don't, don't get caught! It's no good for you, drains so much energy from supporters in defense work, and wastes taxpayers' money in court and prison costs. Practice security seriously. It may be awkward at first, but after a while becomes second nature.

Lastly, spread the knowledge about the techniques necessary to do actions.

In our 'free' society, we can fuck up radical smash-the-state ideology in any alternative bookstore. We can also pick up much of the know-how to do it too, but not in those bookstores. The Left practices a tremendous amount of self-censorship when it comes to the practical how-to. Is that because if we knew how-to, we'd have a lot less excuses not to?

If people believe it's not necessary to acquire this knowledge and materials now (the ol' "The time isn't right" argument), remember that when the time is right, it will probably be too late. You won't be prepared and the gathering of such will be too restrictive. The state is getting ready, how about you?

The point is to get ourselves in position to make the changes we fantasize about. Illegal activity will probably be one method needed.

Chicken Little

Is It Genocide?

Dear Women:

In keeping with your recently stated policy of attempting to be more sensitive to the feelings of Jewish women—I suggest you look up the meaning of the word genocide. You use this word in the October, 1983, editorial to describe the policy of Israel toward the Palestinians. The tragedy of the struggle in the Middle East is not enhanced by being termed genocide. Genocide is a very specific term used to describe a very specific and overt policy to destroy an entire people by killing each and every one of them.

There have been excesses on both sides in the Middle East. I recall living in Israel during the Six Day War and hearing some of the Arab radio commentators say "The blood of the Jews will run in the streets. Jewish women prepare for the conquerors—etc." However, I don't believe that any serious and responsible leader on either side intends to carry out "genocide". The use of the term in that context is highly offensive to most of the Jewish women I know and is a deadly insult to those few women who survived the Holocaust!

Sincerely,  
Sue Deutsch  
Milwaukee, WI

BMR RESPONDS ON PAGE 15