Racism Is THE FEMINIST ISSUE IN SOUTH

By Anne V. Mayne and Ann Levett

(Letters' Note:
-authored

In order to understand the context
in which feminists are struggling in
South Africa, it is important to outline the racial and political situation,
and how this affects the daily
lives of the people.

Segregation has been progressively
forced on us by the white Nationalist
government until it reached a point a
few years ago where it became almost
total. Only whites are enfranchised
(one-fifth of the total population),
and with a 60-70% poll, some 2/3's of
the electorate vote Nationalist. Thus,
the Nationalist government holds
3/4ths of the seats in Parliament and
represents about 11% of South African
people as a whole. There is only one
woman Member of Parliament.

Living in a room in the back of
her white employer's house as the
sole support of her family, one
hundred miles away, this is
typical of the kind of life
that women lead.

Until the same public transport, lived in the
same suburbs and could own shops in
the same commercial areas. Since 1948,
when the Nationalist government came
to power, sexual intercourse is illegal
between races under the so-called Im-
morality Act, and social intercourse
is difficult because blacks have been
forcibly moved to townships many kilo-
meters away from white suburbs; they
may live only in these townships.

It is against the law for whites to
use black public transport to those
areas; so, without one's own transport,
whites cannot visit blacks in their own
homes. Blacks can visit whites, but it
is a long, tiring and expensive journey.

The townships are separated into
African, Coloured and Indian residen-
tial zones. A white may only enter an
African (black) township between 9 a.m.
and 5 p.m., with an official permit
which states one’s name, purpose of
visit, who one is visiting and for how
long. This does not apply to Coloured
or Indian townships, but it is illegal
for whites to sleep over in those areas.

An African may not sleep over in a
white area unless he or she is a bona
fide domestic worker or has a special
permit. A Coloured or Indian may stay
for up to 3 months in a white area
without a permit.

Until a few weeks ago, there were
no restaurants at which a white could
have a meal with a black--except at
international hotels--and only two
places in Cape Town where one could at-
tend a theatre or concert together; all
cinemas are closed to blacks except
those in their own areas.

Sporting facilities, campsites and
recreation areas are segregated. But
since the recent nationwide political
uprising, led by black and coloured
students, the “whites only" signs
have been removed from post offices,
public benches, parks and most
beaches. A few blacks have started
entering these areas and have
been encountered eating and drinking
in the erstwhile white restaurants
and have also been seen in "white"
cinemas, and have not been kicked out.

The government's response to the
student-led uprising--apart from killing,
wounding and detaining without
trial hundreds of blacks and a few
whites--has been to promise the phasing
out of so-called "petty" apartheid:
free school books for blacks in 1978,
more money for black education (at
this point three times as much is
spent on education for white children).

Although there have been promises
of better educational facilities for
blacks, the black students reject seg-
regated education, which is inferior.
Apart from this, land tenure has been
promised for urban Africans. (Black
people could be third generation city-
born and have no right to own a house
or shop), and more job opportunities
for blacks are projected. All these
promises are regarded with scepticism
and dissatisfaction by most blacks
and are seen as window-dressing for a
viciously racist and exploitive
system.

Well, this is the context in which
we are struggling, and as you can see
by the preamble to this article on
feminism in South Africa, the political
system is so repressive that one's
energy is drained before one starts.
Because racism is so overwhelming in
this country, many socially concerned,
political women who in any other situ-
ation would be involved in feminism,
feel that sexist issues are trivial
compared with the racist issue.

As for raising public consciousness
about the ideals of the women's move-
ment, the radio and TV are state-con-
trolled--with a strongly Calvinist
church bias. The press, because there
are so few feminist journalists, tends
to trivialise feminist issues as such;
so, it is difficult to use these media
to get even reformist messages across.

Public demonstrations and marches
are virtually illegal. To organise a
demonstration, permission must be ob-
tained from the town clerk three weeks
in advance, and he must approve every
word on every placard. (Permission for
any sort of demonstration is rarely
granted).

Since 1970, little flickers of mod-
ern feminism have sparked up in var-
ious parts of the country and have
died. A group that got going in
Johannesburg in 1971 was dispersed by
the Security Branch (political police)
because of their involvement with
left-wing politics and radical men.

In 1973 in Cape Town, a few middle
class white women started a study group
around some feminist books, and this
grew into a rap group which included
a few black women.

Over the period 1974-1976 there
appears to have been a mushrooming of
small, unconnected pockets of women--
mostly white, middle class and many of
them academics--in the major cities,
organised around study groups and
consciousness-raising. There are no
umbrella organisations and any commun-
ication between groups has been large-
ly coincidental via individuals.

In 1973, the Abortion Law Reform
League was started. A woman could
only have an abortion to save her life.
In 1974 the law was "liberalised" to
permit abortion for cases of rape, in-
cest, disability or where continued
pregnancy would cause severe physical
damage or permanent mental damage, or
where the child is likely to be defec-
tive. Even in these cases, the red
tape is so very involved that very few
women actually succeed in obtaining a
legal abortion.

At the University of Cape Town's
summer school (a sort of open univer-
sity) in 1974, a course on women and
society was attended by hundreds of
women, far in excess of expectations.

In 1975, a sort of turning
point was reached for South African
feminism. Throughout that year, the
so-called International Women's Year,
the established national women's organ-
isations held numerous symposia on the
condition of women.

In March, 1975, Juliet Mitchell was
invited to speak at the University of
Cape Town. She stayed two weeks and
gave lectures and was involved in a
symposium. This gave further impetus
to campus women; numerous study groups
and rap groups formed and interest
spread.

Later in the same year, in a little
country town called Stutterheim, there
was a small, but significantly national,
multiracial feminist conference. Women
--most of them university undergrad-
uates or graduates and politically rad-
ical--came from the three major cities.

During the same year, a group of
women in Durban put out a publication
called "Women Power", a guide to the
legal rights of both black and white
South African women.

In November, 1975, there was a gov-
ernment-sponsored, multiracial confer-
ence of Eminent Women, in Grahamstown.
It was a glittering affair, opened by
the Prime Minister's wife, Tini Vorster,
who (looking like a female Frankenstein)
categorically stated that a woman's
place was always firmly behind her hus-
band, to encourage him in his important
work, (and to see that he has clean
socks and underpants); her place is in
the home, where her duty is to incul-
cate in her children Christian Nation-
alist values.

This opening speech was followed by
an address by Margaret Mead on the fu-
ture of the nuclear family, after which
an ashen, tight-lipped Tini was escorted
out by an apologetic organiser.

In December, 1975, the Black
Women's Federation, a black separatist
organisation, was formed. Since the
recent political unrest, most of the
executive (7 women) have been arrested
and detained without trial for taking
part in the demonstrations against
apartheid.

In 1976, the movement to liberal-
ise abortion laws became national in
the form of the Abortion Reform Ac-
tion Group (ARAG). This group puts
out a highly informative quarterly
newsletter, they have lobbied parlia-
mentarians and have organized many
public meetings.

In 1975-76 an organization was
started by and for domestic workers,
one of the most exploited groups of
women in South Africa. A national
conference was held in an effort to
improve status and working conditions.

In September, 1975, in Pretoria,
about 250 women attended a national
Women's Legal Status Committee Con-
ference. One outcome was the forma-
tion of a permanent lobbying commit-
tee to press for the reforms endorsed
at the conference.

In Cape Town, a women's centre
was established to serve as a resource
center, run voluntarily by a hetero-
geneous group of 20 women who range
from devout Christians to radical
feminists. (Simply because there are
so few of us do we tolerate one an-
other, I suspect.)

As is obvious, different groups in
South Africa have different prior-
ities. The Durban women's group,
Women in Action, devotes its energy
to teaching black women basic skills:
literacy, sewing, typing, etc. A
group of Cape Town feminists has
found that a way of exposing women to
the ideas of the movement is by way
of weekend workshops--informal sym-
posia on such topics as our bodies,
sexuality, health, anger, self-asser-
tion and religion. There are work-
shops on self-defense, massage, yoga,
music, movement and drama. These
weekends--three so far--have been
small, but successful. Women find
their experience energy-providing and
motivational.

Rape crisis groups were initiated
in Cape Town, Johannesburg and Dur-
ban (the three major cities) in
1976-77, with about 15 to 20 women
involved in each centre. These
groups are still largely collecting
information and are not yet fully
functioning.

BECAUSE RACISM IS SO OVER—
WHELMING IN THIS COUNTRY,
MANY POLITICAL WOMEN FEEL
THAT SEXIST ISSUES ARE
TRIVIAL COMPARED WITH THE
RACIST ISSUE.

Cape Town feminists introduced a
national, bimonthly newsletter/maga-
zine called "From Women", without a
specific editorial policy, to be
collectively produced by feminist
groups at low cost. Each group takes
a turn to produce an issue; so far
there have been five. This keeps us
in touch with one another and also
serves as an introduction to femin-
ism.

One of the many problems we have
in South Africa is the difficulty in
getting feminist literature. Many of
the important books (e.g. Millett's
Sexual Politics, Brownmiller's
Against Our Will and Chessler's
Women and Madness) are banned.

In the major centres there are
numerous study groups and rap groups
which now seem to be viable. In Cape
Town there is a self-defense for
women group and two sexuality rap
groups as well. There seems to be
a growing national awareness of the
significance of women power as a
means to social and political change,
on the most general level. But as
mentioned earlier, the issue of
racism vs. sexism is a major division
among the more radical women in
South Africa. And among those who
feel a commitment to feminism, there
is a conflict between those who feel
that personal change is of prime im-
portance and those who feel that
wider feminist political activity
should be the main focus.

Some women are able to give time
to both arenas, but political ac-
tivity (e.g. demonstrations and
marches) is not possible. On the
other hand, there are specific areas
in which feminists can be politically
active in South Africa: e.g. abor-
tion law reform, rape crisis, equal
pay (which touches racism and sexism)
etc.

It is also important to recognise
that these issues can be a binding
factor between black and white women,
affecting us all, and that through
working together the customary so-
cial separation is overcome. Finally,
we realise that personal change
leads inevitably to political aware-
ness and action, and that personal
change too is political.