hot briefs

Red Zora

A woman calling herself "Red Zora" has been robbing pornography shops in Cologne, West Germany, leaving notes protesting the oppression of women and the “use of our bodies to make profits." Shop owners have offered a reward for her capture.

-News and Letters

Free At Last

After being raped and beaten for eight years by her father, Noreen Winchester, 19, of Belfast, Northern Ireland, stabbed and killed him. When she was convicted of manslaughter and sentenced to seven years in prison, the judge said she must not have minded her father's behavior if it took her so long to fight back. A major protest campaign resulted in a pardon earlier this year.

-Hard Labor

Short Changed

The grandniece of Susan B. Anthony, Susan B. Anthony III, has charged the US Treasury Department with prettifying the image of her aunt for the new dollar coin. Pointing out that the Treasury Department did not “prettify" Roosevelt or Kennedy, Anthony complained that her aunt looks “more like that Miss Liberty those tricky mint people want than Aunt Susan."

-Lesbian Tide

The United States’ Bill of Rights is ratified.

Security in Divorce

The new Social Security law improves the financial security of divorced wives. Under the old law, a marriage must last at least 20 years for a divorced wife to collect benefits on her ex-husband's account. But starting January 1, a divorced wife, who has not remarried, can collect benefits if her marriage lasted 10 years, affecting thousands of women and many more who will untie the marriage knot in the future.

~Free For All

Censored

The Hite Report, Brazil's bestseller for the past few months, has been pulled from bookstore shelves in that country. The official government censor, Armando Falcao, said he banned the book on female sexual response because the book goes “against the morals and good customs of Brazil." Shere Hite, the book's author, told Majority Report that she believes it "is also a break with Brazilian customs for a woman to have an orgasm."

-New Women's Times

Peter Panined

The Reverend Ron Adrian, who led fights against pornography bookstores in Wichita, Kansas, and commanded a successful referendum to overturn the city's gay rights ordinance, has set his sights on a new menace—the play, "Peter Pan," written in 1902—because of its profanity and ridicule of fatherhood. When young Wendy Darling, not her father, John Darling, acts as leader of the family, the father role is usurped, he asserts. The profanity occurs when Tinker Bell, talking to Wendy, says, "You silly ass."

-National NOW Times

Cursing Feminism

Rapier, “a potent new weapon for men," is one of the latest magazines to hit the British newsstands. Rapier's publicity material says: Women's Liberation seems to be taking a nasty turn lately. Anyone who monitors magazines for ‘thinking’ women, or has seen the ‘sexist shit’ nonsense and other graffiti in public places, knows how aggressive, divisive and militant this campaign has become..." And in the first issue: "Rapier's hunt for the world’s ugliest woman; women at their very worst; are you treating your wife too well?"

-Women's Report

Breast Butchery

Forty-eight women in a national cancer-detection project were mistakenly told they had breast cancer, and thirty-seven then underwent surgery, a medical review panel said in a report released last month. But the panel, headed by the Mayo Clinic, defended the needless operations, saying that “in almost all instances, based on information available to the surgeon at the time, treatment was consistent with acceptable surgical practice."

Sexist Slides

Two women electrical apprentices walked out on a school class in Gary, Indiana when a slide presentation contained slides of nude women. The nude slides were added to the tool company's presentation "to keep the interest up of some of these young apprentices." The women were threatened with disciplinary action for leaving class without permission, but succeeded in getting the charges, and the slides, dropped. The women said, "the slides are a direct relation of how women are viewed in the mill; we are for entertainment, amusement and humor."

-USWA Women's Caucus Bulletin

Midwife Defended

A California judge has dismissed charges of murder and of practicing medicine without a license against Marianne Doshi. Doshi is believed to be one of the first midwives in US history to be charged with murder for the death of an infant she was helping birth. The DA's office had maintained that in California it is a misdemeanor to practice medicine without a license, and that when a death occurs during the commission of a high-risk misdemeanor, it becomes a felony and the death is murder. The judge dismissed the charges as unfounded, then stunned a packed courtroom by launching into a defense of the rights of parents to have children born at home.

-Her Say

Murder at the Border

La Sra. Coneras, a six-month pregnant Mexican woman, was harassed to death by border officials as she attempted to return to Texas. She was detained while crossing the international bridge in Progreso, Texas and taken to the INS office for interrogation. Migra officials took away her papers and threatened her with deportation. When she became ill, she pleaded with officials to call an ambulance. They refused and she died.

The Texas Farm Workers Union is calling for a full investigation and urges you to write letters of protest to President Carter and Attorney General Griffin Bell. For more info, write: TFWU, Box 876, San Juan, TX 78589.

-04{ Our Backs

FBI Kills Again

Johanna Brand, in her book, “The Life and Death of Anna Mae Aquash," says the FBI was directly involved with Aquash's death. Aquash, a Micmac Indian from Nova Scotia and a leader of the American Indian Movement (AIM), was found dead in 1976 on the Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota. An initial autopsy, conducted under the auspices of the FBI, concluded she had died of accidental exposure. It was later discovered she had actually died from a bullet wound, fired from a .32 caliber pistol into the back of her head. The US Civil Rights Commission said she may have been “singled out by the FBI because of her association with AIM leader Dennis Banks." The FBI denies any wrongdoing.

~-Matrix

Lesbian Moms Win

Sandy Schuster and Madeline Isaacson and their six children have finally “won it all." After seven years of legal battles, the Washington State Supreme Court ruled that Sandy and Madeline, lesbian mothers, may retain custody of their children, and may live together in the same household as a family, despite previous court rulings that they must maintain separate residences, for "the protection of their children."

~Seattle Gay News

Where It Goes

How do working women spend their earnings? Working Woman magazine reports that after paying 23% of their annual gross salary in taxes, women who work outside the home pay another 31% of their paychecks merely for shelter. Getting around town takes up a bigger chunk than eating, with transportation accounting for 21.4% of their take-home pay. Eating is next, with clothing, cleaning and laundry combining for 7.8% of the gross salary.

-Her Say

TV Rapist Stopped

ABC Television has cancelled plans to dramatize the “adventures" of Oscar Kendall, who posed as a famous photographer and used this to attract women he then raped. Women Against Violence Against Women, which announced ABC's intention to produce the program, credits the thousands of women who wrote letters of outrage for stopping the production.

~WAVAW Newsletter

ERA Ransom

A District Court Judge will rule early next year whether NOW can be forced to stop its boycott practices of states that have not ratified the Equal Rights Amendment. The state of Missouri, in filing an anti-trust suit against NOW, argued that the boycott tries to take “states as economic hostages, with ratification of the ERA as the ransom." Last year, with only 100 organizations committed to the boycott strategy, Missouri lost an estimated $19 million. Currently, 350 groups have agreed to the boycott.

THE UNRATIFIED

~Harrisburg Area Women's News

Flags and Foetuses

The National Abortion Rights Action League reports that some Catholic schools in Wisconsin have amended the Pledge of Allegiance. According to NARAL, their pledge now reads, "I pledge allegiance to the flag of the United States of America, and to the Republic for which it stands, one nation, under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all, born and unborn."

Pregnant Pot Smoking

The substance called tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), present in marijuana, has been found to be harmful to the fetus in tests carried out on pregnant rats and mice at the Mason Research Institute, Massachusetts. There were significantly more fetal deaths in the group exposed to THC smoke than in the control group.

~Boston Women's Health Collective Packet 17

Price of a Woman

In Afghanistan, a new law requires a negligent driver to pay $4,895 for running over a man, $2,447 for running over a woman.

-Rocky Mountain News

Radio Donna

Radio Donna, which means “Woman Radio," broadcasts 15 hours a week to the women of Rome. The three-hour daytime program has been on the air two years and is completely controlled by women. How effective is the program? In a recent case, 20,000 women gathered on only six hours' notice for a rape victim after hearing the news over Radio Donna.

-Her Say

New Wave Sickies

Toronto's new wave band “Battered Wives” has changed its name to simply "The Wives." The abrupt name change came because planned demonstrations and disruption from groups almost forced cancellation of a 13-city tour of Canada. The group's logo features a fist with the impression of a woman's lips on it.

-Her Say