Page 16

Elie:
When We’ve the

Linda Fowler

As you have all surely noticed, Big Mama Rag has been
changing fast, and growing so rapidly we can hardly keep up with
her. We thought you'd like to know what’s happening with your
newspaper, beyond the printed page 1 - inside BMR.

We also want to let you know what some of our needs are
and hope you will let us know about yours. Our aim is to
continually increase BMR’s effectiveness as a service and
communication organ for all women.

Perhaps the printed page is a good place to begin.

During the past few months, BMR has doubled in size. The
features section has been expanded with more in-depth coverage
of issues relevant to local women. We have added more interviews
with both local and nationally known Feminists, expanded the
poetry section, increased book and film reviews, added regional
news, national news, a Women and Advertising column, and a
calendar of events. Plans are to add a financial column (to help
women with money planning and management), to expand
coverage of working women and labor union women, and to add a
section on the herstory of women. Casse Culver and Spottswood
suggested more analysis of the political aspects of Lesbianism.
We hope to offer more here.

What We Need

We need writers to help with features, articles on theory,
analysis, news stories, and poetry. Along with the larger BMR
have come needs for more graphics—send yours in! We need a
graphics editor; someone to take on the job of finding artists,
lining up what needs to be done, doing it or getting it done. We
also desperately need a good proofreader, experienced, if
possible. This job would take about six hours per month.

More advertising to pay increased printing costs; call us
(322-2010) if you can help sell ads (even 2 or 3 hours per week). If
you know a business which might take an ad, call us. Take a
classified with us—8 cents per word.

The demand for the paper is rapidly growing. Every day
women call the office asking where BMR can be bought, and our
distribution outlets are increasing. We plan to triple (for a start)
these outlets and are working on this now. It’s a big job. Please
help. We need women to get new outlets, stock existing ones, and
ultimately we will need someone to take over distribution
coordination entirely. This involves responsibility for all mailings.

Income is increasing, but so are expenses, so we are still
not out of the dark here. We're picking up about 30 new subs per
month, plus doing bulk mailings to bookstores and women’s
centers around the country.

We're increasing promotional activities and hope to offer
more women’s cultural events: music, poetry readings, film
series, etc.

We need: more subscriptions... Encourage everyone you
know to subscribe. Pledges... No amount too small or too large. $
for salaries... A better BMR requires more time from staffers.
Many are volunteers, some receive a bare subsistence wage.
Putting out the paper is a full-time job and can’t be done without
some salary money. If you know individuals or community-minded
groups who could contribute to this, please encourage them to
do so.

Where We Work

We've recently doubled office space to accommodate our
increased activities. We need: desks, overhead lights, chairs,
paint, envelopes (business size), thumb tacks, a 4x6 file card box,
note pads, lettering for our door, money (the rent went up).

We've talked a lot about classism and plan an issue on class
and Feminism, possibly for October. We also plan issues on day
care, women and madness, women in the military, revolution
(psychic, physical, spiritual, personal, political).

We hope to publish a poetry anthology from past BMR’s in
time for Christmas.

We are trying now to make BMR a regional women's
newspaper for the West. We need correspondents and distribution
points in all Western states. If you have contacts, let us know
about them, or them about us.

One of our big dreams is to publish every two weeks. We're
tentatively aiming for January or February of 1975. This is going to
require more full-time staffers and, thereby, more money for
salaries to pay these staffers. We're checking out possibilities of
grants for this purpose. If you have ideas on this, we'd love to hear
them.

What We’re Thinking About

Five of us are now living collectively, sharing a painting job
and a secretarial job and working almost full-time on BMR. Big
Mama pays one $250/month salary, which we also share. (We are
house painters—if you know of any jobs we can bid on, please get
in touch.)

In our personal lives we have been dealing with the overall
question of a woman’s civilization and what that means. We feel a
woman’s civilization has to happen on all levels: cultural,
spiritual, political, personal, and philosophical, and are working
on these areas within our living collective and within BMR.

Living collectively has brought us many challenges and
many changes. And a lot of personal growth. We've had to define
and re-define our purpose and the way each one of us fits into
that. We've become more responsible to ourselves, each other,
and the women's community. We are stimulated; we work harder;
we see results; these results, in turn, give us added stimulus.

But while our minds and souls are turned on, our bodies are
exhausted. We’re looking for ways to salve that problem, for we
learned long ago the farce of altruism.

If you can share your work with Big Mama, Big Mama can
share her satisfaction with you, a reciprocal arrangement.
Reciprocity, fairness, holding together is what this Women’s
Movement is about.

Big Mama Rag Vol. 3 No. 3

Lawsuit...

From Page 3

Besieged by many of these
things. That men have more
opportunities than women is a
matter of opinion since the
average time for a girl here is
14 months and we have a low
recidivism rate of 6%. We feel
that we are doing a good job...

We have never lost a life here
for any cause. We're doing
what we can. We're not on the
defensive about the lawsuit—
we're not uptight about it.

Poor Medical Care
Specific charges in the
lawsuit include the following:
“Women have been denied and
are being denied necessary
medical care, resulting in
serious medical problems, the
full extent of which is not at
this time known to the
plaintiffs." That is being inves-
tigated by a medical screening
arranged through the Medical
Committee for Human Rights.
Volunteer doctors, nurses and
clerical people will conduct
complete physical examina-
tions to gather data to clarify
the allegations. There have
been serious medical pro-
blems reported at the wo-
men’s facility such as persist-
ent bleeding that was seen as
“normal” by the staff physi-
cian and improper diet for a
diabetic woman who wasn’t
receiving the proper leafy
greens and protein she need-
ed. It seems that there is no
dietician at the prison, that
inmates are chiefly responsi-
ble for cooking food and that
specific items are unavailable in the prison kitchen resulting in unhealthy
substitutions.

According to Rudy San
Fellipo, the new Director for
the Department of Institu-
tions, medical care at Colora-
do State Penitentiary is “just
not adequate at all.”

But Ms. Gillespie, who is in
charge of the women’s facili-
ty, sees the medical screening
as “just another one of those
things...there is no special
reason they came down.” The
lawsuit states that the defen-
dants “have the power to
alleviate the conditions there
(at CWIC) but have not
exercised that power.”

Women prisoners are also
“denied the opportunity
granted other inmates to
participate in work-release
and pre-parole programs and
have less access to educa-
tional and vocational rehabili-
tative programs than the
general prison population.”
Since the suit was filed, some
women have been allowed
limited participation in pre-
parole activities. They can
now watch films and listen to
lectures on ways to readjust
to the outside, but women
cannot live in the pre-parole
center that is separated from
all other prison housing for a
month prior to their release as
men do. Instead, the women
in the pre-parole program are
forced to move to a separate
wing at CWCI and given “more
privileges, more freedom, and
possible furloughs” according
to Ms. Gillespie.

The academic program for
the women allows some to get
a high school equivalency
diploma and some to compete
with the general prison popu-
lation in competitive exams to
attend classes sponsored by
Southern Colorado State Col-
lege.

Unequal Pay

Another allegation in the
suit is that women are “paid
poorer wages for the work
they do in prison and they are
assigned duller, less useful,
and less rehabilitative jobs”
than are other inmates.
According to the women’s
warden the girls can “sew,
iron, cook, take business
classes and learn cosmetolo-
gy.” At the other facilities
(that are only for male
prisoners) there are such
“jobs” and “training” as
carpentry, machine shops,
mechanics, print shop, the
dairy and many more.

Women in the sewing
rooms at CWIC start at 15
cents a day and can earn up to
45 cents a day. The machines
are antiquated and aren't the
kinds of machines you would
have to know how to operate
to get a good job on the
outside. “The men use the
machines until they’re all wrecked by that time,” says an unidentified
inmate. “We sew shirts all day
for the men’s side and for all
the other state institutions.
For 15 cents a day. We work
just to keep ‘this state going.”

The usual argument for
equal facilities for men and
women is that there are only
60 women in prison and 1250
men. But according to Joan
Tempko, the facilities should
be shared by both the men
and the women “we don’t
want separate but equal
facilities.”

Women have been and
continue to be arbitrarily pun-
ished for violating unwritten
rules of which they have never
been notified, according to
the suit. Violation of these
rules “are determined without
any due process guarantee,
but they are noted in the
prison records and may affect
the granting or denial of
parole” to women inmates.

Ms. Gillespie says: “We do
have now a set of overall rules
for everyone in the institution.
They are not approved as yet
but everyone is working on
them.” (What? -ed.)

Women supposedly are no
longer being written up for
violation of rules, but they are
still not told the consequenc-
es of breaking certain rules,
according to Ms. Tempko of
the Law Collective.

No Body Contact

The women offenders are
given “less opportunity to
associate among themselves,
have shorter and more re-
stricted visiting hours and
have less of a chance to
associate with people outside
the prison than do other
inmates of the penitentiary.
The Associate Warden ex-
plains: “Visiting on weekends
is discouraged during the
week since programs at the
institution would be inter-
rupted.”

As far as visiting among
themselves, there is the no
body contact rule still in force
and it seems that the principal
reason for it is the fear of
homosexuality at the prison.
Ms. Gillespie says that “we
don’t have a real problem
{about Lesbianism)...we don’t
try to moralize about it at all.
Most of them are just
situational homosexuals
which may indicate a need for
affection, for someone to
care.”

Mail has allegedly been
censored and delayed without
regard for the feelings of
recipients. But the official
policy of the institution is that
mail is never censored, never
marked out or changed - just
read for “security reasons.”

The women do not have
access to a complete law
library or to jailhouse lawyers
as the rest of the prison
population does. The law
library that does exist in the
women's institution is “inadequate.”

The single nurse that works
at the women’s facility is only
there part of the day. At other
times “untrained, unqualified
staff dispense dangerous pre-
scription medicine. Since
inmates do not know what
medicine they are supposed
to be receiving, mistakes have
been made and will continue
to be made, with one inmate
being given the drugs pre-
scribed to a different inmate.”
Women are also “denied
access to the entertainment
and culture available to the
general prison population,
and the movies, cultural
programs and library books
which are available at CWIC
do not reflect the (women’s)
cultural backgrounds or suit
their tastes.”

It is because of the
separation on the basis of
their sex that the women in
the Colorado State Peniten-
tiary system are “subjected to
numerous rules and restric-
tions they otherwise would
not be, are treated like
children in an insulting and
degrading manner, and are
denied many comforts and
conveniences they would oth-
erwise enjoy.”