6

Just What

Please see BMR note about this article in Where We're At, page 4.

In order for the WLM to remain a vehicle for profound political change, our politics must not become tradable; they must not be sacrificed for money. Trading our politics for cash, no matter how badly needed, does not ensure movement life - on the contrary, it inevitably brings about movement death.

For whoever takes money from one side and morals from another faces a potential conflict of interests. Where the material stakes are high enough, and the possibility of moral retaliation low, there are always pressures for betrayal.*

(footnote) *We are not saying academic feminists always sell out. Our point is that structural pressures on academics do discourage anything else. Where exceptions occur, structural variables rather than superb souls must be used to explain them. Similarly, whoever wishes to avoid this problem...cannot depend for protection exclusively on her lonely motives...you can't will yourselves immune. The road to reaction is paved with good intentions.%

Specifically:

June and Patty are grappling with an enviable problem...they must decide whether to sell the book's (Rubyfruit Jungle) reprint rights, which they control, to one of the mass paperback publishers. Sell out, as they see it, for a whopping sum of male conglomerate money. The author (Rita Mae Brown) wants them to do it; they don't.

...the women of Daughters express concern over the recent news that one of their sister publishing houses...has accepted a grant to produce a nonsexist education textbook for McGraw-Hill. This discomfort is caused by their intense conviction that "male money," like male power, can be habit forming. Besides, as they see it, what the Man giveth, the Man can, and often does take away.

But you did grant Bantam a license to reprint Rubyfruit Jungle even though you technically didn't sell.

Our arrangement with Bantam is that they bought a license to publish a mass-market edition of this book for ten years (including foreign rights), with Daughters having approval of the jacket. Rita Mae retains her copyright and Daughters retains all other rights and permissions.

We will keep our edition in print.

How did you arrive at this decision? How much did you sell the license for? Have you distributed any of this money within the WLM? Do you intend to if you haven't already? To whom? How much? What are your distribution criteria?

Originally you had a consciousness and a conviction about not wanting to sell the rights. How do/don't these original convictions apply to your licensing the reprint rights (as opposed to selling them)? Your letter in Big Mama Rag does not sufficiently answer this question.

You cannot help but be aware of the hazards of succumbing to government/business patronage; such patronage always equals interference. I do not believe that either the United States government or United States corporate giants aid the development of any political ideology which may be in direct conflict with the status quo. Accepting their handouts unavoidably involves some kind of political trade-off - enemies of women never give us "something for nothing."

Attempts have been made to effectively disguise co-optation through (1) academic "think-tanks" where radicals are subsidized; (2) government and business endowments/grants; (3) WLM politics being popularized - thus, diluted - through commercial packaging; (4) "feminist stars" being created in the establishment media; (5) women being allowed marginal access to hitherto inaccessible areas of the economy; (6) women's state meetings, such as International Women's Year - Houston, Texas; (7) man's liberation... This list barely scratches the surface.

Insofar as our political movement needs money for both its operation and its workers to stay alive - money has to come from somewhere. The question is where?

Reclaiming Our Money

One of the ways for feminists to reclaim money for WLM use is for feminists who have access to greater or substantial amounts of establishment - "male" - money (as a result of their earning capacity, connections, families, etc.) to recognize their political obligation to share privilege by getting that money and then: (1) pumping it into the movement; and then: (2) redistributing it to women in a politically responsible way - through income sharing which attempts to be a financial equalizer. Income sharing is not the same thing as "good will" or "charity." Obviously, this money would be reclaimed as non-movement representative(s).

There is no question that going to the establishment is usually uncomfortable and undignified. However, for most women it is the only way to get money; most women do not have the luxury of choice. In light of this it is insensitive, unfair and politically hypocritical for privileged women to allow discomfort or humiliation to prevent them from making constructive political use of their privilege.

In anticipating the criticism I am encouraging women to “buy into the system," let me establish that nothing could be further from the truth! Reclaiming money from the establishment and then politically using it accomplishes the following: (1) it allows women to survive, and still have surplus money to contribute to the WLM; (2) it allows some women to not have to work full-time year after year - this enables them to have more time to contribute to political action; (3) it allows women to use their advantageous positions to help less-privileged women - in terms of connections and money - to become credentialed; and (4) it allows us to engender an atmosphere of believability in our struggle - after all, in some very important ways, we are our sisters' keepers. If we don't take care of our own, who will? Lip service is worse than none at all when we get in the way!

Can

Big Mama Rag Vol. 6 No. 5

Feminists

Since privileged women oftentimes are at a loss for what to do with their money, I want to suggest that they set up channels to distribute their financial resources to movement women who are less privileged, and thereby set an example for other privileged women to follow.

Insofar as there is no such thing as "clean money" under capitalism, purity is not the issue; rather, our minimizing establishment interference and our gaining political control of our lives. When WLM politics become marketable, they unavoidably lose impact, and thus effectiveness.

A remote possibility for funding our movement is our, in an organized effort, demanding monetary reparations from the establishment for war crimes against women. This would be a political action (as opposed to a trade-off) because (1) we would demand that there would be no strings attached; and (2) we would insist on not explaining our future uses for this resource - we would insist that our collective pasts speak loudly enough in our behalf. At this point in time, this idea is extremely far-fetched.

Recycling WLM Money

One of the rationales for "feminist businesses" has been the claim that these businesses help to fund the WLM because they recycle money within the women's communities by recirculating that money which feminists have paid them for a political product back to us - the WLM - in the form of political contributions. As far as I'm concerned, this practice is not deserving of special commendation; it is expected of feminists.

Moreover, while this practice contains some political fairness, this fairness is limited because, in effect, a minority of women function as “the executives" of our movement money by making the decisions for us. Decision making leaves the hands of the grassroots women - women who cannot afford to start their own businesses "feminist" or otherwise - women who are dedicated feminists.

More often than not, "feminist businesses" get involved in their own expansion, and lose sight of their relationship to the rest of the movement. When the product itself becomes the main concern, and when expansion of the business is emphasized, this is clear-cut opportunism. This brings up the issue of culturalism.

Culturalism

Although Daughters publishes novels which sometimes contain political content, it essentially presents itself as an alternative cultural press that sees its political focus as publishing novels which are not in accordance with the dominant culture. Although many of these novels articulate the realities of some women's lives, they do not directly function as stimuli for political education and organization. They do not clarify and elaborate issues so that the personal may be reevaluated (and acted on) from a political perspective.

Because Daughters publishes literature almost exclusively while claiming to be a feminist business, it is implied that Daughters either equates art with political action, or that Daughters values art as more radical than political action. Is this implication your true philosophy? How does art fit into “building working models for the critical next stage of feminism"?

Why does Daughters not take advantage of its considerable resources and serve a needed political function by being a vehicle for political communication and organization?

Daughters is not alone in elevating culture to politics. There are many “feminist businesses" which rely upon a female clientele for their respective existences. Some of these businesses provide a genuine service to the WLM, others don't. What is being raised here is the opportunistic structure and/or intention of many of these cultural enterprises.

While culture can be used as a tool to bring about political consciousness, culturalism in itself is not sufficient to bring about a political revolution - it does not appreciably contribute to the building of a political resistance. What it does do is provide a very short-term satisfaction; political drive and long-haul effects get subordinated - even sacrificed - to "feeling better." Not only do some "feminists" legitimize the trading of "political" objects by trying to pass this off as political actions, some "feminists" overtly utilize the WLM as a market for their product - caring little for the movement's longevity as a political force. In either case, the movement is expected to support the business, rather than the feminists in these businesses supporting the movement and maintaining a radical perspective.

I believe that you women of Daughters have regard for the WLM. However, I sadly conclude that you, in addition, are utilizing the WLM for personal betterment - having a successful business, having establishment approval - again, at our expense. You market our ideas, sell them to whom you want - as if you own them. You had a responsibility, for example, to dissuade Rita Mae Brown from licensing Rubyfruit Jungle to the "boys" --and remain true to your stated politics. True, the words were hers, but it is a movement-connected lesbian novel.

Daughters Inc. seemed to have a truer political identification when it first started publishing and made available a very important book - The Cook and the Carpenter by June Arnold. Did you, prior to licensing the reprint right, try to dissuade Rita Mae Brown?

We need Daughters; it can continue to help our common movement. It and other feminist presses can serve a much-needed political function by being vehicles for political communication. Because our political struggle suffers when this aim is placed second to the aim of making a successful business - which is what Daughters and other presses appear to be doing - I suggest, therefore, that these presses: (1) reflect more of a political (as opposed to cultural) commitment; (2) stop engaging in trade with the establishment; (3) and reorganize under a non-business structure whenever possible - one that is funded with reclaimed money, as per above discussion.

In short, exchanging our labor, service or deference for "their" money - although demoralizing - does not undermine our political movement, whereas exchanging our politics for "their" money unavoidably undermines our revolutionary struggle. I do not advocate demoralization; I do advocate our striving to realize self-determination in an effective way.