racism

Soliz A La Luz Como Lesbianas De Color/  
Coming Out Colored by Maya Chumu, translated by Emiliana Carera. From Tsunami Press, Lesbian Feminist Publishers, $3.00, bilingual. A new book that shares the strength and analysis Maya has developed writing as a lesbian of color.

Daughters of Rachel/Women In Israel by Natalie Rein. From Penguin Books $4.95 paper. “Against the background of the Jewish experience Natalie shows how the promise of the first wave of immigration, the early Kibbutzim, and the liberation struggles changed as the reality of Israel and Zionism demanded the perpetuation of traditional female roles."

Essays on La Mujer Part one edited by Rosaura Sanchez, Part two Rosa Martinez Cruz. From Chicano Studies Center Publications, Univ. of CA Los Angeles. $3.00. Major objective of this book is to show the importance of analyzing the situation of the Chicana from an economic perspective.

This Bridge Called My Back/Writings by Radical Women Of Color, edited by Cherrie Moraga and Gloria Anzaldúa with a foreword by Toni Cade Bambara. From Persephone Press, $8.95 paper. This dynamic anthology is getting a lot of play in the feminist press (although it deserves more) with good cause.

This book contains “prose, poetry, personal narrative and analysis by Afro-American, Asian American, Latinx, and Native American Women," confronting racism in ourselves and in our movement.

Las Mujeres/Conversations from a Hispanic Community by Nan Elasser, RyEe MacKenzie and Yvonne Tixler y Vigil. From the Feminist Press $5.95 paper. An oral history of four generations of New Mexican Hispanic women which challenges the myths and stereotypes, representing the lives of 21 women.

No Time For Crying: Stories of Filipino Women by Alison Wynne. From the Resource Center for Philippine Concerns P.O. Box 2784, Kowloon, Hong Kong, $2.50 plus $2.00 for airmail. The women speaking are workers in the multinational textile and electronics industries, on the sugar cane and banana plantations, and in the sex-tourism industry. Very moving and well illustrated.

Indian Women Of The Western Morning/ Their Life In Early America by Donna M. Terrell and John Upton Terrell. From Anchor Press, $2.95 paper. "Many of the largest and most important Indian peoples were matrilineal societies" this book examines the lives of women in these matrilineal tribes.

La Chicana/The Mexican American Woman by Alfredo Mirando and Evangelina Enriquez. From Univ. of Chicago Press, $6.95. Stories of women who suffer under a triple oppression--as women--as members of a colonized culture and as victims of a cultural heritage dominated by the cult of machismo.

The Chicana Feminist by Martha P. Cotera. From Statehouse Printing, Information Systems Development. This book contains "a series of essays and public presentations prepared for Chicana feminist activities and events during the period 1970-77."

THE

Chicana  
Feminist  

Martha P. Cotera

Diosa y Hembra/The History and Heritage of Chicanas in the U.S., by Martha P. Cotera. The text in this book is reprinted from Profile on the Mexican American Woman by Martha P. Cotera. From Statehouse Printing, Austin Tx., $4.95 paper. This is a chronological history survey of the Mexicanas and Chicanas who have helped shape Chicana history, pre-Hispanic to the present.

Women Of Cuba by Inger Holt Seeland. From Lawrence Hill, $7.95 paper. This book is based on interviews with factory and farm workers, high-born women formerly opposed to the revolution, students, older women, and black women.

Claiming An Enemy They Taught Me To Despise by Michelle Cliff. From Persephone Press, $5.00 paper. ‘In this collection of prose poems, Michelle investigates a variety of "despised" identities—color, female, childless, lesbian, Jamaican by birth and of mixed racial heritage.

Black Women: Bringing It All Back Home by Margaret Prescod-Roberts and Norma Steele. From Falling Wall Press, $2.95 paper. From Barbados to Brooklyn, from Jamaica to Bristol. Two accounts of girlhood in the West Indies, the upheaval of leaving and the conflicts of being an immigrant.

No Turning Back/A Hopi Indian Woman's Struggle to Live In Two Worlds by Polingaysi Goyawayma as told to Vada F. Carlson. Story of a Hopi woman who chose in her early youth to live in the white man's world, while holding on to the best of the Hopi culture. From Univ of New Mexico Press, $5.95.

Fighting Two Colonialisms: Women In Guinea Bissau by Stephanie Urdang. From Monthly Review Press, $15.00. This book is an examination of the achievements of the Partido Africano da Independencia da Guine e Cabo Verde since 1974. A study of conditions before and after independence.

Sturdy Black Bridges/Visions of Black Women in Literature, edited by Roseann P. Bell, Bettye J. Parker, and Beverly Guy-Sheftall. From Anchor Press, $6.95 paper. This is a collection of essays, interviews, stories and poems illuminating the characterization of black women in American, African and Caribbean literature.

Heresies: A feminist publication on Art and Politics, special issue on "Third World Women: The Politics Of Being Other." Available by writing Heresies P.O. Box 776, Canal Street Station, NY, NY 10012, $3.00.

Black Lesbians/An Annotated Bibliography compiled by J.R. Roberts with a foreword by Barbara Smith. From Naiad Press, $5.95 paper. "Distributing this book is about supporting Black lesbian freedom."

Brown Sister: publication by dark women, includes writing by dark lesbians. Write: Brown Sisters, Schneider College Center, Wellesley College, Wellesley, MA 02181, published quarterly.

Salsa-Soul Sister, 3rd World Gay Women's Organization, 3rd World Women's Gazette, edited by Candice Boyce. Write: Salsa-Soul Sisters, c/o Washington Square Methodist Church 133 West 4th St., NY, NY 10014.

Conditions: A magazine of writing by women with an emphasis on writing by lesbians. No. 5 "The Black Women's Issue" is available by writing to P.O. Box 56 Van Brunt Station, Brooklyn, NY.

Azalea: A magazine by and for Third World Lesbians, including writings, graphics, commentary, and photos. Published quarterly: 306 Lafayette Ave., Brooklyn NY 11238.

Ain't I A Woman: Black Women and Feminism by Bell Hooks. From South End Press, $7.00 paper. An exciting new publication which examines the impact of sexism on Black women during slavery, the devaluation of Black womanhood, Black male sexism, racism within the recent women's movement, and Black women's involvement with feminism.

The Black Woman Cross-Culturally edited by Filomina Chioma Steady. From Schenkman, $12.50 paper. This anthology brings together the roles, experiences and problems of Black women in the U.S., Africa, the Caribbean, and South Africa. 

MORE ON PAGE 26

Big Mama Rag, December, 1981 - Page 23