letters home

to mama

Psychiatric Violence Against Women

Dear BMR, turned into a separatist of sorts... I only want to share with ex-inmates now. Have been too hurt by a movement I once placed hope in. Some say I’m committing political suicide by not uniting with a “big Movement" but then they don't have headaches from beating their heads against a brick wall for the past ten years. Please note that my thoughts on your article are given with love and admiration for your courage.

So finally I'm deciding to subscribe after much thought. Yours is the only woman's journal besides No More Cages which I believe is not oppressive to former and current psychiatric inmates (also known as mental patients). In fact, it's the mental patients liberation movement (also known as the anti-psychiatry movement) which has given me strength and healing, not the women's movement. Finally, I've decided I don't want to "fit in" to feminism though I still plan to keep in touch through your publication. Who knows, someday feminists may quit dumping on "us sickies" every time they need a label for something disgusting.

Re. the title... A Legacy of Psychiatric Abuse... something about that word suggests abuses in a useful system, or psychiatry rather than psychiatry is an abuse. I believe the issue is one of violence. (I am perhaps being too picky here since the article explains what your thoughts are very clearly.)

In struggle Dee dee NiHera San Francisco, CA 2. 2nd paragraph p.15 col.l. legal rights are hazy on the issue of refusing drugs. On paper "voluntary" inmates are supposed to be given a "choice" to take or not to take this poison (at least in Calif.) though it's easy to get one's status changed to involuntary if one is not "acting in your own best interests," i.e. refusing medicine to help "feel better" rather than be better controlled by the staff so less of them have to be there (economics of institutions).

Dear Lori,

Thanks so much for your letter along with this issue of BMR. I had more time to give an in-depth critique of your excellent article on psychiatric violence against women. Unfortunately, work is attacking me like a school of piranha at this moment so this will have to do. First, thank you for the article. I think it’s really important for the women's community to hear what you have to say. I've been working with this issue for some time but gave up on feminism as a result of my experiences in a women's studies program. Have in fact and I think my favorite part of the article was on taking over the group therapy room. "It felt like we had seized power, then there was nowhere to cover."

Paintings on cover by Frida Kahlo. Story about the artist is on page 21.

collectives: Liz Lewis, Tori Bradford, Sue Goding

Bobbe Ross, Vicki Piotter, Judy Barlow, Constance Perenyi

supporters: Susanna Smith, Kim Womantree, Contributors: Boo Withers, Dee Bade, Deb Luger, K.T. Pantzer, Clair Kaplan, Dona Calacone, Priscilla Canney, Vicki Barriga, Cara Ernst

Big Mama Rag is a feminist periodical published monthly by Big Mama Rag, Inc., a non-profit corporation. Manuscripts and artwork (please!) may be submitted to 1724 Gaylord St. Denver, CO 80206. Deadline for material submission will be announced each month in "Where We're At"—it's generally the 15th of the month preceding. Please enclose a stamped self-addressed envelope with all manuscripts. No responsibility is accepted for unsolicited material. We reserve the right to edit all material for length. Subscription rates are $6/year (11 issues) for individuals in the U.S., $12 outside the U.S. or for Plain brown wrapper, and $18 to all institutions. BMR is free to all women incarcerated in prisons or mental institutions. BMR is on file at the New Alexandria Library for Lesbian Women in Huntington, MA and is available on microfilm (Oct. 1972, Vol. 1 No. 1 through May 1980) directly from Big Mama Rag for $75. BMR is indexed by the Alternative Press Center, P.O. Box 7229, Baltimore, MD 21218. Our phone number is (303) 322-2010; we have a phone message machine.

that there are abuses in psych—

go with me." So true, so true. It reminded me of when I ran away from the hospital only to find I had no place to go, no money, no clothes. Can you believe it! I went back on my own because I was afraid of the outside world.

Oh: Lori, I'm sorry. I have to get sloppy in this letter, no time to think... what kind of society is this anyway?

The most important section of your article for me was re. feminist therapy. To my way of thinking, Feminist Therapy and the ERA don't fit together. I don't consider the ERA oppressive except as a single vision issue. I have not been fucked over by the ERA though it's not an issue I care to give energy to. On the other hand, I consider the institution of therapy oppressive. The name feminist in front of the medical name therapy impresses me not.

Your analysis of the therapy was good, especially how so many "pull away from women who are 'really crazy'." When I flip, feminists are the last choice of people I seek out. In fact, I feel safer suffering alone. You write, "Feminist therapy allows us to be coopted in the belief that we can make the psychi—

MORE ON PAGE 20

More Letters On Page 20

than my shrinks was always ignored (with feminist shrinks this was also the case). Something about the way I communicated was different, though I can't quite put my finger on it right now. Also, I didn't have degrees or credibility. When I quit a $1.90/hr. job ‘cause I couldn't live on that wage, the shrink told me I had a "self-defeating personality." When I was at a demonstration protesting psychosurgery and brought up the issue of class, the M.D. said, "Oh, poor people can't afford this operation."

inside BMR:

America Held Hostage...

Abortion and Ster—

Health Clinic...

Mother's Day.......18,19 Letters More On.......20

Calendar Classifieds/Ads.......23 Resources

Where we're At.........

Health

are $6/year (11 issues) for individuals in the U.S., $12 outside the U.S. or for Plain brown wrapper, and $18 to all institutions. BMR is free to all women incarcerated in prisons or mental institutions. BMR is on file at the New Alexandria Library for Lesbian Women in Huntington, MA and is available on microfilm (Oct. 1972, Vol. 1 No. 1 through May 1980) directly from Big Mama Rag for $75. BMR is indexed by the Alternative Press Center, P.O. Box 7229, Baltimore, MD 21218. Our phone number is (303) 322-2010; we have a phone message machine.