413

Local Feminist Theatre: Two Different Approaches

By Mary Wadding

(Editor's Note: The following article
is based on interviews with Juliett
Wittman of the Boulder Feminist Theatre
Collective and Debbie Lester and Rachel
Mailman of the Denver Feminist Theatre
Collective.)

With two feminist theatre groups in
the Denver/Boulder area, women are get-
ting the opportunity to observe two
different forms of theatre. The two
groups are both feminist and dedicated
to the use of theatre as a means of
entertaining while putting across a
political message.

But, that's where the similarities
end.

Basically, the Boulder Feminist The-
atre's goal is to disseminate feminist
ideals through theatre. As most visual
art is by men, they would like to work
to express the female perspective.

“There shouldn't be a
dichotomy between
art & politics.”

The BFT considers themselves foremost
as actresses (having the experience and
training to qualify for that distinc-
tion) who practice true acting.

The BFT has fallen prey to one of the
major problems of working within any
movement—trying to do too much. Orig-
inally, they were into guerilla theatre
improvisations, skits and formal the-
atre. They have evolved to the point
where they prefer more formal plays

which are easily portable, having few
characters, and the ability to adapt
to any stage.

The second problem they've experienc-
ed, and still do, is the lack of good
scripts. While they primarily use
scripts by outside sources, they have
ambitions of writing their own in the
future.

of only Dinah Leavitt and Juliett. The
two women make the decisions and all
preparations. When preparing for a
play, they ask the help of friends,
women they've met, or hold auditions.
Their belief is that theatre can only
continue by accepting women who are
tremendous actresses and dedicated fem-
inists. Realistically, the BFT does not
see any great change in the number of
women who are dedicated to the group,
due to the transience of the Boulder
population.

A similar lack of members concerns
the Denver Feminist Theatre Collect-
ive. Comprised of Debbie Lester, Shari
Greyson and Rachel Mailman, the group
originally grew out of a series of
improvisations performed at the Woman
to Woman open house last year, with
Debbie being the only original member.
The second project of the DFT was to
perform the play Dorothy and the Wise-
man of Ooze, by Peg Hickox, for Inter-
national Women's Day. The project was
dropped, however, due to internal pro-
blems with some of the new women want-
ing to have a “woman's" theatre group
as opposed to a "feminist" theatre
group. To substitute, a few women from
the cast got together a series of im-
provisational skits, which were well
received at the IWD celebration.

The collective has performed once
since that time at the opening of the
Teresa Trull concert in May.

Unlike the Boulder group, the DFT
concentrates on performing improvisa-
tional segments, with feminism as a
type of expression and art as the qual-
ity of that expression. All of their
skits deal with some political aspect
of women's lives and from there they
work on the artistic expression of
those situations.

The improv form lends itself to a
sense of honesty and realism that in-
volves the audience, because they, too,
have experienced similar situations.

The audience's reaction to truth is

Juliett Wittman and Dinah Leavitt of the Boulder Feminist Theatre

According to Juliett Wittman, the
whole theatre movement in this country
is away from realism. The plays are
abstract with the playwright attempting
to find new tricks in form, like trying
to break the barrier between the audi-
ence and actress. She feels that this
leads to misunderstanding. She explain-
ed that it is an American phenomenon to
glorify conditions through abstract
methods. Too many playwrights are writ-
ing form as opposed to content. Juliett
believes there is a sense of abstrac-
tion versus political realism. "There
shouldn't be a dichotomy between art
and politics, but there is."

Ideally, a play would be true to form,
well-written from an artistic stand-
point and capable of clearly conveying
a political message. For the most part,
contemporary plays may have one of
these qualities, but lack the other.

Juliett views the trend of women wri-
ting about their relationships with
their mothers as a welcome change in
theatre as the most commonly explored
interrelationships have been written by
men and deal with mothers and sons. As
she said, "the new content is true.”

Having been in existence for two
years now, the BFT has become the work

obvious, and very critical to the group

in performing. “We don't let each other

get away with shit, either," said Rach-

el. Debbie added, "As long as something

is honest, it rings true” which the aud-
ience immediately picks up on.

Improv also lends itself to the col-
lective process. “Formal theatre is
authoritarian and patriarchal," while
when working through an improvisational
sequence, ideas come from all mem-
bers, with no one person deciding what
should be done.

The Denver Feminist Theatre also sees
improvisation as a means by which mem-
bers can get to know each other and
understand how they interact on an art-
istic level. Debbie also said, "Improv
has given me a sense of pulling my pol-
itics together.”

Feedback is important to the collect-
ive. Since Teresa's concert, the women
have been stopped by women who watched
their performance. Not only have they
been told what was liked and what was
not, the criticisms have been specific
instead of in generalities.

The DFT would like to involve more
women in the group on a regular basis.
Hopefully, the women would share simi-
lar types of ideas and a sense of poli-

tics complementary to those of other
members. The three women of the DFT
share basic ideas, but acknowledge that
they hold different sets of political
values that they have been able to

work out.

The DFT would also like to find plays
dealing with the history of women,
women's struggles, and the movement. By
performing such plays, they would like
women to be able to experience a sense
of pride, a kind of “goddam, I can do
it!" attitude, as Debbie put it.

According to Debbie and Rachel, the
reason for the lack of good feminist
writers is that women hesitate because
they need someone not only to perform
their plays, but also, to watch them.
Heavy political content is not the ex-
pected norm of an audience and until
that perspective can be recognized,
few women will be willing to come
forth with really strong feminist
plays that are well-written.

The Denver Feminist Theatre Collective
would like to hear from any woman who
has a play she'd like to share, or
who would like to get involved. If you
are interested, call Debbie at 399-9586.

Art & Sexual Politics ..

home, as well as familiarity with a
specific vocabulary of iconography and
motifs—the same is by no means true
for the poet or novelist. Anyone, even
a woman, has to learn the language,
can learn to read and write, and can
commit personal experiences to paper
in the home. Naturally, this oversim-
plifies, but it still gives a clue as
to the possibility of the existence

of an Emily Dickinson or a Virginia
Woolf, and their lack of counterparts
(at least until quite recently) in the
visual arts."

The editors of Art and Sexual Politi-
cs have also contributed essays.
Thomas Hess maintains that although
there may have been no "great" women
artists, women have produced great
works of art, and cites some striking
examples. Hess also says that many

"Masterpieces" of Western painting
heretofore attributed to male artists
are, through painstaking scholarship,

being discovered to have been the work
of women artists—women whose identi-
ties were deliberately erased by sexist
art historians (i.e. the famous port-
rait of Mile. Charlotte du Val d‘Ognes,
hailed until recently as one of Jacques
Louis David's finest works, was actual-
ly painted by Constance-Marie Charpen-
tier, one of David's students.)

The other editor of the book, Eliza-
beth C. Baker, contributes an essay
that is an examination of the woman
artist in the contemporary art scene.
She reiterates facts known by women
artists for centuries—that galleries,
dealers, collectors, and museums are
sexist, racist, and classist—all this
in a field of endeavor where supposedly
talent and skill and creativity deter-
mine success and acceptance and recog-
nition. She also discusses the politi-
cal process of women and their art.

The ten artists who contribute are
concerned and aware of their oppression
as women and artists—more than the
traditional double-bind. They are also

heartened and determined by the fact
that they are in a position to effect
change, as evidenced by the titles of
their essays: “Women Without Pathos,"
“Healthy Self-Love," "Moving Out, Mov-
ing Up," "Do Your Work."

They are primarily concerned with
doing their work, and that's as it
should be. Or, in the words of Ms.
Baker: "The full mergence of the tal-
ents of any group which suffers from
unusual circumstances—and women art-
ists, even with their successes to date
taken into account, do fit this des-
cription—takes a long time. In view
of the number of younger women artists
who are doing excellent work, one can
surmise that this current generation
stands a closer chance to producing
more excellent women artists than ever
before. We may be approaching the last
phase of having to consider the accom-
plishment of women artists as a special

case."

"The Artist's Daughter," Eliza-
beth Vigeer-Lebrun. (From "Art and
Sexual Politics")

Her Mothers...

The mother will be left, bereft. They had drowned each other first in
tears and then had almost drowned each other. The daughter will leave wear-
ing the mother's favorite towel dress and the mother's overpriced light
green sun hat. The daughter's thumbs will work the road."

But Beatrix Palmer, author, feminist, a new daughter, a new mother, a new

woman, will recreate the ending:

"Beatrix Palmer is still at the road, staring past (her daughter's) depart-
ure...A car comes down the road. Beatrix's vision is blurred. It honks. Her
green hat comes out of the car. Her green-and-blue towel dress comes walk-

ing toward her.
"No more assassinations,"

says Lena.

"Birth me, Mothers. Carry me in the brine of your belly and your tears.
Let us sit on each others’ laps, daughters and mothers."

“Mother, I'm pregnant with a baby girl."

"What is she doing?"

"She is singing.”

“Why is she singing?"
"Because she is unafraid."

Kathy Pritchett
(303) 861-1166

17th Ave
Denver, CO 80203

723 E.