Big Mama Rag Vol. 5 No. 2

International Women’s Day  
Celebration Set For March  

where there will be a speaker's rally  

A broad coalition of women repre-  
senting political organizations in  

Denver, Greeley, Boulder and Colorado  

Women's Day Coalition demands.  

Evening events will take place at  
St. Thomas Church, 2201 Dexter in  
Denver. It will include a potluck  
dinner ($1.00 plus a dish, or $2.00  
if you don't bring food), the film,  

Springs are planning a celebration  
for the historical International  
Women's Day.  

On March 5th there will be a march  
leaving East High School at 12:00  
noon. The march will proceed down  

Colfax Avenue to the State Capitol “Dorothy and the Wiseman of Ooze",  

women musicians and singers.  
International Women's Day was  

working women and men were fighting  
for better working conditions in the  
factories and farms, for the aboli-  
tion of child labor (the cruelty  
which existed for children in the  
early 1900s all over the world, the  
U.S. included, is phenomenal), and  

women's right to vote.  

by thousands of women garment and  
textile workers in New York City on  
March 8, 1908 demanding an end to  
these oppressive conditions that  
later provided the date for Inter-  
national Women's Day, as established  
by socialist women in Germany.  

(You can find more information about  

International Women's Day.)  

to play a major role in the struggle  
for our own emancipation as well as  
that of the entire working class.  

In 1977 the Colorado International  
Women's Day Coalition is raising the  
following demands and issues:  

FIGHT HEALTHCARE, WELFARE, CHILDCARE CUTBACKS!  

The recent Supreme Court decision denying maternity benefits to working  
women, cutbacks at Colorado General Hospital in OB/GYN and family planning,  
and reductions in daycare and educational opportunities under the welfare  
program all show that women's needs, which have always been a low priority,  
are given lower priority during the economic crisis.  

STOP FORCED STERILIZATION...FREE ABORTION ON DEMAND!  

We demand the right to self-determination for all women. The U.S. government  
has sterilized one fourth of Puerto Rican women through its AID program,  

and one third of Native American women through its Bureau of Indian Affairs.  
Most of these women were sterilized without their informed consent. The new  
Hyde Amendment now before Congress would eliminate Medicare payments for  
abortions, thus denying poor women their right to safe legal abortions.  

NO PAY/LOW PAY FOR WOMEN AND MINORITIES = SUPERPROFITS FOR CAPITALISTS!  

In spite of our struggles for equal pay for equal work, the difference  
between women's wages and men's wages is double what it was ten years ago.  
Unemployment, which is running between 7% and 12% nationally, is over 65%  
among young Third World people. And this figure only includes those who  
have not given up looking for work. Business is pitting women against  
minorities and other workers in the fight for too few jobs. Women's unpaid  
labor in the home, which could account for one fourth of the gross national  
product, gives the capitalist system two workers for the price of one.  

RATIFY THE ERA, BUT DON'T STOP THERE!  

It is disgraceful that such a simple statement of equality as the Equal  
Rights Amendment has had such difficulty becoming law. For this reason, its  
ratification is important, but its passage will only be a symbol of our  
growing strength. It should not be used to negate protective legislation.  
Equality cannot be guaranteed until the implementation of the laws passes  
out of the hands of the ruling class and into the hands of working people.  

OPEN BORDERS FOR WORKING PEOPLE...STOP DEPORTATION!  

While U.S. industries exploit cheap labor across the U.S./Mexico border, fas-  
cist immigration laws prohibit these same workers from legal access to jobs  
in the U.S. Harassment under the guise of seeking undocumented workers  
begins to parallel South African Apartheid identification policies. In  
Arizona, in the Manzo case, four women whose crime was trying to help those  
caught in this unjust system face a possible total of 166 years in prison.  

WOMEN SUPPORT STRUGGLES FOR NATIONAL LIBERATION...UNITE TO FIGHT FASCISM  

AND IMPERIALISM!  

Women suffer triple exploitation in nations under imperialist domination.  

In South Africa, for instance, Bantustan women are being deported from  
Johannesburg to uninhabitable regions, simply because they are black, female,  
and a threat to the economic domination of the ruling class and foreign  
corporations. In Africa, Asia, and Latin America, women fight for national  
liberation and for equality between women and men.  

SELF-DEFENSE IS OUR RIGHT...SUPPORT SELF-DEFENSE AGAINST RAPE AND POLICE  
HARASSMENT!  

The overturned conviction of Yvonne Wanrow for defending herself and her  
children against attack by a rapist is a great victory for all women; how-  
ever, she still faces a possible retrial. Sexist attacks against women in  
magazines and movies have led directly to an increase in the abuse of women.  
Lesbian feminists face harassment from the courts and police and are fight-  
ing back for democratic rights. Our communities are under attack. The  
police, the KKK, grand juries, and the FBI are assaulting national minori-  
ties and political activists. The re-institution of the death penalty  
victimizes poor and Third World people. We must organize to combat the rise  
of repression.  

are among the organizers of the IWD coalition:  
Aig  
inist Center, Bnerg? i  
Informe Det, Am  
2, Greeley Women's Coalition, Social  
remt Workers, Associated Women of  
Metro, the National Lawyers Guild,  
Installer's Defense Committee, the De  
the Colorado Springs Women's Health &  

with the  

"Salt of the Earth", a feminist play,  

founded during a time in history when  

eight hour work day with higher wages  

It was the demonstration march held  

this world wide International Women's  
Day by consulting Alexandra Kollontai,  

Women in the United States continue  

Batya Weinbaum  

March 8th, International Women's  
a celebration that  
the movement has inherited  
the socialist half of our tradition.  
The day was initiated by Clara Zetkin  
and other feminists working in the  
Socialist International in Europe way  
before the existence of any socialist country.  
The point of the holiday was to cele-  
brate the strength of the women in the  
socialist movement.  

Thoughts on the Eighth of March, re-  
printed below, is a newspaper article  
written by Chinese feminist Ting Ling.  
The point of the article was to artic-  
ulate the continuing problems of women  
in Yenan, one of the liberated zones  
in the war against Japan. She wrote  
the article for publication in a com-  
munist newspaper in 1942. It is now  
considered a classic of Chinese femi-  
nist literature.  

Reprinting Ting Ling's thoughts in  
1977 gives some historical perspec-  
tive to our current celebration.  
Ling and the other early Chinese femi-  
nists, now nearly forgotten, can offer  
many important political lessons to us.  
First, it's important to know that  
there were women like us working in  
their pre-revolutionary situation.  
Second, it's important to see that  
feminist issues are often put aside,  
along with other women, when the  
revolutionary going gets tough. Third,  
it's important to know that sometimes  
this putting away of feminism to get  
out of an immediately dangerous situ-  
ation (like war) continues even after  
the war has been won.  

Ting Ling is not as well remembered  
as other socialist women—such as  
Clara Zetkin of Germany or Alexandra  
Kollontai of Russia—because her writ-  
ings and her political role were much  
more controversial.  

Ting Ling  

"Woman! When will the day come  
when we won't have to pay special at-  
tention to these two characters? When will  
they not have to be specially pointed  
out?  

This day comes every year. And when  
it comes, all over the world there are  
meetings and processions of women. And  
although these last two years haven't  
been as eventful as former years in  
Yenan, it seems that some people have  
been active. Meetings will be held,  
speeches given, telegrams received, and  
articles published.  

Before marriage, all of the women  
had great ambition and endurance to  
struggle in life. Then, under the in-  
fluence of the normal, sexual needs of  
life and the honeyed words, “helping  
each other," they married and were  
inevitably forced to become "Ibsen's  
Nora returned home." In this situation,  
they suddenly become aware of and fear  
the danger of "backsliding," and they  
tend to run off aimlessly in all direc-  
tions.  

Those who have the nerve will demand  
that the child-care center accept their  
child, or they ask for an abortion,  
and even, running the risk of harsh  
punishment by the authorities (the  
party), as well as physical danger to  
one's life, they secretly try to abort  
by using various medicines.  

But in response to their needs, the  
authorities (party) reply, “Don't you  
think that raising children is a very  
valuable task? You only want an easy  
life and make all sorts of unreason-  
able demands. What important political  
work have you ever accomplished in  
your life? You're afraid to have chil-  
dren, and then, once you have them,  
you don't want to take the responsibil-  
ity for them: Who asked you to get  
married in the first place?"  

Generally, when people marry, three  

conditions must be met: There must be  
political purity, a correspondence in  
age and looks, and a willingness to  
help each other. But it seems that al-  
most all people are able to meet these  
conditions.  

We must think seriously about the im-  
plications of the fact that the reason  
for the divorce is always alleged to  
be the backsliding of the woman comrade.  
I think it is a shameful thing for a  
woman not to progress and to hold her  
husband back, but now let us examine  
more closely the causes of this back-  
sliding.  

I'm a woman myself and I can under-  
stand the faults of women better than  
others, but at the same time, I also  
know the agonies of women. Women can-  
not live beyond their time in history,  
they cannot reach perfection, they  
are not made of iron or steel. It is  
beyond their ability to resist the  
many kinds of temptation in society,  
and to resist its silent pressure.  
Each woman has her own tale of woe.  
Each woman once had her noble senti-  
ments (whether she has attained a high  
and respected position or whether she  
has fallen, whether she struggles  
alone or has been swallowed up into  
the daily routine of the mass of soci-  
ety). This is even more true for the  
women comrades who have come to Yenan.  

In this world there is no one  
without ability and there is no one  
without the right to "win the world.”  
Therefore, if the women want to attain  
equality, they must first strengthen  
themselves as individuals. This is  
obvious and requires no repetition.  
Nowadays, some people make speeches  
using this as a basic principle:  
"First we must obtain political power."  
But I, as a member of the front (the  
proletarian front, the battlefront  
against the Japanese invaders, and the  
women's front), would only like to  
mention some points which we must bear  

in mind daily. More on Page 9  

Make support for  
women in Chile  
a focus of your activities.  

WOMEN'S  

is designed to  

provide the basic  
information necessary  
for initiating  
effective Chile  
solidarity work  

Packet includes 17” x 22” poster; stickers;  
postcards; Carta a Chile (for mailing  
campaign); resource list and history of  
Allende period and the effects of the  

coup on women’s lives through five  
composite biographies of women;  
halftones and illustrations  

$1.25 plus 25¢ postage and handling.  
(40% discount on prepaid orders totaling  
50 or more packets, posters, dozens of  
postcards, and stickers. Add  

10% for postage.)  

Name  

Address  
City.  

State Zip  
ACTION FOR WOMEN IN CHILE  

(AFWIC)  

PO Box 530, Cathedral Sta.,  

NY, NY 10025