Letters Home to Mama

Dear BMR:

Opportunities to praise press coverage of Colorado’s incredible prison non-system are so rare that I'm certainly not going to pass one up. Your September issue was excellent -- from the standpoint of philosophy as well as content.

There is something profoundly wrong with a “correctional” system that teaches subservience and demands self-degradation as the price of day-to-day existence. Volumes could -- and, I hope, will -- be written on the dichotomy between what penologists claim to be doing in prisons and what is actually being done. In the meantime, BMR has performed an invaluable public service by providing a forum for women who understand how the pig behaves when there is no longer a need for chivalry.

Mary Louise Aragon and Ronnell Lee know the prison. That their observations and criticisms have implications for all women and oppressed people in general goes without saying. I hope we'll be hearing more from them, and I hope that BMR will continue to publish articles by, for and about, women in prison.

Frank Driscoll

Asso. Editor, Ball & Chain Colorado State Penitentiary Canon City, Co.

Dear Big Mama,

“Shecat” used this column last month as a forum to voice her/his displeasure at the “MANagement” of the August 25th Women’s Festival. “Shecat” made some disparaging accusations of what s/he called the “leadership” of the Festival. As one of the food coordinators of the Festival, some of those remarks were directed towards me. I can handle that since obviously “Shecat” doesn’t know what s/he is talking about even on the very simplest issue of the economics and logistics of providing food for hundreds of women and men. At this point I feel no urgency or even vague desire to educate the ignorant. If “Shecat” had really been concerned, then during the planning stages of the Festival s/he would have had every opportunity to know what was transpiring. But, the First Amendment lives and “Shecat” can make her/his accusations, no matter how irresponsible.

However, I personally do have an incredible sense of urgency to respond to “Shecat” on an issue of timeless importance to the Women’s Movement. In her/his letter, “Shecat” wrote that “What I object to so much is the lack of trust between us...” “Shecat” went on to say, “I am more willing to learn if I know there is love, and that is what we have to start trusting if we are to build a strong and vital women’s community in Denver.” “In the process, let’s see that our learning is open, so that we can all share.” Nice words... Well expressed. Vitally important to the growth of feminism. “Shecat” further stated, “Any woman who needs to fall back on old patterns and processes is denying herself the most important experiences she may ever have -- sharing and learning on a gut level with other women, helping and BEING helped.” More nice words. Very well expressed. Incredibly important to the nurturance of feminism.

I have a huge problem, though with “Shecat’s” statements: Wouldn’t it be neat if s/he really meant what s/he said? Wouldn't it be neat if s/he listened to her/himself? Wouldn't it be neat if s/he could involve her/himself in the process of those statements instead of pontificating from the sidelines? Wouldn't it be neat if “Shecat” could also be “open” in “love and struggle”? Wouldn't it be neat if “Shecat” could have at least signed her/his name to the letter? It’s so easy to talk about trusting and being open. Cheap cheap words.

Terry Miller

Shecat,

It makes me very sad that you and I must correspond with one another through this wall of anonymity — how much nicer it would be to communicate in person. The anonymous mask -- for whatever your reasons -- makes me even more sad on a larger scale. You obviously are a sensitive, caring person with deep personal feelings for the Women’s Movement in Denver. I believe you and I share a commitment to the love and struggle involved in the process, in the realization and actualization of our (women’s) needs and goals. But what really saddens me, Shecat, is that there must be something going on here in the Denver women’s community that prevents you from being really up-front with your views; something that holds you back from wanting to take responsibility for what you say and for what you believe in. What is that? What can we do about it? How can we share our trust and love and growth when we can’t even address one another? You know how to get in touch with me. I can only wish that you felt or you wanted to and that you felt you could be safe in being open.

Terry Miller

Dear Big Mama, My reasons for using a pseudonym have been important to me. However, I agree that some issues are more important than my own personal hassles, and this is one of them. Terry is right on, as usual, and I appreciate her straightforwardness. Therefore, I say publicly that I am Shecat, in openness, love, and struggle.

-Nancy Boyd

Dear Big Mama Rag;

I was most impressed with your issue concentrating on Women in Prison. I am enrolled in the University Without Walls program at Loretto Heights College and would like to expand my interest in prison reform. My involvement in the Women’s Movement is extensive so I would like to concentrate on the plight of women prisoners.

Do you have any suggestions of areas that I might be of service? Living where I am presents a problem.

Thank you.

Sincerely, Penny Gardner

More on Page 4