movement

Women and Fascism: Comparing Nazi

Cate Gilles

More and more often recently I have been startled by strong resemblances between what is happening to us and the rise of fascism in Ger- many. Looking at the history of fascism has given me some specific insights which have illumined the interconnectedness of the system we are fighting, as well as a means for development of strategy, tactics, ideas and support systems which may keep us alive through the 80's. While there are parallels between Nazi Germany and the present, there are also tremendous contrasts in the style and cultural content of the two eras of developmental Fascism. I have chosen to use the similarities as warning signals.

Fascism very basically defined is a dictatorship of the extreme right which is based on an iron alliance of the triangle: corporate interest, government, and the military. This triangle seeks to impose authoritarian control on the people by (1) Limiting access to freedom of the mind and the body, (2) twisting minds by means of propaganda and doublespeak, (3) encouraging and developing the innate racist tendencies of a culture into full blown militaristic nationalism and neo-colonialist imperialism, and finally, (4) ensuring control by preying on existential and economic insecurity with simplistic, often mythical answers to the most basic questions.

Underlying the gains of the 1970's were the seeds of the current arch conservative movement, seeds sown in reaction to the tremendous change in traditional Amerikan society. I have made several assumptions which form the base for my seeing Amerika as a Fascist state which is male, technological and extraordinarily subtle. The assumptions are first, that the forces converging to limit our lives are inseparable from the high technology which makes the rape of our minds, our autonomy and the land possible. Second, there are clear psychological, ideological and economic reasons for conservative Amerika's rise to power, for the backlash against the rights of women and people of color. The backlash is a direct and necessary product of the cyclical nature of this economic system. The backlash against our basic rights is also a very clear example of the scapegoat psychology. Something is very wrong in this society and it is the fault of uppity women and people of color, rather than being the fault of a basic sickness in the marrow of the structure of white culture. Sociobiology with its implicit inference that white man is intended by nature to be on top, i.e., a new wave Social Darwinism, came along very conveniently for the status quo of the upper middle and upper classes, as conveniently as the KKK, the white Christian paramilitary groups and the Amerikan Nazi Party came along for the catharsis (emotional cleansing) of the white lower middle and lower class.

This reactionary ideology attempts to speak with an authority based on "science, tradition, the church, and white culture's traditional assumption of the absolute necessity not only to exist within an enforced hierarchy, but to be #1. Contemporary racist, sexist and imperialist assumptions are paralleled historically in the Nazi ideology. Hitler once said, “whoever has doubts regarding the future of this greatest of all blocs of human beings of one race, or does not believe in its future, is himself nothing but a weakling. I believe unconditionally in this future. We were once the greatest empire of all. Then we became weary and slack, we wasted our strength on a process of internal disintegration and thus lost our status and reputation abroad." This kind of reasoning is seemingly the justification for Amerika's foreign policy.

The economic trauma of Post World War I Germany and the contemporary economic situations seem to have heightened the fear of women which is indigenous to both societies. Women pushing for rights have posed a serious threat to the economy because the economy cannot handle an entire other population which demands equal pay. The other deeper reason for the repetitive cycle of women's struggles for rights and the consequent backlash is that women have been the locus or the center of social continuity for centuries. A world in which women were not constrained to act according to traditional rules of role behavior would subvert the need for male posturing and would certainly change the shape of the nuclear family now so essential to capitalism.

Business cycles are essential under capitalism in order to preserve the hierarchies which maintain the status quo. Capitalism needs to create divisions between colors, classes and sexes of people in order to perpetuate these hierarchies. This is why the economic circle moves from periods of relative prosperity to periods of tremendous economic stress in which the conservative corporate world struggles to gain the upper hand again, often by fostering a war.

You may have wondered why alongside the ideal family so touted by the right and the "Christian values" so popular among members of the "right to death for women" movement, there are often strong pressures to end gun control, such as it is, and for hawkish policies in foreign affairs. I think that at least part of the answer is economic. During the periods of economic stress known as depressions, the poor are hurt first when so-called beneficial programs are cut to the bone. Economic downturns discipline the working class, forcing them to turn inwards in the struggle for basic survival needs.

Some of the psychological motivational similarities between contemporary Amerika and Nazi Germany become apparent in the following statement by Dr. Paul Wierwille, founder of "The Way" (a Christian paramilitary group). He said, "If you have to kick a few butts, well you have to do it. Christians aren't a bunch of lollipops." On its face this statement is funny, but underneath, with its assertion of power and maleness, it's not funny at all. Those who espoused the Nazi ideology also sought to prove how "male" they were by dominating Jews, women and people of color.

Racism and sexism are intimately linked in the ideology of Fascism - granting Jews, women and people of color the status of full personhood threatens the male assumption that women are his property, as well as his assumption of the right to power over the other side of himself, the feminine, the lesser being, the Untermensch. The contemporary sickness in white culture concerning sexuality, the feminine and love for a member of one's own sex also existed in the sublimated homosexuality and the free reign of sadism which existed in Nazi culture. This sickness is also visible in the bated breath with which the Amerikan public views films like "Cruising" which exploit the oozing sadism and heavy leather maleness that are accepted as a given in the stereotypic jack-booted Nazi.

According to Hitler, "The slogan ‘Emancipation of Women' was invented by Jewish intellectuals...Our National Socialist Women's Movement has in reality but one single point, and that point is the child... Just as the Jew himself systematically ruins women and girls... it was and is Jews who bring Negroes into the Rhineland... ruining the hated white race by the necessarily resulting bastardization... rising (himself) to be its master." According to the ideology of The Way (which has also taken it upon itself to burn books) the Holocaust is a hoax perpetrated by Jews and Communists. This organization distributes two texts entitled The Myth of The Six Million and the Hoax of the Twentieth Century.

Again, with a chilling similarity to Post World War I Germany, many turn their faces to a mythic past when the U.S. was the power in the world, and the authoritarian hierarchy of family, church, and state was respected, feared and the All-Amerikan way to live. Somehow, recouping the "defeat" in Vietnam, regaining "strength" as a world power, i.e., being “real" men, has lent credence and emotional support to the romance of nationalism. The Nazi myth of Nationalism was that of Teutonic supremacy over the entire world, a world peopled with Volk of "pure" Germanic blood, heroic white males surrounded by a mystical phallic power. The Amerikan myth is no less phallocentric - One Christian right-wing group exhorts us to believe that ":..the attack on the family is an attack on civilization itself." What would we do without males asserting their dominance over women and children? The right apparently does not think we can do without this traditional hierarchy of power: they mounted tremendous resistance to a proposal which would have increased federal funds for shelters for battered women.

The need to affirm supremacy, authority and masculinity has deep psychological roots. The insecurity underlying these three motivations of patriarchy was exploited most efficiently by Third Reich propagandizing, and it is manipulated with even finer precision by the subtle, highly technological propaganda spewing out of the corporate world, the government's decisions and press releases and the variegated groups lumped under the generic title "the New Right."

Much as in Germany post-World War I the shifting economy and the insecurity of everyday existence has traumatized people to the point that they have seemingly mandated a great white leader - a father figure who has an absolute, simple pat answer for all of the problems which face white Amerikan culture. However, just as the people who elected Hitler in 1933 did not know what his reign of terror would look like, so with Reagan. A ray of hope lies in the fact that the actions of Reagan and his cabinet may radicalize people to the point of rebellion. The opposite is also a true possibility; that passivity has been so ingrained by powerlessness with its parallel need for authority that the continuing infringement on our autonomy will be accepted by a people cowed by an increasingly efficient and effective police state. Wilhelm Reich argued that alienation does psychological and physiological damage, and it gradually anesthetizes people against thinking for themselves and reacting.

Not only are women's struggles for liberation seen as one of the root causes of the dissolution of society, but additionally, the "evil" inherent in women's assertion of our autonomy is responsible for the problems of youth in this culture, according to many right-wing groups. This in turn, in the eyes of the right wing, makes it vital that women be stuffed back into the home and that children be taught the "truth" about sex role division. The renaissance of male power was tremendously exciting to youth in the Nazi period. The Hitler Youth was extremely popular among schoolboys, perhaps in reaction to the "boring femininity" of the Weimar culture which preceded the Nazi period. Many of the youth of today are extremely conservative. A visit to a high school may call up nightmares about the 1950's... In future, if the so-called Moral Majority has its way, not only will the children be taught the "Amerikan" way of life, creationism (more subtle pressure to accept the Bible's word as the only one), etc., but the fears and lack of knowledge surrounding sexuality that any growing child has in this society are to be exploited to the hilt. Denial of sexual exploration and the power that comes from understanding one's own body is a means of control and the Moral Majority's intention to use this weapon against the children in the interests of preserving the status quo will guarantee another generation of sick amerikans.

Combined in the susceptibility to acceptance of fascism are the tremendous insecurity of the economic situation, the cancerous growth of the war machine, and perhaps most basically, white culture's insecurity as creatures divorced from the land and from our bodies and emotions. Continually, this anxiety demands that women become non-persons, attachments defined by the role of child maker. As already noted, the economic and existential tensions which made this a necessity during the rise of German Fascism are occurring again today in a slightly different manifestation. The Pro-Family Caucus states that "90% of our problems with children are probably the result of a mother who has 1) failed to learn to really love her man and submit to him, 2) tried to escape staying at home, or 3) hindered her husband in the discipline of the children."

Phyllis Schlafly's Eagle Forum holds that children must be "taught from textbooks that honor the traditional family as a basic unit of society, women's role as wife and mother and man's role as provider and protector." The Nazi ideology also held that women's reason for existence was a sphere that was limited to circling around the husband and child. Kinder, kuchen, kirche (children, cooking, church!) was a prominent theme in the propaganda directed towards women. Youth were to be encouraged to ‘belong’ to the Nazi Party and to inform on their parents when necessary. Nazi ideology held that "Young people should be made to realize that there is no nobler career for a girl than that of a wife and mother.

(2) A woman's social position

CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

Big Mama Rag, August, 1981 - Page 17