The Individual Solution

A Depressing Discourse

The following article was originally printed in the 1974 winter issue (Vol. 3, no. 4) of The Second Wave: a Boston feminist publication.

Some members of the current BMR feature committee had planned to write articles analyzing to a greater degree the connection between feminism and oppressive economic and societal forces. Unfortunately, the time needed for this task greatly surpassed the copy deadline of our publication. We decided then, to reprint “A Depressing Discourse on Romance, The Individual Solution, and Related Misfortunes” as it did explore some of the areas we had planned to cover.

This article, due to space limitations, had to be shortened considerably. The editors do not feel that this obscures in any way important points of the article.

Janet Sergi  
Angela Wilson, eds.

Karen: I had to go through the flaming militant women’s trip before I could get into people's liberation... I feel much more comfortable with myself since I've passed through that space.

Barbara: It seems like some women have had to go the militant route, a male-hating trip, before they can begin to feel good about relating to men. For them, that dynamic seems to be a freeing process.

“Women in Community,” Communities, no. 8, May-June, 1974, p. 4.

Unless I'm cockeyed, what seems clear to me is that a lot of women have found — and Jesus, what a sock in the eye it's a mystery, the adventure and excitement (the romance) of falling in love are still available to them. The pull of tenderness, the feeling that one dwelt in clarity and truth, the certainty that one really knows/is known, the desire, the affirming flame exist, at least, as a possibility. Two years ago, the same women weren't admitting the possibility.

Barbara Grizzuti Harrison, “Is Romance Dead?", Ms, July, 1974, p. 43.

These statements are depressing. These women are discussing an individual solution that may apply to them, but not to the population at large. Women celebrating their new strength often fail to recognize their privileges and responsibilities; privileges in having time to analyze oppression and in being with other supportive, aware women (it’s so easy in the movement to forget that most women are still isolated from one another); and responsibility to continue to fight for change that will affect all women.

One opinion on the love and romance question is the “boob girl” position, alluding to a quote by Harriet Van Horne in the New York Times Sunday Magazine some years ago: “Most of us would rather be some dear man’s boob girl than nobody's cum laude scholar.” Another side would be the “inhuman man” theory, put bluntly by Shulamith Firestone in The Dialectic of Sex, “Men can't love.” The misfortune in siding up with either of these ideas is the superficiality of both positions. Accepting either explanation lets a lot of people off the hook. If women want to be boob girls, then those floor wax commercials are simply helping us find our true natures. If men are all beasts, then they just can't help slaughtering peasants.

The institution of romance has some qualities that influence all powerless people, and a lot that influence women as a class. The basic bedfellow of the romantic impulse is the individual solution. The idea that one’s life will improve significantly with personal changes, and that the secret of contentment lies in happy personal involvements takes the steam out of efforts to change people’s lives in more material ways. Perhaps more dumped-on people would be happier if they got decent wages and cheap health care and housing than they would be if they found someone else to be dumped on with. But we are led to believe the reverse.

In addition to the counter-revolutionary effect that emphasis on one’s personal problems can have, the promotion of romance through advertising points out some of the benefits of capitalism. Instead of working to fill the real needs of food, clothing, shelter, and health care, whole industries depend on creating and marketing non-existent needs. Often these industries release products, such as vaginal sprays and some facial make-up, that do direct bodily harm, as well as the psychological harm of creating self-hate in women when they're not wearing Cover Girl. That these industries promote artificial needs to make profits, and that the products designed to fill those needs add to women’s helplessness (try kicking an attacker in platform shoes and long skirt) is an astonishing coincidence. The existence of an unnatural (made-up and dressed-up) appearance as the acceptable norm creates a whole sector of buyers whose insecurity makes them easy game for advertising, and whose accessories become an albatross (picture a woman taking to the streets and barricades, dragging along her “face” equipment and change of stockings).

The perpetuation of the species through its best-known Western channel, the family, provides specious justification for the perpetuation of a number of related habits: sex roles, romance, heterosexuality, capitalism. This is understandable — the family draws support from these institutions and vice versa.

Families serve as an introductory hierarchical model. A child grows up in a powerless position in relation to her parents (siblings may provide an alternate power position, or pile up the powerlessness, depending on age and disposition). “We live under the image that we can be free to choose. This is dogma. Everything children are taught is taught by an authority quoting other authority figures.” — Doris Lessing. The structure she feels most at home with is top-down: child being controlled by parent or older sibling, child controlling younger sibling, child hearing about society controlling parent. Often a hierarchy exists between the parents. Though the male is not always the power person, patterns emerge along sex roles — father exerting power through breadwinning, mother wielding power through hidden manipulation. The exceptions to these roles are objects of ridicule — the milquetoast and the battleaxe.

The consequences of the family education benefit a system based on isolation and control. On one hand, we are used to fitting into slots — “Work, study, get ahead, kill,” a chant of the ‘60s, could well describe the life plan for a majority, using “kill” figuratively to also mean “oppress others economically.” On the other hand, we are unused to working as equals, and any social movement with equality within its own group as a goal must expend energy struggling over its internal process. Often the internal problems are so great that harmony becomes an end in itself, and sight is lost of the original aims of social change.

Romance shores up the family in the same way it does capitalism. If people are unhappy and trapped in their marriages, an outside fling or even the fantasy of an affair can spice up their lives enough to make them bearable. The cult of individualism leads young couples to feel that the thrill will never leave their relationship - They're willing to step into patterns they see failing all around them because they know better, they're going to work at it and learn from others’ failures. Instead of accepting the fact that they might change, or need more input than one other can provide, they make an investment of personal success in their relationship. By seeking permanence for themselves, they absorb creeping conservatism. The tolerance of the status quo and view of change as disintegration rather than growth in one area of life spreads. This is so universal that the moderation that comes with “settling down” is accepted as a natural sequel to youthful hot-headedness.

Raising a child in the traditional sense of molding her and instilling her with a set of values is already becoming impossible. Parents who would shudder at the idea of collective child care are already losing out to the media as primary educators. The function of a conscientious parent may be reduced to alerting the child to the lies of TV. While individuals may be “better” or “worse” parents than the television, the picture presented in any case is similar. As the propaganda of the media is superseding the influence of the family, part of that propaganda is the sanctity of the family itself.

The fear exhibited that women generally, once fully independent, will not marry, is proof of how well it has been known that only dependence forced them to marriage as it was.

Charlotte Perkins Gilman, Women and Economics, p. 91.

Romance and glamour and love are all concepts associated with women, but where do they come from? The answer to this is, who profits? The answer to this is, who is in power? And the answer to that is men.

Of course, if men and institutions composed of men have enough power to retain certain romantic standards and sex roles as the norm, they must have some reason to go to the trouble of exerting that power.

Men and corporations have more at stake in keeping women in pursuit of a particular image than the perpetuation of a lipstick market. But complex economic interconnections probably have less to do with your average greedy executive’s stand on sex roles than do personal considerations.

Businessmen are accustomed to relating to others in hierarchical ways daily. Exerting power in one area, at work, and operating within a powerless, shifting relationship at home might quickly lead to an emotional short-circuit.

Men who have made it have had to swallow the whole business ethic (unless they're trying to change GM “from within” in which case they're fools). Though some powerful men, particularly politicians, may pay lip service to the women’s movement, they hardly have an inkling of the real issues of feminism and how threatening they are to business (and politicians). Or, they may be more cunning than they seem, and grant reforms such as hiring more women, as a sop, to co-opt a few and stem momentum.

Perhaps the most tangible influence in the goal of women in a stereotyped mold is the definition of success as “masculine” and therefore alluring to women, if only because they are economically unable to live alone in the way they can live with a successful man.

The role of the media has become that of a monster blender. In go the traditional influences of religion/morality, patriotism, capitalism, sexism and so on, and out comes the same mush for everyone. While TV did not invent its own philosophy, it has become, with the school system, a major purveyor of those values already in existence. Though schools vary sharply, TV gives the same message to all. This consistent influence is less powerful than the government with its military force, but it is also much more immediate and serves the purposes of the government while allowing it to maintain a facade of democracy. One axiom of media power is, more money = more power: another is more money and power = more reluctance to rock the boat. The truly radical alternatives reach a minuscule audience compared to one ad for rice-a-roni.

The media possess the ability to absorb potentially disturbing radical input and co-opt it into an acceptable form. An example of how this has been done to changing attitudes on women and sexual morality is Cosmopolitan. The now woman differs from the then woman in ways that may shock some, but don’t threaten anyone. If women’s sexuality and alternatives to marriage were presented with some insight into economic and societal factors, they might provide a taking-off point for radical change. In Cosmo, the concept of being a liberated woman is the ability to have many exciting affairs instead of one dull marriage. Women have careers so they can meet men and not scare them off with overt signals of entrapment.

A discussion of the institution of romance and its connections with the media, economic conditions, and sex roles, is empty without tying it in to the personal impact that love relationships do have. Many of the same problems apply to meaningful relations as to superficial ones.

The situation in the early women’s movement was supportive to ending unequal relationships with men — initial outrage made it impossible to put up with men who had little understanding of the problems of being a woman. And the first rush of sisterhood made giving up your male lover for the cause an act that was almost impersonal in its collectivity, like donating blood or buying war bonds during a time of national crisis.

Few had the vision to realize that this could only be a temporary solution, that the task of changing a sexist society would meet too much resistance, require too many basic overhauls, and take far too long for any decisions made in the fever of that first radical insight to seem viable forever. The woman who cheerfully declared her autonomy five years ago must be tired. Now we see the revolution is not coming tomorrow. The sexist put-down we originally attributed to the individual unenlightened male is connected to the war in Vietnam, is connected to welfare, is connected to the oil companies, is connected to the price of milk. And sincerely trying to convince men one by one that they need to change just doesn’t work.

The obvious solutions for a lonely heterosexual woman are limited and not very inviting: 1) celibacy — this can get bleak after a while, especially with the realization that it is of indefinite length; 2) lesbianism — a logical solution, but one that can be artificial and cold-blooded if made solely to relieve loneliness, also not fair to lesbians if it is considered a stop-gap, second-best measure; 3) promiscuity with no strings — the men still have the cards here and the woman is open to being hurt by many; 4) a return to romantic involvement — in retrospect, this has a lot to offer: the thrill of being in love, a companion, an affirmation that there is hope for men, a way of dissociating oneself from the concept of man-hating and testing out the belief that one is stronger now than she was five years ago.

There are alternatives — one can develop a callous attitude and concentrate on not being vulnerable — this clashes with the feminist fight against the dehumanizing effects of a male-dominated system and the objectification that women are subjected to. Or one can strive for a loving energizing mutual relationship — this can be very rewarding and effective in easing a love/work conflict, but by its rarity and the initial effort required, the relationship as an entity becomes so precious that the resistance to change and desire for permanence so inimical to feminist revolution may crop up. Multiple relationships.

More on Page 14