Voices from our lives

Psychiatric Legacy - 11 Years Of Pain & Fear

Sue Doell

Dr. -- How has life been for you in the 11 years since you've left?

I can't answer that too honestly, Dr. - can't you see I've gotta lie to be able to walk out of here?

* * * * * *

I'll talk to you, Dr. - you sign me something real legal that says I'm free to go at all times and I'll talk to you. I'll tell you how messed up I am. I’ll tell you about the incredible loneliness I feel. I'll tell you how I can't hardly trust anybody. I'll tell ya how after 11 years I cannot talk to a friend when other people are around because you never know who's gonna hear & run to the staff - or goddamnit who is the staff. You don't always know them - They sure in the hell know you. We were always being observed - Let me tell you, Dr., how after 11 years I feel like people are watching me. It's hell for me to sit in front of a window if the curtains are open.

Let me tell ya, Doc, that after 11 years I still cannot speak in front of a group. You haven't forgotten the ward meetings, have you? Where if you say something wrong you are ridiculed (by the staff). And I can't even relax in a group situation, Doc. Ya never know when they're gonna start firing questions at you. Everybody stares at you. If you answer wrong you're made to look like a fool. If you answer & become emotional you get thrown in seclusion. If you're too scared to answer, you're uncooperative and get put in seclusion. So, Doc, I tend to avoid groups whenever I can. Easy answer, huh? Do you have any idea how many group situations there are? I'm political, Doc, have I mentioned that yet? I'm sure you won't be too disappointed to know how many political group meetings I cannot participate in. Yeah, but I also can't work at a lot of jobs - Even if it's an individual job I do - there's always the group in the lunchroom during breaks. And of course the company meetings. And I can't have a roommate, Doc, because their friends might drop by at any time & poof a group is formed. My home is my sanctuary - my need for privacy could be seen as neurotic (psychotic??) Do you ever go with a group of friends to a movie, Doc? Out hiking or camping? Do you go with a group of friends to dinner? To parties? Can you go to the grocery store when it's crowded, Doc? Can you be on a crowded elevator? Can you ride a bus?

Can you tell me, Doctor, some way that I can explain to my friends that I cannot do these things because a group means horrendous oppression, being closed in & getting hurt?

Let me tell ya, Doc, about how I can't work with other people & about how it scares me to share things. When you start sharing, or once ya start cooperating & it feels like it's a good exchange - ZAP - before ya know what hit ya you've lost it all. You end up with nothing. Somebody takes possessions, somebody starts making your decisions, somebody else starts dictating how you gotta act, somebody else robs you of your power.

I'll tell ya how nice I am to play cards with, to play Risk and other board games. I'm a good loser, Doc - good to play with. What I learned was the staff could get angry about losing, but if we got frustrated or angry then we were out of control & we got thrown in seclusion.

Let me tell you, Dr. - all about how after 11 years I cannot be touched in public without EXTREME anxiety - because I know that's against the rules - and violators are put in seclusion. I'll tell ya, Dr., how when authority tells me to do something - I do it - passively. Because I know if you argue or stand up for yourself or if you have strong convictions or if your opinion is wrong - Dr., I know all they have to do is announce it over the intercom & the musclemen will be there in a flash & they will drag you into seclusion, strip you, and give you a good dose of Thorazine.

I also learned, Doctor, that when I need the most help or reassurance or need a hug or need fucking ANYTHING - that is not the time to try to ask for it. Because you only end up in seclusion - and you get isolated. And it's FUCKING lonely at the most critical times you're trying to deal with living. So dear Doctor, after 11 years, when I find I cannot cope - I do not have the strength to call my friends. I isolate myself like I was taught so very well to do - and sometimes drink 'til I pass out.

Let me tell you about seclusion, you slimy bastard. Concrete floors, 2" mattress, no blanket, a tiny room. Oh but don't forget the window and the nice view. Did any of you ever figure out that I LOVED being in seclusion once I got used to being alone? That window had a marvelous heavy metal screen, remember, Doctor? I would rub my wrists on that screen over & over & over & over until they were bleeding & raw. The pain helped ease the pain.

-Cate Gilles/Big Mama Rag

I'll tell ya how I can't COPE with seeing plastic silverware, Doctor. Remember the lunchroom - I got new weapons daily. There's nothing like dull, plastic knives for cutting on yourself. You've got to dig that blade in - hard - and go back & forth like you were carving a roast dinner. You want to see all my scars, Doctor?

Does this only offer you proof that I was sick and crazy? Instead of running to the file & writing all this down & putting all your psychiatric labels on me, how about asking me why I did it? 'Cause I'd tell ya, Doctor, that it's because I learned that it is NOT OK to express anger. 'Cause - remember - ya get thrown in seclusion for doing that. And if you use a knife on yourself where nobody sees it, that lets you express yourself, Doctor, and yet you still get to be around people. Ahh...but

CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE