voices from our lives...

Big Mama Rag Vol.8 No.5

Raising A Revolutionary Child

Judy Barlow

So often when I have dealt with my role as a lesbian mother I have talked
only of the fears I have of raising a (male) child in the women's community
and the real threats of loss of custody because of my lesbianism (See BMR
Vol.7 No. 6 page 10) and not dealt with the larger issue of how growing up in
this capitalist/imperialist society has a more catastrophic effect on him.

In this article I am going to deal with some of my recent and ongoing
struggles in trying to make my child-rearing practices congruent with my
politics. The struggle is far from complete and promises to continue for at
least the next 10 to 15 years. I welcome any comments, criticism, or sharing

of related experiences.

me

A Mother’s Struggle

Sometimes it seems like a giant puzzle where only a few of the pieces really
fit together correctly. I find myself trapped in the middle when trying to
reconcile how I feel a child should be raised after the revolution or under
ideal conditions and the real unpleasant realities of raising a child in
this country today. I continually find myself choosing between the "lesser
of evils" rather than trying to choose the best situation possible. This
dilemma is clear in my problems in choosing where my son would attend grammar
school.

Last year when my son was six years old I was faced with making the
decision as to where he would go to school. Since I am a working woman I
took into consideration that I would need child care both before and after
school. The options open to me at the time were to enroll him in Denver
Public Schools and arrange for additional child care (17 to 19 hours per week)
or place him in a private school where additional hours of childcare are
available at the school. At the time I chose to enroll him in a progressive
private school not only because it was logistically easier, but also because
the cost of before and after school care would have been only about $20 a month
less than the private school tuition. There was also a long waiting list for
care centers for before and after school care.

In choosing to enroll my child in a private school, I have to acknowledge
the privilege and class problems this presents. I know that I have worked
hard to instill some revolutionary and feminist values in him, but I felt
very strongly that I had to acknowledge the impact that the 9 hours a day
he spends in school has on him. I still do not want to enroll him in Denver
Public Schools. I do not want to make one of my priorities that of playing
watchdog to what goes on in the classroom. “I would rather make my priority
one of working for revolutionary change that would make the kind of education
that my son is getting in private school accessible to all children. I have
to acknowledge that I am allowing my child privilege and I'm not really
clear on what all the implications are. As I said before, I feel that my
choosing to enroll him in a private school was not a good choice, but I will
try to explain why and how I decided that it was preferable to enrolling him
in public schools.

Perhaps I should begin by saying that I plan to have my son, Eli, in public
school by the time that he is ten. I believe that private schools can be
isolating from the society at large and that the privilege can be divisive.
I do not believe that my child is ready to deal with the society at large
that he would encounter in public schools. In the interests of raising him
to be a revolutionary I feel it necessary to see that he is strong and secure
in dealing with close and emotional controversial issues such as homosexuality,
sexism, racism, and politics before he has a heavy exposure to closed-minded
individuals and knows how to deal with them. I realize that this is an
individual solution and not a good one.

My lover and I have gone around and around on this issue. She has problems
in accepting that it is OK for him to go to a private school. I might add
also that my son's school is less expensive than his pre-school care was and
much less expensive than private schools that have a monetary barrier to
“weed out undesirables." I'm sure that the faculty and staff
at Eli's school (Gilpin Grammar School) are paid considerably less than their
public school counterparts. They make the financial sacrifice because they

are frustrated by the public school system because it does not allow them to
be truly effective teachers. At this private school they feel that they are
free to be better teachers.

My lover and I continue to have conflicts around whether or not putting Eli
in a private school can be justified as a "correct" decision.

One of the biggest problems I face in relating to my child is in knowing
how much to tell him and how soon he needs to know what the real world is all
about. I have taught him openness and honesty to the point where it worries
me sometimes. He speaks openly and matter-of-factly to people he likes about
my lesbianism and his relationship to my lover and how he hates to go to
political meetings, etc. I guess the question is how does one teach discretion
without stifling openness and honesty? More and more he is beginning to
understand that there are people out there who would think me an unfit parent
merely because of my lesbianism. He is very defensive and says that if he
meets anyone who feels this way that he will either "explain to them that
we are happy or beat them up."

In a meeting with his first grade teacher we talked about his classmates’
reaction to Eli's openness about my lesbianism. She said that his total
acceptance comes across so strongly that other children in his class do not
question him. She said that she is concerned about how Eli will react if he
is challenged. So far this has not happened.

In some ways my lover and I putting our politics to work at home has greatly
helped our home environment by opening up lines of communication. At one
point Eli referred to his and my relationship as me being "the boss of" him.
If he saw me in a boss role, did he see himself as the oppressed worker? At
that time he was being rebellious and openly breaking rules I set for him.
When I told him that he could ride his bicycle only on the sidewalk and
explained why I thought that the streets were too busy for him to ride on
until he had more practice, I found him openly disobeying me. We immediately
put criticism-self criticism to work and let him know that he had a responsibility
to tell us when he thought we were being unfair. As it turned out
he was quite ready to begin riding on the street. He had logged almost 50
miles on his bicycle odometer riding on the sidewalk around one square block!
He has since put constructive criticism to use in dealing with a situation at
school where he thought that he was being unfairly accused of bad behavior.
When he opened up to his teacher he found her very willing to listen and
change the way she was dealing with him. I strongly believe that putting
constructive criticism to use (see book review on page 20 of this issue of
BMR) at home and in everyday situations has benefitted all of us and greatly
increased our understanding of each other's wants and needs and limitations.
We are breaking down some of the role barriers and getting to know each other
better as people. I think that we may have learned that we really like
each other and maybe have dropped some of the "blind love" problems inherent
in many nuclear family situations.

So much of what I do seemingly automatically as a parent is a mere imitation
of how my parents raised me. My lover confronted me once by asking "What was
so great about your childhood?" "Nothing," I replied. But even now it can
be difficult to recognize where my relationship with my child is modeled after
my far-from-ideal relationship with my own parents. Sometimes when he is sad
or depressed or sick I buy him a toy that he has been wanting to try to cheer
him up. When I was growing up my parents used gifts as rewards for acceptable
behavior and as a symbol of love. My father showed his love or disapproval
by the monetary value of the gifts he gave my brothers and me. As much as I
hated my parents for trying to "buy" my love, I sometimes find myself doing
the same thing. When there is more money available than there is time it is
easier to buy a gift than it is to spend time talking or reading together or
going on outings. This tendency is something that I am actively working to
overcome. Sometimes it amazes me how much garbage we all carry from our
childhoods.

That brings to mind what sometimes seems an overwhelming responsibility
thrust on a mother in this society—to sacrifice herself for the benefit of
the child(ren). So many of us are indoctrinated thoroughly at a young age
into the role of a mother as an individual who gladly and graciously places
the needs of her children before her own. The degree of self-sacrifice and
anguish suffered by a mother is a measure of how good a mother she is. As
much as I develop a feminist analysis which connects "masochistic motherhood"
to women's oppression at large, I have to acknowledge the reality that the
courts can consider a woman's fitness as a mother in terms of her willingness
to make personal sacrifices for what the court considers to be in the best
interest of the child(ren). This is frightening to me. One way that the
ruling class has used to "keep women in line" is by threat of loss of their
children. This threat is used against Native Americans, poor women, blacks,
Chicanos, lesbians, political activists and any individuals deemed unsuitable
by the ruling class. Perhaps the courts see our duties as parents as including
singing the praises of the age-old "American way" to our children.

Another societal (class) value that oppresses mothers is the widely accepted
belief that most of an individual's neuroses can be attributed to something
their mothers did wrong. Sometimes I wonder which of my behaviors
might be the "one" that causes my child a lifetime of hang-ups. It is my
feeling that a mother can become so paralyzed by fear as to what she may be
doing wrong or how she has behaved incorrectly in the past that it is overwhelming
and debilitating to say the least. I believe that as long as there is open
communication between adults and children and a commitment to work
to come to a consensus through the use of constructive criticism, all
problems and oversights can be dealt with quickly enough and with consistency
so as to leave no major trauma unresolved. I do not know what else parents
and caring adults can do for their children or for each other.

Another societal (class) role thrust on mothers is that of protecting their
children until the time when the children are able to care for themselves.
Ideally the child leaves the parents with the skills and knowledge necessary
to survive in its culture. What I want to give my son is a clear understanding
of the problems with capitalism/imperialism in general as well as
specific problems in dealing with current issues. One of Eli's strongest and
longest political learning experiences began when he was 2 and walked and
chanted in the picket line at the Coors brewery. The union was on strike
and he went to a number of other activities in support of the union. At
two he only understood that one should not drink Coors beer because the
money went toward supporting right-wing things that he could relate to. He
understood that Coors was somehow related to "those bad people" who did not
think my lover and I were fit parents. He also understood that because I
was a member of the working class that Coors' unfair treatment of the
workers was related to some of the unfair treatment my lover and I have
been subjected to as members of the working class. In the last five years
(especially after seeing someone drinking Coors beer or seeing a Coors
commercial on TV) he has asked more sophisticated questions. We have talked
more about boycotts in general including the Nestlé's boycott.

Sometimes I am acutely aware that I overplay the importance of protecting
my son from anti-male attitudes prevalent in the women's community while
downplaying the really dangerous ways capitalism is reaching him. Watching
Saturday morning cartoons exposes him to a wide variety of things that he
"has to have." I get tired of being the heavy by refusing to buy sugar-coated
cereals and expensive toys. Sometimes he will go around incessantly
singing "You asked for it, you got it, Toyota" or "Nobody tops a pizza like
Totino's." It really makes me wonder on what level this reaches children. I
guess what concerns me about children and advertising more than maybe the
average "liberal" parent is the way that advertising is used to reinforce
sexual stereotyping and patriarchal and capitalist values as well as how
it teaches children to be good little consumers that serve the needs of the
ruling class. Sometimes I don't take the time to talk to him enough about
what he sees on TV. Sometimes I think I can't stand another minute of
educational television shows like Mister Rogers, Sesame Street, Electric Company,
and 321-Contact and I encourage him to turn to commercial television.

It is another case of no really good choices being available.

The recurring theme in my list of child-rearing dilemmas is the difficulty
in having to choose between the lesser of evils rather than feeling that I
can make any really good choices. My goal is to impress my child with the
need for revolutionary change and release him knowing that he has a responsibility
to be ethical and accountable in his continuing struggle. I can
only hope that our years of struggle together will prepare him for the
realities of a lifetime of struggle.