pa gua rt  
Women’s  

To the Editor:  

The Women's Committee Against Geno-  
cide is part of the National Campaign  
to help build the National Institute  
for Women in Zimbabwe. We have joined  
this coalition as part of our strategy  
to build solidarity with the victor-  
ious revolution in Zimbabwe and help  
build an anti-imperialist women's  
movement here in the U.S. Enclosed  
you will find an article about the  
campaign to build the Women's Insti-  
tute and its relationship to the re-  
volutionary struggle for women's lib-  
eration in the U.S. The 10,000 Zimba-  
wean women who fully participated  
in the people's war for liberation  
are leading the struggle for women's  
liberation worldwide.  

There is a pressing need today for  
a revolutionary women's movement in  
the U.S. As the oppression of women  
heightens, debates are raging on  
burning issues: what is feminism,  
what will win women's liberation,  
what relationship does our struggle  

Big Mama Rag Vol. 8 No. 11  

League Continues Struggle  

been the biggest blessing for the  
Zimbabwean women. Within a few years  
it opened doors which would probably  
have taken decades to loosen. The  
struggle for National independence  
has opened our women-folk to a world  
even they would not have dreamt of.  
The need for each other, the need for  
manpower to perform a variety of im-  
portant Revolutionary tasks, have  
shown that once given the opportunity  
to unlock her creative talents, a  
woman, like any exploited and oppres-  
sed person, is capable of performing  
heroic and magnificent feats.  

The number one priority in Zimbabwe  
today is reconstruction of the coun-  
try. Programs involving land redistri-  
bution, health care, education and  
relocation of refugees are being  
enacted as part of a nationwide effort  
to transform the colonial economy in-  
to socialism. Reconstruction is an  
especially difficult period for a  
new government in the face of contin-  
ued attempts by the U.S. and other  

these capacities, the women suffered  
serious losses. Many were killed and  
imprisoned because they had no means  
of self-defense. Women in ZANU then  
demanded that women be fully trained  
as freedom fighters. The party respon-  
ded and by the end of the war, one-  
third of the guerrilla army was women.  
Women who actively participated in  
the struggle to free their nation  
were totally turned around by that  
experience. From living as subsisten-  
ce farmers at the mercy of a terror-  
ist white police force and being  
constantly torn by sick and starving  
children, they became soldiers capable  
of turning their firepower on the  
enemy and demanding the respect of  
their brothers and communities. They  
often led brigades into the villages  
to organize the people to support the  
struggle. As Teurai Ropa has said:  

Women have played a key role in mo-  
bilizing the masses in Zimbabwe. At  
first our party had problems convin-  
cing the masses that we could win  

women's centers throughout the coun-  
try. These centers are to be commun-  
ity institutions for political educa-  
tion and training for women in vital  
areas such as education, health,  
daycare, agriculture and vocational  
training. The first step in this  
strategy is the building of the  
National Institute of Women. They will  
develop women's leadership capabili-  
ties and train them to staff the  
women's centers. In response to this  
struggle on part of the Zimbabwean  
people, the National Campaign in  
Solidarity with the ZANU Women's  
League is calling on all women, wom-  
en's organizations, and progressive  
anti-imperialist people to join to-  
gether to raise $15,000 for the Na-  
tional Institute of Women.  

The victory in Zimbabwe is a vict-  
ory for women's liberation worldwide.  
As U.S. imperialism suffers one de-  
feat after another, the material  
basis of all women's oppression is  
being destroyed and the struggles  
for women's liberation are stronger  

Se cen SE SNA SS SE  
“The revolutionary armed struggle has been the greatest blessing for the Zimbabwean women. Within a few years it opened  

doors which would probably have taken decades to loosen . . . Given the opportunity  

like any exploited and oppressed person, is capable of performing heroic and magnificent feats.”  

Teurai Ropa Nhongo  

to unlock her creative talents, a woman,  

Leader of ZANU Women’s League  

have to the overall struggles of opp-  
ressed peoples against imperialism?  
The National Campaign in Solidarity  
with the ZANU (Zimbabwe African Nat-  
ional Union) Women's League is raising  
$15,000 by mid-September toward the  
building of the National Institute  
of Women. The Institute will train  
more than 2000 women to build women's  
centers throughout Zimbabwe so that  
all Zimbabwean women can play leading  
roles in the continuing struggle of  
Zimbabwe to maintain the victory and  
reconstruct the nation. The coalition  
has already shown its slide show, a  
first-hand account by coalition member  
Silvia Baraldini of her trip to Zim-  
babwe during the elections and again  
during Independence Day celebrations  
in 24 cities in 15 states in the U.S.  
Newspaper articles and radio inter-  
views are a key part of the campaign  
strategy to raise political and mat-  
erial support for the ZANU Women's  
League. Please call or contact us at  
(212) 499-2767 or (212) 522-7294.  

Thank you very much  

Valery Barr  
for the Women's Committee  
Against Genocide  

Editors’ Note: The following article  
makes a couple of points we would  
like to take issue with, though we  
believe our readers will find it val-  
uable reading.  

We do not believe that women can  
"cease to allow themselves to be ex-  
ploited" because we do not "allow"  
ourselves to be exploited. Women are  
exploited--our degree of collaboration  
in this exploitation is certainly  
small, all factors considered. It is  
incorrect to, even indirectly, blame  
oppression on the oppressed.  

The basis of women's oppression is  
certainly material but is rooted in  
patriarchy more than in capitalism or  
imperialism. Changing economic systems  
will not necessarily end the oppres-  
sion of women. This is certainly why  
the formation of the National Institu-  
te of Women is important.  

On April 18, 1980, the Zimbabwean  
people celebrated independence. The  
overwhelming election of the ZANU  
(Zimbabwe African National Union) gov-  
ernment of Robert Mugabe marked a vic-  
tory over the white settler colony of  
Rhodesia—a victory made possible  
through 16 years of people's war. The  
liberation of Zimbabwe is a major de-  
feat for U.S.-led imperialism and  
white supremacy and a victory for wo-  
men's liberation worldwide. Zimbabwean  
women played a critical role in the  
war of liberation. They participated  
as guerrilla fighters and members of  
the high military command as well as  
at every other level of resistance.  
Teurai Ropa Nhongo, a member of the  
Central Committee of ZANU, talks about  
what the people's war has meant to  
women:  

The revolutionary armed struggle has  

imperialist powers to assassinate its  
leadership and undermine its rule.  
Worldwide support for reconstruction  
is a crucial element in ensuring the  
consolidation of people's power in  
Zimbabwe and is also a way to support  
Zimbabwe's commitment to liberation  
struggles in Namibia and Azania (South  
Africa).  

As reconstruction proceeds, ZANU,  
the ZANU Women's League and the women  
of Zimbabwe are determined to contin-  
ue the struggle for the total libera-  
tion of women. They want to make it  
possible for every woman to fully  
participate in the reconstruction of  
their nation and in transforming it  
into a society that will meet the  
needs of all people. They have made  
an international call to women and  
progressive people to support the  
building of a National Institute of  
Women which will train women leaders.  
The National Campaign in Solidarity  
with the ZANU Women's League is com-  
mitted to raising $15,000 for the  
Institute in solidarity with the  
struggle for women's liberation in  
Zimbabwe and in support of the new  
government led by ZANU.  

In 1890, the British entered Zimba-  
bwe and established the white settler  
colony of Rhodesia. They drove the  
people from their land and farms and  
expropriated all of the best farm  
land. The Zimbabwean people resisted  
fiercely under the leadership of the  
great woman general, Mbuya Nehanda.  
They were only defeated by superior  
firepower and ruthless destruction  
by the British forces. The white set-  
tlers, convinced that they had an  
undisputed right to take the land  
and super exploit the people, pro-  
ceeded to force the African people  
to work for slave wages on huge plan-  
tations and in dangerous mines. To  
maintain control they perpetrated  
genocidal attacks against the whole  
nation. It was particularly through  
the women that the settler regime  
attacked the social and cultural fa-  
bric of Zimbabwe. Rape was used to  
terrorize women and crush resistance.  
Women were isolated on "tribal trust  
lands" with the sole responsibility  
for the survival of their families  
through subsistence farming. Families  
and community life were seriously  
disrupted because men were forced to  
migrate to work in urban or mining  
centers. Women were denied basic edu-  
cation and were excluded from produc-  
tion. Fifty percent of the Zimbabwean  
women were forcibly sterilized by the  
Ian Smith regime to control the peo-  
ple's ability to reproduce and resist  
in the face of genocide.  

For the last 16 years, ZANU has  
mobilized the whole Zimbabwean people  
to fight a people's war to liberate  
the nation from white domination and  
imperialist control. The ZANU Women's  
League organized women to participate.  
Ten thousand women left their homes  
and families, walked for miles across  
enemy-controlled territory, and de-  
manded to become freedom fighters. At  
first, women were made responsible  
for feeding and making clothing for  
the soldiers, doing intelligence work,  
and transporting war material. In  

against the settler regime with their  
seeming all-powerful Nazi army and  
police everywhere ready to crush the  
slightest sign of revolution. But  
once we had won the confidence of  
womenfolk it became much easier to  
win support from the masses. Menfolk  
were ashamed to see women fight  

the savage regime of Ian Smith when  
they themselves were too afraid to  
take up the gun against the enemy.  
Thus, the mobilization of women into  
our struggle as soldiers, leaders,  
social workers and medical personnel  
has made our struggle tremendously  

On December 1, 1978, a brigade led  
by women successfully exploded major  
oil tanks in Salisbury and proved  
that guerrilla forces could penetrate  
the most important enemy stronghold  
and helped to turn the tide of the  
war in favor of the guerrillas. The  
participation of women in the armed  
struggle has a major impact on the  
whole people of Zimbabwe. They were  
forced to seriously question the  
traditional beliefs around the capa-  
bilities of women.  

ZANU and the ZANU Women's League  
are committed to the principle of  
liberation through participation:  

As women participate in military  
warfare to free themselves they will  
cease to allow themselves to be ex-  
ploited. As they participate in eco-  
nomic liberation they will win the  
economic independence to make it un-  
necessary for them to depend on the  
whims of others for a livelihood.  
And most important of all, the ideo-  
logical struggle will enable women  
to understand their situation and  
how to improve it.  

During the period of reconstruction  
following the war ZANU is determined  
to involve all women in the struggle  
to rebuild their nation. To accomp-  
lish this there are plans to build  

than ever. Zimbabwean women have  
clearly identified the U.S. as the  
greatest perpetrator of genocide  

and the greatest oppressor of women  
throughout the world. Zimbabwean  
women have joined the armed struggle  
and helped to defeat the imperialist-  
backed white settler colony which  
illegally ruled their country. In  

the process, they have liberated  
themselves and begun the struggle to  
liberate all Zimbabwean women from  
both traditional inequality and im-  
perialist oppression. In the U.S.,  
greatest advances in the struggle for  
women's liberation are being made by  
Black women who are fighting for the  
liberation of their nation. As free-  
dom fighters such as Assata Shakur  
take up the tradition of Civil War  
general Harriet Tubman in struggling  
for human rights and self-determina-  
tion and against genocide, they  

bring the defeat of U.S. imperialism  
closer and closer.  

At the same time, the decline of  
U.S. imperialism means increased op-  
pression for women in this country.  
As wars of national liberation  
around the world take back the land,  

-Schuster/LNS  

resources and labor power once explo-  
ited by U.S. imperialism, it means  
that the United States is forced to  
exact more profit from those of us  
still under its power. So life for  
women in the U.S. is getting worse.  
For Third World women, this means  
increasing genocide. They and their  
communities are the victims of the  
increasing drug plague, arson and the  
murderous health care system. They  
are subject to escalating police ter-  
ror and attacks by the Ku Klux Klan.  
It is most frequently through the  
women that whole Third World commun-  
ities are attacked in an attempt to  
destroy resistance. For all women,  
rape and violence are increasing,  
daycare is becoming scarcer, good  

MORE ON PAGE 13