voices from our lives

Women Shut Up By Institutions And

(Reprinted from Outwrite: Most women who have experienced prison and psychiatric hospitals do not feel safe to tell their story. They are silenced by society, the institutions which incarcerate them and often by their families. Sheena, a 25-year-old working-class woman from Hackney, London, has been in psychiatric hospitals, borstal, and Holloway prison.

When she spoke to Outwrite, Sheena reflected on the silence imposed on her. It is her story.)

What follows is Sheena's account:

‘When I think about myself at the age of 17 I can't believe that I was ever like that...it's like going to bed one night being one person and waking up being somebody completely different.'

"I look back now on all my experiences—the psychiatric hospitals, prisons, borstals—and I can say I'm thankful I've had those. I've seen a lot of things that other people don't see and I can deal with things better than a lot of people. It's also hurt me like there's certain jobs I can't do, for example, I really wanted to do nursing. Also, the medication was bad and medical treatment in prison was appalling. I've got scars on my body because they didn't treat me properly for chronic abdominal pains and I ended up—after I got out of prison—having major surgery. I had pancreatitis, jaundice, hepatitis, and blocked bile ducts—but at the time I just didn't know where to go or who to turn to."

‘You know my parents never came to visit me in prison or in hospital, not once. I always felt my family didn't want me. Margaret, my middle sister, visited me regularly and they didn't. I felt, oh they don't want me. You know I didn’t talk until I was 10 years old.'

‘When I went into hospital I was about 18, I'd left school and went into a bum job washing dishes, had a fight with one of the girls—just a fight, you know, but she went to the manageress and said I was sexually assaulting her near enough. I got instant dismissal and this led to a big argument with my parents, so I left home."

'I just couldn't cope with telling my parents I was gay and them battering me and making me live a lie and even having a marriage arranged for me, you know, and expecting to fulfill all their needs and getting none of my own needs fulfilled."

‘Then I thought the only way to solve the problem, stop my parents being upset and help my family was to get rid of myself, so I took an overdose, and then another one. I took about 2000 pills in five weeks, 'cos they used to empty me out and I'd go straight out and fill back up again. When you get to hospital it's like they say "Oh God she's taken an overdose, she's causing us more work" so they empty you out, bung you in a bed, you see a psychiatrist the next morning and then you go home until you really crack. I get very angry when I think about it. There was nobody to turn to then and how can society allow that to happen, (they say) it's your problem, get on with it, so you're gonna have a breakdown...there's nobody reaching out to do anything: I was put in hospital under Section 25. I had to be there like if I stepped out of hospital all the police in England would have been notified. I was got up in the morning and given medication five times a day. I would never drink medication so I'd just end up being jabbed so you can't win, you can't even wear clothes on the ward, you have to stay in a nightgown and there are male nurses, so you don't want to be bathed by them, so you start having a fight and the next day you're dragged along to the psychiatrist and he's got this report saying you were uncooperative. You're sort of trying to explain why and they say "you're a nut, you don't know what you want." Eventually, Sheena was told by a psychiatrist that her "problem" was that she was having a lesbian affair with her sister. 'I suddenly got up and battered her (the psychiatrist) which did me no good. You know, I started hitting her—because I think the world of my sister, like she's my mother, she brought me up as a kid and I can tell her anything...about girlfriends or lovers, and she listens but doesn't condemn and she's always interested to know what I'm doing. If it hadn't been for her I probably would never have pulled through.’

‘They have a funny way of dealing with you in a psychiatric hospital, if you show improvement too quickly they think you're spoofing and they put you back on medication. You know, in a way I think I was institutionalized because I didn't have anywhere else to go, so I just thought I'll live here for the rest of my life. But at one point I was perfectly fit to go out into the world, find a job, but they just put me back on this medication—I was zombified.’

On her 19th birthday, Sheena was sexually assaulted by male nurses. 'I went to undergo tests and this doctor turned round and said "never mind, lass, you're still intact and it's going to have no effect on you." But what about psychologically? It's just that humiliation. The police wouldn't take it to court because when you're a mental patient under Section 25 you're "not in control of your own mind," so they can't prosecute, they just dismiss the nurses and that's that.

‘After that I went on a rampage, smashed everything in sight... was transferred to a locked ward for “highly disturbed" people. Eventually, without knowing what I was doing, I signed this piece of paper and discharged myself from hospital, was picked up by a guy in a van who tried to rape me, then went into town, bought a knife and committed 26 cases of criminal damage around this town, smashing everything in sight, threatened a woman with violence. Just having so much hate you know... then being arrested, knowing nothing about the law, being strip searched, put in a cell.

"Prison was a whole new world, something I'd read about in books. We drove in—all these tiny little windows, massive gates, this bell, they took my possessions, you're not allowed to wear a bra (in case you try to hang yourself). It's then you really start to think about where you are."

‘And it's all surnames you know it's really harsh. You're given a number and told this number is your life. My first number was 293706—it sticks like glue. You see this piece of paper with your name and number stamped all over it and HM Holloway and you start thinking what have I come to. The thing that struck me most when I first saw my cell was the window, the bars, little square panes of glass and bars. I thought I'm gonna die, they've put me in prison to die, there's nothing else and I really got disturbed, jittery, aggressive. And then getting used to the buckets, piss pots, the routine, they say jump and you jump.’

‘At Christmas something sort of hit me about the outside world. I suddenly realized I'd got a family out there and there was a world going on and I went to church and couldn't cope with it at all. I totally cracked up.'

The next day, after a violent incident with her cellmate, Sheena was taken to a punishment cell. She stopped speaking again and was not allowed to wear clothes. ‘Everything came too fast, this wanting to degrade me. I remember having my face splattered on the concrete floor because that was the only way they could stop me fighting. I was left there and I sort of battered myself up and woke up three days later after they'd given me a largactil (a very strong tranquillizer/sedative which is widely used in psychiatric hospitals) injection and thinking God this isn't me, please believe me this isn't me, I just broke down, banging my hand on the table. I spent three months in punishment and every time they let me out of my cell I went berserk, I was like a lunatic. And every time I got a largactil injection in my leg, went to sleep and the days went, so I'd have a fight; get the medication, go to sleep, wake up and cause another bit of rumpus; you start to get addicted.’

‘When I went to court the judge said "you're an animal, a public nuisance, a menace to society, if I had my way I'd lock you up and throw the key away." For my first offense I was sentenced to six months to two years Borstal twice. Just before I went to court I tried to kill myself in prison, things just got too much. Luckily I now have only two small brown marks on my neck to show for it.’

"You know in Borstal it's very hard if you're gay, 'cos the young women and the staff have a very funny outlook, you're sort of outcast. I came out of Borstal and had five months in the outside world, things were really heavy at home, so I got up one morning and walked miles and miles, and ended up committing two more offenses and this woman battered the fuck out of me with a handbag. I just sat there and waited for the police to come and went back to Holloway."

‘I'm thankful I did my second sentence. I was put on a wing with older women and they made me grow up. You know I suddenly went to bed one night and woke up a totally different person. I said God I'm gonna knuckle down, do my sentence and then I'm gonna live when I come out. For my second sentence I served one year of a 5-1/2 year concurrent sentence.'

"I've had to fight to get a work record and show my willingness to work. I've done bum jobs, such as catering, I hated it. And I'm a fully-qualified fancy box maker! I made fancy accessories for Harrods. But the best job I've had was working in Highgate cemetery, restoring the cemetery. I remember it was a really hot summer and all the guys were taking their shirts off and laughing at me because I couldn't. So one day I did and stood there in my bra and then went home and cried.’

‘Today it couldn't be better, like I've got more to give women. It's taken four years of being institutionalized, in hospital, in prison, and now I've got something to give. If somebody comes into the workshop (Kentish Town Women's Workshop) and says "listen I've just come out of prison" or "I'm gonna crack up", I can help them a little bit, give them advice on how I've dealt with things."

‘I'm getting a file together at the workshop with information for ex-offenders on how to deal with Social Security, clothing grants, housing rights, hostels, child custody, and job application forms.

*Note: Section 25 is used to hospitalize people who are ‘considered' a danger to themselves or to society. The minimum compulsory stay in the hospital is one month.

(Outwrite is a feminist journal out of London. Rates for the UK are 4 pounds, regular rate, and for North America, 6 pounds, individual rate. For subscriptions or more information, write them at Oxford House, Derbyshire St., London £2, England.

For further information, see Marshall Islands, a Chronology: 1944-1981, available from the Micronesia Support Committee, 1212 University Avenue, Honolulu, Hawaii 96826. $4.00 per copy airmail.

(Broadsheet is a feminist magazine out of New Zealand. New Zealand subscriptions cost $15 and overseas subs are $19.50. For more information, write Broadsheet Magazine, P.O. Box 5799, Auckland, New Zealand.)

Big Mama Rag, December 1982 - Page 17