Women Installers

FROM PAGE 1

tments other than installer-repairer- it was a company-wide adjustment. A Mountain Bell vice-president (the company plant manager in 1974) called the time of the force adjustments a "very traumatic time." His job was not affected.

Pat Butera, one of the plaintiffs, had applied for an outside job with Mountain Bell in 1971, and was told women were not hired for those positions. She, along with the other plaintiffs, was hired for a craft position (installer-repairer) in 1974 and then demoted. When counsel for Mountain Bell asked her if she thought the seniority system was fair, she replied, "Sir, there is nothing fair about this." Each of the plaintiffs was working overtime at the time of their demotion, a time when there was supposedly a work shortage.

In their testimony, several of the women cited harassment from supervisors and fellow employees. In one incident, one of the plaintiffs felt very threatened by two male supervisors who were approaching her. Because of recently being raped, she felt very afraid of these men. She was holding a screwdriver in a defensive position which she was ordered to drop, and did so. She was suspended and then fired with the possibility of charges of assault being brought against her.

Several women called the training program "condescending" and "infantile." One woman's supervisor called her "stupid" and would refuse to answer her questions. Remarks from fellow employees included, “What this company needs is nigger bitches." Throughout the trial, the Mountain Bell attorney consistently tried to discredit and intimidate the five women.

In his ruling, Judge Finesilver said that there was no concrete evidence of discrimination, only conjecture and speculation. If there was past discrimination affecting hiring women, which in turn affected their seniority, it was too late to bring suit about it as the statute of limitations (5 years) had passed. The seniority system itself has been proven bona fide. According to Finesilver, the plaintiffs were not hired as a facade or as tokens for the EEOC, and were hired with every expectation by the company of permanent employment. At this writing, the plaintiffs are considering appeal of the court's ruling.

The women installers need money to pay their lawyer and for expenses incurred at the trial. Donations are tax-deductible and can be sent to the Women Installers' Legal Defense Fund, 1038 Bannock St., Denver, CO 80203. Or buy Women Installer t-shirts for $4 at Woman to Woman Feminist Center or at RIP bookstore, both in Denver. The Women Installers will have a booth at the Women's Festival, Sept. 9th, and will be having a $5 fundraising dinner Sunday, Oct. 1st at 6 pm at 1236 Lipan.

then take off my hair and fingernails and my face and my flesh and finally my bones. Just to step out of it. All the way out of it.

My date said, "There you are!"

Dykes vs Dexter

FROM PAGE 8

June 22, just a day after the women met with the editor, a coalition representing Puerto Rican, Black and white community groups turned up at the Daily News Building to protest another of Dexter's articles. This one, entitled "Their Island Is No Paradise," was an interview quoting the racist comments of an elderly white couple living in a Philadelphia neighborhood that was once white and had become mainly Puerto Rican.

The Daily News called this a “separate" controversy and columnist Dexter told the community groups that women protesting the rape columns were "a bunch of lesbians" in efforts to keep them separate. Newspaper editors were therefore quite astounded when on June 26 several women involved in the anti-rape protest walked in with the Puerto Rican coalition to lend support.

To the argument that "it's freedom of the press," the protesters said "bullshit!" “We know there's an editorial policy underlying what gets run. Every paper has certain things they'd never print--it's about power, not freedom of the press."

~-Liberation News Service

FROM PAGE 8

Georgia. The Florida Parole and Probation Commission estimates 6 months before they can begin to review the case. Meanwhile, Mary Worlds is incarcerated in Lowell State Prison for Women. Her two children are left without their mother. As Worlds summed it up, “I think all the jury heard was a white woman said a black woman burned a patient."

--Gibbons Rising

Depo Provera

FROM PAGE 9

women learn about various birth control methods.

The information they receive about Depo Provera in the UCSC training program handbook is blatantly misleading. A U.S. package insert warns that an injection of Depo Provera may cause congenital heart defects in babies of women receiving Depo Provera during early pregnancy, but the handbook states, "If inadvertently given to a pregnant case, it will do no harm, but actually prevent against miscarriage." The handbook also recommends the use of Depo Provera in women who have hypertension, heart disease, thrombophlebitis, liver disease, varicose veins, diabetes, and psychiatric problems, although the U.S. insert warns against the use of the drug by patients with these exact problems.

The bill that the House is now considering would permit the U.S. to ship drugs if other countries ‘need’ them and are aware of the risks.

The Third World has always been a dumping ground for products that are banned from the U.S. due to unsafe side effects, for example, red dye number 2, poisonous pesticides, and Tris. And this bill would pave the way for larger markets and profits for companies which manufacture goods deemed unsafe for the U.S.

As stated in the FDA drug bulletin for March/April 1978, "(Banning Depo Provera) may be more appropriate for nations with higher birth rates, lower physician-patient ratios, and less readily available alternative contraceptive methods." After all, according to Donald Kennedy, commissioner of the FDA, "A decision about the appropriateness of a contraceptive drug for the U.S. should not necessarily apply to any other nation let alone all."

As for Depo Provera use in the U.S., the FDA refusal to approve the drug is not final. Upjohn has asked for a hearing on the FDA decision which will begin in September.

Meanwhile, Upjohn is not waiting for the hearing to distribute Depo Provera. For example, it is known that women in the Los Angeles area are still being prescribed Depo Provera, according to a report by the Institute for the Study of Medical Ethics.

A loophole in the FDA drug approval system allows a drug approved for one use (Depo Provera has been approved for the treatment of uterine cancer) to be used for another unapproved use. Since the FDA's jurisdiction applies only to the interstate shipment of drugs, once the drug has reached the state, doctors can prescribe it for whatever purpose.

In Los Angeles, mostly Third World women have been injected with Depo Provera. The Institute found that 85 percent of those women were unaware that Depo Provera was not approved for contraceptive use by the FDA, and less than 5 percent had accurate information about the drug, including its high incidence of permanent sterility.

The California Department of Health has advised against the usage of this drug and in its Medical Advisory notes, "the benefits of use of Depo Provera as a contraceptive are, with possible rare exceptions, outweighed by the formidable risks involved."

--Liberation News Service

Feminist Calendar

SEPT 5 and 19 - Boulder Lesbian Network community meetings, Metropolitan Community Church, 15th and Euclid, 7:30 pm.

SEPT 13 - Picket in support of Cynthia Logan (see article, pg.10) in front of Sid King's (Colfax and Marion), 4:30-6 pm. Make your own signs or use one made by the organizers.

SEPT 13 - Program meeting of South Denver NOW, “Womenpower in politics," with Sheila Cole, Co. Democratic State Chair, Marian Carter, Co. Republican State Chair and Sue O'Brien from KOA. Capitol Federal Savings Bank, 2625 S. Co. Blvd.

SEPT 13 - Program meeting of Jefferson County NOW, “Lesbian Issue: is it?," with Madeline Holdorf, the State Lesbian Rights Task Force Coordinator, at the Lakewood Community Center, 8715 W. 16th, both NOW meetings at 7:30 pm.

SEPT 16 - Super party to raise money to fight the Briggs amendment. 8 pm at 1727 E. 25th Ave., Donation $2.50.

SEPT 16 - State NOW Board meeting in Grand Junction. Call Barbara at 321-2299.

SEPT 23 - Demonstration in Ft. Lupton against police crimes. Car caravan will leave Denver at 10 am from 3777 Lafayette. Call 839-1288 for info.

SEPT 30 - “Free and Female: A Symposium on Female Sexuality", Co-sponsored by NOW and Co. Woman Magazine. A discussion on the myths and realities of women, our bodies, our needs and the effect society has on the mental concepts of ourselves.

Speakers are Barbara Seaman, Dr. Anke Ehrhardt, Libby Bortz, Sherry Tepper, Jean Fortier, and Lenore Walker. Houston Fine Arts, Co. Women's College, Registration 8-9, Symposium 9-5:30. Cost $15 which includes lunch. Early response recommended. Send to NOW conf., 14455 W. 32nd, Golden, CO 80401.

SEPT 30 - Coffeehouse sponsored by the Boulder Lesbian Network, Metropolitan Community Church, 15th and Euclid, $1.50. Call 492-7735 for info.

OCT 1 - A fundraiser dinner for the Women Installers' Legal Defense Fund, 6 pm, 1236 Lipan, $5.

OCT 6-9 - National NOW conference, Washington, D.C.

OCT 14 - Meeting to discuss organizing and forming a collective, with the Boulder Socialist Feminist Collective. Call 447-2425 for info.

OCT 14 - Women's Presence at Rocky Flats. Women from feminist collectives and anti-nuclear groups want to bring women together for a day (weekend) on the tracks at Rocky Flats. If you'd like to participate in any way (organization, publicity, workshops, music, etc.) contact: Denver: R.I.P. Bookstore, 839-1288, Colorado Springs: Bonnie, 635-0067 or Nancy, 633-3201, Boulder: Michelle, 499-7847 or Fort Collins: Barb, 492-9321.

Each Thursday the National Lesbian Feminist Organization holds meetings at the Gay Community Center, 7:30 pm.

Each Tuesday there is a meeting of the Lesbian Alcoholics group. See story front page.

Each Tuesday there are meetings to plan a women's film festival in Boulder at the Women's Resource Center, 7-9 pm. Call 447-9670 for more info.

Consciousness raising and coming out groups are forming in Boulder. Call the Feminist Alliance at 492-7735.