DRAFT

RESPONSES

A.F.S.C.

Dear BMR:

I write to correct the inaccuracies, clarify the implications and express my feelings about how you reported the role of the American Friends Service Committee in the draft rally held March 8 in Denver and reported in your March and April 1980 issues.

First, your readers should know that the reporters of the articles, Judy Barlow and Susan Goding, did not speak to myself or any other AFSC staff with responsibility for facilitating the meetings at which the rally planning took place prior to forming their opinions or submitting these articles for publication. Connie Perenyi, a member of the BMR collective, works as staff for the AFSC Rocky Flats Nuclear Weapons Organizing Project. Connie and I consulted prior to the February 13 meeting when Women Say No first met, but Connie had no AFSC work responsibility for the AFSC's participation in the draft rally planning. Connie has indicated to me that she had no input into either of the BMR articles prior to their publication. Therefore, both articles were written based upon impressions about the course of events, formulated without any attempt to find out the facts and presumably fueled by feelings of anger about the result.

Second, the AFSC did not direct any group planning the rally; nor did the AFSC have anything to do with the scheduling of the rally for March 8, International Women's Day, opportunistically chosen or not. The entire account of the rally implies that AFSC somehow had ownership of the event, an implication surely resented by the 20 or more other groups who participated in the planning.

What did happen is as follows:

1) January 23, Carter's State of the Union proposal for renewal of "peacetime registration"; the AFSC phones are ringing off the wall with inquiries about what we were going to do; how could Vietnam era resisters, draft counselors, and activists help?; what could parents and draft-age youth do? AFSC in Colorado has two people who share one full-time salary who were available to respond to this issue. In order to maximize our efforts, help facilitate community response and organize outreach, distributed to a few places in colleges and hang-outs, but no mass outreach for the February 6 meeting occurred. I do not recall whether the Women Say No leaflet advertising the February 13 meeting was distributed prior to the distribution of our leaflets. I do know that the Women Say No leaflet was displayed in our office and that women calling about the draft were informed about the February 13 meeting.

2) February 6 - Anti-draft meeting facilitated by AFSC staff and volunteers: Eric Wright and I facilitated the meeting where over 100 people gathered together. Chester McQueary, an AFSC draft worker in the 60's, had just returned from Washington so he addressed the plenary meeting with his concerns about the war climate and repressive legislation in the works to cement the power structure. His clear call to “aid, abet, and counsel about what they could individually bring to bear to fight the proposal. Gary Mundt, military affairs aide to Rep. Schroeder in the Denver office, summarized the legislative scene. A political debate ensued among the Socialist Workers Party members, Gary Mundt, and a representative from the International Committee Against Racism. Eric Wright suggested that political discussions could take place best in another setting and helped break the plenary session down into 4 working groups.

The 4 working groups were: a) Outreach; b) Values Clarification; c) Draft Counseling; and d) Political Action. These groups had been predetermined by us from our perceptions of what the needs were of people who were politicizing them and assisting them in their own organizational efforts. The working groups reported back to the plenary session. When the political action group reported that they had planned a rally for March 8, I informed them that Women Say No was already planning a rally for that day and suggested the alternative date of March 22 as a support rally for the National Mobilization Against the Draft rally. The sense of the people who had done the planning for the rally was that timing was crucial and the sooner the better so they, not AFSC, decided to proceed with a clear invitation to Women Say No to join them. The Political Action Working Group also had designated February 13 as their next meeting date and wanted to know if the Unitarian Church facility would be available. I again pointed out the conflict with Women Say No's meeting. An invitation to join them was forthcoming. Hindsight tells me that I should have made announcements about the Women Say No rally prior to dividing into working groups.

There was an announcement slot scheduled on the agenda for the meeting prior to adjournment. When one other person tried to ignore the agenda and make an announcement, he was requested to wait. Adhering to agreed-on process at the meetings I facilitate is crucial for maintaining a sense of fairness and impartiality. The one simple step of making sure Chester McQueary knew of the Women Say No Rally scheduled for March 8 prior to his facilitating that working group probably could have changed the entire complexion of events. Yet I have been an organizer long enough to realize that I do the best I can and certainly feeling guilty or apologizing about one thing that just didn't get done does not mean I bear the responsibility for the consequences.

3) February 6-13: I informed Connie Perenyi about the conflict of dates who took the information back to Women Say No's core group. Connie relayed back to me a request that either the February 6 rally planning group postpone their rally or the Women Say No would reluctantly change their rally although International Women's Day, March 8, was the important connection.

4) February 13: I planned on attending the first part of the February 6 rally planning group to relay the request from Women Say No and then planned on going to the Women Say No planning meeting. I was looking forward to my first women's community meeting and to working on political action with women only. Connie and I had agreed to consult by telephone before my arrival at Woman to Woman, the meeting location. I realized at 7:10 pm when speaking with my fellow AFSC staff, Eric Wright, and another veteran organizer, that neither of them was able to attend the February 6 rally planning meeting. That meant that no one was going to be there to facilitate the meeting where the Libertarians and SWPs and others were gathering.

I reluctantly picked up a magic marker, went to the meeting location, and mapped out an agenda. I let myself and the AFSC get put into a “leadership" position because it was and is my job to do organizing work. Because of our neutrality on political scales the AFSC is a safe organization for the sectarian groups to trust in coalition efforts.

The first item on the agenda was the request to change the date of the meeting. I again proposed March 22; others suggested the February 6 planning group could do a Sunday rally; problems with press coverage were aired; the consensus was to stick with March 8 and an invitation to Women Say No to join the effort. Kee Warner, support staff for AFSC, relayed this result to Connie at the Women Say No meeting.

The group decided to make decisions tacitly by consensus. Again, an invitation to join them was forthcoming. There was an announcement slot scheduled on the agenda for the meeting prior to adjournment. When one other person tried to ignore the agenda and make an announcement, he was requested to wait. Adhering to agreed-on process at the meetings I facilitate is crucial for maintaining a sense of fairness and impartiality. The one simple step of making sure Chester McQueary knew of the Women Say No Rally scheduled for March 8 prior to his facilitating that working group probably could have changed the entire complexion of events. Yet I have been an organizer long enough to realize that I do the best I can and certainly feeling guilty or apologizing about one thing that just didn't get done does not mean I bear the responsibility for the consequences.

John Proctor

Deb Luger, Kathy Riley and Kim Womantree

Women Say No

This Struggle Column, written by three of us from Women Say No, is written for several reasons:

* To clarify our politics and process in organizing around the March 8 International Women's Day Stop the Draft Rally in Denver,
* To examine BMR's coverage of that event, coverage which was frequently negative and incomplete,
* To explain our self-criticism of our work.

First, we'd like to explain who “we" were and the nature of the coalition we formed with other sponsors of the rally.

Women Say No is (was) 14 women who organized following a mid-February community meeting at Woman to Woman. The four women who called the community meeting sought support for a feminist demonstration against the draft--at a time when Congressional approval of a bill authorizing registration of women was possible.

At the same time, separately, the American Friends Service Committee was coordinating a rally of numerous area anti-war groups, also planned for the same day.

Contrary to the implication in Sue's Struggle column, the four community meeting organizers did not come into the meeting with a developed set of politics which the women who attended could either accept or reject. Rather, the politics which grew out of Women Say No came out of frequent task group and large group meetings. Literally, we met as often as possible in the 3 weeks between the community meeting and the rally. During that time, we developed points of unity for ourselves, wrote and printed a leaflet, organized a women's march preceding the rally, planned an hour of women's music and theater before the rally, coordinated music for the rally and worked with our group speakers on their speech.

Although the organizers of the community meeting had originally wanted a feminist-led demonstration, those of us who worked on the rally felt that joining the coalition coordinated by the AFSC would be a sound political choice. We had several reasons for this. A major one was the opportunity to bring radical feminist politics and presence to large numbers of people, many of whom might not have turned out for any rally we did on our own. We felt it was especially important to do this in view of the established "feminist" line widely quoted in the media: that any draft bill coming out of Congress should include "equal" representation of women. Our politics urged resistance by both women and men.

All of the authors of the articles (Judy Barlow and Constance Perenyi, BMR collective members; Bobbe Ross and Lori Bradford, BMR supporters; and Susan Goding, BMR collective member and Women Say No member) referred to on this page were at the initial Women Say No community meeting and all but Constance Perenyi were at the March 8 rally.

The BMR collective had (has) a strong commitment to struggle to develop a radical feminist analysis of the draft which is congruent with the rest of our politics. We saw the rally as strictly an anti-draft rally with feminist involvement and not an International Women's Day Celebration as in previous years. We do not consider 50% of the speakers being women on International Women's Day as a victory when 100% of the speakers have been women at past IWD rallies. We stand behind our coverage reflecting the differences.

Those of us attending the rally did not feel a strong feminist presence. When, at the end of the Women Say No part of the program (all entertainment), Kim Womantree took the microphone and chuckled a comment about that being the end of the "women's hour" it was hard not to make light of the importance or impact this "women's hour" really had.

Although the women's chorus may have sung politically “right-on" songs, for some reason (microphone placement or number of singers) many of the words were undecipherable. We do not believe that political songs can reach a higher level of consciousness than a moving speech; however, this does not imply that political songs are unimportant or cannot move an audience.

In her struggle column Sue did not imply that the 4 community meeting organizers had a developed set of politics, but said that it was unfortunate that this was not the case. She said, "It was demoralizing to discover 20 minutes before the community meeting that our group (meaning the 4 organizers) had fallen apart." (See Vol. 8. No. 3)

We tried to solicit information about possible changes in Women Say No's position and plans from those we thought had been decided at the community meeting. Some of the information was not available at press time and other information that was accurate at press time was no longer accurate by the time the issue hit the streets. We do not know how to avoid these kinds of inaccuracies.

We at BMR continue to be concerned with the problems of working in coalitions with groups or individuals whose politics and goals are in opposition to our own. We reiterate from our draft analysis article (Vol. 8. No. 2): "Radicals must, whenever possible, push our position around the draft and acknowledge the classist and racist options as being merely liberal and reformist. We must also realize that the question of drafting women is a false issue that is unrelated to the passage of the ERA. We must continue our fight against racism, classism, and sexism wherever we find them. We must not let ourselves be distracted. We must not compromise."

On the contrary, in deciding to work with a coalition, we also wanted to be part of a strong and large anti-draft protest in Denver. Some of us saw ourselves as potential allies of other anti-war groups, groups which, like us, would be hit hardest by the draft: people of color, the poor, the young, working-class people, as well as women. Eventually, a large and very diverse number of groups (28) put their names on rally publicity.

How much we actually prepared for future coalition work is debatable, however. The coalition was not one in which groups challenged each other's politics to come up with a common set of points of unity. That would have been impossible in view of the time we had for planning and improbable in view of our diversity. The only criteria for participation in the rally was opposition to the draft.

In an effort to ensure that no group's politics dominated the event, each group was limited to a 3-5 minute speech, and the order of speakers was determined by lottery.

Although Women Say No accepted at least the intent of both of these around rules, we attempted to circumvent both of them in order to give feminist politics more play. For the most part, we justified this on the grounds that International Women's Day was "our" day and had been taken from us unfairly. (There was disagreement among us on why this had happened). As a result, throughout the planning, we had two attitudes toward the coalition--one of sharing work and the other, acting as its adversary.

One of the main ways we challenged the coalition was by requesting that at least half of the groups involved choose a woman for a speaker, in light of the rally date being International Women's Day. The coalition members who attended weekly meetings agreed to this--operating on a sort of informal consensus system--and, subsequently, more than half of the speakers at the rally were women. While we knew this would not necessarily make the rally any more feminist, we felt that it was good politics to challenge groups that were not in the habit of giving leadership to women.