South Africa: Women Fight Back

Black Women Under Apartheid

This article is edited from an excellent article that appeared in Women and Revolution, titled "On Black Women in South Africa: Smash Apartheid Terror.”

Black women in South Africa suffer all the oppression of black men and, in addition, the special oppression of women. They generally have no right to own land—not even in their so-called homelands—many are separated from their husbands for 11 months a year and relegated to an isolated existence in desolate, barren wastelands, and, of course, they are eligible (when they can work at all) for only the worst jobs at the lowest wages.

In most advanced industrial countries, the wages paid to a worker include not only the cost of food, clothing, shelter and transportation to get her/him to work the next day, but also enough to cover industrial accidents, health and unemployment insurance and some kind of pension. Workers are usually also paid enough to reproduce the next generation of workers, i.e., to raise a family. But in South Africa anything apart from the bare necessities to get the worker to work the next day is not included in wages. This is made possible by transforming the black labor force into migrant male labor which is allowed into the white area only as long as it is economically desirable, and as long as there are jobs. If a male worker has a serious illness or industrial accident, or if there are no jobs, or if he grows old or “makes trouble,” he is shipped back to the Bantustan where the women are kept.

The apartheid system, which renders blacks foreigners within their own country, is administered by a maze of regulations which subject them to continuous intimidation, terror, arrest and imprisonment. One in every four blacks is arrested every year for technical infringements of laws applicable to blacks only.

The apartheid system is linked to the development of South African capitalism. Until the discovery of diamonds and gold, the Boers (descendants of Dutch settlers) were a nation of sheep herders, producing wool for the British textile industry.

Gold and diamond mining are hazardous and labor-intensive industries, and demand for their refined products is subject to enormous cyclical variations. Thus, the mines require a large, “elastic” low-paid and unskilled labor force.

Originally this class included European immigrants, but this has since been transformed to the present system whereby only three percent of whites are unskilled, and the black population has been turned into a giant industrial reserve army of illiterate, unskilled, unorganized and terrorized migrant labor that will accept hazardous work at wages beneath subsistence.

Although whites comprise only about 20 percent of the South African population, they are allocated a "homeland" which covers 87 percent of South Africa. As one would expect, it includes all of the land rich in South Africa's various and rich natural resources, and all of the industry and developed urban areas, which have all been accumulated through black labor.

Blacks comprise 70 percent of the population, yet they are allocated only 13 percent of the land area, set aside in 280 scattered plots of the most barren and desolate leftovers.

The government approves of marriages contracted according to tribal law as interpreted by white judges and administrators. Women who enter into these “customary unions” (including almost all of the women living on these “homelands” or Bantustans) must do so with parental consent, and only after the practice of lobolo, which is the transfer of cattle and/or cash from the husband to the wife's father. Lobolo gives the husband the right to repudiate the marriage unilaterally at any time simply by forfeiting his lobolo rights, but the wife has no equivalent right, since lobolo is an agreement between her husband and her father. An African woman married by customary union is considered a perpetual minor under the tutelage of her husband. She cannot own property in her own right, cannot sign a valid contract without her husband's consent, and cannot be sued or sue. Any money she earns belongs legally to her husband. In some provinces, custody of children may never be given to divorced, separated or widowed mothers, and such women are remanded to the control of their fathers or guardians. According to the minister of the Bantu Administration and Development, the aim of his white-controlled policy of imposing the customary unions upon the black population was "to restore women to their rightful place...that women occupied in the old society."

According to the white supremacist myth of separate development, each "nation" is supposed to develop self-sufficiency with its homeland, but none of the homelands are capable of economic self-sufficiency, not even the wealthiest white homelands, which are dependent on the exploitation of black labor. As there are no economic opportunities in their "homelands," black men are forced to migrate, often a thousand miles, to the white "homeland" in search of work, but even this dubious privilege is generally denied to black women. Until 1964 women were allowed to live in urban townships if their husbands qualified, but since then unemployed black wives and widows have been prohibited from living in the urban areas. Most townships and company hostels do not permit women even for visits.

Denver women marching in a picket of a local stone selling and promoting the Krugerrand, the gold coin mined by black workers and used to finance the racist South African government.

Photo by Deb Taylor

Blacks are restricted from visiting, working or residing in white areas by the pass laws, which require every black over age 16 to carry on her/his person at all times a number of official papers. An average of almost 2,000 people are arrested every day for violations of the hated pass laws.

While black men are allowed in the cities only as they are economically useful, it is feared that allowing women into the cities would lead to the establishment of a stable black population. As one member of the ruling Nationalist party states, "This African labor force must not be burdened with superfluous appendages such as wives and children."

The creation of a migratory labor force and the exclusion of “superfluous appendages”—i.e., the great majority of black women—from urban areas has destroyed family life and replaced it with nothing.

Four million black women are relegated to the reserves, where, on an inadequate plot of impoverished land, they are supposed to scratch out of the brush and rock the subsistence to nourish and raise a family and care for the sick, the injured, the children, the aged and the unemployed.

The most "fortunate" are the housewives; those whose husbands, working in the cities, send home what meager earnings they can spare. An African woman writes of them:

"It is the tragic story of thousands of young women who are widows before they reach age thirty; young married women who have never been mothers; young women whose life has been one long song of sorrow—birthing one baby after another and fastly burying the husband—that lover she has never known as husband and father." 
~ Phyllis Ntantala

Not only are these women barred from seeking work in the cities, but they are severely handicapped in seeking the few jobs available in the Bantustans. Many jobs are reserved for men; women with children often have no one with whom to leave them and no one to take over the domestic chores which, in a primitive society, are all-consuming. An entire day may be spent fetching firewood or water; and those widows lucky enough to have the right to occupy their late husband's homesteads dare not leave them or they will be forfeited. Often the cost of commuting to a job is simply greater than the wages paid.

Against all odds, many black women in South Africa do manage to enter the labor force, chiefly as domestic servants. Like black men, the conditions these women must work under include inadequate wages, substandard housing (usually without water or electricity), no privacy, insufficient medical care, and the knowledge that they may lose their jobs and their homes and be separated from their children at any time.

Over and above the oppression and exploitation based on class and race which black urban working women share with men, they suffer still greater discrimination because they are women. Unlike black men, they cannot qualify to enter any of the skilled trades. In industry, where more and more black women are being drawn in to replace black men as even cheaper labor, the official policy of the government Wage Board is to set wages for women 20-30 percent lower than for the equivalent jobs performed by men. Black women in the colleges or the public service who marry have their employment terminated by law, and then as “superfluous appendages” they are candidates for shipment back to the Bantustans.

Black women are prohibited from being registered tenants in the townships. This means that should those women fortunate enough to live with their husbands become widowed, divorced, separated or deserted they face immediate eviction. Under the circumstances, many women suffer any abuse in the knowledge that if their husbands leave them, they will lose their right to

MORE ON PAGE 10