BOOK REVIEW

THE BELL JAR

SYLVIA PLATH died on a Monday morning's emotional deterioration of the women
around 6200 Sen. She went down into the skewed sea. The limited roles they
are confined to. She seeks something

different and is told that she must
become a super-woman, make herself
somehow different from “all those

other women" and yet still channel
her talents into a restricted mold

a plate of bread and butter and
jugs of milk for her children.
Then she opened the oven door,
turned on the gas, and laid her
head down.

Her book "The Bell Jar" is widely acclaimed now, and her two books of
poetry, "Colossus" and "Ariel" are a common sight in all bookstores.

Still - I wonder how many of her
have the power over her life that
will allow her to end the nightmare
that an analytical perceptive
realistic mind shows her daily.
She decides to commit suicide.
Suicide, the last attempt at self
determination, real control over one's
life, a desperate and liberating act.
She is thwarted in her attempt and
describes the hell she underwent in
being forcibly rehabilitated. Esther
was a rebel defeated, and one finds
herself wishing she had won the battle
then, rather than suffer the ten more
years of forced compliance Sylvia did
before she liberated herself from the
hell-holes she faced in life. The

mornings began with the hope that
someone might understand, and how
many years of disappointment accumulated
in the process of her life.
Do not just read her book and say
you understand. For unless it
moves you beyond tears and into
some kind of action, your intro-
verted understanding will be of no
use. Do not read her poems and cry,
rather read them with the same anger
with which they were written. And
realize that unless things change,
or until we change things, I can
guarantee you that one of your
friends, my friends, our friends,
will surely do the same one day.

"The Bell Jar" is an autobiography
novel written by Sylvia Plath about
herself in her 20th year of life. Some
are better insulated than others, some
of us allow ourselves to

see bits and pieces of the picture. Some of us have help... Many of us do not. Sister-
hood must become much more powerful.

This young woman who gets slapped
in the face with the reality of
life and what happens to talented
women in our society. It is a rare
chance to change the picture of reality
now, and it was reality in the 50's. Sylvia, speaking through Esther in the book, sees the

BIG MAMMA RAG WANTS YOU

Hey Lady, your Mamma's calling you.
BIG MAMMA RAG wants to hear from you.

We are your newspaper and we're here to
serve the needs of the women in the
Denver Community. We think what women
have to say is important and it's about
time women had a chance to communicate
their ideas and feelings to one another
and to the Community. If you agree or
do not agree with this paper, we want

to hear from you. We want articles from
women in Denver, poems, graphics, short
stories, ideas. Feel free to express
yourself.

WE NEED YOU, WE NEED EACH OTHER. WOMEN'S KARATE

Karate classes are being conducted
and are open to women every Sat.
afternoon at 3:30 at the SIS office,
1428 Lafayette. Joan Stuart who
holds a black belt in Kung-Fu
Chinese Karate is conducting the
class. Save a Sister - Save Yourself
and learn Self-Defense.