10  
Letters . . . From Page 2  

To the Feminist Press  

If Gloria Steinem is a C.I.A. agent, I wish they would send us a dozen more at once.  

No one seems interested in where the Redstockings press release came from, who paid for it, who wrote it. Why are they hiding under their redstocking masks, like the Ku Klux Klan, when Redstockings no longer exists and many former members of Redstockings denounced the press release?  

Who are the Redstockings? If they are concerned about the threat of the C.I.A., they are presumably interested in feminism and other societal problems. We have taken to our breast many people once with foreign or domestic intelligence, namely, Al Lowenstein, William Sloane Coffin, and Ramsey Clark, who, as Attorney General of the United States, was the head of the F.B.I. and other intelligence gathering communities, and whom we have not regretted for one moment joining our ranks. Their involvement was not one jot less than any of the allegations against Gloria.  

I deplore the amount of focus the feminist press has placed on the attacks against Gloria Steinem as opposed to focusing more fully on what happened at the Mexico City Convention. Whose interest is served by increased suspicion, horizontal hostility, and piranhaism in the Women's Movement?  

What damage has Gloria done to the movement? To criticize Ms. while the feminist press is still microscopic by comparison is to criticize success. If the feminist press related better to the women in the country, the feminist press would have a higher circulation.  

Why is it so difficult for a feminist to get credit for doing the right thing? Who would the Redstockings nominate as the woman who has done more for women or feminism than Gloria Steinem? Who has participated in more benefits, made more speeches, worked harder, raised more money for the feminist movement?  

For all their words against her, what damage has she done? Who has been arrested or gone to jail because of her?  

Everything she has touched has thrived. And her work has touched the lives of many, many people.  

I await the emergence of the Redstockings from the shadows to answer these questions.  

Flo Kennedy  

From Page 3  

BMR: How do you feel about your own participation in the school and bookstore?  

AL: All I want to do right now is teach. Since I can't teach the class I want to the women I want to teach, until the school exists, I've got to help create the school. Still, I like being here in the beginning. I really like it. One of the pamphlets we sell at the bookstore, Anti-Mass, is by a collective about what they learned about being a collective. One of the statements they made, I don't remember the exact words, asks, "Do you want to be an object of history or a subject of history?" Or, do you want to be a woman adapting to her changing role in society or do you want to be the woman who's changing her role in society? Maybe that’s the difference between a woman who's a feminist and a woman who's not yet. As for me, I want to change my role in society.  

Big Mama Rag  

Colorado Springs . . . From Page 1  

We need to be bilingual in a world which puts a premium on English even though most of its inhabitants speak some other native language; we will each learn to understand the business side of the clinic (insurance, taxes, billing, bookkeeping, scheduling, etc.) although we will employ one part-time staff person to oversee that learning; we will continue to do speaking engagements in order to further develop speaking and presentation skills and reach out to all kinds of women; we will continue our self-health education, understanding that to stop learning is to stagnate; and we will have ongoing workshops for all staff and volunteers on our racism and sexual and class biases. All of these are attempts to create a truly alternative health care clinic for all women in our community.  

Perhaps the most important goals for us at this point concern the hiring and serving of low-income and non-white women. At this time we have an all-white salaried staff. We believe that it is just as important for us to move in some concrete ways on our own understanding of racism and classism as it is for us to bring in non-white women to deal with those issues for us. We have made the hiring of non-white women a priority for the upcoming year, and we have made outreach to non-white women through the clinic an equal priority. Meanwhile, we believe that we must be more sensitive to the issues of racism and classism and heterosexism — we must in fact comprehend those issues and their effects. To be an alternative feminist institution, we will have to deal with women without the prevailing assumptions that all women are white, middle class, and heterosexual. We understand that this will be hard and we won't always succeed, but we are determined to put as much energy as necessary — (without burning out) into the effort.  

We are beginning to understand the reality of outside harassment to our work and our clinic. We have never accomplished our goals without problems. However, with the actual opening of clinic doors, we are learning what outside pressure really means. It is difficult to predict exactly what kinds of specific pressures will be put on us at this point, but there are rumblings in our community from various directions, especially the medical community. Already we have had our sexual orientation and the "credentials" of our physician challenged. We have had our "ethics" challenged for "advertising," a fairly predictable point of attack from local doctors. The fact that we have a non-profit organization which will focus on that part of the population for which doctors are not willing to assume responsibility, i.e. poor, non-white women, is of course not acknowledged.  

We are communicating with other feminist health clinics around the country in the hopes of learning from their experiences what problems we can assume we will encounter and what our most effective strategies might be. Clearly the opposing forces will use whatever means available to discredit us with the intentions of stopping our work. Essentially we counter all attacks with positive facts: our clinic will provide quality care and sensitive counseling to women who have not been receiving any health care at all, and to women whose health care needs have not been adequately met. We have something alternative to offer. The responses to that are varied, but the important response is from women in the community who are already making appointments to receive their health care from us. That is the response on which we will concentrate, and hopefully that is the response which will ultimately legitimize our work. The success of this new feminist institution is contingent upon utilization of the clinic, referrals, financial contributions, and most importantly, the moral and political support of all our sisters in this region. Any suggestions, criticism, ideas, useful information about similar experiences, etc. is welcomed and can be sent to:  

Women's Health Service Clinic  
1703 North Weber  
Colorado Springs, Colo. 80907  

BMR APOLOGIES  

BMR wishes to apologize to two Seattle, Washington women for a misprint in last month's issue. A sentence in the article, "High School Women Explore Feminism" which read, "Thursday, August 14, Clare Strawn, a member of the BMR collective, and Janine Bertram from the Lesbian/Feminist radio collective in Seattle presented a workshop on 'Women and the Media,' should have read, "... Janine Carpenter ...". To both Janines, we stand corrected.  

Also, we wish to apologize to Susan Binder for not having credited her graphic that accompanied the Nourishing Space Article.  

The song quoted in the Summer Solstice article (see August BMR) was written by Hayfield of Portland, Oregon.  

COLOR  
NATIONALITY  

Mon.-Sat. 10-6