Sagaris Collective Self-Evaluates

Frances Earl Kimber

Over the weekend of January 10, women who had attended the summer of 1975 sessions of Sagaris reconvened. The focus was on the questions of power, responsibility, and accountability, which had been raised at both sessions of Sagaris.

The meeting began with a self-evaluation by the collective. They responded to the criticisms with which they had been confronted during the past summer in a manner that assured those present that a sincere, perceptive, and thorough analysis had taken place within the collective as a body and individually.

They accepted responsibility for any mistakes of the 1975 program. They realized that because they had failed to make conscious efforts to work with non-white women earlier in their structuring of Sagaris, that this omission amounted to racism.

Because they did not have a thorough enough understanding of the differences in economic and cultural backgrounds among women, they made mistakes that were classist.

They tended to overreact to questions last summer regarding their personal politics, and recognize that they should have been open about their disagreements with each other.

The collective saw the survival of the program as its primary goal during the past summer and felt that it was correct in standing by that policy. However, they believe that they are better equipped at present to work with organization, efficiency, strength, and experience.

Clumsiness

They feel they handled their responsibilities clumsily, which not only prevented them from discovering means to distribute their power, but also obscured methods that would have avoided some of the difficulties that this responsibility invites. They recognize fully their mistakes in these areas: they realize that leadership necessitates articulating their positions, standing by them, and taking responsibility for them.

The collective intends to share administrative work with students during future sessions. Blanche Boyd sees this as good training for it will provide skills and knowledge that will enable students to understand all that goes into putting a school together (and keeping it intact!).

And in the area of funding, the collective has been and will remain circumspect, and very clearly will maintain and enforce their authority and autonomy in this area.

We were introduced to the new members of the collective, Fabi Romero-Oak, Joy Barnes, and Deborah Singletary. Eugenia Wilshire has moved from the collective to a consultant status. Fabi is also a mother, so sisters with children will definitely be heard. Joy and Deborah are active in Civil Rights and Black Feminists’ organizations and are anxious to share their knowledge and experiences in these areas. They hope we can work together to eliminate the racism that still exists in the movement.

Presently the Sagaris collective and the National Black Feminist Organization are combining efforts to co-sponsor a short conference this coming summer on ‘Feminism and Racism... Coalition Building between Non-White and White Feminists.’

What it isn't

Before discussing the future goals of Sagaris, it was necessary to emphasize from the beginning the type of institution that Sagaris does not intend to be. This enabled us to focus input in the proper direction. Sagaris is not any of the following:

1) a free space for women who do not recognize that capitalist society is exploitative and who are not concerned with working towards its elimination.

2) a place for sisters to simply get together (although it is, of itself, a community).

3) a political organization where every woman has exactly the same goals.

4) an institution for purely academic research, i.e., reading or studying about women as the primary goal.

5) a place for women whose individual solution is more important than political action.

6) just a feminist school or studies program at a more sophisticated level.

7) a school for feminist purists who cannot work in anything but a perfected egalitarian situation.

8) a school for feminist anarchists who do not approve of any structure.

Specifically, Sagaris will direct its energies toward a school that teaches radical feminist theory with scheduled practical skill development within a total feminist analysis. Future courses will definitely provide for praxis (theory plus practice). In the future Sagaris will be an issue-oriented school.

Many hours were devoted to the consideration of suggestions made by students and collective members. A format evolved that not only will ensure regional representation, but will provide for student participation at various levels of structuring.

Task forces were decided upon as the most effective method to accomplish this at the present. The following task forces deemed most relevant now were formed: faculty, curriculum, and facilities. A task force coordinator was appointed for each of the above. She would be responsible for coordination of the task force and communication not only to members within the task force, but also to the collective.

Accountability

Following this procedure, the collective will be responding to the information as it is assembled, thus assuring accountability. The task forces will be involved in decision-making, e.g., the faculty task force would not only search for faculty, they will interview potential applicants and review all applications received in their area. The coordinators will meet with the collective a few times a year and participate in the final decision-making process regarding faculty, facilities, and curriculum. Each coordinator will have one vote in these matters, just as members of the collective do. The coordinators are: Faculty—Ann Richtman, Curriculum—Josy Catoggio, Facilities—Janet Mercer. Individual sisters signed up to work on the task force of their choice.

It was a provocative meeting, a fruitful session and a gift of sorts. Those of us who returned concerned, and cared enough to stay, came away with the assurance, the hope, the conviction that Sagaris will not only survive—it will thrive!

Result of Patriarchy

The institution of day care functions in the capitalist system to create a stable, cheap pool of labor, make a profit for day care businesses, and keep poor people quiet. Our economic system supports day care because it facilitates women coming to work, and cuts down on turnover and absenteeism. In the sixties, the number of working mothers increased because of new job categories in the electronic and service industries, the heavy arms commitment, and the growing need for clerical help in this ‘paper age.’ Large day care businesses formed to meet the growing demand for day care, and today there are chains of day care centers spreading around the country much like Kentucky Fried Chicken stands. 60% of all day care centers are now privately owned businesses run for profit. The reason these companies are not expanding enough to meet the huge need for day care is that in order to make a profit, they must charge at least $20 a week, which is more than most women can afford. Most women earn so little that they are reluctant to shell out any large sum for day care. And these centers are criticized by educators and mothers because they usually give inadequate, custodial care. They are often merely ‘children’s garages’ where children are parked all day watching television. In order to make a profit, these businesses cannot provide quality care. Therefore women hesitate at putting their children in such centers, and instead will pay a relative or friend they can trust.

Day care centers which are nonprofit are supported largely by state and federal welfare funds, and are part of the government’s attempt to keep poor people under the illusion that the government is doing something for them. It enables some welfare mothers to get jobs, compensates for the deprived backgrounds of ghetto children much like the Head Start program, and helps keep the gap in income distribution between rich and poor from getting wider. But most day care agencies feel vulnerable to pending welfare cuts. Like most social service programs, their position is not contingent on delivery of service, but on the political and economic needs of the government. In 1973, H.E.W. nearly cut day care funds drastically and only a massive letter writing campaign prevented it. H.E.W. has now made the eligibility requirements for welfare mothers stricter so that fewer mothers can get day care. The skyrocketing welfare costs are already a great burden in our capitalist economy, and it is doubtful that businessmen and taxpayers will agree to spending more public money on day care. In fact, states do not spend the money that is already available for day care. In 1969, Congress allocated $22.6 million nationwide for day care, but the states only spent $14 million. They would not come up with their share of the matching funds (25%).

Day care centers are caught up in our huge, bureaucratic tangle of municipal and state law so that it is very difficult to start them. It takes about two years of legal red tape and fundraising to meet most state licensing requirements. The expertise of lawyers,

More on page 14

723 E. 17th AVE. DENVER, COLO. 80203