from The National Conference

Robin "

Computer Wizard

" Richard Veger, who is the wizard
of the new right, as he's been called--*
young, very slick, computer genius,
with 24-hour computer offices in Vir-
ginia, brags that he can get a 30,000
letter mailing out overnight, and has
done it; and who engineered the anti-
Panama Canal Treaty campaign, and who
is now focusing almost full-time on the
women's movement--has announced that
he sees us as the greatest, the most
serious threat. Now this is very
flattering. I think he's actually
right. But it's interesting that they
take us many times more seriously than
we do ourselves, knowing what we really
stand for: which is, as Elizabeth
Oakes Smith said, I think in 1893, a
complete dissolving of the existing
social compact--not equality in a sys-
tem where the phrase actually is mean-
ingless, but the power to transform
that system into something that would
be, for the first time, really human."

WCTU Feminism

"The connections between alcoholism
and battery make me re-think the WCTU
historically. For a very long time,
many of us have been ashamed that the
first wave of feminism in this country,
the suffragists, somehow got mixed up
with those crazy little old ladies who
went around with hatchets in saloons.
We weren't them, of course. Well, I
think we were. And I think there are
reasons for that. I think it's very
interesting that the WCTU, the temper-
ance movement, was mostly composed of
middle class and working class women
who saw the ways that alcohol was
being used as a palliative and a paci-
fier for their men, who would direct
their anger not back to the employer
who was exploiting them, but to the
women. And they did, in the way that
they could, go after the booze. But
their motivation was a very feminist
motivation."

Ted Kennedy

"In England there is a killer who
is calling himself Jack the Ripper,
proudly, and calling for his brothers
to rise around the world. In Boston,
there have been 12 murders, all of
them Black women, by a man who is cal-
ling himself Boston Strangler 2, and
Ted Kennedy is running for president.
Am I the only one who remembers? I
assure you, I have no great affection
for the present occupant of the White
House; nor, for any of the others who
are running. And maybe if we hit the
streets again, Bella would look like
the rational and ideal candidate that
she is---by comparison. But since we
have not been out in the streets, they
claim she is as radical and crazy and
insane as you can get. . .I think it
is very important that in every city
and town that he (Kennedy) hits, that
women--and from a feminist standpoint,
not from the salacious way in which
the Right or the Left or any of the
boys' various directions. . .that we
make it clear we are not amused. If
he runs against Baker, it will be the
first time in the history of this
country--leaving murder aside--that both
candidates for the presidency have
admitted former alcoholic wives,
whose wives said publicly that they were
driven to alcoholism by their husbands’
careers. What that means in terms of
politics in this country, I think, is
violence toward women who are still
living and women who are dead. . .I
don't think we are being divisive by
raising it again and again and again."

Houston

“But I think what has been happening
over the past few years, what we saw
really beginning at Houston, is some-
thing else. There is, for example, a
precipitous increase in activism and
leadership in Black feminism in the
women's movement. At Houston, there was
more grassroots representation; more
minority women, ethnic women, more
class mix, more geographical and
economic income mix than at any other
conference ever held in this country
by men, women or both. And it's show-
ing in our networking and in our ac-
tions."

Divisions

"Ten years ago you were a Specialist.
I, for example, was a street activist;
most of the women I knew and worked
with were. I would have been cheerfully
crucified rather than write a letter
to a senator or go and lobby in Congress
or work for a woman who was running
for office: you know, it's the enemy,
it's working inside the system. And
women who were working inside the sys-
tem were terrified of us--crazy, wild-
eyed boot-stomping radicals. And so,
the stereotypes we had about each other;
they were useful, obviously, to the
man. '

60s Nostalgia

"I look forward to the 80's a lot.
I think we are already seeing a resur-
gence of our rage, nationally and
internationally. Over Iran--in a matter
of weeks, days in fact, there were de-
monstrations all over the world in sol-
idarity with the Iranian women. Re-
cently, we had another such internation-
al feminist action in the case of
Maria Antonia Palla, who is a journ-
alist, who was arrested for doing a
television program on a woman's right
to abortion. This is happening more
and more. . .And I think a resurgence
of our rage and our militancy is going
to be the hallmark of the ‘80's. I
also think, without it, we will fail."

on Violence against Women

Cathleen Schurr ...

Humiliation is the backbone of misogyny, hatred of
women which has flourished in all cultures at all
times all through history. Misogyny wrote the Bible
and the men calculatingly designed God male after
their own image. Misogyny kept the vote from us. Mis-
ogyny took away our property rights. Misogyny kept us
from equal opportunities in education, at work and
-Trivial as some of the manifestations of
misogyny may seem, it is only a step away from phys-
ical violence. If dirty cracks are the order of the
day, a bop on the head cannot be far behind. How many
signals do we need? How many more messages? That ill
wind that has been blowing in our faces for several
thousand years is not suddenly going to turn around
and quietly go away. The ancient Greeks, who had a
knack for this sort of thing, first invented the
word misogyny. But neither the Greeks, nor anyone
else, has come up with a word for man-hating, which
tells us quite a bit about who is in charge."

"And why should the family, supposedly such a safe
haven and a sanctuary, be such a dangerous place? Well,
for one thing, the family, a schematic device thou-
sands of years old, was not invented for woman's pro-
tection, as we in our innocence once believed, but to
ensure that man remained top dog. Look at the word
itself--family. It comes from the Latin word famulus,
or servant, which in the Roman order of things, meant
slave. Familia was the household, the community of
servants or slaves, ruled by the fellow on top who
turns out to be, you guessed it, the patriarch. Now
once you've got such a cinchy power thing going for
you, you aren't very likely to let it slip away. So
you whip up fellow patriarchs and begin to invent all
sorts of rules, including physical restraints, to make
sure that the slaves and servants keep their place."

"The conventional wedding ceremony, in which one man
gives, or presents his daughter to another man, is a
ritual encapsulation of the loss of identity for the
woman. It shows how thoroughly we have come to accept
male dominance that we often do not recognize it in sym-
bols such as this. I believe that symbols are important.
Unless we question symbols, we are never going to shake
off the customs and institutions that oppress us."

"And what about the tiny hints of humiliation that we
tolerate in our daily lives? The mother-in-law jokes, wom-
en as nag, sexual devourer, castrator, demi-moron, idiot
manager, and so on. . .Remember the fun the guys used
to have when storms and hurricanes were named after women?
The advent of male hurricanes, by the way, caused a lot
of commentators to become unstuck."

"And presently we have been told that we have been
given this or that reform, but in the fight for equal
rights, we have been given nothing. We have worked
long and hard for each victory. Don't you believe
that women were given the vote. My mother, and yours,
and millions fought and bled and not a few died to
get the vote."

"Women should band together and squat not only
in our churches and synagogues, but also in our po-
lice stations, at the courts, social welfare offices
and all the other institutions which have failed so
miserably in aiding battered women."

"And there is hope for the future. Changes I've seen
in the last decade make that clear. . .People are coming
around to understanding that when a stranger puts his
hand on a woman's knee, it is the owner of the hand
who is to be scrutinized, and not the owner of the knee.”

Cathleen Schurr--feminist, author
and actress--co-authored Sexual
Assault: a Crime in
America. She has also written
Naturally Yours, a book on natural
health published in the early
'50s, and a number of books for
small children. Schurr, born in
London to a German immigrant suffragette during World War I, was a
cofounder and performer for the
Washington Area Feminist Theatre.
Currently, she can be seen acting
in Al Pacino's film, Justice for
All, and in Alan Alda’s The Seduction
of Joe Tynan.