Colorado ©

Task Force Takes Off

Carolyn Agosta

And we sit, safe, secure... while our sisters are being dehumanized and socially controlled. As we enjoy the comfort of our homes, other women are attempting to take action regarding the dilemma of our sisters in prison.

Early in November, a group from the National Organization of Women (NOW) decided to investigate the prison situation of women... they were appalled at what they learned. The Women in Prison Task Force was then formed, with a general goal... “to see a community service system work as an alternative to incarceration.”

According to Phyllis Muczynski, the newly-elected state coordinator, there are several problems related to women who are incarcerated.

First, there is “forced homosexuality on an emotional level” since it is forbidden for women to touch or embrace each other. “We want to deal with the myth of homosexuality in prisons... we are dealing with a social rather than physical rape.”

Second, the women are stripped of everything they have or are, “so much so that the only thing she has left is her imagination.” Once released from prison, they “try to sort out fact from fiction... it takes years to readjust.”

Third, as far as Ms. Muczynski knows, there are no women parole officers.

Fourth, women are separated from their family and children... this makes prison life even more painful and adjustment more difficult.

Half-Way House Planned

The task force hopes to open a half-way house, as an alternative... a private place with rules or guidelines where a woman would be able to spend time with her family and/or children.

The greatest problem the group has encountered in attempting to set up a half-way house is that at the present time no neighborhood would accept it. But the women are beginning to educate the community by speaking at churches, clubs, Moose and Kiwanis.

When asked how their task force differs from other groups related to women in prison, Phyllis responded by stating, “There is no difference, none at all.” They want desperately to work with other groups - especially Minority Women’s Task Force, “which has done a lot with women in prison and which deserves the credit.” “We need all the support available... we don't just need a community center in Denver, we need one in Pueblo and in all parts of the state.”

Prison Workshops Organized

The task force is working with the Unitarian Universalist Church which is organizing two days of workshops, January 18th and the 25th at 4101 E. Hampden Ave.

On January 18th there will be a Focus on Women Day which will be dealing mainly with women in prison - favoring a movement toward community-based corrections. Five aims of the workshop are: 1. Learning what women are incarcerated and for what offenses 2. Understanding “the enduring quality of many women prisoners’ strength, passion and aspiration for a better life...” 3. Learning what plans are being made at both state and local levels for community services and in educating judges and prosecutors. 4. To develop feminist alternatives to incarceration at both pre- and post-trial levels. 5. To publish “white papers” related to the imprisoned.

International reports that torture has been used against Dr. Forest and other people who are being held. Forest was held incommunicado for 26 days. She was continuously beaten and kicked in all parts of her body. She was told she would be thrown out of a window and that the world would be told that she committed suicide. When she vomited, she was forced to swallow “the mess;” when forced to urinate, she was mocked by 12 policemen.

According to a letter smuggled to her lawyer, Dr. Forest wrote that the severest form of torture for her was psychological and involved her daughter. She was told, untruthfully, that her 12-year-old daughter was being interrogated in prison concerning her parents’ activities and that her husband was dead. Forest's husband turned himself over to the police to save the lives of his wife and child. He is now awaiting trial: According to Spanish law, a husband is legally responsible for crimes committed by his wife.

Apparently the continued use of torture on Genoveva Forest has been successful. She has been charged with the murder of the premier.

The second workshop, on January 25th, will focus on parolees, both women and men, and the Community Service System. This will deal with people who have been or are now incarcerated... what is available to them upon release.

Both the Women in Prison Task Force and the Conference at the Unitarian Universalist Church need support. As Phyllis stated, “Whether you're a member of NOW or not; please get involved! We need some physical help. We need some bodies. We need some people who want to share some love.”

If you have any questions or can help in any way, please contact Phyllis Muczynski by calling 935-6908.

ST sesq

page 13

Joanne Little —

From Page 11

them access to evidence, including Alligood’s pants and underwear, essential for proving the rape.

The Sheriff's Department of Beaufort County claims that Little seduced Alligood into her cell so she could escape. Alligood was an outstanding member of the community and a good family man, according to the men.

JoAnne Little's supporters held a demonstration for her and against conditions inside the prison. Under special attack is the prison laundry where all of the several hundred women prisoners, mostly black, must work. Women work in 120-degree heat and must carry very heavy laundry bags weighing up to 175 pounds — laundry from the men’s prison.

JoAnne Little is a woman, is black and a prisoner in a rural town in America. She needs the support from sisters everywhere. Her defense is already estimated at $20,000 and her lawyers aren't charging fees. Contributions can be sent to:

The JoAnne Little Legal Defense Fund

P.O. Box 10003

Durham, NC 27702

She can be written to at the women's prison at 1034 Bragg Street, Raleigh, North Carolina 27610. According to the November 1974 issue of Off Our Backs, nine other women at the prison would also appreciate correspondence (and need stamps to reply). They are Marie Hill, Ellen Porter, Mary Alexander, Sandra Youngblood, Marianne Lucas, Pearlie Bennett, Edna Barnes, Pauline Cauldwell, Wanda Reid. These women need to know that sisters everywhere support them.

California Women Aid Prisoners

The California State Task Force for Women in Prison of the National Organization for Women (NOW) has organized NOW chapters for women who are incarcerated in prisons in California. “Adult and juvenile women prisoners cannot relate to the penal system in any police form and our purpose is to help women prisoners obtain their freedom and keep it,” says Shelly Fernandez, an organizer of the task force.

Women on the task force feel that women prisoners have specific needs unlike those of other women and they intend to support them. California already has two chapters in prisons with more planned in the near future.

Fernandez is with the NOW chapter that has just organized in Pleasantown Prison, the pride of the state’s penal system — a co-ed facility that houses 50 women and 250 men. At first the warden at the prison wanted the chapter to include both men and women, but he later agreed to have only women involved in the chapter. “He was apprehensive about us and what we wanted to do,” says Fernandez, “but after we talked to him about NOW he changed his mind and then he was really enthusiastic about the idea.”

The chapter at Pleasanttown Prison is called the Golden Gate chapter and will be completely autonomous in its decision making with the women prisoners doing the work themselves. Dues for the members of the chapter have been waived at the National Board meeting that was held in Denver in October, since California state law says that no prisoner can belong to any organization that requires the payment of dues.

Consciousness raising groups and workshops on the role of women have started in the prison. The task force also plans to develop work-release programs for women.

Since almost 85% of all women prisoners eventually return to prison, Fernandez and other members of the task force want to open a re-entry center run by former prisoners that will assist women who have just been released from prison. The re-entry center would help her get a job, start school, help her with any legal problems and generally provide information she may need to survive in a basically hostile world.

The task force also wants to create and coordinate a nationwide information center for women prisoners and their needs when they are released. “This way, if a woman is released in Los Angeles and wants to go to Denver to live, we can help her get settled there,” Ms. Fernandez emphasized.

Another reason that the task force got involved with women in prisons was to provide a means for third world women who are in prison to get involved in the women’s movement and to be able to look at conditions in women’s prisons first hand.