IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

CGH ‘Lies’

Phyllis Kadison

For Mother's Day 1977, approximately  
50 women, men and children picketed  
Colorado General Hospital. The demon-  
stration, organized by the Women Every-  
where Radio Collective and women who  
have been affected by the hospital  
cuts, was to protest major cutbacks  
in maternity care. Since Spring 1976  
the hospital administration has been  
gradually cutting back on and cutting  
out the maternity clinics; special  
team nurse system, continuity of care  
for all women (normal and high risk  
cases), and family planning services.

? j

/

after  
from Denver women and maternity care  
nurses, the hospital agreed to continue  
the team nurse system of care which  

Last spring, much pressure  

was doing an excellent job. This was  
after the Administration cried "no  
fault" and investigation showed that  
the passage of the Long Bill for fiscal  
1976 greatly increased the funds  
allotted to Colorado General.  
while the guise of a team nurse system  
remained, the phasing out had already  
begun.

By winter of 1976 the only women  
really receiving continuity of care  
were those in an experimental control  
group. By January 1977 the decline of  
any kind of woman-oriented gynecologic  
and obstetric care was evident. The  
Family Planning Clinic was temporarily  

eliminated and a woman who had a normal  

pregnancy was given a 6 month wait  

for her first prenatal maternity care  
appointment. (By that time she would  
be at least 7 months pregnant!) The  
clinic started to refer women to the  
neighborhood health clinics. What  

CG wants are only those women who  

are considered “high risk", those with  
a possible problem pregnancy. CG  

wants these women as tools for teaching  

med students, whereas normal pregnan-  
cies are just routine for them.

bmr:  

photo by Bev Renick  

However,  

Exposed  

Dr. Edgar Makowski, in charge of  
gynecological and obstetric services,  
has continually denied charges of any  
cutbacks. In February 1977, he pre-  
tended he had no idea the Family Plan-  

ning Clinic was not taking appointments  

He, and other hospital administrators  
are still publicly stating there are  
no cutbacks, while every clinic nurse  
and the chief doctor have openly  
admitted that major cutbacks have  
been effected.

At the picket on May 7, we told the  
hospital that we demand just what we  
deserve, the best of maternity and  
gynecological care for all women  
wishing to use the hospital's services.  
During our talk with J. Laird Hanson,  
a hospital public relations man, he  

admitted the program had been cut back,  

and that more funding was needed to  
have the clinic adequately serve the  
women of Colorado. However, when it  
came time to make a public statement  
to the press, the Administration again  
stood firm in its denial of our  
charges.  
ieee  

A  

It's been 1 year of repeated lies  
about the status of the clinic. Colo-  
rado General provided good, quality  
care for a short period of time before  
deciding it was too expensive and that  
maternity care was definitely not a  
priority.

The picket on May 7, was the begin-  
ning--Now they know what we want, now  
we must continue to press our demands  
until they are met. If you want to  
help us and join us call 399-7809.

In other Mother's Day news, the East  
Metro Denver chapter of NOW sponsored  

More on Page 14  

where we are at  

Basically, we are at a point that we have been dreading for quite some  

time.

We are about to lose two of our members  

Vickie and Cheryl will be leaving us with the completion of the July  

issue.

Vickie will be moving to Seattle where she lived prior to moving  

to Denver, while Cheryl will be devoting her time and energy to getting  
through law school.

The collective is already feeling the loss of their energies and presence,  

although they are still with us.

As our commitments are for the duration  

of one year, we have known that the collective is a relatively fluid one.  
But, on a more personal level, we who are to remain feel their imminent  

departure stronger in terms of the friendships we have experienced.

We will  

miss them for their various contributions to our lives.

But, life goes on.

We are hopeful about the interest shown by Lorraine  

Bauman and her friend Wendy (for some peculiar reason none of us can recall  

her last name, though she appears on the front cover).

For reasons that may  

be somewhat selfish, we hope that their interest evolves to the extent of  

perhaps joining the collective.

spending time on the frustrating search for graphics.

Really, women, there is more to it than  

Think about it.

If anyone out there is interested in the collective, drop by the office or  

give us a call at 322-2010.  
we'll get back to you.

We're not always here, but leave us a note and  

As a side note, the typesetter is still suffering from a bad case of neg-  

lect.

We need your contributions to make this machine possible.

photo by Bev Renick  

Big Mama Rag Vol.5 No.5  

Pregnant Worker Shafted By Coors  

Peg Hickox  

Sandra Haus worked for Coors Brew-  
ery on the Clean-up crew. Her job  
involved handling a pop-gun filled  
with pressurized water, working with  
acids, and lifting glass barrels  
weighing 150-200 lbs.

When Sandra was four months pregnant  
she informed her supervisor of the  
pregnancy and asked to be transferred  
to a lighter job. Coors has no pro-  
visions for pregnancy. Her super-  
visor told her that in order to get  
transferred, she would have to get  
a doctor's note saying that it would  
be harmful for her to continue in  
her current job. Sandra could not get  
an appointment with the company  
doctor for 2½ weeks.

During the 24 week period, Sandra  
refused to lift the glass barrels.  
Although it was only a small part of  
her job (5-10 minutes at the end of  
each shift), she was particularly  
worried about it because she had been  
having stomach pains from lifting the  
barrels.

During the same period, her super-  
visor called her into his office and  
told her that the men on the clean-up  
crew were complaining about having  
to do her job for her and that she  
would have to go back to picking up  
the barrels or she would be termin-  
ated.

Sandra went to the shop steward.  
The steward asked the men privately  
whether they had complained that  
Sandra was not doing her share of the  
work. They said they had not. When  

the shop steward confronted the  
supervisor with this, he denied hav-  
ing told Sandra anything of the kind  
and denied threatening to fire her.  
On three separate occasions the  

supervisor made similar threats to  
Sandra and each time denied having  
made these threats when confronted  
by the shop steward.

After her appointment with the doc-  
tor, Sandra received a note indicat-  
ing that she should not lift anything  
over 25 lbs. due to her pregnancy.  
Meanwhile, a union representative had  
negotiated with the company to get  
Sandra transferred to a lighter job  
in canning. Sandra, however, was  
never told that she could transfer to  
this job.

Instead, when she showed her super-  
visor the doctor's note, he told her  
he could put her on medical leave  
immediately. This effectively  
laid her off work without pay, except  
for a limited period of medical com-  
pensation. After making her work the  
rest of the night because there was  
no one else to finish her job, the  
supervisor then handed Sandra her  
pink slip, putting her on medical  
leave. Sandra said she accepted the  
medical leave because she was tired  
of fighting.

On medical leave, Sandra is en-  
titled to eight weeks of medical  
compensation (60% of her regular  
paycheck). The insurance company  
now refuses to pay her compensation.  
They state that a normal pregnancy  
is not an illness and that in order  
to get paid compensation, there has  
to be a physical complication to the  
pregnancy. The union is currently  
fighting to get Sandra the medical  
compensation due to her.

The insurance company has also sug-  
gested that Sandra go back to Coors  
and try to get a lighter job, since  
there are more jobs available now  
that the brewery workers have gone  
on strike. Sandra was given her med-  
ical at the end of March and the  
strike did not start until April 6th.  
However, as a union member, she does  
not feel she can scab on the other  
brewery workers by going back to-  
work at Coors while people are out  
on strike.

Sandra is also worried that she will  
not be able to get her job back after  
the baby is born and she is ready to  
return to work. Coors’ policy states  
that you can stay out on medical  
leave up to one year or the length  
of time that you have been employed  
by the company without losing your  
job. Sandra worked for Coors about  
7 months prior to being given a  
medical leave of absence. It is  
possible that Sandra's medical leave  
of absence will run out before the  
baby is old enough for her to  
return to work or before the strike  
is over.

Denver Gays To Confer  

On June 18, there will be a Sym-  
posium entitled "Contemporary Gay  
Issues in Colorado." Presently, over  
twenty workshops and panels are plan-  
ned concerning the multiple personal,  
political and social issues faced by  
lesbians and gay men in our commun-  
ity and in the broader social context.

While nearly all workshops will  
deal with gay issues, several will  
be of particular concern to lesbians  
and lesbian feminists. A workshop  
entitled, "The Lesbian-Feminist Per-  
spective” will feature a panel of  
five or six women who represent al-  
ternative points of view, including  
motherhood, separatism, moderate  
strategy and third world concerns.  
Each speaker will address her issue  
and small group discussions will  
follow.

Representatives from the Colorado  
Feminist Federal Credit Union will  
present a workshop on Class and Fem-  
inism which will explore how class  
differences divide us not only as  
women, but as feminists. The work-  
shop is designed for group participa-  
tion and exploration of class aware-  
ness, not a lecture. Other work-  
shops of potential interest are "Fem-  
inism: Its Meaning for Gay Men,"  
"Separation between Lesbians and Gay  
Men," and “Gay Parents and Parents  
of Gays.”

The Symposium is scheduled to be  
held at the Unitarian Church at 1400  
Lafayette, Saturday, June 18 with  

registration beginning at 8 am. Sym-  
posium organizers are asking for a  
$3.00 participant donation to cover  
expenses and create funds for a sim-  
ilar project in the future. Any ex-  
cess revenues will be donated to the  
Gay Community Center of Colorado.  
Participants are encouraged to bring  
their own lunches. Day care facili-  
ties are being planned and limited  

overnight housing is available for  
out of town participants. Further  
information will be available at the  
Gay Community Center phone number,  
831-6748.

The Mow Miss Alice Stone  
fades Society Orchestra  

announces  
the release of our first  

GOLD RECORD  

including:  

The Alice Stone Theme  
Magnetic Rag (Joplin)  
(Everybody Has To Have A) Mother  
White Girls  

$3.50 + 50¢ handling  

Make checks payable to Harmony Club Records.  

Mail to Alice Stone, P.O. Box 925, Hollywood, CA 90028