Against Nukes

FROM PAGE 1  
disobedience training.

The final item of business on the  
informal agenda was the obvious ques-  
tion of what direction to take from  
here. Ideas for actions and for on-  
going concerns emerged. Ultimately it  
was decided to form three committees:  
one on alternative energy sources and  
another on the military-industrial  
complex would research these issues  
and present their findings at the next  
meeting, in the interests of self-  
education; and one would develop ideas  
for a Coalition action on International  
Women's Day next March.

The next two meetings will take  
place on the second Saturdays of Jan-  
uary and February. The January meet-  
ing will be held in Denver - the  
venue, yet to be confirmed, will be  
posted at Woman to Woman Bookstore in  
Denver (2023 — Colfax, 320-5972), the  
Women's Health Service Clinic in Colo-  
rado Springs (1703 N. Weber, 471-9492)  
and the Rocky Flats Truth Force in  
Boulder.

After the meeting, the group watch-  
ed a videotape, "Hot Spot", in which  
various officials connected with Rocky  
Flats and the Fort St. Vrain nuclear  
plant and other "experts" were inter-  
viewed. It was clear that even those  
who know most about nuclear power  
don't know nearly enough to protect  
human life from its effects.

Auntie Porn

FROM PAGE 1

What emerged from the day's meeting  
was a unity of spirit and purpose  
which cut across widely divergent sty-  
les of political involvement. Although  
no structure was employed to facili-  
tate the meeting - there was no moder-  
ator, no agenda, no format - discus-  
sion evolved easily to cover most  
concerns raised. A plan of action was  
developed, and most participants left  
with a sense of accomplishment behind  
them and of potential yet to be explor-  
ed.

The raw materials for successful  
coalition are here. As the group be-  
comes more aware of and at home with  
itself, it should provide its members  
with plenty of opportunity for politi-  
cal growth and effectiveness.

Struggle

FROM PAGE 5

As feminists we have two major re-  
sponsibilities toward the issue of  
rape and racism. First, we can no  
longer allow the racist stereotype  
of the black male as rapist to con-  
tinue. And, we cannot allow our  
own lives to be put in jeopardy by  
condoning acts of violence against  
women on the part of anyone. To-  
gether, these two responsibilities  
will work to attack the power of  
the capitalist/patriarchal system.

Off Our Backs

translated into an electronic signal and encoded on magnetic tape. Tapes can  
be distorted or erased by contact with a powerful magnet.

“USE RAZOR BLADES. To damage record covers or records which exploit women,  

Leave a leaflet telling why.

“LOCK LOCKS. Epoxy glue or epoxy putty will seal a lock -- including the  
kind on street corner newspaper boxes. Epoxy mixed with rubbing alcohol will  
keep the solution fluid enough to go through a hypodermic needle -- for those  

hard to reach places.

“OUTDOOR ENAMEL PAINT. For a variety of uses. Feminists in several cities  
have used it with stencils to mark places on sidewalks where women have been  
raped or assaulted. A safer strategy than painting business establishments,  
and should any legal hassles arise -- you could note that taxpayers in Chicago  

were bilked out of thousands of dollars  

over the years, when in August every  

downtown sidewalk intersection was adorned with "Mayor Daley welcomes you to  

the annual lakefront festival."

“CONSIDER TAMPONS. A common item in any woman's purse, backpack or pocket.  
Consider how much damage you have inadvertently caused when you flushed too  
many of them down the toilet. But the largest size. And remember, it's hard to  

find a plumber on weekends.

Alicia’s

Mexican Restaurant

278 Downing 777-9904  
“Good Home Made Food”

Diana Press

FROM PAGE 5

Another major accusation Ruth has  
made is that we failed to communi-  
cate with her adequately, even about  
our move from Baltimore to Oakland.  
The impression Ruth gives is that we  
avoided all contact with her. This  
is simply not true. In going through  
our files, we retrieved the carbons  
of several letters written to her be-  
tween December 1976 and October 1977  
- an eleven-month period. These were  
just the letters, and there were, of  
course, many phone calls. Included  
in the letters was one from Coletta  
Reid, dated March 31, saying that our  
move from Baltimore was a hassle and  
“thank you for your patience..." It  
included our new address. We moved  
in late February.

As far as communication went, Ruth  
was far from perfect herself. She  
seemed to feel that the best way to  
communicate with us was to threaten  
legal action at the drop of an ini-  
tial, to call us collect whenever she  
felt we weren't tending to business,  
and to view us, generally, as a hind-  
rance to the publication of her book.  
Now she's wasting her own time and  
energy, and the time and energy of  
those who have joined her in her cam-  
paign against Diana. It would be  
more productive, certainly, to put it  
all into publishing the book herself.

We do not intend this statement to  
be part of another argument with Ruth  
Geller. We will not answer her an-  
swer to our answer to her... etc.

We are all working double time right  
now to make up for last year, and we  
have no more energy to give to any-  
thing but producing books for our-  
selves and our readers.

The Members of the

Diana Press Collective

Dialogue

C.P.: It's very comfortable. It's very  
safe. But in other ways it isn't so  
safe because you're opening yourself  
up. I mean, if I were ever to show out-  
side of the women's community, I would  
be opening myself up to tremendous  
criticism, not only because I've cho-  
sen traditional ways to work with fa-  
bric, but that I'm using fabric at all  
that I'm not working for technical  
perfection, there are all kinds of  
things that feel pretty vulnerable.

Harris

FROM PAGE 9

as fighters who defend themselves a-  
gainst physical assault; as women who  
aggressively seize options that will  
better the material conditions of  
their lives when this society fails  

to permit meaningful work for women.  
Why does NOW choose to ignore these  
women so great in number and need?  
These women need assistance fighting  
their cases in court, support in re-  
sisting dehumanizing conditions in the  
prisons, help in struggling to survive  
once they do get out of prison.

The word "feminist" is not just a  
label or a name. It represents a sol-  
idarity with other women based on un-  
derstanding and acting against the many  
forms that male supremacy takes. Of  
the sisters I've met in the penitenti-  
ary, most would not call themselves  
feminists, but they are far closer to  
the heart of feminism than many of the  
self-satisfied women in NOW. They  
stick together and fight right along-  
side their sisters. NOW represents  
a perversion of feminism as long as  
it persists in turning a deaf ear to  
the many in order to wave banners for  
the privileged few. As such, NOW will  
never contribute to the liberation of  
oppressed women but will instead be-  
come a new functionary for the oppres-  
sor.

Emily Harris

-moment hedges with a philosophy of  

Big Mama Rag, Vol.7, No.1

Review

FROM PAGE 7

yourself together. Get in touch with  
your anger. Ask for more recognition  
on the job etc."

For Her Own Good points out that  
these suggestions may be lifesaving,  
but as axioms for political change,  
they are morally untenable.

In its uncertainty, feminism at this  

individual choice: Let there be rights;  
let there be choices; Let there be no  
night of wrong way for all women... The  
reason we hang back is because there are no  
answers left but the most radical ones.

We cannot assimilate into a masculin-  
ist society without doing violence to  
our own nature... neither can we  
retreat into domestic isolation, clinging to an  
archaic feminine ideal. Nor can we  
deny that the dilemma is a social issue  
and abandon each other to our own "free  
choices" when the choices are not of  
our making and we are not "free."

In our very confusion, in our legacy  
of repressed energy and half-forgotten  
wisdom lies the understanding that it  
is not we who must change but the social  
order which has marginalized women in  
the first place... and the "womanly"  
values of community and caring must  
rise to the center.

For every sexually successful sin-  
gle woman, there must be a hundred  
unsuccessful, unthin, "unattractive"  
housewives. For every career woman,  
there are dozens of low-paid women  
job-holders. For every divorce that  
frees a woman, there are others that  
throw women into poverty and loneliness.

For Her Own Good points out that  
women in America are offered the  
choice between the "romantic" solu-  
tion of the "sunbelt suburbs" and the  
"rationalist" supposedly feminist,  
solution of the paperback, self-help  
shelf. Neither choice is acceptable.

subscriptions- individual $5/15 issues  
Institutions, $10/15 issues

9 East 48th Street  
New York, N.Y. 10017

HERESIES:

FEMINIST PUBLICATION  
ON ART AND POLITICS

A collectively edited, idea-oriented journal devoted to the exami-  
nation of art and politics from a feminist perspective—includes  
research, theoretical articles, analysis, fiction, poetry, visual art.

Issue No. 4 Traditional Women’s Arts—The Politics of  
Aesthetics

The Great Goddess— Women's Spirituality  
Women and Violence

Working Together—True Confessions

Issue No. 5  
Issue No. 6  
Issue No. 7

SUBSCRIBE NOW

—one-year subscription/4 issues $11.

BACK ISSUES $3.00 each plus 50¢ handling: No. 2, Patterns of  
Communication and Space Among Women; No. 3, Lesbian Art  
and Artists.

Collectively designed Heresies fan poster $5.00

Heresies - Box 766 - Canal St. Station - N.Y., N.Y. 10013