8

voices from

Marianne Hricko Stewart

Ten trillion years of anniversary
impressions reflect in our minds -
not beautiful, like finely-cut prisms
of crystal, but - like mirror after
mirror of fun-house bad dream, back
to back, hot and closed-in-dim.

Watch the sailing chair, the tearing
hands, the reflections of jagged
butter knives; feel the pain in my
head when she pushed me against the
laundry wall - I wanted to kill her,
and don't even hate her.

Echoing voices, echoing stories,
remembering faces, remembering June,
whose husband was going to take the
little girl because she wouldn't drop
the divorce proceedings. "He took
that 2 X 4 and broke that window, and
I just pulled and pulled that trigger.
I told Ieesha to stay in the bedroom,
but she didn't listen." I can hear
her baby crying "Daddy! Mama! Daddy!"
looking like, faces changing, my
children. I never had a gun. I might
be here for murder.

But what's Ieesha going to do, and
where will reactions to violence take
her? Lives will be impressed - like
the impression of bullets. Bullets
will take us all into the future;
bullets will take us into history.

See the lives going down. See Sandy
in psychiatric isolation because
there was no room for her in solitary.
"They just broke in. We gave them all
our bread, told them to take the
televisions, stereo, everything, just
leave us alone and stop pointing the
gun at my little girl's head. They
wanted the heroin... wouldn't believe
us. Vanessa kept crying and reaching
out for me. She still has dreams
about it. That was four years ago."

Punishing people because they hit
back - husbands with guns, themselves
with drugs.

Put them in the deep-evil mirror
for a while/forever.

Punishment doesn't work! Three words
as long as "I love you" or "You're
under arrest".

Punishment embitters.

Prison tempers, refines, fuses;
makes or breaks, and those with bro-

ken minds go out on drugs, those with
broken spirits go out to drugs.

Prison makes: better thieves, slicker
liars, professional masters of
skills and dexterity, and lots of
associates, locally and nationally.

Better bitter than baffled is how
sanity is kept: "Hey, what you gonna
do when you get out?"

The first "job", the first fix, the
first friend's .38 (and probably the
first million): Almost like being a
virgin again! “Gonna buy some nice
clothes to hit those places with.”
But society isn't aware of what's
going on.
Look in my mother-fucking face and
tell me who you were thinking about
when I was in the hole, tell me who
you were thinking about when you took
my children because I used, tell me
who you were thinking about when I
never got any mail, tell me who you
were thinking about when I was raped
and beaten, tell me who you were
thinking about when the state-appointed
attorneys played with my life, forgot
me... Well, mother-fucker, I'll look
in your face now, not too cowardly
to face you. And blow you away.
Forget you.

I been looking for you, criminal,
for a long time.

Jolene couldn't walk to meal lines,
so we would bring her food. They said
she committed Welfare Fraud. Close to
fifty-five, and taking care of thirteen
grandchildren, not sixteen. They
said she had ulcers and diabetes;
less than a year later, she died of
cancer. But it's easier to die than to
live here.

I always had nightmares in the prison
hospital rooms - with its green
sheets. What happens if you die in
hell?

See the overcrowding. See the violators
doing life on the installment plan. Kathy
imprisoned for prostitution; but where
was the Demand half? Lydia and Marcella
were in the wrong cars, they got seven
years. Greta has a petty with priors.
Jesse broke her parole with attempted
suicide. Lisa has a temper she can't
control, and is epileptic; she talks
about her little boy like he was still
alive. She talks to him. Sherie is
supported well; she took the rap for
organized crime. The alternative was
death. Karen took it for the F.B.I.

Germany was like this, minus the
electronics. Soon they'll step-up
capital crimes, then executions; that

I am writing this as a kind of open letter to feminists because I have sev-
eral things on my mind that I want to communicate with more immediacy than I
could by writing an article.

As usual, as a Black feminist I am concerned with the intersections of race
and sex in my politics and in my life. I am feeling these intersections more
viscerally than ever, because I think that we are finally at a stage when the
Black community is having to deal internally with the implications of sexual
politics, feminism and most crucially Black feminism. The evidences of this
are many during the past year and I won't go into them here.

I feel that it is urgent, however, that women familiarize themselves with some aspects of the “debate" over feminism that is now surging among Black people by reading
several recent Black publications. In April, 1978 The Black Scholar did a special issue on "Blacks and the Sexual Revolution.” It was an astounding mixture of pro-feminist, even pro-Lesbian articles by, for example, Assata Shakur and Audre Lorde and the most reactionary anti-Black women articles by Black male writers.

This year The Black Scholar published a virulently anti-Black feminist article by Robert Staples in its March/April issue entitled "The Myth of Black Macho: A Response to Angry Black Feminists" and asked people to respond. The May/June 1979 issue entitled "The Black Sexism Debate" again contains many more articles that are pro-feminist, anti-feminist, innately anti-Lesbian though the word is hardly mentioned and ones that fall somewhere in between.

I think what these issues show is that sexual politics is finally up for discussion by Black people and that there is a massive amount of resistance to the idea of Black women being autonomous on the part of many Black people.

Committed white feminists should also read issues of Essence, Ebony, Jet and other Black publications not only to familiarize themselves with what is going on in the Black community around issues of sexual politics, but also to see what we as Black feminists are up against. The most recent issue of Ebony, for example, is a special one devoted entirely to the theme of "Black on Black Crime" and yet it does not deal with the epidemic of violence against women or sexual oppression and patriarchal notions of "manhood" as causes for Black women's abuse and deaths.

I find this particularly ironic since in my own community 12 Black women were brutally murdered in a four month wave of lives... Siege will solve the problems of: Unemployment, Poverty, Race and Welfare. Everything is legal as long as people in power say it is legal. Consider no right or wrong. Prison rapes my mind. Society rapes your morals.

Nepa News-LNS

We both work for the state. We both work for the same pimp.

Sweden's criminal justice system is the best in the world.

But everything is simpler for Americans to understand if there is no understanding.

And discussing criminal justice and prisons is tantamount to discussing relativity and how many holes are in the acoustic-tile ceiling.

So, at the risk of being redundant, where were you when the low-caliber prison doctors carved out their dismal futures with pieces of my friends?

And tell me how high your fences go?

Do you have an electronic community - electronic guards and gates keeping you in, too?

I've wondered about you while learning electronics....

Can it be you are the person in the next cell, separated only by space? And you have taken your family with you. I'm sorry for your daughters and sons; they are like mine. But I will teach mine to be freedom fighters, inside and outside.

There are over half a million men, women and children in American prisons. But you're too busy to think about their faces or their lives - and they may as well be Hiroshima's children.

My baby’s in a foster home. I'm surprised you don't outlaw foster homes, and sell our babies in Beverly Hills. I'm surprised you paper words, with official seals, have not sterilized me. Like Indians, like Blacks, like Chicanas. I edge along the visions of a college class movie: The Hangman. No one believes they will be hung - it only happens to others.

7 No. 8

Big Mama Rag Vol.

We all fall one by one.

Each new cell in the new prison will cost $40,000, I've read. If you paid me only $12,000 a year, I would do any community work you wanted, my three children would live well on this - three times what we are thrown on Welfare. Even the Welfare workers are paid more than this to sign their names and make us feel like trash.

What's the difference between you and me but our paychecks?

What ONE THING, taken out of your life, would place you here with me? Your husband? Your degree? Your incentive? Your family?

How long would you hold up in my prison before you came to feel like me, or they sent you to a mental institution? Is this why you don't think about me, in your prison?

Because you've taken my family, my possessions, my pride and what you call my humanity. And next is my life; because you must be hard. Thinking about us would be slicing too deep into your guilt. And your sanity.

Think about slicing our minds with lobotomies? STOP! DO NOT THINK PAST THIS POINT. PROCEED AT YOUR OWN RISK. Think about thirteen-year-olds getting life without parole? FINAL WARNING. Think about a man or woman in an electric chair? DANGER. DANGER. Think about injection deaths, gas deaths, electric, electronic and experimental deaths? Mass deaths? OVERLOAD! YOU HAVE FIVE SECONDS TO TAKE YOUR MIND-ON-AUTOMATIC-PILLS. Pictures on the front page...until it becomes like the Vietnam news was...Accepted...So what's new, dear?

Hitler is smiling at the controls. Brown shirts past time and space, of even Orange County, and no one's telling you there are no more controls - because you'd be bored.

I am sick. I am afraid. I am not a Nazi, but I am almost sick and afraid enough to go join up.

Intellectualism cannot touch you. Emotionalism - that should do it. Magic words.

What magic words will make you listen?

I am going over the edge, and I will take you with me. We will fall together. Together, our destinies will waterfall, and as we quake inside, your islands will go down, too.

Wound for wound, we will disappear

But we will be free - of ten trillion years.

(Marianne Hricko Stewart, an inmate of California Institute for Women)

Migrant Farmworkers

Karen

This article was intended to present the problems faced by women migrant workers through means of interviews with ex-migrant workers who have settled in Denver.

When I first approached the women they were very receptive to talking about the problems they had faced - informally, in a group, in sort of a "mutual commiseration session" - thoughts and complaints flowed freely until I mentioned that they would be able to share their ideas with other women through a newspaper article - the women have much to say, however, they are essentially rebuilding their confidence and their lives, seem to be intimidated by fear that exposure (voicing complaints in public) will threaten the already shaky circumstances surrounding their lives. Therefore, I'm not at will to directly quote, but I can share some of their thoughts.

We focused on health and child-care. Concern for the children was a priority among all the women. Next they seemed concerned about the availability of health care for them and their families at campsites. Complaints ranged from working long hours at low pay to lack of decent housing and sanitary conditions. Health problems were prevalent including back problems, headaches, eye strain, swollen legs and ankles, arthritis, rheumatism and loss of teeth (due to lack of dental care).

Children are often lacking vaccinations since there are rarely doctors available at or near campsites. For example, one of the women was forced to come to Denver to save her infant's life (the child had pneumonia) after the child was denied treatment for 2 weeks despite the protestations of one mother (she was called a complainer).

Additionally, all the women worried about the long-range psychological effects of their transient lives on their children. The basic rights of health and education are denied these children, by virtue of the fact that there is no system developed to effectuate a smooth, positive transitioning of children from place to place - they wind up being shuttled from school to school (when and if they can leave the fields) without records being transferred, thereby creating a difficult teaching situation, leaving the children ignored.

‘MORE ON PAGE 17