Feminists to counter abortion foes

An Armed Struggle for Abortion Rights

“Women’s power begins with control over her body.”

Lisa Gould

The Abortion Rights Movement of Women's Liberation (ARM) is a newly formed national pro-abortion group begun in February 1979 by women who were dissatisfied with existing pro-choice groups. ARM is a feminist organization with membership, start-up funds, and goals which align it with those of the women's health movement. The goals and strategies of ARM are based on the premise that "women's power begins with every woman having control over her body." (ARM: Action v.1 issue 1 May-June '79) The struggle for this right to be recognized, the need for grassroots work to be organized is ARM's focus.

The women interviewed here, Sue Smith and Marilyn Banshaf, called in while en route to the national ARM office on May 25, 1979. My first concern was whether ARM would duplicate the efforts of leading pro-choice groups such as National Abortion Rights Action League (NARAL) or National Organization for Women (NOW). ARM got started by women frustrated with the strategies of these pro-choice groups. In January of this year, the national office of NOW attempted to reach a cease-fire and compromise by meeting with anti-abortion groups and "pro-choice" groups. Abortion itself would not be discussed. The summit was a flop because it summoned neither cooperation nor significant dialogue among the participants. The more adamant activist groups on both sides stayed away because no one wants a compromise. The extent of compromise of NOW's pro-choice position is expressed in a California NOW letter by their statement that no one is pro-abortion and that women use abortion as a last resort.

PRO-CHOICE COMPROMISE

Pro-choice groups which call abortion a last resort serve to allow our rights to shrink back to "therapeutic abortion" where women resort to the choice of abortion after having been the victim of rape or incest, or if pregnancy is deemed a strain to a woman's physical health.

The women in California who formed ARM met the news that NOW attempted to compromise with anti-abortionists with anger and dismay. They feel the question of whether ARM is a duplication of existing pro-choice groups is partially answered by the difference between the pro-choice and pro-abortion positions.

Research into the abortion movement in the Denver area found that pro-choice groups exist whose interests are mostly legislative. There are no pro-abortion groups. And while ARM does not promote abortion in place of various regularly used methods of birth control, like the diaphragm and menstrual extraction, mostly due to the higher relative costs of abortion, it is a pro-abortion group, stated the two ARM activists whom I interviewed. According to numerous studies comparing the high risks of abortions with those of carrying a child full term, abortion has fewer medical complications than full pregnancy.

("Standardized Mortality Rates Associated with Legal Abortion in U.S., 1972-75"; Family Planning Perspectives, December '77.)

The pro-choice stance of groups in Colorado leaves one with the alternative of lobbying the legislature or starting another group. NARAL, which has the largest membership in the country of any pro-choice group, has given money to reelect persons in the Colorado Congressional races. However, NARAL calls itself a single-issue group—the issue of federal legislation. So what's a radical feminist to do? since there are so many struggles of urgent concern on the community level.

The two ARM activists interviewed by BMR felt that there is a problem where the national offices of such liberal organizations as NARAL, NOW, and Planned Parenthood are concerned. NARAL, said Marilyn, "has not grassroots orientation. It hasn't the perspective and respect for what grassroots women are doing."

"One thing we at ARM strongly recommend is that all the chapters send somebody to the D.C. office to get that perspective on how feminist politics breaks down at the national level. And to keep the grassroots perspective in the ARM office," said Sue.

ARM proposes to attack abortion on numerous levels. Eventually, according to ARM's literature, the organization proposes to “lobby, write letters, attend demonstrations, hold public forums to educate people about the issues, promote accessibility to abortion by support of abortion clinics and development of improved abortion techniques, teach self-help to women and spread the technology of menstrual extraction." (p.2 ARM: Action, Carol Downer founder of ARM, director of Feminist Federation of Women's Health Centers.) "Our ultimate goal would be that women have access to safe and effective means of birth control without having to go through the medical profession, so that this whole issue becomes totally irrelevant." (p.2, ibid.) Compared to the single issue of pro-choice lobbying by NARAL, ARM is on an entirely different course. NARAL does not call itself a feminist organization, according to one staffer of NARAL's D.C. office. Nor does ARM have the financial backing of the large foundations; for example, from the Norman Foundation, the Sherman Foundation, or Stuart Mott and the former John D. Rockefeller. According to the membership office at NARAL, these persons and foundations contribute most of NARAL's annual budget of $1.5 million.

ARM: Action

POPULATION CONTROLERS

These are the same foundations whose names are connected with the population control practices of Planned Parenthood. Planned Parenthood in turn is a close cousin to AID (the U.S. government Agency for International Development) whose forced sterilization programs are only one example of global policies of imperialism, racism, and eugenics which operate against third and fourth world populations.

Black Nationalists have long noted the connection between pro-sterilization, birth control, abortion, and the genocidal policies of Planned Parenthood which women's liberation has for a long time overlooked. Such policies are examples of population control which is defined by the ARM newsletter as “an effort to influence the birth rate and the death rate through promoting certain attitudes, behavior, and customs. Population control can be implemented by medical regulations, religious institutions, foundations, media, courts, and the state of the economy. Population control can be either anti-natalist or pro-natalist." (p.24)

FORCED STERILIZATION is a nice name for "Genocide."

REFORM V. FEMINIST CHANGE

NARAL has over 68,000 members, many in affiliated groups located across the nation; however, the organization's main focus is federal legislation and federal policies. ARM is still calling itself a "reactive organization," meaning that its actual strategies are continually forming and being influenced by its membership.

Sister organizations and individual membership dues will eventually have to cover the expenses for the organization, although it is currently supported by a grant of several thousand dollars from the Feminist Federation of Women's Health Centers (see RUR Anei? 1979 issue p.11).

In its struggle to make sure abortion remains safe and legal, ARM does not concentrate on the decision-making bodies of the courts and the federal legislature. As an example of methods to build a grassroots women's health movement and a pro-abortion force, ARM activists were present at the June abortion rally in Cincinnati, Ohio, and held a self-help workshop after the demonstration. They also infiltrated the anti-abortion demonstration called Baby Peace to learn more about the opposition. An advanced self-help clinic on menstrual extraction was planned but the pro-choice demonstration ran too long.

ARM: Action

ARM & WOMEN'S HEALTH MOVEMENT

Since women respond with great enthusiasm, says Sue, “One of the first things we found to provide ARM with direction is that most women want to have a real understanding of their own body, what to do about birth control, more importantly but also about M.E.”

M.E. or menstrual extraction is considered birth control, and in a sense is abortion. M.E. is a technique between a group of women to remove the contents of the uterus. It's a very powerful tool, since it is safe, accomplished without doctors, and is relatively simple. Said Sue, "We really believe in M.E. ARM has decided to be very open about it. That it is something that every woman should know and have as a backup in case abortion becomes illegal. More than that, so that it becomes irrelevant." It must be remembered that while abortion is legal, it is not taken lightly that women control their reproduction; a woman in Kentucky faces a trial for doing an abortion on herself.

Another example of ARM activism is the results from power structure research conducted by ARM members. Revealed in a press conference in Cincinnati were connections of the Roman Catholic Church and the illegal burial of the two fetuses which had been used by anti-abortionists to break up the March NOW Summit meeting. The findings illustrate the formidable power of the Catholic Church as an anti-abortion force.

Concerning other ARM activities, Marilyn said, “The kind of lobbying orientation that ARM chapters are taking has to do with what is happening in the community. Fighting in Santa Fe concerns the threat of an Akron-type ordinance. In Northern California going down to Sacramento and fighting against the introduction of bills, fighting against separate clinic regulations for abortion clinics. Less emphasized, if at all, is federal lobbying. "There is only so much that ARM could do and being out there and teaching women self-help and how to care for themselves if abortion becomes illegal, they are making abortion itself irrelevant to women by providing an alternative," said Marilyn.

The matters of reform within the capitalist decision-making process are left to non-feminist NARAL and the compromises of NOW. ARM is striving for reform but beyond that for some skills with which to live outside the system. The emphasis is on feminist change, capitalist change.

(For information on ARM, the newsletter, joining or starting a local chapter, contact the National ARM Headquarters located at 1212 Pennsylvania Ave., S.E., Washington D.C. 20003, (202-544-1832). They have slide shows about ARM and about the abortion rights struggle which they are very willing to share.)