Big Mama Rag Vol. 6 No. 4

CETA Grant Questioned

Virago Holds Community Meeting

For BMR's analysis of the Virago
Community meeting, see the Editorial
on Page 4.

Dona Calacone

On March 21, Virago Productions held
an open meeting for the Denver women's
community. This was the first of a
series of community meetings sponsored
by the Woman To Woman Bookstore. The
purpose of these meetings is to provide
a forum where local feminist collect-
ives and groups can discuss their or-
ganizations with women of the community.
It's an opportunity for women to quest-
ion and learn more about these groups
and offers valuable feedback for the
groups themselves.

Virago is a collective of ten women
predominantly engaged in presenting
feminist musicians through large scale
concerts. Some of the musicians they've
presented are Teresa Trull, Margie
Adam, Alice, Willie Tyson, Meg Christ-
jan and the Berkeley Women's Music
Collective. They've also sponsored a
lesbian talent show, workshops and
films.

The Virago Collective began the meet-
ing with a presentation describing
their history and past projects, their
goals and projects planned for the
future, the inner workings of the col-
lective, their financial situation and
how they are working with the CETA
grant, and, in depth, how they go
about producing a concert. The meeting
was then opened up to questions.

Sarah Falian, a collective member,
stated that the goals of Virago are to
"promote women's culture" especially
that of "women in the feminist aware-
ness." In the past the collective has
presented only white middle-class les-
bian musicians and she said that they
felt the need to "seek out performers
who may not identify themselves" as
such. To this end, upcoming concerts
are planned with Sweet Honey in the
Rock, a Black gospel quartet, and
Izquierda, a Latin acoustic jazz group.
Falian said that another concern of
the collective is to "break down the
barriers between lesbian and straight
women, and minority and white women and
explore our common bonds." They are
committed to bringing concerts to the
women's prison at Canon City and to
places such as detention homes, safe
houses and nursing homes. In the fut-
ure, Virago plans to produce art shows,
theatre, dance, and skill-sharing
workshops.

The collective members said that the
widening of their scope and their in-

FBI Steals Child

creased community outreach was made
possible in large part by the federal
CETA grant which they received last
month. The grant allows for six un-
equally salaried positions varying from
director to sound technician. Maureen
Mrizek, another collective member said
that despite the position titles of the
grant, Virago is still functioning col-
lectively, i.e. all tasks are shared
and there is no director or hierarchy,
per se. The salaried members have
chosen to rechannel money back into the
collective, thus equalizing all of
their salaries. Mrizek said that the
rechanneled money is viewed as indiv-
idual personal contributions and is not
based on a collective decision.

Pat Dellin, another collective mem-
ber, spoke about the importance of
accountability. From now on, financial
statements of all events will be made
available to women of the community.
She also addressed the problems of re-
holding events open only to women. She
said that the collective publicly apol-
ogized for allowing a man admittance to
the Leaping Lesbian Follies; in the
future, events closed to men will be
publicized "all women welcome" and pub-
lic events will be publicized "everyone
welcome." The collective is open to
suggestions on how this may be better
done.

The first question raised by the wom-
en of the community was that of women-
only events. The collective said that
they could lose their tax exempt status

*

Local Woman Fights Courts

by Bobbe & Susanna

Joan Fremo was arrested in Colorado
Springs in February, for "flight to
avoid prosecution and kidnapping."

She was arrested by the Sheriff's
office of El Paso County, acting on an
FBI warrant, the day after she had
given birth to her second child. By
order of the FBI, she was not allowed
visitors.

Fremo had filed for divorce from her
first husband (in Florida) in 1972. He
came to her house and took their child.
After an emergency custody hearing,
which Fremo waited a year for, Family
Services was ordered to investigate and
it took them 8 months to do so. Thir-

teen months later, a hearing took place
before Judge Cowart, Brevard County,
Florida. Judge Cowart said "I am not
saying you are not a fit mother, but he
(son) has been there (with father) a
year, we will leave him there." Fremo
was allowed visitation rights of one
week each month.

The warrant had been issued by
Brevard County, Florida on behalf of
the grandparents. It was signed by an
attorney who later told Fremo that he
was forced to sign the order through
the Governor's office and he has since
told his story to a local newspaper in
Florida. He has agreed to be her law-
yer when she appears in Florida.

The FBI called on friends and relat-
ives in California, New York and Ken-
tucky to find out where Fremo was.
People were coerced into talking by
threats of charges of aiding and abet-
ting by the FBI. This led to Fremo's
arrest in the hospital.

Fremo's present husband was on his
way, with her first son, when he was
stopped by several men. They ordered
the husband out of the car, took the
child, then identified themselves as
FBI. They did not show any warrant or
court order. The FBI then gave the
boy (6 years old) to the first husband's
father, who had flown up from Florida.
The grandparent and child flew back to
Florida without being allowed to say
goodbye to his mother, see his newly
born brother or being allowed to take
any of his clothes and possessions.

Fremo's son is still in Florida and

MORE ON PAGE 14

yar

graphic by Kathy

Rescheduled To April 15

for turning away men and publicizing
concerts “for women only" and that they
had been threatened with suits. They
said that they aimed for half of their
concerts to be women-only events, with
the rest open to the public. The pre-
ference of the performer usually det-
ermines whether a concert will be open
or closed.

Several women voiced their discomfort
at Virago's acceptance of government
money and questioned how it would change
the collective. One woman commented
that this was the government's way of
“buying off discontent" by "buying out
radicals" and also said that the col-
lective needed to discuss the "privilege
involved in having a movement job."

Two new women, who were not former
collective members, were hired under
the CETA grant. The process by which
these two women were chosen was quest-
ioned. It was asked whether these new
openings were indeed available to eligible
women of the community or were the se-
lections pre-ordained (i.e. for
friends) and the interviews merely a
sham? The collective responded that
they chose the two women with whom
they felt they could work most compat-
ibly and who had the most to offer the
collective. Another woman expressed
her unease about the size of the col-
lective being fixed and determined now
as a result of the grant and asked what
would be told to new people who wanted
to join. Virago said that they felt
that ten was the largest they could
work with, but that other women were
welcome to help them.

When asked about the political crit-
eria of the collective, Virago answer-
ed that they were a practical rather
than a theoretical political group and
that they were still in the process of
defining their politics. They said
that their main commitment was to the
furtherance of women's culture. When
asked what kind of outreach they plan-
ned, they said they would make contacts
through local community action centers,
nursing homes, etc. When asked if they
would support a women's theatre group,
they said they could not financially
back such a group but that they would
support it.

Also raised was a question of
Virago's openness to communication.
Virago responded that anyone is free
to question members or to call or
write the Virago office. Their address
is Virago Productions, P.O. Box 18753
Denver, CO 80218 and their phone
number is 837-8741.

IWD Postponed

by Susanna

The celebration of International
Women's Day (IWD) will be held on
Saturday, April 15. The event was post-
poned from March 4 because of snow and
ice and extremely cold weather the day
before the celebration was to be held.
April 15 was chosen because city or-
dinances state that at least 30 days
notice must be given in order to get
a parade march permit. Come hell or
high water (translate: 100° in a hot
sun or pouring rain) we will celebrate
ourselves as women!

The day will start at 11:30 with a
march (lots of singing) from Mestizo
(Curtis) Park at 32nd and Champa. There
will be trucks for children and those
who don't want to walk. We will proceed
down Champa to Broadway and then to
the Capitol for a rally at 1:00.

Women will speak on six major issues
concerning us all: welfare, deportation,
violence against women, lesbian/hetero-
sexual unity, national liberation and
working women. There will be more sing-

ing at the rally.

Workshops, beginning at 3:00, will
be held at the University of Colorado
at Denver (UCD), 14th and Arapahoe,
with parking on Lawrence, between 13th
and 14th. There will be transportation
from the rally for those who need it.

Besides those on the six major
issues, workshops will be held on
ageism, disabled women, psychiatric
assault and legislation (affirmative
action, ERA). Two films will be shown:
“Bottle Babies," an explanation of the
boycott of Nestlé's products, and
"Testimony: Justice vs. J.P. Stevens,"
explaining the J.P. Stevens boycott.
There will be food and free childcare
at UCD.

For those of you who showed up for
the events on March 4 and were dis-
appointed, for those of you who were
notified of the postponement, and for
everyone concerned and interested in
women's issues, come and celebrate on
April 15 and bring your friends!