hot briefs

Compiled by Vicki Piotter

Property Rights

A man who sued his best friend for stealing his wife and won an $80,000 settlement in October, said that the case will protect the family structure in America. Gerald Zarella, the jilted husband, sued Sidney Robinson for $250,000 for the loss of his wife's company and her services as mother to their two children, $250,000 for mental pain and anguish and $500,000 for punitive damages. A jury of four men and two women found that Robinson had “criminal conversation" with Lila Zarella and violated Gerald's right “to exclusive privileges of physical intercourse." Gerald Zarella, commenting on the Rhode Island jury's decision, said, "People are finally starting to wake up. Pope John Paul has pleaded for family unity. We need to keep families as tight as possible and this case may help avoid break-ups."

Look What She Made Him Do

A London court was seduced into believing a man's claim that he didn't have the power to refuse to have sex with an 11-year-old girl. Adrian Mellett, a 29-year-old conductor, described the young girl as “a school girl nymphomaniac," and the judges believed him. The story goes that the girl followed Mellett, "a shy Irish bus conductor," home from work and got into bed with him because she had a weakness for men in uniform. Mellett claimed he was "no match for the temptress." He also told the courts that he thought the girl was more than 16 (legal age) at the time because "she is taller than he is." The judges gave him a conditional discharge.

-Kenesis

NOW’s Bridal Party

The three important decisions engaged "girls" must make are silverware, china and crystal. So said Tiffany's, Fifth Avenue's prestigious jewelry and gift store in a recent New Yorker advertisement entitled "How to be a Registered Bride." Donning veils, a bridal party from New York's NOW assembled outside Tiffany's and passed out leaflets on "How to be a Legally Informed Bride," on issues NOW thought more important than matching china, crystal and silverware.

-Off Our Backs

A Change of Chains

Women who go to prison are usually the principal wage earners of their families and as many as 85% have children. Recognizing this, San Jose County, California, operates a Women's Residential Center, which houses up to 24 women and 6 children. More than 180 prisoners have served their county jail terms in this apartment building in the last two years. The women cook their own meals, care for their children and work or attend college.

-National NOW Times

Chiquita Boycott

In California and Arizona, 4,500 lettuce workers are on strike. United Brands, owner of the Chiquita banana label, also owns SunHarvest Farms, the largest lettuce producer in the Imperial Valley. The United Farm Workers has called a nationwide boycott of Chiquita bananas to help persuade SunHarvest to resume serious negotiations with the union and lead the way to settling the lettuce strike. Boycott Chiquita bananas and iceberg lettuce.

-SCLGA News

Big Mac Attack

When employees of a McDonald's restaurant formed a union recently in Shawnigan, Quebec, Big Mac managers all over the world started getting indigestion. This is the first time workers anywhere in the McDonald's chain have been successfully organized. Shawnigan is a strong union town and probably as good a place as any in which to start the Big Mac attack.

-Kenesis

Fight the Federal Fuckers

The Post Office and Civil Service Committee has launched an investigation of sexual harassment of federally employed women following reports of widespread sexual harassment of women employees of the Department of Housing and Urban Development. The committee is asking federally employed women who have been subjected to sexual harassment to contact Rosemary Storey, Post Office and Civil Service Committee, 309 Cannon House Office Building, Washington, DC 20515. Storey notes that the committee cannot do case work, but it does need to find out the extent of the problem.

~Spokeswoman

where we're at

Big Mama is late this month because our fuse blew at the beginning of production weekend and the landlord was out of town and we had a hard time finding the fuse box.

After many phone calls and hours of not being able to type or make headlines, it started getting dark and we couldn't see well enough to lay out the pages that were already typed.

Then, we finally found the fuse box. We know that sounds like a phoney excuse, but it's true. We swear it!

We have been trying to find ways of raising money to keep Big Mama going. We would like to thank KR and Bobbe for organizing the Halloween party/benefit. Thanks also to Kate, Eileen, Lori and everyone who helped make the evening successful.

We received $58 from the party and are already planning our next benefit—a BMR birthday party and Eleanor Roosevelt's coming out party scheduled for November 17th at 3904 E. 16th Avenue. (Please see back cover for more information.)

Besides benefits we still really need sustainers—those of you who can pledge to give us so many dollars every month. Much thanks to those of you who are already on our sustainer list. We appreciate your show of support, but we need more.

If you can't contribute financially there are other ways that you can support BMR. Give us a call or stop by during the weekend. We desperately need typists, writers, and help with mailing and production. Production happens during the last two weeks of each month.

We are also always in need of office supplies—pens, typewriter ribbons, tape, scissors, chairs, etc.

We would like to thank all the women who have written us letters recently. As we get more and more mail we become aware that there really is someone out there who reads and cares about the paper and about issues raised in the women's community. Keep those cards and letters coming!

We will be taking the month of December off as far as publishing goes, so there will be no January issue of BMR. Instead we will spend the month of December getting the office in shape and working on our politics and collective process. We welcome any suggestions for themes for upcoming issues. The theme for next month is “Women and Dependencies.” The deadline for copy submitted is November 15th.

Not Tonight

The California legislature has just declared, by passing the marital-rape bill, that women are people and have the right to consent to sexual intercourse with their husbands. If signed by the Governor, the bill will become law on January 1st. The law will broaden the current rape code to include sexual intercourse with one's spouse if accomplished under force or violence or threat of bodily harm.

-Plexus

Album Cover Abuse

Women Against Violence Against Women's survey of abusive record industry promotional graphics is continuous and requires new input constantly, input which you can help supply. Doing a survey differs from ordinary record store browsing only in that you write down what you see on paper or index cards and send these to WAVAW, 1727 N. Spring St., Los Angeles, CA 90012. Information should include: what the item is (record album cover, ad, poster, billboard); where and when it was seen; album title; name of recording artist or group; manufacturer (and address, if given); name of art director, photographer and/or designer; and most important, a detailed description of the image, including whether it's a photo, drawing or cartoon, in black and white or color.

Police Priorities

Police threatened to arrest members of Rochester Women Against Violence Against Women for posting signs naming and describing a man who follows young girls in his car. The police had questioned the man after receiving complaints from concerned parents. The police released him after he reportedly confessed, telling parents the man was receiving psychiatric help. Parents have reason to believe the man is not getting help and continues to shadow their children; the police do not intend to look into the matter further.

-Off Our Backs

Worthwhile Exposure

Posters and leaflets published by women in Washington DC in the apartment and community where one of them was attacked drove the attempted strangler and rapist out of the city after he found his picture and description posted on hundreds of trees, walls, fences, and in store windows, laundromats, restaurants and gas stations. After the police, who had apprehended the attacker in the woman's apartment, had let him go without even fingerprinting, the women formed their "Women's Network." "Driving the attacker out of here I'm sure is very inhibiting to other men who will now know there is a penalty—exposure,” said Julie Wall.

-Media Report to Women

Op-pressed-on

The Anchorage Times and the Fairbanks Daily News Miner refused to run paid advertisements for the National March on Washington for Lesbian and Gay Rights. The Times refused to comment or present their ad policy. The News Miner said they refused all ads of “that type." According to the Alaska March Committee, "the action taken by these two newspapers in denying access in their advertising forum on this issue to some members, while opening the forum to others is a dangerous precedent, which, if goes unchecked could lead to future situations where issues in the community would not be freely debated by everyone."

-Up Front

Big Mama Rag Vol. 7 No. 10

Job Rights

A French teacher, Ollie Adamson, who was forced to resign after taking a pro-gay rights stand during a classroom discussion, recently won her job back at Newman Smith High School in Carrollton, Texas. Because of the discussion, principal Kenneth McKinney called her to a meeting in which he asked whether she was a lesbian and had a letter of resignation waiting for her signature. She replied that she “felt very strongly about individual choice being one of our basic rights." Adamson said she signed the letter of resignation because she had become so emotionally distraught over the confrontation and immediately regretted doing so; when she asked to have it back McKinney refused. The School Board, in hearing the case, voted 3-2 to have her reinstated.

-Up Front

Gays Sick of It

A large group of lesbians and gay men employed in Stockholm, Sweden recently phoned in sick to their employers, reporting that they felt ill with "homosexuality." The protest moved the Swedish State Health Board to reverse its long-standing classification of homosexuality as an illness. Furthermore, the Board agreed to destroy all records of individuals classified as afflicted with this "disease."

-Body Politic

As the World Turns

In a recent round-table discussion with nine abortion activists, Sen. Gordon Humphrey from New Hampshire claimed that the number of women who will die each year from illegal abortions “is a small price to pay for saving a million babies.” Humphrey said the two most legitimate functions of government are to save life and provide a strong national defense. Confronted with statistics about the frequency of rape, incest, child abuse and child neglect, Humphrey exclaimed, “How can the world go on if all these horrible things that you say are happening?”

-Gay Community News

Know Thy Enemy

At a recent meeting of the Lane County Commissioners in Eugene, Oregon, Commissioner Harold Rutherford said he opposes abortion, but “has no objection to giving pregnant women who want abortions the right to be sprayed by 2,4,5-T, a herbicide believed to cause miscarriages."

-Oregon Coalition Against Domestic Violence News

"Look, they can send men to the moon and they can't even make something to put in the corner to collect dust."

Cloistered Information

Sister Rosalie Bertell, a Roman Catholic nun, claims that the National Cancer Institute stopped her research project after she found a connection between low-level radiation and premature aging. She said the Institute notified her research team in 1977 that further funding would be unavailable unless the team changed its line of research. Bertell said her studies showed that even a single spinal X-ray would speed up an adult's natural aging process by one year.

She said the escaped radiation from the damaged Three Mile Island nuclear reactor will definitely have a negative effect on public health, but because of the way public records are kept, “the individual won't be able to detect it." A congressional committee held hearings on the cut-off and ordered the project reinstated; however, no money has been forthcoming.

-Hersay