Feminists Picket Anti-woman Film

What Happened

Dona Calacone

On Friday evening, March 14, the
Denver opening of the movie "Windows"
at a downtown theater was picketed
by forty people, about 35 women and
six or seven men. Chants such as
“Windows is woman-hate," "Women don't
rape, men do," and "It's a lie, pass
it by" echoed through one of downtown's
busiest streets for two hours. A
mere dozen or two people entered the
theater to view the film. Several
others were persuaded by the picketers
against seeing the movie.

"Windows" is a feature film re-
leased by United Artists which "com-
bines numerous anti-woman, anti-les-
bian stereotypes, grossly misrepre-
sents rape and lesbianism and ab-
solves men of their responsibility
for violence against women." (BMR
March, 1980)

The film is about a lesbian who
spies on another woman through the
woman's apartment windows. The les-
bian pays a man to rape the other
woman at knifepoint, so that she will
be turned off to men and fall in love
with her (the lesbian) instead.

The movie has been met with dem-
onstrations in every major city in
which it has been shown.

The demonstration on March 14 was
organized rather spontaneously by
individual feminists on Thursday
afternoon as the movie's presence in
Denver was close to becoming a real-
ity. The press and media were not
notified. The demonstration was
planned simply for the benefit of
people at the theater, those coming
to view the film and traffic driving
by on Sixteenth Street. The leaflet
handed out at the demonstration was
prepared by the Committee for Gay and
Lesbian Human Rights, organized
through the Gay Community Center.
An hour prior to the demonstration, a
meeting was held at a feminist's
house nearby where picket signs were
made.

On Saturday afternoon, the day
following the demonstration, the
same theater was picketed again.
Eight women handed out leaflets con-
sisting of excerpts from news stories
about "Windows" which appeared in
Big Mama Rag and Off Our Backs. Hun-
dreds of people were gathered down-
town for a parade and the women handed
out over 250 leaflets in the course
of an hour.

(For more information see BMR March,
1980, and Off Our Backs March,
1980.)

Lack of funds?

York Street

Constance Perenyi

On March 18, York Street Center in
Denver was forced to close its doors,
thus ending five years of service to
aid victims of domestic and criminal
violence. Initially funded for its
first four years of operation by the
Law Enforcement Assistance Adminis-
tration (LEAA), York Street functioned
during the last year on money from
the Denver Social Services. The cen-
ter employed eight people, one of
whom was, according to Jesse Ortega,
the only Spanish-speaking counselor
in this kind of program in Denver.

The closure of the center, and the
withdrawal of Social Service funds
from Safe House for Battered Women,
came as a result of a city proposal
for the two projects to merge with
Columbine Center and Brandon Guest
Home. Kathy Sulzman, director of
York Street, estimates that the com-
bined operating costs of the four ag-
encies is $1 million, and that the
city appropriated only $200,000 for all
of them. When talks broke down,
Denver City Council asked the agen-
cies to submit competitive bids for
the funds; and it was on March 18 that
Brandon Guest Home and Columbine
Center, both operated by the Volun-
teers of America, were informed that
they had been awarded the bid. With-
out this money, York Street was for-
ced to close immediately, and Safe
House will be able to continue ser-
vices only through June 1.

Director of Safe House, Carolyn
Agosta, stated that after June 1st,
"we just don't know what will happen.
We'd put everything on hold and
weren't expecting to look for funds.
Now we're going to be looking every-
where and anywhere." The staffs of
both York Street and Safe House agree
that it will be impossible for the
VOA programs to provide all the ser-
vices that both agencies have main-
tained, even though local VOA dir-
ector, Jack Dignum, indicated that
the VOA programs will be expanded to
deal with a larger and more varied
clientele.

Whatever happens with the VOA pro-
grams, it is clear to Jesse Ortega of
York Street that the city's choice of
funding was clearly political. He
feels that both his center and Safe
House were punished for their refusal
to merge with the other agencies. In
effect, they were denied funding be-
cause they wanted to remain autono-
mous.

Actually, these recent cutbacks
are symptoms of what is happening
across the country as “human service"
spending is reduced in order to bal-
ance budgets, both on the local and
national levels. It is not surpris-
ing that Denver Social Services set
up a competition between agencies
needing funding; this is a tactic to
take public attention off the city,
and place the blame on the agencies
themselves. It is also predictable
that social service cutbacks will
discriminate against programs that
aid women. Rape and battering have
never been considered serious prob-
lems by city and federal governments,
and so projects focusing on these
issues are the first to be cut. Even
if Safe House has to turn away 800
women a year, because of lack of
space and resources, officials refuse
to assess these realities.

And this all points to the fact
that every reform that benefits women
is not really a victory for any of us
--it is an illusion. As women have
demanded changes, some have been
granted; but the system has not
changed because we as women still have

MORE ON PAGE 18

And Why

Dona Calacone and K.T. Pantzer

In our efforts to protest this
film, we encountered several issues
which we feel are important to dis-
cuss.

First of all, several people
questioned whether we should demon-
strate against this movie at all.
Since "Windows" received very bad
reviews in the straight media, it
seemed obvious that the film would
fail on its own lack of merit. Many
people felt that demonstrating against
it would only draw more attention to
it and help sell tickets. It is our
belief that huge corporations like
United Artists are multi-million
dollar operations to whom the loss or
gain of a few hundred dollars is no
more important than their concern over
hassle-free, nondisruptive public rel-
ations. Of course, it would be ideal
if the film were removed entirely, but
this will not happen unless to remove
it is in the interest of United Art-
ists and the individual theater own-
ers. We believe that the main issue
is not whether a few hundred more
people see the movie, but rather that
the consciousness of all people,
whether they see the film or not, is
raised around the issues behind the
movie and the reasons we are protest-
ing it.

Demeaning anti-woman, anti-Lesbian
images cannot be taken for granted by the
public or by the filmmakers. Women
have been silent for too long. Anti-
woman sentiment is already widespread
and gets worse and more blatant each
year. We must loudly protest this
whenever and wherever we can.

During the organizing of the
"Windows" demonstration disagreement
arose over how people should organize
such political actions. Some people
thought it would be divisive for dif-
ferent groups of people to work sep-
arately on different forms of pro-
test and that everyone should work
together in a single coalition. It
appears that we're so concerned with
political "ownership" of specific
issues, approaches to analysis, and
methods of dissent that our true
enemies, i.e. racism, classism, sex-
ism, male domination, and imperialism,
are being forgotten. There's no need
for this competitiveness or for any
one group to feel a sense of owner-
ship of individual issues. All femi-
nist issues belong to all of us and
we need to take whatever actions we
can around these whether those ac-
tions be long term or spontaneous--
neither kind precludes the other.
We need both kinds of actions since
we need to strike out at the source
of our oppression in as many ways as
possible, be they traditionally
structured or anarchist in approach.
We need to create a safe climate with-
in the feminist community to enable
diverse approaches to political mobi-
lization. It is important to res-
pect each other's efforts in our
struggle against oppression.

Reflections On The
Draft And The AFSC

Susan Goding

On March 8th, International Women's Day, a rally was held to protest reg-
istration for the draft. The rally was in two parts. The first part was
organized by Women Say No, an ad hoc group of women formed at a community meet-
ing. The second part, organized by the American Friends Service Committee
(AFSC), consisted of about 22 groups, including Women Say No, who spoke out
against the draft. These groups ranged from pacifists like the AFSC, to
NOW and the Women's Political Caucus, to revolutionary groups such as the
Communist Worker's Party. Originally, this rally had been planned differently.
The rally held on March 8th was the result of a forced struggle for lead-
ership. As such, it is important for us to examine the struggle
from the beginning and our response to it.

Women Say No!

During the last year eight bills have been introduced in Congress to revive
the draft; three have included women. Consequently, there has been an in-
crease in activity toward an anti-draft movement.

To obtain CO status a person must oppose all violence.

When President Carter disclosed he was considering mandating the registra-
tion of young people for the draft, Vicki Piotter and Connie Perenyi asked
Kathy Riley and me to meet to discuss planning a demonstration.

During this meeting we decided to organize a demonstration that gave a feminist analysis of
the call for registration for the draft and the reasons to resist registra-
tion. We also set a date for a community meeting to see what support we had
and put out a leaflet inviting women to the meeting.

"Women's fight for freedom does not mean fighting for our right to die
with men in war. It means fighting for everyone's right to live." We gave
the group the name "Women Say No."

That night and later we agreed on some points of unity. We saw that the
people who are called upon to defend the U.S. government are those who are
most oppressed by it, and have the greatest need to change it. We saw the
draft as a radical and radicalizing issue; no solution to the draft could be
accomplished through legislative reform.

We met before the community meeting in order to have definitive politics to
present. The four of us have some history of working together and from that
felt we had a basis of unity to begin with. By having political unity when
we went into the meeting we could clearly define the politics of the group
that we were forming.

Women in disagreement could start their own group or
whatever--but not redefine the group.

Most of the energy and or-
ganizing is being spent to educate people to lobby against this legislation
and on strategies for helping people obtain Conscientious Objector (CO) status.

In the leaflet we stated:

Women who shared these politics could stay to organize.