hot briefs

Homophobia

Keep on boycotting Florida orange juice: Anita Bryant has just been rehired by the Florida Citrus Commission for $100,000 a year for another two years. Bryant is a leading spokesperson of the current national effort to oppose gay rights, and our boycott of Tropicana and other Florida juices is one way we can show our opposition to this effort.

Supreme

The U.S. Supreme Court let stand Oct 3, Washington and New Jersey state rulings that teachers can be fired for being homosexual.

Housekeepers Organize

After a two-week work stoppage and a sit-in at the office of the company director, the 211 housekeepers employed by the Morrisania Community Corp. in New York City have won the right to a union certification election.

The women, mostly Black and Puerto Rican, work for the corporation's vendor program which services clients who are sick or disabled. The program receives $4.20 per employee per hour from Medicaid in reimbursement. But the housekeepers earn only $2.50 an hour, receive no transportation money and have no health or pension benefits.

Union cards were signed by more than 185 of the housekeepers, asking to be represented by Teamster Local 854. Finally, on October 26, the corporation agreed to allow an election.

The Guardian

Now it’s Menopause

Researchers in a project exploring the link between smoking and heart disease accidentally discovered that women who smoke enter menopause at an earlier age than non-smokers do, and that the more a woman smokes, the earlier she will begin menopause.

The study, the Boston Collaborative Drug Surveillance Program, involved 3,500 women in seven countries.

Synapse

T's AGiRU

Pandora June 76

No Liberty or Justice

NEW YORK (LNS)--Sixteen-year-old Debora Lipp refused to stand up and recite the pledge of allegiance in her high school, and now she—and anyone else who objects—doesn't have to. A federal judge's ruling stated that New Jersey's law requiring students to stand and recite the pledge violated students' right to freedom of expression.

Lipp felt that the pledge's claim of “liberty and justice for all” didn't apply to "any minority group you can think of,” or to women, gays, and young people.

Flying Low

Thirty-two years after World War II has ended, the U.S. Senate has voted to extend Veterans' Benefits to the 850 women pilots who flew during World War Two.

However, the House, unlike the Senate, passed its veterans’ legislation with no mention of the World War Two women flyers, who were known as WASPS. A House-Senate conference committee is scheduled to consider final amendments which may include benefits for the WASPS.

Even non-citizens who fought for the allies and later became U.S. citizens were able to study through the G.I. Bill after the war.

Her Say

Life is Cheap

In October, the government decided that Janet Sloan's life was worth a whopping $810. Janet, 22, was killed last summer while working at the Sun Shipbuilding yard outside of Philadelphia. A welder, she was working on a double-hulled ship when she fell 52 feet to her death.

She was assigned to the job alone, out of hearing distance from any other workers. Workers demanded that the company officers be indicted for murder. Sloan's death was the second there in a year. Coworkers also charged that Sloan, a member of the Communist Party, was given the unsafe job because of her militancy.

Instead, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) fined Sun Shipbuilding $810, charging that there was an inadequate back railing where Sloan was working. Workers claim that there was no railing at all.

Since Janet's death, Sun Shipbuilding has not corrected the safety violations and has appealed the OSHA citations.

The Guardian

Evil Women

One thing women get more than their equal share of is prison sentences.

Crime researcher Gail Armstrong says that laws in many states reflect the attitude that a woman offender should be jailed longer than a man for the same offense, because it takes an evil woman longer to shape up.

This is usually accomplished, says Armstrong, by giving a male a specific jail term, of say, one-to-six years, but giving the woman offender what is called an "indeterminate" sentence, which ends up being whatever prison authorities think is best.

Armstrong says that as a result of differing sentencing practices for men and women, women jailed even on a minor misdemeanor conviction usually wind up serving longer time than men, sometimes as long as five-year terms for a non-felony offense.

Her Say

Pill Strikes Again

A recent study of the effects of oral contraceptives on women sponsored by the British Royal College of General Practitioners has concluded that women who take the pill have a 40 percent higher death rate than women of the same age who never used the pill.

This most comprehensive study to date of pill-related deaths was based on an analysis of 101 deaths that occurred among 46,000 women involved in the study since 1968. Half of the women used in the study had never taken the pill.

The new findings also suggest that the risk of death associated with the pill may increase with the length of time a woman takes the pill and that this risk may remain elevated for some years after pill use is discontinued. Combined with cigarette smoking, the dangers of pill use were said to escalate further. LNS

An eleven-year-old girl successfully fought off two would-be child molesters, it was reported in KARATE NEWS. As she was walking home, a car with two men stopped, and one man opened his door and grabbed her by the arm. She flipped him onto his back on the sidewalk, chopped him on the neck with the edge of her hand, and jabbed him in both eyes with her fingers. The driver jumped out, screaming, "that's murder!" Neighbors, alerted by the noise, called the police, and both men were apprehended. The child is the daughter of a woman who studied judo and a man who holds a brown belt in karate. She was unharmed, except for a slight bruise on her arm where the man grabbed her.

-PLexus

What Next?

WIAP—Women's Institute for Alternative Psychotherapy has now closed its office in Boulder, Colorado. WIAP did not receive its government funding this year. There will be no national conference of feminist therapists in Boulder this year without the government funding. Plans for a degree-granting psychology program have been dropped by WIAP. Director Anne Schaef could not be reached for comment.

Legal Murder

When Congress banned Federal Medicaid funds for abortions on August 4, women and third world groups denounced the action and warned that many women would die as a result of cheap, back-alley abortions.

Already one Texas woman has died and four others suffered serious bleeding, following cut-rate abortions in Mexico according to a report in the Daily World. At least three of the women would have been eligible for federally subsidized abortions before the recent ruling.

Texas is one of ten states which have already terminated all state funds for abortions. Another 30 states are in the process of doing so.

INS

Race & Class

500 women from all over the U.S. attended the first convention of Women for Racial and Economic Equality in Chicago Sept 23-25. Members of W.R.E.E. see their organization as focusing on issues of race and class. Workshops were led by Angela Davis, members of the Gray Panthers, and women from a broad racial and economic composition.

Conference

Plans are being made for a national conference on the economic and social status of Native American women to be held in Denver January 1978. Anyone interested should contact Grace Good-eagle at 303/758-1700 ext 258 or Lynn Brown at the Dept of Labor, Women's Bureau at 303/837-4138, both in Denver.

Francine Hughes Acquitted

Francine Hughes has just been acquitted for the alleged murder of her ex-husband in Michigan. She had been accused of pouring gasoline on the floor near him and then burning him to death while he slept. He had beaten her for years and there was a restraining order against him at the time. She was acquitted on grounds of temporary insanity.

The jury accepted the defense argument that her temporary insanity was caused by 13 years of abuse, threats on her life, and domination by her (ex) husband. She had divorced him and he had returned after a serious car accident.

After subsequent psychiatric testing ordered by the court, Hughes has been found to be sane. Now she is planning on going back to school and helping other battered women.

This is an important case because it proves that battered wives may fight back even though at the exact time of the incident their husbands may not have been beating them.

Sore Losers

On September 24, the Socialist Republic of Vietnam was finally admitted to the United Nations. The United States refrained from using its veto power which three times previously had blocked Vietnam's admission; the General Assembly's decision was unanimous.

The U.S. has refused to help in Vietnam's reconstruction. There is a U.S. trade embargo and Congress has barred all aid to Vietnam.

Individuals wishing to make direct contributions to Vietnam to aid in the reconstruction are encouraged to do so through Friendship, P.O. Box 4000 D, Berkeley, CA 94704.

Chants Collected

A tape of chants from women all over the world is being collected by WomanSpirit Magazine. Send your chants to WomanSpirit, Box 263, Wolf Creek, Oregon. They will be retaped and returned with chants from other women in place of yours. When enough have been received to fill an hour cassette, WomanSpirit will reproduce them in quantity and distribute them commercially.

Catching Up

A recent article in WomenSports magazine argues that social rather than biological factors have limited the performance of women athletes, and predicts that women's running and swimming times will eventually equal those of men.

CALS
nepenthes
ot Nav (offrehouse-
He maRrkEeT
S34 > $424