health

Meeting On Health from page 5

lived up to their campaign promises: health and medical care for poor and Third World Minority women and their families still remains embarrassingly inadequate, punitive and/or difficult to obtain.

IMPERIALISM AND POPULATION CONTROL

From the Workshop on Imperialism and Population Control: India: Women recognize the need for population control, but have also been faced with the abuses. Women need invisible contraception, like injectables, but face the dilemma of also knowing the dangers. Ivory Coast women approach it from a different direction. They don't need population control as such, but wish to lower the infant mortality rate. For this the emphasis is on family spacing. Contraception is therefore an issue. In Puerto Rico the women see their country as the experimental ground on reproduction control for the world. For example, at one point, one third of all women were sterilized, many without their knowledge. Health issues of reproduction control cannot be separated from the economic and political context. They must be seen in the framework of world imperialism and world capitalism. As feminists we should be anti-imperialist, anti-classist, anti-racist and anti-patriarchy. We must regain power over our lives by altering the distribution of resources and power, i.e. information, money, and decision-making. Depo-Provera continually arose as an important issue. The dilemma in general was reflected by that of the workshop group (i.e. we couldn't come to a stand). The two sides of this dilemma are: 1) Women's expressed need for contraception of a specific social/cultural/economic context, versus 2) a. that this can become a racist stance, allowing one standard for women's health in the Third World and another in the First b. the knowledge of the negative side-effects, c. the need to ensure that women in the Third World can make informed choices.

PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH

From the workshop on Pregnancy and Childbirth:

In India breastfeeding is the rule: only 3% of women do not breast-feed. The high-powered advertising for artificial milk has been successful only among the wealthy. Pregnancy is avoided more by breastfeeding than by all other contraceptives! The new program promoting the contraceptive pills is proving to have quite the opposite results from the expected: since the pill inhibits lactation, it increases the risks of infant deaths and, because the women stop taking the pill regularly, they find themselves pregnant more often. Indian women generally marry at 14 or 15 and have 8 pregnancies on average of which only 3 to 5 survive. They go on breastfeeding for 3 years and spend 50-60% of their lives in pregnancy or breastfeeding with dire nutritional results.

India is a favored market for multi-national companies producing contraceptive devices, but most women would rather be pregnant than take a contraceptive! Rani Bang thinks that in rural areas especially, it would be wiser to invest all that effort in abortion. The women would not object to abortion, it is the doctors who object; most of the abortion services are available only in the cities.

WOMEN FROM THE THIRD WORLD

Statement of the group "Women From The Third World" (reprinted here only in part):

In discussing ways whereby women from the developed and the developing countries (First and Third World respectively) could help one another to achieve a truly human world, we realized that since women's oppression derives from international capitalism and patriarchy, what we must do to guarantee total and complete liberation is to concentrate our efforts on a two-fold objective: socialism and feminism.

To that end we call on all feminists throughout the world: 1) To consider women's problems as part and parcel of the struggle for social transformation. Therefore to be aware of the danger of pursuing separate objectives one by one, of taking action without a prior thorough social, economic and political analysis, i.e. to be aware that this involves the risk of fragmentation of effort and becoming a fringe movement; 2) To not only ensure the existence of an autonomous women's movement, but also to effectively cooperate with other social and political groups which are active in seeking a change; 3) To see to it that development aid fosters real independence and autonomy for the Third World, rather than being used as a tool for capitalist penetration, and, especially in the field of health, to ensure that projects are not set up in the economic or political interest of the industrialized countries exclusively.

ZIMBABWE— VILLAGE HEALTH WORKERS

From a paper presented on Health In Developing Countries by Margaret Nhariwa: Zimbabwe: During colonial times 80% of the health system was based in urban areas where 25% of the African population lived. The African population makes up about 90% of the total and the health delivery system was then heavily curative and only 10% preventive. Most health problems in the Third World countries, Zimbabwe included, can be prevented or avoided by promotive and preventive measures.

After the war 250 people, mostly women, have been trained as Village Health Workers (VHW). VHWs are predominantly young married women with a position in their community, most of whom can read or write. They receive two weeks theoretical course and then for 54 months they work in their respective areas. While doing this they attend weekly study days and every month they have a day at the district level when they have their monthly reports, records and study day.

The work of a VHW is mainly preventive and promotive health care. We seek to promote antenatal care and normal childbirth by advising pregnant mothers on the foods they should eat, the rest they need, their posture and the kind of clothes they should wear and by stressing the importance of antenatal clinic attendance for vaccination and examination. The VHW assists normal deliveries in the homes and refers complicated ones to the nearest clinic.

Breastfeeding is encouraged. In the past powdered milk was becoming more prevalent, and ill-prepared milk frequently caused diarrhea, which often terminated in malnutrition or death.

VHWs aim is to promote locally obtainable foods and so promote the people's health. Where there were 2,225 malnourished children under five in Jan. 1981, we now have 277 malnourished. It is the VHW's duty to watch the nutritional state of their communities and diagnose the cause of malnutrition and together with the community seek to eradicate them.

Emphasis is on the use of natural herbs. When the program was started, drugs to help the women for minor ailments were not available so they used local herbs. In class they discussed different herbs, their uses, dosages and side effects. People had lost the art of using local herbs and their belief in them so they were brought back to the local people's trust in what was once quite helpful to them.

The VHW constitutes the channel to promote self-help. The community at large was aware of the big gap in the health delivery system--it had been foreign and had not met the demands of the community, so they desired their own type of health system. The VHW is made aware of their rights as human beings, especially when discussing social problems leading to bad health, they learned that health means wholeness and well-being and that health is not just a matter of disease and cure. Now the local people would like a community development centre where some could be trained in skills that are needed by the community to build up its area, they would like local industries like fruit bottling, jam making and pickling. The area has plenty of fruit and certain types of vegetables that go to waste in season and are not available in others.

Contraception is not a new thing amongst the people. The old method of family planning was for the woman to breastfeed for a long period, it was rare for a woman to have more than five children. The VHW program plans to help parents plan their families under the supervision of paramedics and will incorporate both traditional and Western methods.

Big Mama Ragy April, 1982 - Page 17