Susan Saxe Is Now on Trial

LNS

Political activist Susan Saxe is
scheduled to be tried in Boston Sept
15 on charges stemming from a 1970
Boston bank robbery in which one
policeman died.

The charges of first degree murder
and two felony counts of armed rob-
bery carry a penalty of mandatory
life imprisonment without parole.
Under state law, a conviction of
first degree murder only requires
proof that Saxe somehow conspired or
participated in the robbery—not that
she pulled the trigger. Saxe's
defense intends to challenge the
constitutionality of this “felony-
murder" law.

An anti-war activist, feminist and
lesbian, Susan Saxe was arrested in
March 1975 in Philadelphia after
having eluded capture for over four
years. Katherine Power, also sought
in connection with the robbery, is
still underground.

In June of this year, Saxe pled
guilty in Philadelphia to federal
charges for a 1970 conspiracy to rob
a bank and for possession of a mol-
otov cocktail, charges for which she
received a 10-year sentence.

In addition, she pled guilty to
theft, from the Newburyport Armory,
of classified documents detailing
government contingency plans for
counterinsurgency operations against
the civilian population of the Boston
area in the event of martial law.
For this she received a two-year
sentence to run concurrently with the
10-year sentence.

Explaining her pleas of guilty,
Saxe said, "The most significant
point of this plea agreement is that
the United States government realizes
that I am not and never will be
a collaborator. I have made it clear
to them that if I am called as
a witness in any government proceed-
ing I will refuse to testify.

"The government has agreed that I
will not be held in contempt for
this refusal. In return I have ag-
reed to enter a guilty plea and re-
ceive a ten-year and a two-year sen-
tence. The length of the sentence
is a direct result of my refusal to
testify."

"As a feminist, revolutionary, a
lesbian, Susan Saxe faces “extreme
prejudice," writes historian How-
ard Zinn. "She is unlikely to get a
fair trial by a jury of average Am-
ericans nurtured from childhood in a
system where heads of government
may plunder and kill and yet retire
from office unpunished."

"I support Susan Saxe's struggle
because I respect her," says poet
Denise Levertov. "I respect her be-
cause she had the courage to act as
she saw fit in response to America's
abominable aggression in Indochina,
risking life and bodily liberty to
do so."

While awaiting trial during the
summer, Saxe has been moved back and
forth several times from prisons in
Worcester, Massachusetts to prisons
in New York City and Long Island,
making it difficult for her support-
ers to remain in close contact with
her. Now she is in solitary confine-
ment in the Suffolk County, Mass-
achusetts courthouse, with two
guards—one armed with a shotgun.
Her door is kept open so that her
every move can be monitored.

During the search for Susan Saxe,
a series of grand juries were con-
vened which resulted in the impri-
soning of three women who refused to
testify: Terry Turgeon, Ellen Grusse
and Jill Raymond. The pressure of
publicity from supporters won the
release of Turgeon and Grusse, but
Raymond remained in jail for the full
twelve 14-month duration of the grand
jury.

Lesbian Mother Fights Courts and
Husband to Keep Her Daughter

Early last month Ginny Yaseen, a
lesbian living in Denver, went to
court in Illinois to fight for the
right to keep her 6-year-old daughter,
Rachele.

Ginny has had custody of Rachele
since her divorce four years ago.
Pam Keeley, Ginny's lover, has lived
with them since then. A few months
after Ginny, Pam and Rachele moved
from Illinois to Denver, Ginny's ex-
husband obtained a temporary custody
order and refused to let Rachele
come home after an extended visit with
him.

Ginny, unaware of the temporary
custody hearing, went to Illinois to
reclaim Rachele. After she returned
home, she was informed that a final
custody hearing would be held in a
week's time. When she appeared in an
Illinois court to ask for more time
to prepare a case, she was jailed
for having taken Rachele back.

She was released on bond only after
she proved that she hadn't known ab-
out the temporary custody order when
she reclaimed Rachele. The final
custody hearing was set for a month
hence.

For the next month Ginny and Pam
worked frantically at preparing their
case. Although the court date was
to be a hearing, and not a trial,
Ginny expected to face accusations
that she is an unfit mother because
she is a lesbian.

At the first hearing, Ginny's ex-
husband David had ten witnesses lin-
ed up, prepared to support his claim
to custody. In the four weeks be-
fore the final hearing, Pam and Gin-
ny had to come up with witnesses of
their own.

Because they need an Illinois law-
yer, all their legal strategy had to
be discussed by telephone, long-dis-
tance. And money had to be raised,
to cover their legal expenses as well
as phone bills and traveling
costs for themselves and their wit-
nesses.

Early in September Pam, Ginny, Ra-
chele and their witnesses from var-
ious parts of the country flew to
Illinois for the hearing. The court
had obviously not expected quite such
a turnout on both sides, and it
soon became clear that the one day
allotted for the hearing wouldn't be
enough.

During that time, however, David's
line of attack took shape. Although
lesbianism was never openly mention-
ed, it appeared, thinly disguised,
throughout David's lawyer's question-
ing. Ginny was asked if she has a
roommate, whether they share a bed-
room and whether they have a double
bed.

Another piece of evidence at the
hearing was a report by a psycholo-
gist hired by David to test Rachele.
The psychologist, whom the court re-
cognizes as an “expert witness",
testifies that Rachele has “sexual
identity problems." These, in his
opinion, would disappear if she liv-
ed in a “normal man-woman environmen-
t."

The psychologist also gave the
judge a report on Rachele's history
which included a statement from David's wife that Ginny is a lesbian.
Several other references were made
during the hearing to Ginny's "life-
style" and “unnatural living situa-
tion."

After a brief appearance the next
day, the hearing was continued to
November, which means that Ginny and
Pam now have another two months to
further prepare their case.

It also means two more months of
long-distance phone bills and law-
yer's fees, and another round of
plane fares for Ginny's witnesses as
well as for herself, Rachele and Pam.
Both women are working full-time and
borrowing heavily to meet their ex-
penses.

The Rachele Yaseen Defense Fund,
established when Ginny's custody was
first threatened, raised enough mon-
ey to cover expenses incurred by the
September hearing. All that money
has now been spent, though, and the
Defense Fund must start from scratch
to pay for the next two months’ ac-
tivities and the final hearing in
November.

Donations should be made to the
Rachele Yaseen Defense Fund, P.O.
Box 18628, Denver, Colorado 80218.
For tax deductions, make checks pay-
able to the Aton Foundation.

Scraps From Mama’s Table

Chocolate Waters

Ronald Reagan a What?—Feminist Communications, a San Diego publication,
recently received an anonymous letter (originally sent to the O.B.
whose office they now occupy) which was written "in hopes of curbing a vi-
cious rumor...that Ronald Reagan is a homosexual.” (Actually, we think
Ronald is a vicious rumor, but anyway...) The letter went on to say that,
“The Carter people make much of the fact that Mr. Reagan refused to take a
lie detector test on the issue of his homosexual experiences...We have
evidence that other presidents have had homosexual relations, but we feel
it would not be acting responsibly to condemn a national leader on the
basis of a few experiences earlier in life....This letter is to inform you
that Ronald Reagan is not a homosexual, and also to make it clear that the
printing of any such allegations will render you actionable for libel. I'm
sure that neither advertisers nor subscribers would want to associate with
any paper that slanders a decent American like Mr. Reagan..." (Feminist
Communications, July 76)

Essential Information—If a man wants to change his sex the operation aver-
ages about $3,000, but if a woman wants to change sex she will have to pay
anywhere from $18-21,000. (Dr. John Money, People, Sept 20, 76) I thought
I'd include this interesting tidbit since it's a known fact that all fem-
inists, especially the lesbian variety, want to be men.

Ex-Cheerleader Makes Good—Phyllis George, the former Miss America and one-
time North Texas State cheerleader, is now being touted as the first highly
successful woman sportscaster. (Ms. George claims she'd “like to see more
women get involved as long as they retain their femininity.”) Many femin-
ists would have liked to have seen Jane Castain receive this “honor” but
Castain's contract was not renewed. Mark Goodman (yes folks, that's really
his name) tells why: "Castain was as miscast as Gertrude Stein might have
been in the NFL broadcast booth." Why, he postulates, did others (i.e.
the not-feminine-enough Jane Castain) fail where Phyllis George succeeded?
Writes Goodman: “Here is a stunning revelation: Athletes like to talk to
gorgeous girls with eyes of onyx and a smile like a flash of summer light-
ning on a hot Texas night." (Perhaps it was the color of Mr. Goodman's eyes
and his hot lightning smile that got him a job on People magazine—it cer-
tainly doesn't seem to have been his writing.) "A More Provocative Sports -
caster than Cosell? There She Is—Phyllis George," Mark Goodman, People,
September 20, 1976.

True Love Never Dies. It Just Gets Dumped at an Intersection or The Con-
tinuing Saga of I Love You I Love You Forever At Least for the Time Being—
Now listen closely. Anonymous woman #1 has been having a Primary Commitment
with Anonymous woman #2 until Anonymous Woman #3 slithers onto the scene
and steals the heart (and other things) of Anonymous Woman #1. So much for
#2. In the meantime, however, unbeknownst to #1, #2 gets involved with
Anonymous Woman #4. Got all that? OK. Anon 1 and Anon 3 are on their way
to pick up some furniture for their new Primary love nest which just hap-
pens to be located at the home of Anon 4 (the furniture, that is, not the
nest). What 1 and 3 don't know is that former Primary Commitment 2 has
chosen this particular time to visit newly beloved 4. Number 1 is cool
about it all until she puts the furniture and #3 in the back of the pick-up
and roars off. In the midst of the roaring off, both #3 and the couch she
is sitting on are dumped unceremoniously into the street (Anonymous Boule-
vard #1) and #3 is left singing "Happy Trails to You" as #1 continues obliv-
iously on her way. (So much for the shameless gossip of the month and if
anybody asks, this was written anonymously and please don't go back over it
again to try to figure it all out.)

Whoever Put My Name on Their Mailing List Better Take it Off—This month I
received a publication called the Cross and The Flag which purports to be
the "official organ of the Christian Nationalist Crusade." This magazine
is replete with statements like the following: “Our present predicament—
Washington, D.C., with its 71% Black population, has now become the city
with the highest concentration of Black residents outside of continental
Africa..." and "A reminder we must never forget—The Jews have the atom
bomb and nuclear weapons and they are ruthless enough to use this to black-
mail the world." The Cross and the Flag also offers a column called
"Missiles" which says things like, "If sophisticated weaponry...had been
considered as a means of warfare in Indo-China, the traitors, the doves and
the left wingers would never have recovered from their outcries of accommo-
dating the enemy." The magazine sells such enlightening books and pamphlets
as "God, the Original Segregationist," "Jews Crucify Courageous Clergyman,"
"The Most Persecuted Minority in the Nation—The Whites of the South," and
"Jesus was Not a Jew." Admittedly, I sometimes have to read a lot of gar-
bage to find things for this column, but this is going too far.

P.S.—All rumors to the effect that I amputated one of my toes at a job-
related accident last month are absolutely untrue. Actually, I was decapi- 

KATHY PRITCHETT 723 E. 17th AVE.
(303) 572-4906 DENVER, COLO. 80203