14  
Interview  
[From page 1]  
feminist consciousness. They were  
professional "feminists". It was a  

good way for those women to get  
to know big women in the state, etc.  
A good example is that there was a  
central committee meeting that a  
number of us from the relationships  
committee went in mass to air some  
grievances, and we started talking  
about the personal being political,  
and almost no one understood. They  
could not understand that the process  
of how the conference was being held  
and the way decisions were being made  
was political. They were afraid of  
the word. That's a good example of  
where 90% of the women who planned  
the conference were coming from.  

BMR: Why was this conference impor-  
tant to feminists?  

Madeline: As a lesbian feminist, I  
have chosen to work within the sys-  
tem. I have chosen to let moderate  
feminists, non-feminists, etc., be  
exposed to lesbian feminist politics.  
We have to move in on their territory.  
I stuck it out for 15 months to ed-  
ucate less radical women.  

BMR: What do you think the Houston  
conference will accomplish?  

Carol: It'll probably be about 20  
times as bad as the Colorado confer-  
ence. It'll be bigger. It'll come  
out with a national plan of action  
though, which will be taken to Iran  
in 1980 where the next International  
Women's Conference is going to be.  

Fathers Day  

+  

Health Group  

[From page 5]  

year's Capitol Hill Peoples’ Fair  

where they gave out questionnaires to  
assess health care needs of local women.  
Over 100 women responded to the ques-  
tionnaire.  

They are in the process of contacting  
over 50 clinics in the U.S. for infor-  
mation on how they got started. They  
intend on using the experience of other  
groups for assistance with their own  
process of forming a clinic.  

The collective is made up of nursing  
students, nurses, natural healers, a  
pre-law student, and feminist activ-  

ists. They need support for what  
they're trying to do, help with a  
variety of work, and donations.  
They can be contacted through Woman to  
Woman Feminist Center at 320-5972,  
or at 377-9754 (please leave a mes-  
sage).  

They  

Mandela  

[From page 3]  

reportedly said that Mandela could  
go to the Transkei--a phony "indep-  
endent" Bantustan set up by the  

apartheid regime--or to Swaziland  
if she wished.  
"if anybody should leave, it's not me, it's the settler  
government," she was reported to have  
said.  

Black groups, women's organizations,  
and other defenders of civil liberties  
in this country should demand that  
the ban on Winnie Mandela be lifted  
and that the racist South African  
regime release all its political  
prisoners now.  

[From page 10]  

“My father was very strict with me. There were thirteen of us in the family so  
I guess he had to be strict. We weren't allowed to go out; the only place we  
could go would be to church. He was strict in a sense, but we never did with-  
out-- all thirteen of us were fed every day. He took care of his family. During  
the summer all we used to do was to go pick prunes out in the country and with  
that money he would buy us our school clothes. Things like this I remember--  
how hard we used to work. I also remember that when my brothers and sisters got  
tired of his strict ways, they all ran away-- my brothers ran away when they  
were real young to join the merchant marines and my sisters ran away to get mar-  
ried. I don't remember any of my sisters having my father's permission to get  

married; he was sort of possessive of us.  
I was strict with my children, too. I tried to reflect in my children the  
same way my father tried to reflect in us to stay together. I brought my child-  
ren up to help each other in the sense of staying together as a family because  
I have seven of them.  

My father mellowed in the years-- I remember he paid a little bit more atten-  
tion to what my brother had to say because he was the last boy in the house,  
but he paid a lot of attention to me and my sister because we were the last of  
the tribe."  

"My father was always your essential Archie Bunker type-- he was reactionary,  
racist, sexist, classist, anti-female. He was the kind of father that would re-  

fuse to teach his daughters how to drive a nail or fix their cars. He didn't  
want me to go to college; the entire time I was in college he discouraged me and  
told me to drop out, preferably to get married, but since he knew that was kind  
of hopeless, to become an LPN. He never quite understood why I wanted to go to  
medical school; he knew he didn't want me to.  
I guess you could understand him a little bit better on that score knowing that  
he dropped out of school when he was in the eighth grade. I think he always  
resented that a woman, even though she was his daughter, was getting a better  
education than he had. I think he is probably very unhappy. He is totally  
emotionally cold-- unable to relate to his wife or his children. The big thing  
my friends always asked about my father was, ‘does he talk?’, and I don't think  
he does. I know I've never talked to him...he travels a lot; he traveled a lot  
when I was a kid. He was out of town for a week, two weeks at a time, and I  
think he was happiest that way and I know we were, too."  

"My father was stern and remote, or, maybe he wasn't. Maybe it was just that  
I grew up during the Second World War. It was a time when the men who weren't  
in the service were working 12, 14, 18 hours a day, so maybe the times I saw  
him, he was just tired rather than being stern and remote. Suppose, when I  
think of my father when I was young, says things like, 'Your father would not  
have liked that', or, 'That would make your father very angry.’ Somehow, this  
was a guiding principle-- we don't do things in my family that would make my  
father angry."  

"One thing I remember is that when I was little my mother would leave the  
house really early; I'd get up to go to school and my father would be there and  
he'd make me masturbate him. I felt really weird, but I didn't feel like any-  
thing wrong was happening, except he kept saying, ‘Don't tell Mother, don't tell  
Mother.'  

I used to see him running around naked all the time; my whole family  
would walk around nude all the time, and so it wasn’t his nakedness that bother-  
ed me, it was his attitude. I was about four or five.  

It's like a lot of my friends, the same thing has happened to them. My best  
friend, she and her sister shared a room, and her father used to make them dress  
in front of him. She put a lock on the door and he busted it down and told her  
never to lock it again. It was like everybody in my neighborhood didn't like  
their fathers because their fathers did something weird like this. One time I  
remember I told my mother, ‘when I get married, if I have a daughter, I’ll never  
leave her alone with my husband.'"  

Credit Union  

the remaining women who had volunteered  
substantial labor did not want the  

jobs or did not meet Manpower hiring  
requirements (e.g. being unemployed  

for 15 weeks prior to hiring).  

Like many Denver feminist projects,  
the CU staff and board are composed  
almost entirely of white women. Two  
minority women sit on the CU credit  
committee (which gives final approval  
to loans), and recently a Black woman,  
Senida Pratts, was hired to do the  
Colorado Springs coordinator job.  

The creation of the paid staff  
positions created a major problem for  
the collective process of the CU. Both  
before the grant and now, the Board  
included staff members and operated  
as a collective: that is, decisions  
were and are made by consensus. But  
with the creation of the paid staff  
positions, and the fact that staff  
members working full-time are bound  
to have more working expertise than  
non-staff board members, the staff  
found itself as a majority of the  
board with a definite power/expertise  
advantage.  

Julie said the board will be ex-  
panded to deal with the staff majority  
problem. "It's a problem; board mem-  
bers who are not in here have to work  
real hard to feel productive and a  

part of the organization.  

Aside from the fact that the staff  
sits on the board and there is a  
commitment to consensus, the CU has  

a fairly traditional, federally im-  
posed structure. Apart from the board,  
there is a supervisory committee,  
which holds financial responsibility  
for the CU and functions as a sort of  
grievance committee. The members of  
the credit committee, also separate  
from the board, act to approve and  
disapprove loans.  

AUTHOR'S NOTE  

When we first approached the CU for  
an interview, we were interested in  
seeing how an institution under the  
thumb of strict federal regulations  
could keep its political commitment  
to "challenge the contradictions of  
capitalism."  

Like all alternative institutions  
hoping to provide a service within  
the law, the CU must compromise to  
survive; and that is what has hap-  
pened over the past year. Specifi-  
cally, we're talking about:  

- The new 3-month waiting period  
for loans, which virtually restricts  
abortion loans to women who have  
friends with enough money to share  
secure those loans, and  

- The CU's financial inability  
to lower the interest from 12%, and  
the corresponding acknowledgment  
that a dividend is going to be nec-  
essary if savings are ever to grow.  

- The federally-imposed structure  
and the Manpower grant provisions  
which work against the CU being a  
true collective.  

Both of us saw the CU as providing  
a valuable service, yet at the same  
time moving away from the radical  
feminist community in Denver, where  
most workers are unpaid and involved  
in projects that do not have to toe  
the line with the law.  

Part of this distance comes from  
the CU's legitimacy in the eyes of  
straight funding sources. Noting that  
she had written a number of good  
funding proposals for feminist groups  
that never got accepted, Julie said,  
“I think the reason we're doing as  

MASSAGE  
for women  
by women  

832-3802  

Big Mama Rag Vol.5 No.6  

[From page 4]  

well as we are is that we are dealing  
with money. We have all kinds of fed-  
eral regulatory agencies providing  
protection (for someone else's grant  
money). It's not like we were just  

a bunch of women who got together and  
had a good idea."  

Some feminists see the CU as  
becoming isolated from other radical  
feminists in a number of relatively  
small ways. For example, the CU  
did not endorse International Women's  
Day in Denver this March. When asked  
about this recently, Julie said she  
believed the CU had never been ap-  
proached, as the issue had never  
come up at a board meeting. (However,  
organizers of IWD say the CU was  
approached, but never returned an  
answer). This point may be dismissed  
as a communications snafu within the  
CU; but even so, the fact that it  
never came up at a board meeting  

clearly shows that IWD was not the  

priority it was with other feminist  
groups.  

As we prepared this article, our  
feeling was that the CU's problems  
in keeping its politics strong were  
partly due to a desire to play it  
a little too safe (namely the new  
abortion loan policy), but mostly  
due to the inherent restrictions of  
creating feminist alternative insti-  
tutions. That is, alternatives  
which aim to institutionalize them-  
selves are almost always forced to  
back away from challenging the gov-  
ernment regulations that allow them  
to exist. (One major exception has  
been feminist women's health centers,  
which have been challenging govern-  
ment restrictions--but almost as a  
condition of their survival. See  
June BMR).  

Shortly before this issue went  
to press, we came across a long  
article by Christine Pattee in Sister  
(a Connecticut women's paper) which  
analyzed the reasons for the closure  
of the feminist CU in Connecticut.  

We learned that, at most, Colorado  

is playing it safe on a very thin  
margin. (Connecticut, which had a  

lot of problems with the feds, closed  
with an 11% delinquency rate).  

Pattee goes into it all much more,  
but her basic point is that Connec-  
ticut was shut down because it could  
not function with strong unresolved  
racial tensions on its board, and  
because it refused to accommodate its  
politics to the need for sound busi-  
ness practices. (For a copy of the  
article, write Sister, 148 Orange  
Street, New Haven, CT 06510).  

Sound loan criteria were never  
adopted, Pattee says, because (among  
other reasons) the CU "was not pre-  
pared for the emotional shock of  
having to refuse money to needy  
women (who could not possibly repay).  

A study done after the CU closed  
tends to support the fear that femin-  
ist CUs will really not be in a  
position to lend money to the women  
who need it most. The loans most  
likely to go delinquent were from  
women living at subsistence levels.  

Pattee concludes that feminist  
CUs need to examine very carefully  
what they can and can't do. They  
cannot, she says, change the funda-  
mental nature of borrowing and lend-  
ing in this society, and they cannot  
really be an income-sharing device.  
However, a CU can offer women a  
chance to save, get a little somethin  
back, and still do something for the  
movement; it can be more “humanistic”  
than traditional lending institutions.  

Pattee's statement, we believe, points  
to a basic question: how much can "al-  
ternative institutions"—defined as  
self-supporting and operating more or  
less within the law—offer a political  
direction to our movement.  

caLe  
nepenthes  
ob Nw (ofrchouse-  
He market  
534 * 5425