Iran/Afghanistan

Revolutionary Rape Of Iranian Women

Mariam Mosta'are

editor's note: it is necessary, for
reasons of security, that the author
of this article remain anonymous.
Mosta'are means anonymous in the
Persian Language.

When the Iranian revolution erupted
in full force last winter, it was
a people's revolution in the true
sense of the word. It was not simply
one army battling another army, but
rather the full participation of al-
most the entire population: men,
women and children. In these massive
demonstrations of the people's revo-
lution, women, as frequently as men,
were at the front lines, leading the
demonstrations. Forced to segregate
into units of their own, women were
the front, back and middle of their
own units. Women were then and con-
tinue to be in numbers equal to those
of men, as close as possible to esti-
mate, nearly 50% of the demonstration
force.

Thus, the Iranian women were not
just on the sidelines of the revolu-
tion, cheerleading "our boys" on to
victory. Neither were they at the
rear, as men would often have us be-
lieve, tagging along after the coat-
tails of the courageous males. Women
were, as often as not, in the lead
at the head of the conflict.

There can be no question that the
overwhelming majority of women were
deeply serious and committed to their
cause of getting rid of the Shah and
creating a better life. Though few
women, except in major cities, are
aware of the tenets of women's libera-
tion, the hope and struggle for a
better life for themselves can be un-
derstood as no less than that, no
matter how far removed from western
definitions of the term. Any call by
women for a better life can only be
viewed as a call for release from a
portion of the male tyranny which is
totally responsible for the structure
of women's lives.

Whether women are fully conscious
of the significance of their demands
is relevant only to the process and
results, but not to the cause. In
major cities, on the other hand, where
the concept of women's liberation has
had some development, women presented
clear programs: documents listing the
requirements they felt necessary for
women's equality.

If eliminating the Shah alone is a
gain for all, and there can be little
question that the replacement of a
foreign supported dictator with a pop-
ularly supported government is indeed
a gain, women have shared in this gain.
However, men have shared in this gain
as well, and the relative position of
inequality between men and women would
have remained unchanged. But the pos-
ition of women in Iran has worsened.
The betrayal of Iranian women has
begun.

The astounding effort of the Iranian
women is not new to the history of the
world. Neither is their betrayal. The
betrayal of women once the fight is
over, however, has become a special
characteristic of modern conflict. In
the beginning of organized warfare,
back in the aeons of unrecorded his-
tory, as well as in warfare's later
forms, the sanction of women is deemed
essential.

Modern warfare, however, requires
more than mere sanction by women; it
requires their participation. Whether
in the factories, in the supporting
services, or in the front lines, the
participation of women is essential if
victory is to be achieved. The Iranian
revolution was no less in need of
women. Without the efforts of women,
as admitted by all, little could have
been achieved.

In all recent struggles, in order
to secure the support of women,
leaders (men) have offered the well-
worn promise of equality to women. In
the fascist countries, women were to
be “honored" as partners of fascist
men. Hitler said, "Woman is the com-
panion of man in work." But too late
women discovered that he didn't mean
"equal", for he also said, "Man is the
organizer of life, woman is his organ
for carrying out plans, i.e., his slave."
In fascist countries, women were told
that their greatest glories and
contributions to the state lay in
motherhood, providing soldiers for
nations looking toward imperial
expansion. Women did become partners
in the fascist efforts of their coun-
tries, but the partnerships were never
equal. Men had no intention of sharing
power.

Capitalist democracies have always
promised women the right to choose.
Yet consistently, there has been only
one choice. During wartime, women
were recruited to the factories and
support services. They eagerly parti-
cipated despite pitifully low wages.
Once the war was over, women were
pushed out of their jobs, which in-
stead were offered to men, and were
forced to return to the home. The gov-
ernment consistently supported such
practices under programs designed to
give vets the edge in employment and
education. The few women allowed to
remain in the "work force" remained
in inferior positions at pathetically
low wages where they could be properly
exploited. Nor has the situation al-
tered much in the 35 years since the
close of the war. A steady blast of
propaganda of moral-religious virtues
glorifying motherhood and the idealized
traditional family life, combined with
the systematic exclusion from full
participation in economic and political
life has made equality for women unat-
tainable. Only the carrot on the stick
("If you keep working at it...") has
hidden the ugly reality of the promise.
Communism has promised that women's
equality can only be achieved by full
economic participation for women, and
that can only be established under
communism. Women must, therefore, de-
vote their full attention towards the
successful completion of the revolution
after which will come equality. Yet
in country after country, despite some
good intentions and some progress
(which might just as well be attributed
to any other system) equality has not
been achieved. Time after time, com-
munist leaders (men) have diverted
their attention and their finances
from women only to turn to “more urgent”
matters. Women are told they must
wait; they must be patient. Other
problems are more important than they.

Communist men, as men of every other
system, have never really wanted to
share their power.

The Islamic Revolution of Iran prom-
ised the women of Iran equality under
the Islamic philosophy as determined
in the holy Koran. Though the Shah
was a practicing Moslem and supposedly
operated his government within the
framework of an Islamic constitution,
he was labeled a “traitor to Islam";
he was certainly not practicing "true
Islam". The Islamic revolutionary
leaders promised to bring “true Islam"
to the people of Iran which would solve
all the problems of women. Just exact-
ly what "true Islam" is was not dis-
closed. Severe repression under the
Shah made open communication impossible.
Moreover, in a country where nearly
75% of the people are illiterate, a
larger proportion being women, and
where most household Korans are written
in Arabic instead of the native Persian
language, few women were afforded the
benefits of discovering for themselves
exactly what opportunities the Koran
offered to women.

The Koran was the trick of esoterica.
In the trick of esoterica, someone says,
"I have a plan." But for one of sev-
eral reasons, political sensitivity,
complexity of the plan or use of lang-
uage, the general public is prevented
from comprehending the necessary mater-
ial and is, therefore, denied access to
information. The trick of esoterica
is the imposter's paradise, for it
allows someone with nothing to pretend
he has something. In Iran, the Koran
became a natural for this trick in the
hands of males who had no intention of
relinquishing their privileges.

The hodgepodge of claims and asser-
tions of Koranic scholars appear to
fall into four main categories, all
of which are invalid. First, the
Koran is said to emphasize the equality
of origin or creation of both sexes.
Second, the Koran stresses equality in
pursuit of daily activities with equal-
ity of reward in the afterlife. Third, the
Koran has frequently been misunderstood;
references to women that have been in-
terpreted negatively must be considered
within the total framework of Islamic
philosophy. Fourth, what other system
of belief has done any better for women?
Overall, Koranic scholars emphasize, the
Koran offers women equal rights though
not necessarily the same rights, which
ought to tip us off immediately. Such
verbal games are reminiscent of fascist
promises.

Koranic scholars like to cite five
verses as evidence of equality of ori-
gin. Two of these should provide ample
refutation of such claims: "Oh man take
shelter in your Lord who has created
you from a single self and created from
it its pair." And, "He it is who
created you from a single self and from
it did He make its mate that he may
dwell resting unto her." As shown
continually throughout the Koran, God
addresses man through his male prophet
Mohammed. Moreover, God, himself, is
always a male, referred to as Lord, he
or him. It cannot be said that the
Koran regards both sexes equally when
all significant positions are allotted
to males.

The second assertion, that the Koran
stresses equality in daily activities,
is equally invalid. Although the Koran
urges both sexes to work towards a just
and good (Islamic) society, it makes
no mention of the kind of work, quality
of work, or amount of work. Thus it
can be interpreted as supporting neither
equality nor inequality. This absence
of direction, by implication, therefore,
allocates interpretation and implementa-
tion to the power structure, which was
then and continues to be male-dominated.

The assurance of equality in the after-
life is just one more example of the old
carrot on the stick strategy. Women
are tranquilized to the acceptance of
exploitation on earth with the promise
that if they are good (passive) and
just keep doing God's will (as dictated
by men) they will find perfection and
happiness after they are dead, in heaven.
In other words, “Don't bother us now;
other matters are more important. You
must put all your efforts towards the
attainment of heaven. Equality can only
be achieved in heaven. The communists,
at least, promised women a heaven (utopia)
on earth.

The third assertion, the most ridicu-
lous of all, attempts to deflect all
criticism leveled at the Koran for its
injustices to women, which are plentiful.
Husbands are given the right to maintain
total control over their wives. Women
do not have the right of divorce, while
men can divorce even in their absence.
Women are regarded as legal minors,
acting only under the consent of their
husbands, while men need no such ap-
proval. Men are granted the right of
polygamy; they may possess up to four
wives. Women are allowed no such right.
Men and women are to be stoned to death
for committing adultery; however, men
are allowed numerous "temporary wives"
of any duration (in addition to the four
regular), while women are allowed none.
And so on and so forth, etc.

All these have been misinterpreted,
we are told, by people who know noth-
ing about Islamic thought. What ap-
pears to be an injustice to women is
not an injustice at all. Consideration
within the totality of Islamic thought
will make this apparent.

One example should suffice. Under
Islamic philosophy, women are per-
mitted to inherit only 50% of the
amount granted to men. “But," we are
admonished, "this must only be under-
stood within the context of a truly
Islamic society. In such a society,
a woman can participate fully in ev-
ery aspect of economic life (but only
with her husband's consent and all the
while continuing her "sacred duties"
as wife and mother); she may earn
wages, invest her money, and even
charge her husband for nursing her
own babies." Such being the case, let
us imagine a family in which both
parents have participated in economic
life. They have two children, a girl
and a boy. At the death of either
parent, the son will inherit twice as
much as the daughter, simply because
he is male. The daughter then has the
opportunity to work, just as her
mother did, but if she entertains any
ideas of catching up with her brother,
she had better plan to work three
times as hard for she will need to
maintain two occupations in addition
to beginning with a clear financial
disadvantage. To propose that such
practices offer equality to women is
preposterous nonsense.

The Koran is incontestably patriar-
chal: awarding every significant
privilege to men, offering token
privileges to women (a wife may charge
her husband for nursing her own babies)
only when they can be easily counter-
acted (a husband maintains complete
control over his wife). All power is
concentrated in male hands; there is
no intention of equality.

"But," cry Koranic scholars in a
final plea for acceptance. "What else
is there? What other system has done
any more for women? The East ex-
ploits women; the West exploits women;
everyone exploits women." True
enough.

Women are exploited everywhere. The
East has been no less guilty than the
West, the northern hemisphere no less
guilty than the southern. However, the
Koran offers us nothing better, and in
many cases, it is decidedly more oppressive.

What the Koran either says or does
not say, however, has been largely
irrelevant to the present conditions
imposed on the women of Iran. Women
were promised the solutions to their
problems. The promisors were the
leaders of the revolution. But now,
once the revolution is over, those
same leaders (all of which are men
and are either clergy or are extremely
well versed in the Koran) have mal-
iciously and prejudicially selected,
grossly distorted, and brutally im-
plemented only those portions of Is-
lamic philosophy which further their
own male dominance. The Ayatollah

MORE ON PAGE 10