Resignation Explained

Dear Sisters at Big Mama Rag,

I was a member of the Sagaris collective for 1½ years, until the end of Session 1 at which time I resigned. I'm writing this letter to explain the reasons for my resignation and to give my position on the future of Sagaris in terms of my analysis of the politics of the collective.

I began working with the collective because, although other women in the collective had certain skills, I felt the collective needed the kind of political input and organizing skills which I had to offer as well. There were differences between myself and most of the collective members from the beginning. I was a class conscious working-class woman in a collective of women who had a primarily middle-class perspective. I identified strongly as a political woman in a collective which did not have a clear political perspective or methodology for examining issues.

One of our major failings was that issues were dealt with primarily within the context of the end product of Sagaris, to the exclusion of the political work that needed to be done within the collective itself. Connections were not made adequately between concrete issues and the reflection that these had on the politics of the collective. This was partly a result of my own inadequate organizing, partly the result of defensiveness and lack of political consciousness of the collective, and partly a function of the lack of time and resources that we had available. Issues not having a political context gave the collective a chance to pay lip service to certain issues without understanding the political implications of them and, therefore, without really having the tools to follow through on them.

Without the backup of a whole perspective, issues were not taken seriously.

Class and Race

Class and race issues were dealt with superficially when at all. There are significant, albeit subtle, issues which should have been considerations in our planning. The fact that we were isolated geographically and that sessions were 5 weeks long made Sagaris inaccessible to working women, women without economic privilege, and women with families. Significantly, the primary emphasis was on economic ways of enabling these women to attend, rather than on planning a program that would be responsive to the needs and interests of working-class and Third World women. The point is not simply one of being aware of specific issues, but one of consciousness and perspective.

Although there were teachers at Sagaris who dealt well with these issues, it is important to realize that the forum concept, upon which Sagaris is based, allows for a token representation of teachers and courses that will raise class and race issues. Token representation is not a reflection of the total perspective.

Group Authoritarianism

In addition to disagreements about Sagaris, the institute, there were interpersonal political conflicts within the collective. There were struggles about the way in which members with economic privilege used that privilege in terms of oppressing other women and in terms of sharing their privilege. I was constantly criticized for being hypercritical (having too-high expectations) and for coming on too strong. Trying to get the collective to understand that part of my aggressiveness developed as a result of my class background where I had to fight to get something became progressively less successful. Much less could they accept that I felt good about these qualities. The collective began more and more to insist that I admit that these qualities were mostly a result of plain old personality, not class, and that I would really have to work on it if I wanted to get along with people.

While at Sagaris, I kept the struggles between myself and the collective private. The collective, including myself, felt that we should publicly support every decision the collective made, regardless of whether or not we actually agreed with it. At the time it seemed to me the most principled and constructive way a collective member could function. I now see it as a group authoritarianism, which stifles political growth through controlling the positive functions of dissent, individuality, and creativity. These should be public for a collective which is accountable to its constituency.

I was active at Sagaris in the Working Class Women's Caucus, but because of the collective’s ideology about internal struggle versus public struggle, my relationships and interactions with the working-class women were not put to use as a way to have more input into the political development of the collective and of Sagaris. In fact, an actual hostility on the part of the collective toward the whole issue of class was developed.

Although it was important to me that we be accountable for our politics and our actions, I never really analyzed what that meant in concrete terms of our relationship to other Sagaris women and to other feminists.

The request for our credentials as active feminists led some of us to believe that politically inexperienced feminists would be screened out. We believed then, that politically conscious, actively involved feminists were being solicited, and that we were coming to an institute seriously interested in meshing the experience and theories of radical feminists.

At the first community meeting, the real structure was presented to us by the Sagaris collective, who at that time presented themselves in name only. The final decision-making power lay with the Sagaris Collective, including the decision to make available or to withhold pertinent information. The needs of the “student body” were neither addressed nor solicited. There was no information given on insurance, and no adequate information on security procedures.

There was to be no economic class.

A five rather than six-day schedule was proposed by the collective. Women with children were promised childcare six days a week, through a staffed childcare facility, with a special day-care worker for older children.

On The Sagaris Splits

As a result of my determination to always support the collective publicly, when Sagaris women began raising the very issues that I had been struggling with within the collective, I found myself on the other side of the fence from the politics I believed in.

By the last days of the session I started understanding the mistakes that I had made throughout the Sagaris session. I was beginning to realize the utter disrespect my actions reflected toward other political women and toward my own politics. Part of the reason I was so out of touch with other Sagaris women in terms of dealing with many of these issues was that there was so little time. But part of the reason I had so little time was that I tried to deal with political issues in isolation and that makes it a much longer struggle.

Although I joined the collective aware of many of the differences between my political perspective and that of the other collective members, struggling with these issues within the collective became more and more unworkable throughout the summer. Political disagreements along with interpersonal conflicts led me to contemplate resigning. I finally did resign after my realization that the majority of the collective members wanted Sagaris to be a forum which presented a broad spectrum of feminist thought for which they felt it would not be fair for us to legislate what we thought were priorities. I and one other collective member felt we had a responsibility to make political decisions about the program.

Decision Making Process

In terms of the question that Jackie St. Joan raises at the end of her article about Sagaris: (see August issue) I share all of her concerns, but have come to somewhat different conclusions in terms of the ways that we can ensure that the collective is accountable to the radical Women’s Movement. Jackie's assumption, which is shared by some of the other women who were at Sagaris, is that one way of assuring that Sagaris reflects solid politics would be to have elected student and faculty representatives to the collective with voting power.

It seemed clear to me that the majority of students supported the collective, or at least felt that it was most constructive to leave the decision-making up to the collective and trust that it would be responsive to feedback and suggestions. Were teachers and students to elect representatives, I don’t think it would insure the kind of representation that many women wanted. This is not to mention the fact that Third World women were barely represented at Sagaris; working-class and older women were not well represented, etc. We need their input into the development of Sagaris’ program. The majority is not always right. I would rather see the collective make good decisions based on political thinking than follow what the majority wanted in terms of student representation or anything else.

It is important to note that the issue of student representation at Sagaris was raised at first only weakly, with little support. Not until the end of the first session when a greater number of women had lost a greater amount of faith in the collective, did the argument for student power get real support. This indicates to me that the issue is not one of student power as much as whether or not people trust the politics of the collective. In terms of providing a forum, that is, a wide representation of many feminist viewpoints, the current Sagaris collective has developed many skills to be able to do this. There are many feminists who would be most responsive to just that kind of program. Because the basic organizing has already been done and Sagaris is an already existing resource, I would hope that many women would encourage a more political program and functioning of the collective. If the collective does not develop the kind of program and institution, in which we had no decision-making power.

Our New Community

New members would, as we had done, sign the statement objecting to Ms. affiliation for the next two weeks, during which we would not participate in the Sagaris system.

Since daycare for our five children had been terminated, we made plans to collectivize childcare completely.

We formed a curriculum committee, whose membership was to be rotating, to make suggestions for scheduling and structuring. We collected from each member of the community a list of the classes and workshops she'd like to convene or see convened, along with suggestions for the forms that these might take. Part of each day was to be reserved for community meetings. We wanted to continue our process of fully collective decision-making. We tried in all our classes to relate the subject matter to the events surrounding our separation from Sagaris.

Criticism-Self Criticism

Yet even though we as a group chose to disassociate from the “prestigious” Sagaris, we still identified with remnants of it, as politics that many of us see the need for, maybe what we're talking about is a different collective and a different school. In Sisterhood and Struggle, Judy Cohen.

When we gave those who had been faculty members more attention, some deference and expected less out of them in terms of shitwork. Women became casual about attending meetings, coming on time, participating, and taking responsibility for what went on in the groups. The problem of unequal participation was never fully solved.

We were influenced by our class origins and class identification, and the absence of the perspective of third world women.

We criticize ourselves for perpetuating volunteerism.

The structure of our community meetings, where decisions for the entire group were reached, made necessary the use of the traditional skills of verbal communication and group discussion. Dependency on these skills involved a parallel dependency on the skills of writing and analysis as a form of valid political expression. In effect, some of us did not have the skills necessary to participate in the decision-making process.

We must strive to keep in mind the varied backgrounds and skills women bring to the feminist movement and provide a means whereby each woman can contribute equally according to her skills.