Big Mama Rag Vol. 6 No. 3

STRUGGLE

GETTING HEALTH RECORDS

Susan Goding

Within the last few months a federal law has been passed supposedly changing this, yet even with this new law doctors and hospitals may withhold information if they believe it is in the "best interest" of the patient to do so. Theoretically the qualification will only be used to protect the terminally ill who may suffer mental anguish for the rest of their lives and the mentally ill where their recovery will be affected.

While there may be a few instances where this is valid, many more times it will be used to relieve the health care provider of his responsibility to not only treat a patient but to also provide as much information as possible to the patient in order that she be involved in all decisions regarding her life.

It gives legal support to the idea that people need to be taken care of. That ultimately people cannot be responsible for their own lives.

This gives a very few people power to make decisions for many people concerning their physical, emotional and financial situation.

As long as the medical industry has the power to provide only information to people as it sees fit, deciding what is in the “best interest" of patients and what is not, it will be in control of the quality of health care. The medical profession is run by the people who can most benefit, financially and politically, by manipulating the information it gives to consumers of health care services, and treatment that has not been in the patients' best interest, especially by drug companies, for bigger profits is well documented.

There is no valid reason that everyone should not have a copy of theirs and their children's medical records in their possession. In a medical emergency, or where someone moves or goes to another doctor, having their own medical records would save time and hassles.

Knowing past treatments and what tests have been done is basic to being an informed participant in health care. With this information people will be able to compare their medical treatment with other people. Only when health care is demystified and patients have the information to make informed decisions will their "best interests" be served.

&

Kathy Pritchett 723 E. 17th Ave

(303) 861-1166 Denver, CO 80203

10% DISCOUNT

ON PURCHASES*

OF $10 OR MORE
THROUGH MARCH 25

* this does not include
items already discounted.

FAMOUS WOMYN
T-SHIRTS

MARKED DOWN 20%
TO $4.20

No, ALL RECORD ALBUMS
MARKED DOWN
FROM $5.32 TO $4.28

LOW COOL TOR

1743 LIALNUT, BOULDER, COLORADO

(303) 473-9447 80202
10 AM - 6 PM TUESDAY - SATURDAY

in Denver

Page 7

Woman's Health Service Opens

The Women's Health, Education and Referral Service (WHERS) is opening March 17th at 1744 Vine St., Denver, and will be open for services twice a week. WHERS is a group of Capitol Hill women who believe that the present health care system is not giving adequate health care information to women and does not offer any alternatives.

WHERS believe that some of the major ways the health care system does not meet women's needs are:

- That health care workers are not responsive to women and their needs.

- That they do not recognize nutrition and stress as two major factors of disease.

- That women are offered birth control methods detrimental to their bodies.

- That women are in danger of losing and some already have lost the right to determine whether they will have children or not.

- That women are being pressured by the use of scare tactics to accept medications and medical procedures that are harmful to them by a medical profession that is predominately male.

- That for most women, their birthing experiences are not as positive as they could be and their newborn children are born from a warm, dark, watery place into the bright, cold, unprotected space where they are separated from their loved ones, handled roughly and not respected for what they've been through.

- That women are given misinformation about their own sexuality.

- That women in need of emotional support and help are financially, sexually and emotionally exploited by the mental health industry.

- And finally that women as consumers demand good health care at a cost they can afford and by people who are sensitive to their health care needs.

WHERS will be providing health care classes, for donations from participants, in the following areas:

1. The ovulation mucous method of birth control.

2. Basic Nutrition.

3. Raw foods and healing diets.

4. A rap group and workshop on female sexuality.

5. Joyous Homebirth.

6. Midwifery study group.

7. Women's rap group that will be ongoing and those topics will be determined by the participants.

8. Young women's support group.

9. Self-help exams - teaching vaginal and breast exams.

10. Herbalism.

The center will also offer referrals, printouts, patient advocates, labor coach, childcare reference materials and for women interested in sharing what they know and facilitating changes in the health care available in Denver.

Women who have anything to share or energy and time please contact WHERS.

Women's Health, Education and Referral Service is located at 1744 Vine St., Denver and will be open Friday evenings from 6-10 pm and Saturdays from 10 am - 3 pm. Classes may be held at other times. Call 333-5611 or 388-8036.

Lesbians Watch Out

Susan Goding

Lesbians be aware. Denver General Hospital apparently has a policy of unethical treatment towards lesbians. Three lesbians have been treated very unethically by three different health care providers on separate occasions.

One lesbian, suffering from an excruciating uterine infection, went to the emergency room of DGH. During the exam the doctor questioned her on her method of birth control. While this questioning was valid he would not accept her answer that she used no birth control. Finally she told him she was a lesbian. That ended the questioning and he finished the exam, prescribed a drug, and told her to get dressed and come into his office.

When she came in and sat down he sat forward and said, "I've always wondered about lesbians. What do you do? Do you use any instruments?”

On another occasion a lesbian saw another doctor who, during a general physical, questioned her on her method of birth control. He was also not content with her answer that she used none. Finally she said she was a lesbian. Thereupon he began questioning her about the nurse practitioner at the hospital who had recommended the physical; how well did she know her, did she see her outside of the hospital, etc.

A third lesbian visited the clinic and was seen by a woman nurse practitioner. Her symptoms were vague achiness and she had a history of thyroid problems. The practitioner started checking her reflexes and got to the knees. Seeing that her legs were quite hairy and that she wore boots and had a motorcycle helmet, she stopped the exam and asked, “Are you heterosexual or homosexual?" After hearing the answer she said she'd finish the exam but thought what she really needed was therapy. The thyroid test was negative and she suggested setting up an appointment with a therapist that night. The lesbian declined and left. Wanting to know what the practitioner had put in her medical record, she found that while there was no mention of lesbianism, she had had a swollen thyroid and swollen glands which the practitioner had not mentioned during the exam.

Lesbians who have received questionable treatment because of their sexual preference at Denver General should report the incident, date and health care provider's name to the Patient Care Committee, the head of nurses and the administrator's office. Also, the provider should be confronted right then if possible. Otherwise, go through the channels; this must be done within a few days of the incident.

Women should also know that they can demand that a woman be present during their exams. Medical records can be examined free of charge in the

MORE ON PAGE 10

Quest In Trouble

Quest magazine is in critical financial need. In order to bring out the next issue, or for that matter to continue publishing, it must raise $2000.

As a forum for political discussion, Quest has been important in developing current feminist theory and analysis. Its next issue will be "International Women".

Send $9 for a year's subscription or a donation to Quest, a feminist quantity, P.O. Box 884%, Washington, D.C. 20003.