international

Harassment Escalates To Supporters Of The Five

(Sources for the following
article include: Bulldozer;
Free the Five Newsletter;
Northwest Passage; and Bul-
letin. Compiled by Joan Petti-
john)

“We move toward freedom by
stepping away from the sys- —
tem's attempts at victimizing
us. By acting. It is not easy
because the system deals

resistance

harshly with those who are
not victims, and who act. And
it escalates in response to
the accuracy and success of
our acts. But we will never
see freedom in our lives, or
our children's without taking
those risks." Free the Five
Newsletter

On January 20th, five people
were arrested in Canada (see
Aug/Sept issue -BMR) and have
been charged with a series of
political bombings. The Van-
couver Five, Julie Belmas,

Ann Hansen, Gary Hannah, Doug
Stewart, and Brent Taylor,
face 19-24 charges each in-
cluding firebombings of three
porn video outlets (Red Hot
Video); sabotage of Litton In-
dustries which produces the
guidance system for cruise
missiles; and sabotage of a
controversial power plant, as
well as a variety of charges
relating to political conspir-
acy. They are now in prison,
denied bail, and face four
separate trials, the first to
have begun September 12th.

The investigation began a-
mong environmental activists
following the bombing of B.C.

Hydro's power plant. Although
B.C. Hydro offered a reward
of $125,000 to be used to bait
the dozens of people who were
interrogated, the investiga-
tion and reward were to no a-
vail. Following the Red Hot
Video firebombings a "joint
forces operation" was formed
involving local police, Cana-
dian Bureau of Investigation
and Vancouver Integrated In-
telligence Unit forces, among
others and an intensive cam-
paign to repress political
activity and manipulate the
media began.

The police cut off unemploy-
ment benefits of one woman
and offered another a "suit-
case full of money," but both
refused to collaborate. Des-
pite these attempts to co-
erce and buy testimony, the
police have no substantive
witnesses against the Five
and have instead compiled
mountains of wiretap and
roombugging tapes to prove
that they have captured an
"anarchist-terrorist cell."

The Canadian government/
police have continued to es-
calate their harassment of
all groups who maintain their
support of the Five. On Mon-
day, June 13th, fourteen or
fifteen Toronto cops raided
the home/office of Bulldozer,
a publication by and for po-
litical prisoners, and seized
their mailing list, political
papers, and typeset galleys
for the issue in production.
The political charges against
them are “sabotage of Litton"
and "Seditious Libel (the ad-
vocation of the use of force
to overthrow the government
without authority) and if
they are guilty then so are
many more of us.

A week after the raid,
Colleen Crosby, who had lived
at the Bulldozer collective
house for several months was
arrested and charged with
‘procuring an abortion and
procuring instruments for an
abortion." The only reason
that enough information was
gathered to lay such charges
was because of the intensive
surveillance that we were un-
der. Colleen has no involve-
ment with either Bulldozer or
Support work for the Five.

Bulldozer After her arrest,
the police offered to drop
the charges if she told them
what she knew about Litton,
which she did/could not do.
Other defense and support
groups have formed since the

arrests of the Five and the
houses of a number of these

groups have been raided (four
houses and twelve women) and
at one home the police told
two of the women "we know that
you are lesbians." Although
searches were done, no charges
were made.

MORE ON PAGE 21

america held hostage (day 2030)

At the start of the summer RayGun appointed Henry K.
to head a commission that would "forge" long term policy
towards Central America. And all the time we thought that
was already decided--squash the peoples' revolutions and
back the dictators. How else does imperialism goose-step
on?

Trickie Dickie Nixon got his pardon for crimes against
the people by bargaining with Jerry Ford. Ford got the
presidency--Nixon got off the hook. All ancient history,
but a recent article brought it up--we knew it then, that's
plea bargaining at a high level.

Vail, Co.-- playground of the wealthy, saw
Ford, Henry K., Giscard d'Estaing, Helmut
Schmidt and other biggies in economy,

making and corporations meet.
They discussed, very privately,
trade, economic policy and the
political arena of the Pacific
Basin. Very, very private.
Confidential records, from
Dow Chemical and four other
companies that manufactured
Agent Orange were opened in a
Uniondale, NY court case. The

records showed that Dow knew, even before the mid-60's,
that exposure to dioxin might cause serious illness. And
yet, the Air Force can't find any exposed veteran's death
directly connected to Agent Orange. Maj. Gen. M. A. Chesney,
deputy AF surgeon general said, "War is hell. You've got
to win it. Agent Orange is a war agent. . .It protected
more lives than it hurt." If war is hell, how come it is
the boys' all-time favorite game?

RayGun certainly stands by his friends. The killing of
Benigno Aquino by dictator Marcos has not dimmed his appre-
ciation of Philippine "democracy."

The U.S. Court of Appeals ruled that the RayGun admin-
istration used illegal coercion last year when it tried
to get 4 million aged, blind and otherwise differently
abled welfare recipients to disclose how much they are
worth. The administration had hinted that SSI benefits
might be denied if the people refused to let the government
access to their tax returns. They wanted the people off
the rolls and the SSI money into "defense." Hound the
people and stockpile the weapons--our glorious leaders are
really all heart.

The escalation of U.S. troops and air and sea support
in Lebanon, no matter how you cut it, is war. The papers
report how many U.S. Marines are killed, but never any
Lebanese, Druse or Syrian people. And our troops are
called "Peacekeepers."

RayGun is trying to get more money for covert operations
in Nicaragua and more for his troops in Honduras. While
CIA people are worried that too much open investigation
of their activities might endanger their slimy boys and
their killing activities, the House has cut appropriations
for the making of nerve gas. They cut $114.6 million in
half, but it will still kill lots of people.

Will Watts go, will he stay? Burning issues of our day!
Listening to Watts' latest speech when he spoke so bigoted
was the sound of men's laughter in the audience and their
approval and appreciation of what he said. By their
laughing the bimbos showed they were all in the Old Boys
Club and understood! Get rid of them all--off with their
heads.

Big Mama

Rag, October, 1983 - Page 17