Tucson GYN. Acquitted  
of Raping Patients  

Veronica Angel  

A Tucson gynecologist, Harold  
G. Carstensen, was acquitted of  
two charges of first degree rape  
and one charge of lewd and  
lascivious acts in December last  
year. The charges were brought  
against the Tucson gynecologist  
by two of his former patients.  
Four other women also testified  
to similar incidents occurring  
between them and the doctor,  
although they were not bringing  
charges.  

A 24-year-old married  
woman, on whose behalf the se-  
cond charge of first degree rape  
was brought, testified that she  

had had six-month check-ups  
several times before the assault  
and that she had ceased to be his  
patient as a result of what oc-  
curred on her last visit, in March,  
1971. The witness related that  
she had gone into the examining  
room, prepared for the examina-  
tion and Carstensen spoke to her  
during the bimanual. The  
witness said the nurse was pre-  

sent at the beginning, but that  
she didn’t know at what point  
she was left alone with  
Carstensen.  
Raped During Exam  

He removed his glove and she  
assumed the examination was  
over, but he said, “No, it’s not  
over” and asked her to scoot  
further down on the table. She  
complied, whereupon he began  
manipulating her clitoris  
manually. At this time  
Carstensen questioned her  
regarding her “sensitivity.” Subsequently she felt his hands on  
her legs and his body up next to  
her. The woman stated she felt  
something penetrate her vagina.  
“At first I thought it was his  
hands and then he pulled out  
and pushed in again... he had  
both hands on my legs.” She  
said at this point, “My God, what  
are you doing to me?” and push-  
ed away. She asked him five or  
six times what he was doing and  
claimed that when she pushed  
away he turned to the side and  
appeared as though he might be  

zipping his pants. The witness  
maintained that Carstensen  
refused to answer her and that  
she had no further conversation  
with him.  

Under direct examination the  
witness maintained that there  
are very different tactile feelings  
associated with a penis, fingers  
or a speculum insertion into the  
vagina. She based this state-  
ment on previous experience  
with sexual intercourse and  
gynecological examinations,  
and felt sure that what had  
penetrated her was a penis — in  
fact, Carstensen’s.  

Testimony from five other  
witnesses read much the same  
as the foregoing and have been  
omitted so as not to turn this arti-  
cle into a pornographic reading.  
It is important to say that the  
defense attempted to  
characterize the women as  
neurotic and fantasy-oriented.  
One of the witnesses who had  
had drug experiences was  
questioned as to whether or not  
she had ever had LSD flash  
backs.  

Arizona Rape Laws —  
The Carstensen Case  

Veronica Angel  

Legislative changes will not  
stop rape, but such changes  
could humanize the legal  
procedure for victims. For exam-  
ple, the rape laws in Arizona  
allow evidence concerning the  
victim’s prior sexual history,  
even though it may be im-  
material to the actual assault. If  
the victim is having, or has had,  
sexual relations with a man not  
her husband she is labeled  
“unchaste,” the implication be-  
ing that she is open to any and all  
sexual advances.  

This is a clear indication that,  
as far as the law is concerned,  
women have no right to control  
their own sexuality. Evidence of  
prior sexual experience was ad-  
mitted against all the women  

who testified against  
Carstensen, and was freely used  
to destroy their credibility as  
witnesses.  

Pending legislation, co-  
sponsored by Rep. Diane Mc-  
Carthy and Sen. John Roeder,  
would make the victim’s sexual  
history admissible only if the  
judge, after hearing the  
evidence in chambers, out of the  
presence of the jury, ruled it ad-  
missible.  

The proposed legislation  
would make it a distinct  
possibility that the victim would  
be required to testify about her  
past sexual history in the event  
that such evidence was ruled ad-  
missible, a loophole which  
seems to negate the supposed  
purpose of this particular  
change in the statutes. The fact  
that such testimony was ad-  
missible in the Carstensen case,  
although the prosecution made  
a motion in limine to have it ex-  
cluded, indicates that we cannot  

reasonably expect that the  
judiciary will spare the witness  
this ordeal, and that it will con-  
tinue to prejudice juries against  
the woman.  
Wives Can Prosecute  

It is interesting to note that un-  
der the language of the bill,  
husbands can be prosecuted by  
their wives — the exact wording  
reads: “A person is guilty... if  
the person engages in sexual in-  
tercourse with another person  
under any of the following cir-  
cumstances.” The key words  
here are “with another person”  
since the present laws state  
“with a person not the wife...”  

How many women will bring suit  

against their husbands is dif-  
ficult to foresee, but women es-  
tranged from their husbands  
would now have recourse to the  
law if they were raped by him.  
In attempting to “modernize  
the laws relating to sexual  
assaults... and to make the laws  
relate more rationally to the  
reality of the crimes and to make  
the law more enlightened and  
less emotional...” the proposed  
reforms would attempt to  
redefine rape by the broader  
term “sexual assault” and in-  
clude “contact between the  
mouth and anus, penis or vulva  
or between the penis and the  
anus or vulva or between the  
anus or vulva and any artificial  
substitute.”  

Whether hands are con-  
sidered an artificial substitute is  
not mentioned, and the section  
defining sexual intercourse  
could use some clarification on  
this point. In reference to the  
reforms mentioned above, for  
the purposes of prosecution in  
The State of Arizona vs.  
Carstensen, the alleged clitoral  
manipulation might have fallen  
reasonably into the class “sex-  
ual assault,” whereas in fact it  
was charged under the lewd and  
lascivious statute, a law whose  
constitutionality has been wide-  
ly questioned. Indications are  
that even with the passage of  
statutes dealing with “sexual  
assault” the lewd and lascivious  
laws will still be on the books.  

More on Page 19  

Big Mama Rag Vol. 3-A, No. 1  

CREATIVE  
AWARENESS  

Nancy Boyd  

7 + 7 = 3. Eternal duality is in the motion of becoming trinity.  
Two things joined become what they always were, the third  
thing being the unity, the whole. We are aware of only two  
things: opposites. But the seeds of anything that is seen as op-  
posite (good/evil, light/dark, etc.) is in reality only the essence  
of its original possibilities, 1 + 1 = 3.  

Trial of Billy Jack  

Out of all the trash on the screen these days, there is at least one  
movie worth seeing: The Trial of Billy Jack. While the multiple levels of  
this movie are nearly infinite, we were interested in the fact that Billy  
Jack’s trial is a psychic one. For that reason, nothing in the film is as  
simple as it appears. We would like to discuss some of the messages of  
this film from a psychic viewpoint. Unfortunately, there is not enough  
space to cover all the possibilities. A group of psychics viewed and dis-  
cussed this film, and our conclusions and thoughts are highlighted  
here.  

The central image is the overcoming of power struggles and games,  
the message being that we can’t overcome them in someone else, only  
in ourselves.  

Contrary to literary analysis, Billy Jack is not the hero of the movie.  
The “hero” is an idea: the sacredness of the life-force. This idea flows  
through all interactions of the characters and all the messages in the  
film. Between the interactions, there is a balancing of energies among  
the characters and a discovery of the illusive nature of reality. Billy Jack  
seeks the meaning of that which is already manifest in the Indian ways  
and in the person of Jean, founder of the Freedom School.  

It is more than significant that Billy Jack’s spiritual guide is female;  
that his struggles are with men and male forces; that his failures involve  
an unwillingness to face the violence within himself; that Jean is  
already where Billy Jack wants to be. Is there a message here in the  
differences between male and female, yin and yang, violence and  
peace?  

Jean's “message” is that creativity is structuring order out of chaos;  
that responsibility for creativity is leadership; that leadership is  
teaching respect for the life-force by giving respect (for the life-force in  
others).  

Billy Jack's spiritual guide is saying very much the same thing: that to  
discover our personal power, there are many levels we must pass  
through, and we must overcome the violence within ourselves at each  
level. At every level, we must be secure within our center; we must be in  
harmony with ourselves; we must creatively overcome our own  
violence. We must structure order, meaning, and peace out of our own  
chaos to find our center. We must overcome the fear of our own death to  
destroy the power of fear over us; we must overcome the fear of  
violence to destroy the power of violence over us.  

The hopeful thing is that if we accept the premise that facing the  
violence within oneself is a major (and possibly final) step to being  
secure in one’s center, then women have a better chance than men.  
While there is the potential for violence in all of us, women are not near-  
ly so caught up in the power of it as are men, and, perhaps naturally,  
women will tend to seek non-violent alternatives in any given situation,  
much more spontaneously than do men. (This and related ideas should  
be explored for a comparison of the psychic potentials and differences  
of women and men!)  

One of the most significant messages of the film is the meaning of  
psychic power as it relates to the life-force. In the film, the Indian  
culture represents psychic power. No violence occurs in the movie  
when the Indians move as a group, united, to take action. Psychic  
power, used collectively, is ultimate power — power that can be used  
for either good or evil. Collective psychic power is shown by the Indians,  
by the students of the Freedom School, and by the townspeople,  
National Guard and police. The Indians are the only ones using collec-  
tive psychic power creatively, which is a lesson Billy Jack and the  

students are trying to learn for themselves. (The Indian techniques for  

psychic power would be a topic for discussion all  
by itself.  

The main point, though, is that the struggles of the characters in this  
film are the struggles of us all. The psychic trial of Billy Jack is the trial of  
each of us for our willingness to respect the sacredness of the life-force  
within ourselves and others. It is the story of the test of our times, a story  
we are all writing, a story whose outcome depends on the lessons we  
learn and the choices we make. It is not too late to use our psychic  
power creatively, respectfully, collectively. Our survival depends on  
how responsibly we write our own stories.  

About This Column  

To begin a psychic journey, start with the seeds of the unknown  
within. What are those seeds? What can we do with them? The seeds of  
our awareness are the unlimited possibilities within us, the creative  
potentials of becoming whole.  

Starting from this point, this column is devoted to the search for truth,  
offering practical guidelines to the “unknown.” There is a growing com-  
munity of psychics in Denver. We are here to help. Tell us what you  
need. If you have questions or problems, send them to 8/VA in care of  
this column. We will answer as many as we can. (No miracles are  
promised, but all miracles are possible.) If you have needs which cannot  
be met through a column, let us know that too, and we will work on it.  

Many thanks to my friend Jeremy for creating this column with me,  
and to ESP for her accurate drawing of the symbol we conceived, which  
represents life-force within Knowledge. The ideas for this column come  
to us during alpha-level meditation.