INTERVIEW |

Local Women’s Band

Says What They Think

Bourge Miller

Beverly Mayes, Sylvia Brady, Sharon Bankes. Three talented women who, as individuals, have come together to form the musical group known as B.S. Sugar and Company. Although the group is now in what they call its “infant stages,” none of the women are strangers to professional music. Beverly and Sylvia, who are sisters, started performing as a duo 11 years ago in California. They have performed together off and on ever since. Two and a half years ago, Sharon, who sang with various rock groups, joined them and a close personal and musical bond was formed.

Sylvia, who plays primarily lead guitar, designed and built the sound system they now use. Beverly, who along with Sharon, lends her considerable vocal talents to the group, plays both 12-string and bass guitar.

In a small room in the Capital Plaza Inn, crowded with the activity of preparing for the evening's show, they talked about their music, its message, and its place in raising a larger consciousness in all of us.

BMR: As women, do you generally dress for your audience, giving a great deal of thought to projecting yourself visually in a certain way?

SHARON: We're not trying to get into a bag of three women looking alike, but we are trying to project a group image. Too often the people are maybe attracted to one thing on the stage and not us as a group. It’s like we want... we’re blending in with each other as much as with our music.

BEV: We do wish to produce a very solid front. A very solid group image. The group is a coordination of all of our efforts and we want our group image to be a coordination of all of our efforts.

The women consider that they are a local product musically. Beverly and Sharon had given up music in California because of the ways in which they felt they were being taken advantage of as women. Never quite being able to escape those particular circumstances until recently, they had not performed for ten months prior to this current engagement, preferring to devote their time and energy developing their other talents and strengths.

BEV: The bar scene is very difficult to handle because you constantly have people pulling at you and drawing everything away from you and not really adding anything back.

But they decided to regroup and start again after realizing that music was their deepest interest and because

BEV: ...from an economic standpoint we found that as women we can make more money doing music for a few hours a day.

SYLVIA: We're not being sold as sex objects either in our performances or otherwise. And I think perhaps that’s what was wrong before. We became a product.

BMR: Are there any specific problems or disappointments in marketing your music or yourselves as a group that you feel have grown out of being an all-women’s band?

SYLVIA: There is wonderment on many people's part at first. It's a relatively new thing. Women coming together in groups to do things has been an unusual thing culturally. I would say we meet reluctance, but not non-acceptance. So far.

BEV: Of course whenever you're doing this type of thing, you’re in essence in a fishbowl and people are going to pick you apart. But from a behind-the-scenes standpoint, when Sylvia and I were together, I felt we were a freak. People would come just strictly to see what two girls were doing.

SHARON: (laughing) Now they come to see what three are doing.

BEV: In some instances we were catered to because we were women. In other instances we met with very strong opposition because we had more or less crossed a barrier.

BMR: Women aren’t supposed to do that sort of thing?

BEV: It’s alright if they do it, but they can’t be good at it.

SHARON: And that can’t be their main objective.

BEV: Not if you're playing an instrument. If you were a singer or a tambourine player or wore a sexy gown, that was fine. You were in your place and limited.

BMR: Don’t you think that’s symptomatic of the culture rather than the music business?

BEV: Yes, but that’s being alleviated. We don’t seem to meet the same opposition now. There is a certain acceptance now that we are women, we do this thing, and do it reasonably well. We’re not put down nor do other people feel threatened by us.

BMR: Don’t you think the women’s movement has helped that?

BEV: Yes, and we've found we appeal to a very wide variety of people... so ultimately we would like to have a message.

BMR: Is there one group of people or a particular audience you ultimately want to speak to through your music?

BEV: I think my message, and I don’t know if Sharon and Sylvia would go along with me completely, would be the total raising of everyone’s consciousness. To help people accept one another as human beings. First. Second, whatever else. I am a person first,

“We have to get our foot in the door first,” says Sharon Bankes, a member of the all-women band known as B.S. Sugar. From left to right: Sylvia Brady, Sharon Bankes, and Beverly Mayes. Photo By Germain Munoz

then a musician, then a woman. I feel that human beings can accept each other as human beings on a more open level. I feel we should look at one another first as persons and then whatever you do. And not put somebody down because they do something different than you or feel differently or act differently. I feel we have to learn to allow space for one another and at the same time being careful that our space doesn't infringe on someone else's.

BMR: That’s a very humanistic philosophy. Are any or all of you strong Feminists?

SHARON: In my own little realm I never had that much difficulty being a woman. I mostly spaced everybody out anyway. Lately, I’ve come to realize the difficulty in being a woman first. First you've got to prove something there. Then maybe they’ll look at your other talents. If they think you have one.

SYLVIA: I have a very humanistic feeling about the whole race. But there are problems women face, I’ve certainly faced a few in my life, that need to be equalized.

BEV: I think there are a lot of inequities in many areas. And until we as human beings can learn to live with one another those inequities will exist. The Feminist Movement. Black. Chicano. Gay Liberation. To me that’s like taking an aspirin when you should be taking penicillin. I think it’s treating the symptoms, not the cause.

BMR: You must be aware that to many women you may already be a certain symbol of success. Another group of women who've “made it.” Do you feel a particular burden for that?

SHARON: No. Absolutely not. I feel like marching for it. But marching for it in my own way, O.K.? I can't go out and march for Gay Liberation, or march for women. I don’t have the time for one thing. But if we ever do make it big, maybe I could be in a better position to help someone or something.

BEV: At this particular moment we don’t have the space to allow for a lot of things we’d like to allow for. To sum up our feeling about the whole thing: you can only raise someone else to your level. So if you're here (indicating waist level) you can only bring them up this high. But if you’re here (indicating a level above her head) you can bring them up this high. And so I think our primary effort at this time will be devoted to our music because our music is our method of communication. And it's not all that we want it to be because there's not been time to say everything we want to say. But it will get said.

BMR: So in a way you're making some concessions, in a sense, as a means to an end.

BEV: Right.

SHARON: Exactly.

SYLVIA: I don’t know what you mean by concessions.

BMR: I meant that there are certain things you want to do with your music. The type of music you were doing Saturday night was very middle of the road, popular tunes and so forth, but by and large designed not to offend. Commercial. I assume this is not the music you'd rather be doing, ultimately, but you're doing it for a purpose, i.e. to establish yourselves on a firm foundation to go on and do other things. In that sense I meant making a concession.

SYLVIA: Right. Exactly. That's the concession. I'd hoped you'd done it right.

BMR: There is an immense amount of power that any form of mass communication wields. Advertising is one. Music is really no different. And there is an enormous responsibility that goes with that power. With music, the means of communication are even broader because music is more universal. It transcends the language. Putting myself in your place, and being a strong Feminist, if I had your talents I'd want to use them to further that particular cause. I wonder if you feel the same and if you feel you have to hold yourselves back in some areas so as not to offend now in order to someday...

SHARON: ...we have to get our foot in the door first.

BEV: Right.

BEV: We intend to lay a very concrete foundation. Because of our ideas of Ourself, and I say Ourself as one, because we are as one. Individually we are stronger about some things than we are about others. Sylvia and Sharon are both probably stronger Feminists than I am. But by the same token, with Ourself, yes, I would say we are somewhat Feminist. And yes, I feel we have some messages in that.

SYLVIA: I think what she’s trying to get at... People need to work at all levels for their particular cause each person has their own little thing that suits them to work for. And we would work for something like that (Feminism) because things like that need to be done first before the larger consciousness that Beverly is talking about can be achieved. The Blacks need their freedom first, then they'll be equals and able to function on this great consciousness level... women, I think, need equality, then everybody’ll be able to function a little better. And I think you have to meet those things in very small ways. And that’s the thing we try to do that we aren't making any concessions about. For instance, something that we use when we go on the stage and it’s probably misleading culturally. Everybody does it and if we can do one small thing to change that, we will have done something. We say “Good evening, ladies and gentlemen, welcome” to wherever we are. Beverly said... don’t you think we should be using something like hello everybody, good evening persons, or something like that. To let people know those differences don't exist.

SHARON: That separation.

SYLVIA: And I feel things get done in these small ways. A person who is aware that there is an injustice or an inequality has to try to change it. People are culturally habituated to saying things that are not equal or not just. Habits are really hard to break, and people like us, who have some influence over what goes on... if we start changes, perhaps they'll manifest themselves in other people... I think it’s the small things you have to

More on Page 19