Hot on the Presses

Moon Books

Andrea Chesman

As feminist presses go, Moon Books offers an impressively varied list. Their newest book, Lost Goddesses of Early Greece ($4.95 paper) by Charlene Spretnak, is an entirely new collection of pre-Hellenic goddesses, stripped of patriarchal interpretations, and exquisitely illustrated by Edith Geever.

One doesn't need to be involved with the practice of women's spirituality to appreciate Spretnak's portraits of these independent, compassionate goddesses. Combining historical research with poetic myth-making, Spretnak offers a brief history of each of the ten goddesses in the book along with an original reconstruction of the myth.

Unfortunately, it is all too brief. Spretnak's historical backgrounds provide just a beginning, a taste. Although her helpful bibliography and generous footnotes enable the reader to pick up where she began, one can't help but wish that Spretnak had offered more herself. The myths too, beautifully written, are not developed enough, and often lack the dramatic tension of a good story.

But even with the brevity of the material, Lost Goddesses claims serious attention. Who could fail to be captivated by this feminist reconstruction? Imagine a Persephone who was not raped and carried off to the underworld as Homer wrote, but rather chose to go to the underworld to comfort the bewildered dead. And who could fail to be charmed when "Persephone ascended from a dark chasm, there was Demeter with a cape of white crocus for Her Daughter. They ran to each other and hugged and cried and laughed and hugged and danced. The mortals saw everywhere the miracles of Demeter's bliss and rejoiced in the new life of spring." (p. 110)

Moon Books began in 1976 with a commitment to making a wide variety of feminist materials available to the general market. To this end, they negotiated a distribution arrangement with Random House. That this arrangement was successful is attested to by the fact that within six months of publication they had sold over 25,000 volumes of their first four titles. Although the publisher's brochure continues to claim joint distribution, the new book, Lost Goddesses, is distributed only through Women in Distribution and Moon Books. Whether this means that Random House and Moon Books have met a parting of the ways is not clear. What is clear is that distribution remains one of the gravest problems feminist presses face.

Other titles from Moon Books include Moon, Moon ($7.95 paper, $15.00 cloth) by Anne Kent Rush, an exploration of the moon's influence on women's culture from ancient times to the present. Blood Ties ($3.95 cloth) by Anica Vesel Mander is an autobiographical account of a woman's search for her female heritage through interviews with her maternal grandmother. A science fiction novel, The Kin of Ata Are Waiting for You ($3.95 paper, $6.95 cloth) by Dorothy Bryant and From a Spanish Prison ($6.95 cloth) by Eva Forest, a diary written from solitary confinement, round out Moon Books' first year of publishing.

In 1977, Moon Books brought out two books. The Great Sioux Nation: Sitting in Judgment on America ($5.95 paper, $10.00 cloth) by Roxanne Dunbar Ortiz was co-published with the American Indian Treaty Council Information Center. It is a book of oral history of the Sioux people, with current information on Wounded Knee and other struggles of the Indian peoples. From the former editors of Amazon Quarterly, Laurel Galena and Gina Covina, Moon Books offers The New Lesbians ($4.95 paper), a collection of interviews with women which defy all the old stereotypes of lesbians.

Book and general information inquiries can be sent to Moon Books, PO Box 9223, Berkeley CA 94709. All orders can be sent to W.I.N.D., Box 8858, Washington, D.C. 20003.

Answer on pg 11

21. Jane (1850-1935)  
23. do opposite of (pref.)  
25. me and my  
27. women's  
29. thy debate  
31. we never seem to get our money's worth with this  

Women"

corp.

ACROSS

1. equal s  
5. what we used to worry about showing  

10. 1975  

commerce  

12. offspring lacking clitoris  

13. enthusiastic  

14th letter  

"Lady with a na  

what some would do to gays  

behold  

21. what Anita would be if she found out her daughter was one  

location of sexist myth  

"What lesbians _ "  

25. Acts (suf)  

26. leg plumage  

28. bill of lading (abbr.)  

"Such _ shooting *  

bind :  

upper limb  

34. pale  

357-% Minutes"  

Incorrect  

Guide to  

Women’s Publishing  

Guide to Women's Publishing  
Polly Joan and Andrea Chesman  
Dustbooks, 1978  

$4.95/paper, 296 pages  

Kathy Riley  

At first glance, a directory of women's publishing resources may not seem like something anyone would read from cover to cover. Reference works, after all, are meant to be sampled and then stored permanently next to your dictionary.

Yet, Guide to Women's Publishing does make fine reading. It's not only an excellent source of information, but it also provides a sort of capsule history of the incredible growth of women's presses, newspapers, journals and support services over the past ten years.

The book is divided into five sections. The first, Feminist Journals—which focuses on literary, art, cultural and political magazines—also contains a section on women's studies publications. I've never seen one compiled anywhere else. (Women's studies journals are generally under-read by feminists—mostly because the political value of the material is undercut by the journal's ties to male-dominated university systems, but also because the academic jargon can be so hard to read through.)

Andrea Chesman (whose column "Hot on the Presses" appears in BMR) does a fine analysis on both points in her introduction to the chapter, and the resulting list is a good resource for finding some of the exciting work being done by university women who, as Andrea says, “are revising history, reclaiming biology, transforming psychology, destroying myths of sociology and discovering lost literature, art and music."

Other chapters deal with women's newspapers, presses, distribution systems, and other resources such as libraries, directories, writers' organizations and bookstores.

The section on presses, which takes up nearly half of the space of the book, includes dozens of small presses which have published only 1 or 2 titles as well as the larger ones (Diana, Daughters, The Feminist Press). Also included in the chapter are lists of women printers and print shops and non-sexist children's presses.

The listing for each press varies, but generally includes a short history, form of organization (collectively run or not), the kinds of material it seeks, and whether or not manuscripts are solicited. As you might expect with a directory, there is no real analysis of the larger, more powerful presses in relation to the rest of the movement. The book is a place to begin research.

One of the strengths of the book is that it did not attempt to limit the listings to those presses or journals that have a truly feminist structure and purpose. The authors say they debated for a long time whether the book should be a guide to "women's" publishing or "feminist" publishing. It's a debate that "still rages within us," they say. Their decision, a guide to women's publishing, was made on a rather curious analogy to gardens.

("If we have sympathy for weeds, why not for apolitical women's publishing? ...when do weeds transform into edible fruit?) In any case, the book has many sources and tidbits it might not have otherwise had the authors decided to do a different book. For example, presses which include some men in ownership or operation are included if they have shown a real commitment to publishing feminist work. There aren't many, but the few in that category have generally also shown a strong commitment to publishing minority authors as well. Also, a few women's journals with little or no politics are included if they have some features (fine graphics, etc.) that intrigue the authors. In any case, you'll know what to expect if you write away for information.

And by the time you've finished the book, you'll find you've learned a lot.

The Dayhills

June 2, 3, 4 Fri, Sat, Sun  
Irish tunes, ballads and rebel songs Featuring  

Barbara Dayhill’s flute  

Katherine Dines  
June 8 Thurs  

Local singer and songwriter  

Rachel Faro  
June 16, 17, 18 Fri, Sat, Sun  
RCA recording artist;  

Wendy Grossman  

June 22 Thurs  
From New York  
Traditional music  

Sweet Georgia Brown  
June 24 Sat -  

Local women’s group  

Featuring blues, swing, jazz  

ALL SHOWS BEGIN AT 8:30