Politics of Health

Big Mama Rag Vol. 5 No. 3

AA Provides An Extended Family

Anna Slavin

Editor's note: These articles on al-
coholism are written by a recovered
alcoholic and member of AA. She has
not had a drink or mood-changing drug
for more than nine years. She is us-
ing a nom de plume in accordance with
the AA traditions of anonymity.

"Rarely have we seen a person fail
who has thoroughly followed our path."
AA's make this statement with great
confidence as their number of recov-
eries nears the one million mark. AA
operates local autonomous groups in
over ninety countries. In the Denver
area alone there are well over two
hundred local chapters. Each of
these groups takes on its own parti-
cular characteristic, but all have the
basic AA philosophy of attaining and
maintaining sobriety as outlined in
their text, Alcoholics Anonymous.

Since each AA chapter is truly re-
presentative of the community which
it serves, there are certain social
and economic distinctions in each of
them. There are groups formed by
teenagers, Spanish-speaking people,
young people, women, gays, men, and
of course, mixed. The groups are of-
ten economically stratified so that
in Southeast Denver the groups usually
attract a wealthier type of people
than the groups on Larimer Street.
Some of the women's groups are male-
identified, while the Woman to Woman
group attracts women who have alter-
nate lifestyles and who are woman
identified. AA is a fluid society,
one often sees the same people attend-
ing different types of meetings. No
alcoholic can ever be turned away from
an AA meeting.

AA has one purpose which is stated
in their preamble: "Alcoholics
Anonymous is a fellowship of men and
women who share their experience,
strength, and hope with each other
that they may solve their common pro-
blem and help others to recover from
alcoholism. The only requirement for
membership is a desire to stop drink-
ing. There are no dues or fees for

AA membership; we are self-supporting
through our own contributions. AA is
not allied with any sect, denomination,
politics, organization, or institution;
does not wish to engage in any contro-
versy; neither endorses nor opposes
any causes. Our primary goal is to
stay sober and help other alcoholics
to achieve sobriety."

Virginia Read, Chapel Hill, N.C.
A new person coming to AA usually
gets a royal welcome, because AA's
feel that by extending care and con-
cern for another alcoholic, they en-

hance their own sobriety. Telephone
numbers are given to the new woman
with the warm invitation to call "any-
time." The skeptical alcoholic some-
times thinks that this invitation is
a polite gesture until in desperation
she tries using one of the numbers in
the middle of the night only to be
greeted like an old friend in need. A
woman should maintain her skepticism
in accepting invitations from men not
accompanied by a woman. The same
risks prevail in AA as outside of AA
when it comes to men.

At each AA meeting, there is a

Women Athletes Feted at
Annual YWCA Bash

Theresa Schook

On March 6, the Third Annual Sports-
women of Colorado Awards banquet
was held in the Downtown Hilton. The
award program, sponsored by the YWCA,
is a multi-purpose event. Sponsor's
goals are: to encourage participa-
tion and excellence in women's
sports, to create established role-
models from which young women can
learn and emulate, to publicly honor
gifted, well-trained women who have
excelled in athletic endeavors, and

to create enthusiasm and support in
Colorado for women's sports activi-
ties. The awards program also raises
funds for YWCA athletic programs.

The evening began impressively with
cocktails and a fashion show presen-
ted by Gart Bros. Sports Stores. Af-
ter an hour of cash bar, dinner was
served. Dinner was your basic honor
banquet fare. At 7 p.m., the award

program was begun with Bob Kurtz, a
local TV sports reporter, acting as
Master of Ceremonies. Kurtz had a
few interesting things to say about
the lack of funding for women's and
girls' sports programs. It seems
that he has created quite a stir at
his particular station by one day
editorializing on women's athletics
needing more money and support.
Awards were presented in 16 differ-
ent sports, ranging from basketball
to table tennis. Sports areas were
subdivided into under 18, or high
school, and over 18. Women of all
ages from over the entire state were
awarded for their prowess. A series
of special awards were also present-
ed: Coach of the Year, Most Poten-
tial, Most Inspirational, Greatest
Contribution to Women's Athletics,

Greatest Contribution to Athletics in
Journalism. The last award went to
Denver Post staff and selection panel
chairwoman, Dorothy Mauk.

The final award of the evening was
for Sportswoman of the Year. Last
year, this award went to Olympic
sweetheart Dorothy Hamill. This
year's award went to gymnast Debbie
Wilcox, a member of the USGF. Debbie
has achieved several impressive wins
to her credit; there was some talk
of her outdistancing Nadia Comaneci.

This year's program organizing was
done by Jerry Cunningham. Candidates
are nominated through a balloting
system where coaches, teachers, or
most anybody can nominate the athlete
of her choice. This system may ex-
plain why there were so few minority
women present. In some thirty-odd
awards for athletic excellence, there
were two young black women and no

Latinas. This program grows in geo-
metric progressions each year; per-
haps next year's program will see
greater steps toward a more represen-
tative group of candidates for sports
excellence.

A wealth of sober experience exchanged
among alcoholics who have learned to
avoid the first drink, twenty-four
hours at a time. AA's don't swear off
drinking, they abstain from the first
drink for today only. The new member
quickly learns to listen to others'
experience and to experiment with it
in her own life. She learns too, that
some of the most helpful information
comes from people whom she ordinarily
wouldn't listen to. This technique

is facilitated by the guiding princi-
ple of anonymity which cautions the
alcoholic to keep principles above
personalities.

AA gives the alcoholic an extended
family on which she can rely and iden-
tify with all her life. She has earn-
ed her right to the community of peers
simply by coming to AA with a desire
to stop drinking.

AA has no rules or regulations.
There are, however, many successful
techniques of attaining sobriety which
are handed down from one recovered al-
coholic to another. These are truly
suggestions only. Usually it is sug-
gested to the new member that she at-
tend ninety consecutive meetings in
ninety consecutive days. This crisis
period could be compared to conval-
escence from other illnesses where an
hospitalization and/or bed rest are
necessary.

Contrary to the general public's
impression that AA is a religious
organization, AA consistently describes
itself as a spiritual program of
recovery. Since a recovered
alcoholic experiences an emotional
displacement in the form of losing the
desire to drink, they are anxious to
relate this experience to the others
in the group. If they have had a re-
ligious orientation, as most of us
have had, they describe this phenomena
in religious terms. As stated above,
depending on the particular group, the
emphasis on religion will depend on
the social milieu represented by the
group.

Professionals in the drug rehabili-
tation field usually acknowledge the

success of AA and often incorporate
many AA techniques in their own pro-
grams. To varying degrees, many of
the alcohol/drug programs rely on
their clients attending AA meetings
and sometimes have AA meetings “in
house.”

The only all-women's live-in facil-
ity in Colorado is the Stepping Stone
House, 1065 Emerson Street, Denver,
80218, Telephone: 831-7076. This is
a partially funded halfway house for
women with an alcohol/drug problem.

A woman can live here while recovering
if she abstains from alcohol and/or
drugs. There is a sliding scale for
fees, but most women live there free.
There is some therapy and counseling
available, and there are two AA meet-
ings a week. If a woman is a les-
bian, I suggest she not mention it.

An intensive live-in program for
both sexes is Fort Logan Mental Health
Center, 3520 West Oxford Ave, Denver,
telephone: 761-0220. This program
provides medical facilities, therapy,
counseling, and AA meetings.

The ARK is a highly successful fa-
cility for convalescence in a bucolic
atmosphere. The ARK, P.O. Box 626,
Green Mountain Falls, CO, telephone:
684-9585. The staff are recovered al-
coholics and the program relies heav-
ily on the AA program. Most clients
must have an examination from a doctor
before or shortly after admittance.
One must also have medical insurance
or lots of money. Costs are about
$25 a day.

Raleigh Hills Hospital has a program
of aversion therapy for alcoholics at
1920 High Street, Denver, telephone:
388-2491. There are several other
facilities in the area which have pro-
grams for alcoholics. A friend de-
scribed these as having a program of
three V's: Volleyball, Valium, and
Vodka. For political reasons of
health, I cannot recommend these to
women. These facilities rely on sed-
atives which in most cases give the
alcoholic one more drug to destroy
herself with. These programs have a
high rate of relapses.

Manzo 4 Charges Dropped

Jeanne Busacca

Victory for the People!! All
charges against the four defendants
from the Manzo Area Council have been
dropped. The defendants Margo Cowan,
Cathy Montano, Margie Ramirez, and
Sister Ann Gabriel had been charged
with twenty-five counts of harboring,
transporting, aiding and abetting,
etc. undocumented aliens because they
had counseled these aliens on their
rights and assisted many in processing
the proper visa applications (see BMR
3/77). Victory came only after long
negotiations with the new Carter ap-
pointed U.S. Attorney in Tucson,
Michael Hawkins, and after a poor
people's pilgrimage to Washington to
discuss the charges against Manzo
with Congressional members, repre-
sentatives of the Carter Administra-
tion, and the national INS office.

Not only have the charges now been
dropped, but a totally new policy
toward the immigration counseling
efforts of the Manzo Area Council
has been adopted. Manzo will not
only continue to counsel aliens from
their neighborhood, but INS must now
refer aliens who require assistance to
Manzo for help. In addition, Manzo
will process complaints by aliens
against coyotes (someone who brings
aliens into the country and then
blackmails them), employers, and smug-
glers who have ripped them off. The
government is also to institute legal
actions against these oppressors and
give immunity to those aliens who
assist in the prosecutions. Lastly,
immunity has been given to those Manzo
clients who have “transported” or
“harbored” their undocumented
relatives.

Manzo is therefore now recognized
as a legitimate center for assistance
to undocumented aliens after four
of its workers were charged with a
total of 166 years in prison for
doing precisely the same type of
immigration counseling. It is essen-

tial that we understand that it took
the intense and unrelenting pressure
and work of the people to defeat the
U.S. Attorney Bill Vogel and his
attempts to crush immigration coun-
seling and the four Manzo workers who

upheld the rights and the needs of
undocumented workers.

The battle is far from over. Un-
documented workers will continue to
be the scapegoats of the economic
crisis in this country. It is very
easy to blame unemployment of Ameri-
cans, for example, on the aliens who
hold jobs. Looking at the hundreds
of American companies that have
built their factories out of the
country, depriving thousands of
Americans of work, we must recognize
that aliens often take jobs no
American will take and that they pay
income and social security taxes on
their incomes, although they are not
eligible for the benefits.

The work in Manzo is just a first
step in opposing the oppression of
undocumented workers and attempts
at dividing American and foreign
workers. It is only with the com-
bined struggle of all workers that
fundamental changes will occur. The
enemy is not the alien worker, but
the corporate and business inter-
ests that make great profits at the
expense of all workers and then use
those profits to expand their control
of other companies, other countries,
and all workers.