voices

Working Long, Hard Hours, We're All In

Bobbe Ross and Sue Goding

Betty Carr is a white woman, a Coloradan who has worked politically with different groups in this area for a long time. Like many women who work politically, she is not a name, but her strength and energy have been spent doing her 40 hours on the job, single-handedly raising five children and working politically. And like so many other women, her story never gets told, but we thought we would write about one phase of her life because it happened to so many women and it influenced their lives; they really were our mothers, sisters, and ourselves.

I had been reading Rosie the Riveter and talking about the book with Betty when she told me she had been a Rosie. So the interview developed from that. I'm sorry to say I haven't seen the movie yet.

BR: Before World War II, where had you worked?

BETTY: I had worked as an usher in a local theatre, as a fill-in once in a while. I hadn't really worked at a steady job.

BR: During World War II, you worked in the defense industry?

BETTY: I worked for United Airlines in Cheyenne, in one of their hangars. It was a modification plant on B-17s. They flew them in there and we put in the gun mounts and armor and made them into bombers, was what it amounted to. I worked in the sheet metal shop and I operated a drill press, and later I started putting gun mounts in. It was a plexiglass, sort of a saucer shape, more round than that, and we put the gun mounts in that. Then they were taken downstairs and put in the planes.

BR: Were there many women working with you?

BETTY: Yes, there were a number of women. There were three shifts, about 200 people in the sheet metal shop, about 1600 people throughout, and there were probably more women than men.

ers-

herstory

the Greeley paper. I lived in Greeley (CO) and then I had been down to the state employment offices trying to find work, and they told me about it. The company offered transportation. They had buses, city buses that went from Greeley and there from Ft. Collins to Cheyenne every day for all shifts.

BR: Were there women of color working with you?

BETTY: I don't remember seeing anyone of any color other than white working there.

BR: What kind of wages were you getting?

BETTY: I can't even remember anymore, but it was really good pay. It was a bit more than the minimum wage was or what the average... I'm not even sure we had minimum wage then, but it looked really big to me.

BR: Were the men who were doing the same work as you getting the same wages?

BETTY: I honestly don't know. We were told that we were never to discuss our wages. We were put on an honor system and of course at 18, I really bought that. I mean, I felt very romantic about doing a man's job, and you know, I'm wearing Levi's and coveralls and doing my patriotic duty. Because a lot of the people I'd gone to school with were in the armed forces.

BR: How did they get it across to you that it was unpatriotic to talk about wages?

BETTY: We weren't supposed to think about things like money during the war. We were supposed to think about bringing the boys home and making these planes as safe as possible so they wouldn't be injured, which was a lie because they were bombers. There was no union and they got around that because it was not a regular function of United; it was their war effort. United didn't normally do anything with these planes except fly them. We never thought about strikes.

We got regular increases through the merit system. I don't remember ever getting vacation pay. I didn't get any extra rations; we did get bus transportation which was at a very minimum cost.

BR: How did you feel? Since before you didn't have a regular job, now all of a sudden you had good pay. How did it make you feel about yourself?

BETTY: Oh, I felt really good. And I liked the work really well. I didn't think I could actually do mechanical-type work and when I found out I could, I really liked it. Just the general conditioning that women were raised under made me think I couldn't do that type of work. I mean, we weren't encouraged to take math. In fact, I had tried—I and some other students had gone to ask in high school if we could have a trigonometry class and I was actually told, "What would I need trigonometry for? All I needed to know was how to add up the groceries." And I'd already had general math so I didn't really need that. I didn't even need the algebra and geometry I'd taken, according to them.

BR: Did anybody ever talk about wages? You were 18 and felt intimidated and couldn't, but how about some of the older workers?

BETTY: I heard some of the older women talk about it and I was aghast when they said this. You know, the honor system and "we're all in this together" and "United is backing the boys" and "You are helping us back the boys."

BR: Were women acting like this was the first time they were in the labor market?

BETTY: Most of them seemed to be in the labor market for the first time, even the older ones. Those that had worked before talked about the pay. Most of them had done the usual service jobs; hospital, waitress. There were a number of nurses who worked there and I can remember working with a couple of teachers who worked there because the pay was so much better.

BR: What kind of hours did you keep at work?

BETTY: We changed shifts every month. I worked a lot of overtime. We usually worked 10-hour shifts, sometimes 12. I remember the longest I ever worked straight through. It was like 7 weeks; we hadn't had a day off, a 7-day week. I really felt rich. Of course, I was taking out war bonds.

BR: What happened to the women who had children? Did they have any child-care set-up for them?

BETTY: No, there weren't any day care centers. As far as I know, there wasn't any day care unless they had relatives or neighbors. Of course, this was during the time, it's been written about since then, about latchkey children, whose mothers couldn't find anyone to take care of them and didn't have relatives or older children to take care of the little ones. The little kids came home with their door key around their neck on a string.

BR: When you were working and you all knew the war would end someday and that we would win, did the women talk about what they were planning to do afterwards?

BETTY: Most of us, or the ones that I talked to, planned to go on and get more training and actually there was more of a feeling that we had broken into that type of work and we would be able to go on.

BR: Even though the government kept on saying that returning vets would have seniority, didn't that give you any kind of pause?

BETTY: No, I don't remember ever particularly thinking about that. We thought there was such a boom in the country; of course, it was right after the Depression. I had been a child during the Depression but I remember it very well. There seemed to be a general feeling that we were going to win the war, there would be this surge of industry afterwards, that there would be so many things to build and so many things to do, housing would be needed and schools to be built. There was a baby boom and there would be all kinds of increase in industry and in products. Because there weren't things to buy with the money we had then and people thought that after the war there would be a big increase in all kinds of autos, furniture, and all the things.

I was married and living in an apartment in Greeley and my husband was not in service and we had no children, so we were saving money. After a while, we moved to Denver and both of us worked at Continental Airlines. We were both on the line, modifying B-29s, doing the same type of work. His wages, even though he had less experience than I, were more. I sort of took it for granted because men always made more money than women, but it bothered me. He agreed that it wasn't fair but what could you do about it? That's the way things were. He told me I was lucky to have a job, that his mother couldn't have found a job at my age, not a job like I had. She had worked as a housekeeper for some politician and she thought that was a great job. So he just told me how much better I was doing than his mother and what's my complaint?

At Continental, they had the same policy of not talking about wages. We were closely supervised at all times; I mean we had crew chiefs, line managers, upper management, there were army inspectors around all the time, who were inspecting the planes as we worked on them, telling us about blueprints that were changed. But I never saw a woman supervisor of any kind. When I worked in the sheet metal shop in Cheyenne, our lead or crew chief was a man, but a woman actually did the passing out of the work and she trained me and when I went from a drill press to something else, she trained me on that. She had no title; she was just one of the workers, first name only.

BR: How long did the job last, and what did you do then?

BETTY: I think it literally ended on V-J Day (August 1945). I had worked a lot with blueprints, especially at Continental, because I and another woman were literally a special crew and we fixed up the goof-ups that people had made. We were a riveting team and they were called ice-box rivets; they were a special alloy and you had just seconds to get them in and get them smooth with the dural skin on the plane. If you didn't get them exactly right, they would harden and then they were almost impossible to get out; you would have to drill them out and you'd end up with these huge holes and this big mending project. We were really good at what we did and we were all over the plant doing it. We were assigned work, but we weren't supervised actually on that crew because we were sort of scattered out, and we worked well together and really enjoyed it. And I enjoyed working with blueprints. After the war, I wanted to get into drafting and on a Thursday I answered an ad for apprentice draftsman and was hired for Monday. I rushed home and found two drafting classes and planned to work days and go to school nights. I remember I went out and bought some office-type clothes.

I walked in Monday morning and the older partner looked at me and said, "We don't hire girls." And I said, "But I've been hired and I have this experience," and I ran through my whole little routine. "No, you distract men and you are too young." But I've been working a certain amount of years and I have...

MORE ON PAGE 17

all

Sur radonal™wamaa'e" work en The and cleanings and homemaking. Yee some Arerican yom are ail the fvliot 25d mort ied the meth The et he et i shale bet looking ea rll

say of ie ne independent Arengibal wuld

His one of thoes mysterio tl re to comorel healed of ant tows gives her sllctatsenre wien i had ta heightens her lvelioss when she wants to lok er

slicks

tion’s ratio

between luxury goods and the n

In order to sell more products, advertisers developed unu ale for fight Photoplay, September 143. rosie the Riveter

f

Big Mama Rag, November 1982 - Page 11