IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Women in Martinique  
Organize  

Feminists  

The following is an account of women  
in Martinique reprinted from a trans-  
lation of a story in Cahiers du Fémin-  
isme. It appeared in Newsfront Inter-  
national, a publication of People's  
Translation Service, along with a  
brief history of the independence  
movement in Martinique. The history  
is summarized below, and the story  
about women's role is reprinted in  
its entirety.  

Background  

The island of Martinique is a de-  
partment of France. Its economy is  
colonial -- limited to a few cash  
crops and controlled by foreigners,  
largely the French who have lived  
there for the past 300 years. There  
is significant unemployment and 40%  
of those working are civil servants.  

Since last October, the French gov-  
ernment began to cut back government  
spending by reducing the wages of  
civil servants. This came just after  
the island's agriculture had been  
wiped out by Hurricane David. The  
response was a general strike which  
lasted a week and that involved  
nearly all of the public employees as  
well as many in the private sector.  

In April, another general strike  
was organized by a coalition of unions  
in which the demands centered around  
the government cutbacks as well as  
specifying a raise in the minimum wage,  
unemployment compensation, more jobs,  
and the removal of French soldiers  
who had arrived a few days earlier to  
counter increasing opposition to  
French domination. But because the  
demands affected civil servants pri-  
marily, and because they are among  
the best paid on Martinique, the  
strike was resisted by many, inclu-  
ding the Confederation of Martinique  
Workers, who contended that the  
strike would just divide working peo-  
ple. The strike broke up on the  
second day, and was called off on the  
third.  

"I, Maria Haydee Torres, am a Puerto  
Rican prisoner of war. I am a product  
of this continuous struggle waged by  
my people. I am the conscience of my  
people, in arms. And like a captured  
prisoner of war, neither this court,  
nor this country have any right to  
treat me like a criminal..."  

Maria Haydee Torres, May 19, 1980  

-Third World Women's Alliance  

From the beginning, Maria Haydee  
Torres, the 24-year-old Puerto Rican  
nationalist, refused to recognize  
the jurisdiction of the court. But on  
May 29, 1980, she was sentenced to  
life imprisonment for her involvement  
in a 1977 blast at the Mobil 0717 Buil-  
ding in New York City that killed one  
person. Identified by fingerprints  
uncovered in an investigation by the  
FBI, Torres is the single suspect in  
one of five related bombings that  
occurred on August 3, 1977. The only  
other evidence in the case is the  
communique issued by the Armed Forces  
of National Liberation (FALN), alleg-  
ing that the blasts, costing city  
businesses more than $5 million, "were  
a part of our campaign to dramatize  
and intensify our struggle for the  
independence of Puerto Rico, and the  
unconditional freedom of the five  
Puerto Rican Nationalists."  

The five nationalists referred to  
in that statement all served more  
than 20 years in prison for taking  
part in attacks on President Truman's  

Torres Struggle Mounts  

Political issues are also at stake  
in Martinique. There is a growing  
demand for independence from France,  
as evidenced in the discontent shown  
in recent meetings of the Congress  
of the Martinique Communist Party,  
which now supports complete indepen-  
dence from the French Republic. France  
has responded inflexibly and with con-  
cern about the growing relationship  
between the Communist and independent  
parties of the islands and the Cuban  
Communist Party.  

Women in Martinique  

Four members of the Revolutionary  
Socialist Group (GRS) express their  
views on women and the women's move-  
ment in Martinique:  

Q: What are the most striking exam-  
ples of the oppression of women in  
Martinique today?  

Clara: Oppression exists on several  
levels, but in a colonized country  
such as ours it is primarily economic.  

residence and the U.S. Congress after  
U.S. troops crushed a 1950 uprising  
that had proclaimed the Second Re-  
public of Puerto Rico. Finally re-  
leased from prison last September,  
three of the five, Oscar Collazo,  
Irvin Flores, and Lolita Lebron (see  
interview in BMR, Vol. 8 No. 53- June,  
1980), joined a crowd of 300 that  
rallied outside the Foley Square  
courthouse in support of Torres. An-  
other 200 filled the courtroom with  
noisy chants in honor of the 10 other  
alleged FALN members facing lesser  
charges in Chicago. Supporters also  
sang the Puerto Rican national an-  
them. But when Torres turned her back  
on the judge in order to address  
them, she was dragged from the court-  
room by U.S. officials. For the rest  
of the trial, she was isolated in a  
small room where the proceedings were  
broadcast over a loudspeaker.  

Not one person of Puerto Rican de-  
scent served on the jury, with the  
only such candidate eliminated days  
before by a prosecutor's challenge.  
It took only four hours to decide to  
impose the maximum penalty of life  
imprisonment. That sentence will be  
reviewed on July 2, with an attorney,  
appointed over Torres' objections,  
launching the final defense argument.  
Torres told LIBERTAD, the newspaper  
of the National Committee to Free  
Puerto Rican Prisoners of War, that  
the hearing is being held only “for  
the purpose of allowing the judge to  
wash his hands clean." But she will  
attend the hearing to show people  
that she is not intimidated by an  
"illegal trial, an illegal sentence.  
And this new circus is also illegal."  
Torres is still refusing to cooper-  
ate with the state-appointed lawyer.  

In her prepared statement that Tor-  
res was not allowed to deliver in the  
courtroom, she stressed that the U.S.  
violates international law each day  
that it keeps her and other prisoners  
of war in jail, and each day that  
Puerto Rico is imprisoned by United  
States colonialism.  

Information from LNS  

Big Mama Rag Vol. 8 No. 6  

In Liberation Push  

In Martinique most women who work are  
unskilled and earn very little; a  
situation which is aggravated by the  
fact that they are the first to be  
hit by unemployment (women comprise  
60% of the unemployed workforce).  
Women can't make it alone and there-  
fore must depend on a man to sur-  
vive economically.  

Pepe: That explains the widespread  
prostitution practiced by domestic  
and clerical workers and even by  
secretaries.  

Clara: Girls are taught from a very  
early age that their destiny is  
marriage and motherhood; their educa-  
tion is limited to household tasks.  
The schools practice de facto segre-  
gation of students from kindergarten  
onward, encouraging girls to view  
academic achievement as secondary to  
good homemaking skills. We find these  
attitudes deeply rooted even in poli-  
tically active women.  

Religion is also a powerful oppress-  
ive influence: in addition to the Cath-  
olic Church, Martinique harbors an  
abundance of conservative sects --  
often financially supported by Amer-  
icans -- such as Evangelists, Seventh  
Day Adventists and Jehovah's Witness-  

Women in India  

es, who espouse very reactionary posi-  
tions regarding the family, especially  
in their condemnation of contracep-  
tion.  

Angele: There are many other sects  
that exploit the superstitious beliefs  
of the Martinique people -- the Afri-  
can healers who have moved in and  
now profit from the populist notion  
that anything black is good. Evident-  
ly there are women who will pay these  
quacks $125 for "love potions" to win  
back their unfaithful husbands....  

Q: How would you characterize the  
different women's movements in Mart-  
inique today?  

Madras: Presently there are two anti-  
colonialist movements: the Union of  
Martinique Women (UFM), tied to the  
Martinique Communist Party (PCM); and  
the Martinique Women for Progress (FMP)  
an outgrowth of the Progressive Party  
(PPM) of Aimé Césaire.  

Angele: These organizations have  
two characteristics in common: al-  
though they are self-proclaiming "anti-  
colonialists," and despite the fact  
they speak of the dignity of Antillan  
women and denounce their oppressive  
working conditions, they still fail to  

MORE ON PAGE 17  

Rape Resistance Grows  

The battle against rape has become  
a major rallying cry of India's grow-  
ing women's movement following a re-  
cent Supreme Court decision acquitting  
two policemen who had been convicted  
by a lower court in the rape of a  
16-year-old woman while she was in po-  
lice custody eight years ago. The po-  
licemen had admitted to having had  
sex with the woman, Mathura; but the  
Supreme Court held that sexual as-  
sault in police custody did not con-  
stitute rape.  

Mathura came from a lower-caste  
peasant family and at the time of the  
assault was living with a young man  
named Ashok, her employer's nephew. On  
March 27, 1972, Mathura's brother Gama,  
also a laborer, complained that Math-  
ura, a minor, had been kidnapped by  
her employers and Ashok. Gama, Ashok,  
Mathura, and her employers were  
brought to the police station at about  
9 p.m. for questioning. When every-  
one started leaving an hour and a  
half later, Constable Ganpat grabbed  
Mathura and ordered everyone else to  
leave. Mathura was first raped by Gan-  
pat and then molested by head constable  
Tukaram, who was reportedly too drunk  
to rape her.  

Mathura finally managed to get out  
and tell her brother and friends,  
waiting outside, what had happened. Soon  
an angry crowd gathered and threatened  
to beat up Ganpat and burn down the  
police station. The two constables  
were tried but acquitted of the rape  
charge by the Sessions Court. This  
did not come as a surprise because  
assaults on lower castes and poor  
people inside police stations are com-  
mon. The decision in Mathura's case  
seemed to be particularly influenced  
by the fact that she was living with  
someone without being married. The  
judge considered that it was quite  
likely that such a "girl" would  
willingly “surrender her body to a po-  
lice constable," in his words.  

The Bombay High Court reversed the  
decision of the Sessions Court and  
sentenced Ganpat and Tukaram to impri-  
sonment of five years and one year  
respectively. They then went to the  
Supreme Court, which reversed the  
High Court verdict by focusing on one  
section of the rape law and interpre-  
ting it to give free license to po-  
licemen.  

Following the acquittal, women's  
organizations across India took up  
the issue and organized mass demon-  
strations in a concerted effort to  
build an intensive campaign against  
rape. Mathura's supporters attempted  
to point out that there is no such  
thing as establishing resistance in-  
side a police station. The Court com-  
mented: "It would be preposterous to  
suggest that although she was in the  
company of her brother, she would  
have been so overawed by the fact that  
the appellants (the policemen) being  
persons in authority and that she was  
in the police station, that she would  
make no attempt to resist." The  
fact that rape of poor peasant women  
by landlords and the police is a ra-  
ther common occurrence adds to the im-  
plications of the Supreme Court  
judgment.  

In Delhi, women's groups launched a  
week-long program of protest culmina-  
ting in a mass rally and demonstra-  
tion on March 8, International Women's  
Day. This campaign included the pre-  
sentation of a memorandum to the Prime  
Minister, the Home Minister and the  
Police Commissioner, a seminar on the  
question of rape, a press conference  
and the performance of a number of  
short street plays in colleges, hos-  
pitals and resettlement colonies. But  
these efforts to evoke public sympathy  
and consciousness about the sexual  
harassment of women failed to sway  
the Supreme Court, which rejected de-  
mands for reopening the case.  

-Triple Jeopardy  

Writing for Alternative News and  
Features, a monthly news service pub-  
lished in New Delhi, Monica Juneja  
observed that in Mathura's case, as  
in others, "the notable feature is  
the attempt on the part of the govern-  
ment to justify the actions of its  
officers by proving that the women  
were of 'loose moral character.' Link-  
ed inextricably with the power struc-  
ture, rape is used as an instrument  
to suppress democratic struggles, es-  
pecially in the rural area. The hope  
lies in women building their own or-  
ganizations to spearhead struggles  
for their own rights."  

According to Juneja, the coordina-  
tion and cooperation between various  
women's groups in the campaign sur-  
rounding Mathura's case is a definite  
advance for the women's movement in  
India.  

Reprinted from LNS