Page 12

POST

Big Mama Rag had originally announced a poetry contest. A statement prepared by Adrienne Rich, Audre Lorde, and Alice Walker, all nominated for the National Book Award for Poetry, has encouraged us to join in a new feminist tradition not following the usual competitive standards of a contest. Part of their statement reads: “We can enrich ourselves more in supporting and giving to each other than by competing against each other; and that poetry—if it is poetry—exists in a realm beyond comparison.”

In this spirit, we have decided to acknowledge all of the entries and to share the prize money among the women in this community rather than selecting one winner for the announced prize money of $10.00, and so the amount will be offered to the development of a Women’s Center.

Picnics

Leaf eyes and leaf mouth  
Pressed - no crushed -  
so that green leaf juice  

Big Mama Rag Vol. 3 No. 4  

Sovereign of the Streets  

Tonight  

I have decided to wear purple  

And gold on my neck and arms and fingers and toes  
I'll be violet-eyed  

And I'll be the Queen.  

Sovereign of the Streets  

I'll be the Harlot,  

Dietrich and Cleo and Catherine the Great  

I'll sparkle my way downtown  

Smeared upon our fingers and stains our bodies. And then glitter home again  

It won't wash out, mother always said,  

And she was right.  

It never did. Not a bit of it.  
Soak it all you want. Scrub it.  
Mother was right.  

It's really rather embarrassing to be seen like this.  

Change my clothes.  
All clean.  
Oops. What about the fingers.  

That won't come out either.  

(Everybody will know where you’ve been)  

Yesterday  

I was the lioness  

I was all gold and brown and shattering  

Purring and snarling and feline  

And so Wicked  

I was Medusa,  

Destruction in a glance  

The Trojan Horse, and riant at the ruin in my wake,  
I prowled gilded jungles downtown  

And then I green-eyed my way home again  

“Steps” Maybe it will wear away in time.... Tomorrow  

My heart beats slow and  
painfully. I wish to hurt  
no one. I want to laugh  
and give myself. I want  
to dance and touch  
someone.  

I want to sleep so soundly  
soft and wake in the dawn  
with you beside me. And see  
you wake and smile right back.  

I step so soft I tremble now,  

don’t know where to walk to. I must  
depend on no one else. I feel so  
lost  

and hard  

and cold.  

I need someone that must be me  
to step  

and walk  

and live. For now.  

- Karen Greathouse  

Menstrual poems,  

Blood red.  

I cannot stop them.  

They slide and splatter  

Out of my body  

And spot the cold tile of the floors.  

I do not want to write them.  

They are not what I thought poetry was made of.  
But I cannot - will not - staunch their flow.  
Irregular and cramped,  

My handwriting runs across the paper  

And I read its spoor.  

They smell of myself, these poems,  

And trace the delicate, intricate, arterial pattern  

of my mother and daughter  

And a man who once, staring at my blood-smudged thighs,  
asked in a child’s wonder and fear so like my own,  
Does it hurt, does it hurt?  

- Michele Barale  

I'll be a witch  
Michele Barale In black, I'm a ghost  

A dark-eyed Harpy, clawed and winged  

Mysterious and so Evil  

I'll be the Phantom, an Illusion  

Look! I’m the Bogeywoman!  

I'll go downtown, ethereal all the way,  

And then I’ll make my Supernatural way home again  

- Nancy Bell  

Closets  

I bring the pen out from under my wings  
Where it blooms into a quill  
Lady and the Cat Blowing out the light to hide me  
I move toward the other side of the room  
My ears pick out a cat, its size  
alters with the twitching of my lobes  
The room is all doors  
For a moment I pretend to hide behind one  
but I am afraid no one will find me—  
then I am afraid I will never come out  

You pull me into the air  

we walk along a rill smelling of snakes  

that will not come out of doors till we have gone  
and then, in the sensation of our bellies  
touching across a shady membrane  

the need for all the doors resonates within me  
Stone metaphors lead me through a crusted lane  

I sit all alone  
Beside my bucket a day stove  
and sing as I rock along  
The words come out clear  
as my voice disappears  
and my cat just jumped  
on my lap.  

I sit all alone  

out on my dusty old porch  

and sing as I rock along  

The sky becomes black  

as the rain comes with a splash  
and my cat just jumped on my lap.  

I lay all alone Something just ahead of me knows the path  
in my dusty old grave steers me through crystal trees and an opening  
as I heard a tap on my door lined with rose hips and brittle bones  

I open my eyes  

Only now do I understand the parabolas  
and find a surprise  

Only now do the quickly healing lesions  
and the cat just jumped show that the fear within me  
on my lap was hunched over my own notions  
- Cindy Robinson In the open spaces between our legs  
I stop following myself  
I toss my head at the signature of others  
I reach for myself  
a bright fruit grown late.  

- Sandia