Sterilization Guidelines — One Year Later

Paula Kassel

One year after HEW instituted new re-
gulations to protect poor women against
being sterilized without their consent,
health advocates are finding that the
rules are not common knowledge even
among the house staffs and physicians
of some public hospitals.

As a result, the National Women's
Health Network is starting its own
monitoring project. One facet will en-
tail working directly with hospital
health care personnel. But a manual
will also be produced and put in the
hands of women and women's groups who
want to look at hospitals in their
own communities, said Belita Cowan.
Cowan, who is executive director of the
Women's Health Network, is coordinating
the monitoring coalition, which will
include groups such as Health Right,
Mexican American Women's National As-
sociation, Center for Constitutional
Rights, Committee to End Sterilization
Abuse, CARASA, and Indian Women United.

The manual will cover the legal as-
pects of sterilization, describe how
hospitals get around complying with
the regulations, and explain what to do
to help a victim of sterilization
abuse.

According to CARASA, "Sterilization
abuse occurs every time a person is
sterilized without giving informed
consent, knowing that the operation
is permanent, having the opportunity
to make a carefully thought out deci-
sion, or because he/she has been
threatened with the denial of other
medical services or termination of
welfare payments; by court order or
parental consent, because he/she is
‘feeble minded’ or ‘socially inade-
quate.' Sterilization abuse also oc-
curs whenever a woman is sterilized
because abortion is unavailable,
birth control methods are too costly;
or when a woman is forced to accept
sterilization as a condition for
obtaining an abortion."

The overwhelming majority of victims
are black, Native American, and Hispanic
women.

It was the sterilization of the two
young black Relf sisters in Alabama
in 1964 that set off a public
outcry after it came to light years
later because one of the sisters went
to court when she discovered why she
could not become pregnant. They were
2 and 14 years old when county wel-
fare officials had them sterilized,
telling their parents they were be-
ing given injections to prevent preg-
nancy. As a result of the Relf case,
the government issued regulations co-
vering federally funded sterilizations
in 1974.

Revised rules were issued in Nov-
ember 1978 that became effective
March 1, 1979. The new regulations
"continue a moratorium on the steril-
ization of mentally incompetent in-
dividuals and persons under age 21
and prohibit doctors from performing
hysterectomies solely for steriliza-
tion purposes. The new regulations
outline strict procedures for ob-
taining a person's informed consent.
Consent may not be obtained from
anyone in labor, under the influence
of drugs, or actually undergoing an
abortion. A patient must sign an
HEW-approved consent form that lists,
in a language the patient understands,
the nature, risks, benefits, and con-
sequences of the procedure as well as
alternative methods of contraception.
In addition, the patients must be
informed, both orally and in writing,
that no other federal benefits can
be jeopardized by refusing to con-
sent to sterilization or changing
one’s mind regarding sterilization
at any time. Except in cases of em-
ergency abdominal surgery, the
regulations require a 30-day waiting
period between the time consent is
given and the procedure is performed.
The 1974 regulations required a 72-
hour waiting period."

The 30-day waiting period has gen-
erated controversy within and between
women's movement organizations. The
National Organization for Women, for
instance, calls it demeaning, as if
women are not capable of making up
their minds. CARASA, on the other
hand, believes it safeguards the
women most vulnerable to coercion,
the uneducated and the non-English
speaking.

It is the enforcement of the new
rules that is being criticized. After
talking to several officials in the
Health Care Finance Administration,
the division of HEW responsible for
funding sterilizations under Medi-
caid and the Public Health Service,
it is easy to understand why an
outside monitoring project is
starting.

The officials seem sincerely con-
cerned and conscientious. But they
are probably trying to administer a process
doomed to failure by the
statutes and the long chain of com-
munication links.

The regulations were promulgated,
at least in part, as a result of
charges of the coerced sterilization
of poor women. However, hospitals and
physicians are not required to comply
with the regulations for all sterili-
zations of Medicaid-eligible patients.
Rather, compliance is required only
if federal reimbursement is to be
obtained for the procedures.

The procedure for informing patients,
physicians, private hospitals, and
clinics about the regulations is al-
most completely out of HEW's control
after the initial step, notifying the
states. When the regulations were
promulgated, HEW set up two regional
meetings to which state health direc-
tors and regional Medicaid officers or
their representatives were invited.
The regulations were fully explained
and booklets and consent forms were
made available for distribution through-
out the states. Medicaid reimbursement
should be claimed only for steriliza-
tions validated by properly executed
consent forms.

The statute does not provide the
federal government with any way of
stopping sterilization abuse; it only
gives them the right to refuse to pay
federal funds for these sterilizations.

Since withholding Medicaid reimburse-
ment from the states is the only en-
forcement sanction, the prescribed
procedure is for the states to notify
hospitals through their billing depart-
ments, a research analyst at the
Guttmacher Institute explained. "A big
question remains," she said, as to what
happens to that information once it
gets there. Does it stay in the billing
department, or do they actually go
out and tell all the ob-gyns on the
staff? No one is following up on that
question."

The enforcement procedure consists
of spot audits of the signed consent
forms. Auditing is a two-level pro-
cess. First, a state's screening pro-
cedures are checked, because it is the
state that claims federal reimbursement
and the state public health agency that
is responsible for submitting only
valid claims. (This means that
every time a state throws out an
invalid claim, that state loses money—
not a very compelling reason for con-
scientious inspection.) After a state
is given time to implement an approved
auditing program of its own, the plan
is for federal auditors to spot-check
the claims, the amounts billed, and the
consent forms to see if they are pro-
perly filled out. Each state will
undergo an annual audit (spot-check)
according to current plans. HEW has
also announced it will use a special
program for monitoring by the HEW Insp-
ector General.

The first round of audits by the
Bureau of Program Operations in the
Health Care Finance Administration
started last October and is still go-
ing on. As a result, “some disallow-
ance actions are pending at present,"
said a Program Operations Specialist
with the bureau.

How the whole procedure is really
working is still unknown one year after
it went into effect and may never be
made clear. Auditing a signed piece
of paper will not reveal what that
woman experienced. Was she coerced in-
to signing? Did she understand that
sterilization is irreversible? Was
her consent really informed?

In the procedures as described there
are no plans to audit (hear) a single
patient.

(Reprinted from New Directions For
Women with minor changes, see Resour-
ce on page 18 for information about
a health resource guide for sterili-
zation.)

The Demands of Women

demand an end to privilege based on race
and class

demand the right of self-determination for all people

demand control of our reproductive process
demand free, adequate health care

demand free, 24-hour day care

demand the right to the use of self-defense
demand equality in the job market

demand the right to guaranteed jobs or income

demand free and relevant education

demand an end to sexism in the cultural media

demand an end to the oppression of lesbians

demand the end of defining people in terms of
their relationships to others

demand the right to use any means necessary
to eliminate male supremacy

The Demands of Women is now available as a poster.
- See Classified Ad, Page 19

Feminism Lives!