Socialist/Feminist Conference Held

Krista Heron

During this past Memorial Day weekend 60 people arrived at the Red Feather Institute near Ft. Collins, CO, to discuss and experience the synthesis of feminism and socialism. The conference was organized through the combined efforts of several women involved in the left community in Boulder. One of their goals in holding the conference was to provide a forum for discussion of socialist/feminism and an atmosphere where this synthesis could be experienced on a personal level. In addition, they had envisioned the potential for the conference to be a “reproductive act” whereby people would be turned onto the model of the collective as represented by the Boulder Socialist/Feminist Collective.

The conference began with the presentation of 6 issues to be discussed; abortion and sterilization, what is the new right?, big business, technology and birth control, why has the left failed to take up women's issues, and why has the women's movement not taken up socialist issues?, home birthing and birth control, and sexual assault. According to individual interests, people broke into small groups to discuss these topics. Afterwards a report was given by each group sharing the insights and discussion of the small group.

The afternoon session was a panel entitled "Living your Socialist/Feminism" facilitated by the Boulder Socialist/Feminist Collective. The panel began with guerrilla theatre demonstrating the integration, or, in this case, the interruption, of our personal lives with our politics. Each panelist then spoke on one issue that she had researched or developed that later will be utilized for the publication of a collective paper.

The “personal is political” coupled with the concept that the “means equals the ends” provided a base for a powerful integration process of feminism and how it relates to politics.

During the Saturday afternoon panel on socialist/feminism one speaker discussed relationships and specifically "homophobia" and how it supports heterosexism and inhibits meaningful relationships amongst those of the same sex. With this groundwork laid the speaker announced that there would be separate women's and men's dances that evening. Reactions amongst the conferees varied from delight to horror. Several participants felt manipulated and “patronized” (sic) suggesting that the organizers had transgressed democratic process. This issue proved to be one of the more fertile learning experiences of the conference. Discussion evolved to include the compartmentalization of our sexuality (that is socialized to be safe and comfortable amongst a mixed group) and the difficulty in “courting” heterosexual relationships within the movement; in other words the de-personalization of left political movements. This was exemplified in other ways throughout the conference as well. (The persistent call from several participants for a greater depth of analysis during the conference seemed to come from those who had the most difficulty synthesizing their personal with their politics.) The fact that childcare was not integrated into the conference or at least offered more than a babysitting function is expressive again of how our lives are segmented into boxes labeled “politics”, “homelife”, “work”, etc.

A good deal of the conference was spent processing women's and men's roles at the conference and within the movement. Out of this 2 key issues were focused upon; the validity of an autonomous women's movement and the woman identified woman. Inherent within these discussions were the issues of separatism; when it is appropriate, why is there a need and how can it be effective in attaining socialist/feminist goals. Feelings expressed by some women centered on the dilemma of their involvement intimately with men and how this affects their relationship within the women's movement, predominately around non-acceptance. Women expressed feelings of threat and rejection by the exclusiveness of the women's movement. To be woman identified was discussed in smaller groups. Definitions evolved with elements of wide and varied experiences. The need for a label was discussed and disputed amongst my small group, with acceptance that the label woman identified woman is self-validating. Can a woman be "woman identified" and be intimate with men, self-identification and role identification were issues discussed as well.

Ann Markusen, the keynote speaker, discussed the success, or lack of, the socialist/feminist movement from the perspective of 5 years involvement. Areas of neglect were narrowed down to 5 points; these being major concerns to be addressed by the movement at large:

1. The theory of Patriarchy

2. The relationship between racism, classism and sexism

3. An inclusive theory of class

4. Analysis of ideology and methodology

5. The state

Markedly the conference was unable to address many of these issues in any depth. A panel on Sex, Class and Race was not held as those who were to sit on the panel did not arrive due to miscommunications amongst the organizers and non-commitment by the panelists.

A discussion of racism did occur, however. How to approach and include women of different cultures, class and race is a key issue. One solution offered during the discussion was to work with people on their issues, with their reality of struggle. Neighborhood organizing around the issues of basic necessities are key to the politics of many.

Though the conference did not follow its pre-arranged agenda, the level of discussion and experience shared proved to be of great effect. There are valid criticisms to be made about the conference; in its planning stage and its manifestation, and these were expressed collectively at the end of the conference as well as one week later by the organizers. Mistakes were made and plans adjusted but the actual experience of the conference was exemplary of what socialist/feminism is all about; how to integrate and synthesize the personal and political.

Abortion Funds May Be Banned

Lynn

Respect Life, Inc. formed six months ago solely for the purpose of proposing an amendment to the Constitution of Colorado. The proposed amendment bans the use of state funds for medicaid abortions. Specifically, it reads:

Shall Article XVIII of the Constitution of the State of Colorado Be Amended by Adding a New Section 9 Prohibiting the State or any of its Political Subdivisions from Funding or Reimbursing the Cost of Abortion Procedures, Except When it Shall Become Necessary to Save the Life of the Mother?

If the people from Respect Life succeed in gathering the 63,040 petition signatures needed, the proposed amendment will appear on the ballot in November. Colorado is one of 14 states which (since the Hyde Amendment passed) continues to use state funds for non-death-bed abortions.

The Colorado Pro-Choice coalition is organized to defeat the proposed constitutional amendment. According to Mary Bennett Scharf, who is a member of the decision-making Steering Committee, Colorado Pro-Choice is a broad based, feminist and non-feminist group working to educate people around this issue, and to get them to the polls in November to vote "No" on the amendment. The coalition has a Speaker's Bureau to send speakers out into Colorado communities.

Fundraising is a major part of a campaign like this one. Money is needed for running an office, producing printed materials, and buying television and radio time. Donations of time and/or money are urgently needed by Colorado Pro-Choice. There are mailings, voter identification, educating, and fundraising to be done. For more information, call 832-2293.

Mary Bennett Scharf is a 43-year-old Black feminist. She was a Colorado delegate to the IWY conference in Houston, a former president of the Colorado Women's Political Caucus, and is currently on the Steering Committee of the Colorado Pro-Choice coalition.

BMR: Why are you involved in abortion rights, specifically abortion rights for poor women?

MBS: It's a question of individual freedom. And over the years I've always been involved in those things that would deny individual freedom. The last few years I've spent in the women's movement, but in the early 50's I was involved in the civil rights movement, and in the 60's in the peace movement. It's the status quo for me. I tend to be issue oriented though I do support candidates and work in a partisan kind of way. In 1964, I lobbied the legislators on Colorado's first bill on abortion so it's sort of like I'm back where I started from. It's rather depressing to think that we're retreating. You have to fight the same battles all over again. Because, without the funding, abortion is non-existent. Rich women will always be able to obtain abortions as they did before the laws changed and the Supreme Court ruled. They've always been able to do that. What will change is the same women being butchered again.

BMR: Is there a particular philosophical basis for the Colorado Pro-Choice coalition's pro-abortion stand?

MBS: Only that many of the people are people who support the 1st Amendment. Some of the people who have donated money and consider themselves very conservative republicans, who do have some problems with government funding of any kind, still see this initiative as a threat to personal choice. That's the one thing we do have in common, aside from those of us that are feminists.

BMR: Who are Respect Life, Inc. and their supporters?

MBS: We don't know much about the opposition. But we tend to think that they are people who go for things that are really oppressive in nature, I tend to think they are the radical right. I think there is a connection between the Right-to-Lifers and this Colorado group sponsoring the initiative, but I couldn't prove it.

BMR: So these people are working to get their petition signatures, going to churches and knocking on doors, etc.?

MBS: Yes, we've heard rumors there've been a lot of petitions passed out in churches after the service. In some fundamentalist churches, they would feel it was part of the sermon, part of God's right to pass petitions against abortion in the middle of service.

The Right-to-Lifers and other people opposed to abortion have really been working while we've been coasting. Otherwise the Hyde Amendment would never have passed. While we've been relaxing and looking around at ‘this many women in state legislature’ they were selling their point of view to the Congress and to the legislators, which we were not doing. And we were not demanding, as feminists, that the people who represent us, represent us on this issue. And I hope, by God, in 1978 we're going to demand this of them; that they be Pro-Choice.

Because I feel, what with the Hyde Amendment and this proposed Colorado amendment, that the next step is to try to go for a Constitutional amendment to ban abortions period. Many things can be banned at a Constitutional Convention. They would talk about affirmative action, which threatens us as women and minorities. There's the Bakke case and Congress is trying to forbid the use of HEW funds to enforce quotas. I think the whole thing is a gradual erosion of, not only personal choice, but what I call the repatriation of us as minorities and women. I don't feel quotas are bad at all. It's about time!

BMR: What we're talking about is the right wing backlash. All the things "won" in the liberal 60's and early 70's are being lost now.

MBS: The right is becoming more organized. We're still very complacent. It's been a time to be laid back. Maybe this issue will reactivate women and some women might see that politics doesn't need to be a dirty kind of thing. Especially young feminists, who want their politics so pure. Every issue and every candidate must pass a political Wasserman test. There is no such thing.

BMR: Women as a movement have not been forming coalitions, and are not voting. The opposition is.

MBS: Yes, and I'm still not seeing that. I still see a lot of Black women hesitant to join white organizations for many reasons. Many of them feel that a white woman does not know what it's like to be a Black woman. The Black woman has been “liberated” from the home out of necessity for so, so long that it's not a luxury being able to work. Black males, who should be more supportive, are feeling threatened by white women. And in a lot of cases, employers and institutions will do that; will throw a crumb to a white woman here, a Black man here, a Black woman there, and say, okay, you scramble over the crumbs. It's a great tactic. You can have everyone at each other's throats. We'll keep on losing all these battles and we are losing.

BMR: Do you have ideas for getting these coalitions together?

MBS: Maybe it has to be an issue at a time. We, as feminists, will have to band together on one issue at a time, and build the coalition.