hot briefs

Welcome Support

A woman worker at Simpson Timber Company in Shelton, Wash., who said her sexual harassment included being told by a job interviewer that her breasts were too large, has been ordered rehired by a judge, effectively ending a two-month long sympathy strike by the International Woodworkers of America, Local 3-38. Originally, Tony Gilbertson was hired by the company after filing a sex discrimination suit. The claim was filed after an interview last April, in which she was told she might hurt herself on the job because her breasts were too large. She was then asked if she wore a bra and what size it was. In his rehiring order, Judge Jack Tanner noted four other sex discrimination charges against Simpson by women at the mill.

-Hersay

ATE AND i XY WASHROUSES !

TRADI UNSAM

Industrial Injustice

A small army of women recently invaded the bleak industrial section of Edmonton, Alberta to protest the discriminatory hiring practices of Steel Company of Canada. They carried pickets stating "Women can do industrial jobs," "Typewriters, NO-- Rolling Mill Yes!" and “Women into STELCO Now." The demonstration was organized following the company's refusal to hire Lynda Little and Sarah Butson as laborers because the two women did not meet height requirements and the plant had no washroom facilities for women.

-Upstream

bmr:

And Don’t Be Late

A domestic relations commissioner has ruled that a man must pay his former wife the federal minimum wage whenever he misses an appointment to pick up their three children for his scheduled visits. When the father inquired what he should do if he had something important scheduled for the visit weekend, the judge replied, "Do what your wife would have to do. Hire a babysitter."

-New Women's Times

Fear of Aging

A survey by the Massachusetts group called Legal Research and Services for the Elderly has turned up the fact that women make up four-fifths of old people who are beaten, starved, drugged, or abused by those who are supposed to be taking care of them. The survey found nearly nine-tenths of the abuse came from relatives.

-Hersay

Naked Politics

Jacqueline Livingstone, a New York photographer, is under investigation for child abuse for showing nude pictures of her 11-year-old son in a photographic exhibition. The director of the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children has asked the Tompkins County District Attorney to prosecute Livingstone under the state's child pornography laws. Livingstone said, "My photography is not pornography, it's erotic. There's an enormous difference between the two. Unfortunately, some people are blind to that difference, especially when the subject matter is a naked male instead of a naked female.”

-Plexus

Flashed Back

A flasher approached a Vancouver woman, Carole Carl, as she was painting the outside of a hotel. He walked up to her, pulled down his pants, and grabbed her leg. Carl took her roller and painted him up and down. "It was marine enamel," she said later. "It's very hard to get off." The man fled, but police had no trouble picking him up. His bright orange coat of paint was flashing.

-Kenesis

where we’re at

We're back on the streets and stands. We spent the month of December working on developing a process for working together. We have started to develop points of unity and have committed ourselves to using criticism/self-criticism. A fine reference for this is Gracie Lyons' book Constructive Criticism. Putting it into practice continues to be hard... but if you have any criticisms of us, let us know, the address is: 1724 Gaylord St., Denver, CO 80206. We also refurbished the production room with new drafting tables and a chalkboard. The chalkboard is already filled with things we need to do. The one item we need that we weren't able to get is another space heater. The one we have is tiny and it's cold down here. If anyone out there has one to spare, we're accepting donations.

At the end of November Fran Day left the collective, however, she continues to contribute her reviews of children's books. The collective is Vicki Piotter, Susan Goding, Judy Barlow, Eileen Bresnahan, and Constance Perenyi.

We thank the women who are regularly sending BMR money as sustainers, (you know who you are). We need to have a dependable source of money other than from subscriptions and ads. Starting this month we are recognizing sustainers by listing them in the Contributors box along with women who have helped during the month by giving time to the paper. Author's names will appear with their article. A new box has been started this month. Women who have an ongoing commitment to BMR, who will be accountable to the collective for their work and who have an understanding and commitment to criticism/self-criticism will be listed in the Supporters box. Both boxes are always on page 2.

There is now a newspaper display box in Boulder at the Crossroads Mall. Now, when you get the urge to read BMR in the middle of the night....

If you are wondering why your most loved or hated women's book, record, or film has not been reviewed it is most likely because no one has sent us a review. If you have been especially moved by any one or two or so of any of the above please send us your review. Include, if you can, why it is constructive or destructive for the women's movement.

This issue is BMR's first in the eighties. While we may all think "goodbye to all that" meaning the seventies, we laid a lot of groundwork to get us to the eighties. So we won't forget. This month we are running a 4-page section about the last decade of feminism.

But, back to present and future work. On the back cover is a list of upcoming themes. Give them some consideration. We would like articles on those suggested topics, however, it is not a complete list, so feel free to send articles on issues you or your group are dealing with.

More Than Changed

It may not pay to have a sex change operation, according to Norman Fisk, who has interviewed 175 people who have changed their sex. Fisk says he found a "repetitious theme" in the career experiences of the people he questioned-- those who changed from male to female went downhill in their working lives while those who changed from female to male did better than before. The psychiatrist reports that of the three people in Stanford's gender change programs who chose to revert back to their original sex, one was a filmmaker who had become a woman. Said Fisk, “He had achieved success as a male, and tried for three years as a woman, finding that doors that had opened to him as a man were closed."

-Hersay

Bottom Dollar

The Government Printing Office (GPO) has been found guilty of discriminating against more than 300 women workers. US District Court found that sexist job categories existed in the bookbinding section of the GPO, with men and women assigned virtually separate but artificial craft and non-craft job designations. The bottom line difference between the categories: over $4 per hour. The government could end up owing thousands of dollars of back pay to the women.

-National NOW Times

Work, Work, Work

A limit on forced overtime is part of California state law for the first time, however, the overtime limit applies only to the Clerical, Technical, Mechanical, and similar occupations. And some more bad news-- only after 72 hours work in one week is an employee protected against reprisals for refusing to work further overtime. In "emergencies" employers can violate the 72-hour limit.

Deal With It Now

Aileen Hernandez, former president of the National Organization for Women, recently urged black women to quit that organization until the group deals with its racism. She says she has received no official response from NOW. Hernandez outlined NOW's racism at a recent convention of the Black American Political Association, immediately following NOW's national convention in which an all-white group of officers were elected for the second year in a row. Hernandez' remarks brought protests from Eleanor Smeal, NOW's current president, insisting that NOW fights “as hard on discrimination of race" as on sex discrimination. Hernandez says, however, that no attempts have been made by the women's organization to open dialogue on the racism charge.

Still Wanted

Nicaragua has named a woman who was once among the most-wanted guerrillas under the regime of deposed President Anastasio Somoza as the prosecutor in the trials of 7500 prisoners of war.

-Hersay

Bryant Tops

Singer and reactionary Anita Bryant tops the list of 1979's most admired women compiled by Good Housekeeping magazine. Bryant is followed by former First Lady Pat Nixon, Mother Teresa of India, former First Lady Betty Ford, opera singer Beverly Sills, First Lady Rosalynn Carter, actor Katherine Hepburn, former US Representative Barbara Jordan, conservative Phyllis Schlafly, and actor Jane Fonda, in that order.

-Hersay

Pope-fed:

Mother Teresa was fed her lines when she accepted the Nobel Peace Prize in Oslo, according to columnist Liz Smith. The nun from India enraged many at the December award ceremony when she turned her prize acceptance speech into a hardline speech against abortion. Columnist Liz Smith claims that Mother Teresa didn't even write the speech, but charges that the Saint of the Calcutta gutters was handed the anti-abortion manifesto by the Vatican, and that a papal representative stood by in Oslo to make sure she read it.

-Hersay

"Big Mama Rag Vol. 8 No. 1"

No Safe Place

California's Board of Medical Quality Assurance began disciplinary proceedings against two physicians and three nurses who failed to report acts of sexual perversion by anesthesiologist William Miofsky, MD, in the operating rooms of Sutter Community Hospital in Sacramento. Dr. Miofsky has pleaded no contest to three of seven charges of performing acts of oral copulation on unconscious women patients as they underwent surgery.

-Harrisburg Area Women’s News

The Woman Alone

The city of Boston has a statute commonly called the “night walking law." It states that women walking alone at night unaccompanied by a male can be considered to be soliciting for sex and can be charged with prostitution. Are men alone to be considered rapists?

-Amazon

Trust In the Law?

Martha Hutchinson recently appeared before Florida's Marion County Circuit Court Judge William Swigert on charges of having shot her husband. A battered wife all her married life, Martha said she'd been terrified of her husband, who was a member of the Ku Klux Klan. He had shot her several times, including the night before she in turn shot him. The judge gave Martha 15 years in prison.

-No More Cages

Women in Tents

Single women with children may have to live in tents in the '80s, is what a Berkeley professor is forecasting, because developers are still building houses for traditional American families composed of a father, a mother, and three children. Professor Gellen says, in fact, real families are getting smaller while apartment rents are skyrocketing. As a result of the housing crunch, the next five years could see residents of crowded Los Angeles moving into tents, "probably women with kids."

-Hersay

-Off Our Backs

No More Bars

A coalition of women's groups, prison reform, and civil rights groups have come together to block construction of a new 600-bed women's prison in Georgia. Betsy Brinson, from the ACLU Southern Women's Rights Project, said: "It is evident from our research that Georgia would not need another women's prison if its female prisoners were not excluded from eleven existing programs which are presently underutilized by at least 50 percent. We are also concerned that highly publicized but erroneous studies which have attempted to draw a correlation between the women's movement and alleged increases in women's economic crimes have influenced the Georgia Department of Offender's Rehabilitation's decision to expand its prison facilities for women. If so, the Georgia plan may represent a new wave of discrimination against women-- especially the young, poor, and black women who comprise an overwhelming majority of inmates."

-Spokeswoman