Denver Police: A Black and White Double Standard

Race Is A Factor In Rape Cases

Vicki Piotter

Lysandra Vance was a victim of rape last February in her Denver apartment. Kristin Skousgard was a victim of an attempted rape last March in her Denver apartment. Both women are angry at what happened, and what happened to each of them after being attacked is filled with differences.

On Monday night, February 28th, Lysandra Vance answered a knock at her door when a man asked for her roommate. When she opened the door three men entered and one of them put a knife to her throat and threatened to kill her if she didn't keep quiet. They forced her to her bedroom, tied her up, and the three of them took turns anally raping Ms. Vance. During the rape, the men repeatedly threatened to kill her and stabbed her several times with the knife.

During the attack, Lysandra's roommate came home and was also tied up, beaten and thrown on the bed beside her friend. The men did not rape her.

Before leaving, the men ransacked the apartment, taking sound equipment, a clock radio and jewelry belonging to the two women. Lysandra Vance and her roommate did not see the men escape.

In a copyrighted story to the Denver Post, Ms. Vance said after the men left, she managed to get to her door to call for help. She saw the assistant manager of her apartment complex and begged him to call the police, which he flatly refused to do. (He later expressed no remorse at having refused to help and told Ms. Vance, “I didn't know what tricks you and your roommate were playing.”)

Kristin Skousgard was more fortunate. On Thursday evening, March 3rd, Kristin was working on her tax forms at her corner desk when she looked up and saw a stranger in her apartment. After telling the man he had the wrong apartment, she realized exactly what he was there for and began screaming. In a matter of seconds, the man had trapped her behind the desk and started repeatedly hitting her face, tearing at her clothes. Kristin continued screaming and poked at his eyes with her free hand.

Other women, who live in apartments in the same house as Kristin, answered her screams. The first woman to arrive at the scene diverted his attack by running at him; he knocked her down with two blows to the head. The man then picked up a mop to take both women on; however, three other women came running into Ms. Skousgard's apartment. The man then walked out the door and escaped on foot. The women did not try to follow, thinking he had a weapon because of the blood pouring from Kristin's face.

Both women reported their assaults to the Denver Police Department. Lysandra Vance said when the police arrived they were unconcerned with what had happened to her and were more interested in the stolen goods. She said the police thought it was funny that three men could escape with all the things they took.

The police told her they would check back with her in a few days, but after days passed, no one had contacted her. Lysandra and her friend were also not allowed to look at police mug shots of known sex offenders. The detective in charge of the case said he had not offered to show the women the books “Because women look through those books and pick out guys who have been dead for three years. They're just like little kids. They see pictures and get into their minds that's how the guy should look, and when we do get the right guy, they don't recognize him.”

Lysandra Vance feels that if her case is typical in treatment by the police, she now understands why more rapists are walking free.

Kristin Skousgard's experience with the police was quite different. They responded to her call within five minutes. One patrolman, who was cool and distant, was willing to write the incident off as an attempted burglary; however, it was immediately pointed out that the man made no attempt to take money or a camera which were on the desk. The other policeman showed concern for her condition, was sympathetic and helpful with questions. They sent a fingerprint team to her apartment to see if prints could be lifted from the glove the man had left behind.

The next day, Kristin and two of the witnesses were asked to police headquarters to look at mug shots of sexual offenders to try to identify the man. (He was not in the books.)

Why such discrepancies in the handling of the two cases, one in which a woman was brutally raped and stabbed by three men, the other in which the woman suffered facial cuts and bruises at the hands of a lone assailant who was interrupted in his attempted rape?

Lysandra Vance is a Black woman. Kristin Skousgard is white; the man who attacked her is Black.

The Denver Police Department apparently follows the national example when it comes to race and rape. Lysandra Vance fits into the statistics which show that rapes involving Third World women are usually ignored by police and courts and that written reports and follow-ups of such rapes are infrequent, whether or not the assailant is Third World or Anglo. Kristin Skousgard said, "When the police discovered the man who tried to rape me was Black, they seemed much more interested in following up the case.” She said one policeman asked her such questions as, "Was he dressed

(More on Page 18)

e, a film by JoAnn Elam

Graphic from

Precedents Aside, Access to Strong Support

-- And Money -- Make The Difference

bing of her husband. She said the killing was in self-defense, done out of fear that her husband--who had a long history of violence and sadism--was about to tie her up, whip her and perform anal intercourse.

The judge told the jury that a married woman has a legal right to forcibly resist unwanted sexual advances by her husband, although Michigan's new Sexual Assault Act implies that she must submit. Australia is still the only country in the world where it is a crime for a husband to rape his wife, although in the US, the New York legislature recently passed a similar bill.

Despite the importance of legal victories like the Little and Garcia acquittals, the courts have not assured a woman's legal right to self-defense against rape. Precedents aside, the crucial factors are access to good legal and political support--and money.

In the case of Joan Little, a Black woman tried in 1975 for murdering her white jailer as he tried to rape her, the evidence was clearly on her side: Clarence Alligood's body was found partially nude on top of the ice pick he had brought into Joan's cell. However, much of the substantiating evidence--"bungled" by local police--was uncovered only with the aid of a criminologist and other experts hired by the defense.

Joan was acquitted, but she might not have been without strong legal and political support and nationwide attention to her case.

The importance of a good defense, which tends to go along with money and good political support, was underscored in the Inez Garcia retrial (see accompanying story) and the less well-known case of Virginia Tierce. Both women were convicted at their initial trials, and later acquitted thanks to new lawyers and continued feminist support.

Virginia Tierce, a San Diego woman convicted of voluntary manslaughter for killing a man who tried to rape her, was acquitted in February at the end of her retrial. Both the judge and her new lawyer had questioned the competence of the original defense.

(More on Page 18)