Battles For Abortions Continues

National News

Sara Bennett and Joan Gibbs

The longest legal battle in the
struggle for poor women's rights to
abortions came one step closer to a
successful conclusion.

The U.S. Supreme Court has decided
temporarily, on February 18th, 1980,
to let stand Brooklyn Federal District
Court Judge John Dooling's ruling that
declared the Hyde Amendment unconstitu-
tional. The Supreme Court will give a
final ruling on the case sometime late
in this term.

The case started more than three
years ago, in September, 1976, when
Cora McCrae, then a 24-year-old
Brooklyn resident, sought an abortion
at a Planned Parenthood office in New
York City. When told that the Hyde
Amendment was about to go into effect
and that Medicaid would not pay for
her abortion, McCrae decided to go to
court. Planned Parenthood, the American
Civil Liberties Union and the Center
for Constitutional Rights decided to
back her with legal assistance. Women

from Connecticut and Minnesota and the

Women's Division of the Board of
Global Ministries of the United Metho-
dist Church later joined with McCrae,
as did six doctors from several states
who contended that the restriction on
abortion funding interfered with their
services.

The suit was filed against the Depart-
ment of Health, Education and Welfare
and its then head Joseph Califano.
Several anti-abortion intervenors prom-
ptly entered the case in defense of
the Hyde Amendment, including Repre-
sentative Henry Hyde, Senator Jesse A.
Helms (R.-N.C.) and former New York
Senator James Buckley, who all claimed
they were acting on behalf of taxpayers
opposed to federal funding of
abortions. Isabella M. Pernicone, a
lawyer and member of the National
Right-to-Life Committee, was granted
standing in the case as a guardian
for unborn children. A companion suit
was filed simultaneously by the New
York City Health and Hospitals Corpor-
ation.

Though 15 suits challenging state
policies restricting Medicaid payments
for medically necessary abortions have
been filed since that time and over 13

federal and state courts have held that

these restrictions are illegal, McCrae
v. Harris was the only suit directly
challenging restrictions on Medicaid
reimbursement for abortion imposed by
Congress through riders to the Labor,
Health, Education and Welfare Appro-
priation Act.

Filed the same day the first Hyde
Amendment went into effect, McCrae v.
Harris challenged Congress's restrict-
ions on the grounds that they denied
equal protection and due process, and
did not separate church and state.

Since the first Hyde Amendment rider
went into effect, 10 states have vol-
untarily covered the cost of abortion
through state-funded medical care.
Seven more have been funding abortion
pursuant to state-directed court orders.
But in 22 states which have adopted the
Hyde Amendment in its entirety, the
number of Medicaid funded abortions
has decreased by 98.2 percent since
1975. Colorado is one state that still
funds abortions for poor women. At the
same time, the federal government is

CAROLINE WEBB AT THE ABORTION RIGHTS TRIBUNAL—

providing 90 percent of the funds for
sterilization procedures.

While the Supreme Court's decision is

nice, we still need to continue the
fight for reproductive rights and all
that it entails—from keeping federal

funding for abortions available, to the

need to fight sterilization abuse

and population control programs aimed
primarily at Third World women and
the need to have affordable day care
for all women.

The restriction of public money for
abortions has been part of the larger
strategy in an attack that is aimed
directly at a specific group—poor
women.

Reprinted from Liberation News Service
with minor alterations.

Local News

Susan Goding

Although the Supreme Court has
temporarily upheld Judge Dooling's
ruling that the Hyde Amendment is
unconstitutional, Right-To-Lifers
work on many fronts. A dispropor-
tionate number of their members are

doctors, hospital board members,
and legislators.

In Colorado, the state had con-
tinued to reimburse doctors for
abortions under the Medicaid pro-
gram despite the Hyde Amendment.
However, the amount of money
doctors or clinics can bill the
state for is set by the state.

In Colorado, it has set the amount
so low that it has effectively
limited Medicaid abortions to first
term abortions. The amount of money
they will reimburse is only enough
to cover an abortion during the
first 12 weeks. After that the
procedure changes and the expense
to the clinic or doctor rises,
discouraging them from performing
later term abortions.

Also, hospitals are free to set
their own policies on abortion.
Some hospitals refuse to do them
altogether and most others limit
the number of weeks into a pregnan-
cy that abortions can be performed
at their hospital. Most hospitals
have set the limit at 20 weeks,
except under extreme circumstances.

This month two hospitals in
Boulder changed their policy on
abortions performed there. Previ-
ously, the decision for the abortion
was strictly between a doctor and
the woman. Boulder Community and
Boulder Memorial Hospital have
decided to limit abortions perform-
ed there to abortions in the first
20 weeks, except under 6 conditions:
1) clinically verified genetic and/
or chromosomal abnormality in the
fetus, 2) clinically verified
threat to the health of the mother,
3) a woman is 15 years or younger,
4) rape, 5) incest, 6) severe men-
tal retardation of the mother.
Besides those conditions, a woman
will have to go to another clinic
or hospital. The Boulder Abortion
Clinic is still performing late
term abortions.

It seems our battles for reproduc-
tive rights will be long and many
pronged. Even if the Supreme Court
does finally rule the Hyde Amend-
ment unconstitutional, we must re-
member it is only one small vic-
tory for poor women; there is much
more to be done.

Woman Is Charged For Reporting She Was Raped

Mary Klein

In a strange twist of justice, a
Maryland woman who was allegedly raped
by an Air Force major is now being
charged with making a false rape re-
port by the state attorney who origin-
ally planned to defend her.

Although Maj. Harry A. White was in-
dicted by a grand jury on charges of
rape, State Atty. Neal Myerberg deci-
ded not to prosecute him. Instead,
Myerberg dropped the case against the
major and filed charges against Debra
Allman, the rape victim.

Debra Allman maintains she was raped
last January, after her first night
on the job as a topless go-go dancer.
Debra had previously worked in a fac-
tory in Michigan until her husband,

a low-ranking Navy man, was transfer-
red to a new base in Maryland. Because
of her limited job skills, she had
difficulty finding work in the area,
which has no industry. She needed the
job.

During the evening, Debra was intro-
duced to Major White. He talked about
his family and treated her with a
good deal of respect. Debra was re-
lieved to have met a seemingly friend-
ly person in the otherwise hostile
environment of the club. She told the
major of her fear of being stranded
after the bar closed and he promised
to give her a ride home if that hap-
pened. Because she was married to a
military person, Debra felt she could
trust the major.

When her ride did not show up, she
accepted Major White's offer. But
during the trip home, Major White
suddenly stopped the car on an isolat-
ed, dark road and raped Debra. She
tried to talk him out of it, but
when he persisted she did not fight
back physically, realizing that she
could easily be killed. Her resistance
was later questioned because she had
no bruises or wounds.

Afterwards, Major White drove her
back to the Naval Air Station where
Debra lives on-base. She immediately

reported the rape to the sentry on
duty. The sentry got the license num-
ber of the car and reported it to the
police who apprehended the major in
Washington, D.C.

Major White denied that he had
raped Debra but later claimed that
she consented to have sex with him.
Debra brought charges of rape against
him and the state attorney agreed to
prosecute, but not until she took a
polygraph test, which she "passed."

Soon after Debra took the test, a
grand jury indicted White on charges
of rape. Debra was then asked by the
state attorney to take another poly-
graph test.

The man who administered the test
harassed and intimidated Debra. After
starting in a friendly conversation,
he abruptly switched the tone of his

voice and began accusing her of being
drunk the night the rape occurred
and leading the major on. Stunned and
weary, she finally told him something
to the effect that if that was what
he wanted to believe, then she didn't
care if he believed it.

It was after that incident that the
state attorney dropped the rape charge
and filed charges against Debra,

claiming that she gave false testi-
mony. Another key event leading to the
reversal in charges was that the
attorney learned that Debra had orig-
inally not told him that the major
performed oral sex on her. Debra un-
successfully tried to tell the attor-
ney that she was too ashamed to talk
about it. Reportedly Myerberg, not
Major White, was the prime mover
behind reversing the charges.

In the meantime, Debra is suing
Maj. White in federal court on charges
of sexual assault.

Debra has been suffering tremendous
anxiety since last January and is re-
ceiving counseling from the local
rape crisis center.

Asking a rape victim to take a lie
detector test is a blatant denial of
due process. For what other crime
are victims required to first prove
they are innocent; even though

critics have pointed out that what

a polygraph measures is stress—which
could be assumed to accompany re-
counting a rape experience.

Another factor being used against
Debra is that she had worked one
night as a topless dancer, subjecting
her to the myth that women who earn
their living dancing or waiting on
tables are "loose." In contrast, her
rapist holds a highly respected job
in the military, which puts him in a
very advantageous position for a
court battle.

Debra needs to raise at least $4,000
for her defense. She needs money
for two court battles, one of convict-
ing her rapist and another of

defending herself against charges

of reporting a rape, allegedly falsely.
Contributions can be sent, made out

to "The Debra Allman Fund," to NOW,
P.O. Box 370, Waldorf, MD 20601.

Utah Ruling Is Overturned

Eileen Hansen

The Utah Supreme Court recently
ruled to overturn Third District
Judge Bryant H. Croft's decision
holding that women are responsible
for their own rape.

In December of 1978, a jury unani-
mously convicted Eugene Myers of
raping a 22-year-old woman. Later
that month, Judge Croft overturned
the jury's verdict, opining that the
woman had "invited" the rape because

she wore a "flimsy" dress, accepted

food and drinks from Myers and was
seen "necking" with him. The Judge’s
opinion outraged feminists across the
country and the decision was appealed
to the Utah Supreme Court.

In startling agreement with the
women's protests, Chief Justice J.
Allen Crockett expressed the Court's
unanimous disapproval of Judge
Croft's decision and ordered Eugene
Myers to be sentenced.

It is Croft's belief, the Utah
bench stated, that if a woman is
friendly toward a man "and engages
in ‘necking’, that is kissing and
hugging, and this persists over a per-
iod of time, she loses her right to
protest against further advances the
man may desire to force upon her; and
thereby subjects herself to such
advances and should be deemed to con-
sent to intercourse if he, but not
she, so desires." The Chief Justice
closed, "Neither this court nor the
law will justify any such conclusion.”

Utah women hailed the Court's de-
cision as "a great victory, won by
women, for women everywhere." They
noted, however, "Judge Croft still
sits as a judge, ready, willing and
able to blame the victim for intru-
sions into her body."