Coalition of CO Women Against Nukes

Wood

On Saturday, December 9th, the Co-
lorado Women's Anti-Nuclear Coalition
came together for the second time, in
Colorado Springs. In a sense, this was
the Coalition's first meeting. At the
previous one, held October 14th in
Boulder, a proposal for the autono-
mous women's coalition, independent
of the established anti-nuclear
groups, was proposed and debated (see
BMR, December 1978). The women who
met in Colorado Springs came together
in the context of an established wo-
men's group.

The meeting began around noon with
introductions, an opportunity for the
participants to get a sense of each
other's approach and involvement. Af-
ter that, women shared information on
the nuclear threat. Assuming roles of
politicians, profitmongers, engineers
and technicians, we clarified terms
like "fission" and "fusion," and de-
bated the touted benefits of nuclear
technology.

After a sack lunch, the group
heard from Mary Lyn Sheetz, member of
an ad hoc group which had organized
a week of prayer, fasting and leaf-
leting at the Air Force Academy, just
north of Colorado Springs. Pointing
out that at the Academy, people are
trained to use the weapons developed
at Rocky Flats, Mary Lyn reported
that several had been arrested during
the action. Members of the group had
stationed themselves outside the Ac-
ademy chapel, where they leafleted
visitors and talked with cadets. The
Academy establishment schedules talks
on pacifism and related topics, but
follows them up with pro-militaristic
propaganda, thus rendering the talks
ineffective. This action disrupted
the facade of open access to ideas,
and challenged the Air Force chap-
lains' image of themselves as univer-
sally accepting of all forms of re-
ligious expression. Several cadets

were surprised to learn that they
have more options than those the Aca-
demy would prefer they consider.

Around 2 p.m., a contingent of women
arrived from Boulder, swelling the
number of participants to 23. Discus-
sion turned to definitions and expec-
tations of the coalition. It was sug-
gested that, in order for this Coali-
tion to succeed, its members would
have to discard the concept of an
absolute political truth; commonali-
ties and differences would have to be
defined, acknowledged and respected
so that the Coalition could narrow
its focus to the issues on which it
could act effectively.

At the Boulder meeting, the women
who attended had found themselves di-
vided in their approaches to two
issues in particular: non-violence
and attitudes toward men. Those
women present who are currently work-
ing alongside men in anti-nuclear
politics asked for support and sug-
gestions in dealing with the inevi-
table difficulties. In Boulder, women
of the Rocky Flats Truth Force have
begun caucusing outside the regular
mixed meetings, a move which has
clearly threatened many of the men.
The women, however, have found that
they emerged from their separate
meetings energized, enthusiastic and
much more effective in the mixed
groups. Some women felt uncomfortable
at being unable to analyze exactly
why their own meetings had become so
important to them, especially since
they wanted to find some way to
explain it to the men. There was a
great deal of support for their
struggle from the other women pre-
sent, and it was suggested that they
take the further step of translating
their newly-generated power into con-
crete leadership within the struc-
tures of the larger group. There is
also a reading list of material avai-
lable which demonstrates the connec-
tion between the male privilege
which the men in question feel is

conduct aggressive, forceful actions
without resorting to violence. Vio-
lent actions, in their view, contra-
dict the spirit of the struggle to
end the violence of nuclear war-mon-
gering.

On the other side, it was asserted
that there is a difference between
the violence of the oppressor and
that of the oppressed. Violence is
justified, then, in certain situa-
tions, such as in a war of liberation.

It was agreed that to debate the
morality of violence was beside the
point; if the Coalition should need
to make decisions based on an ap-
proach to violence, it would be in
the context of its strategic effec-
tiveness, and then attitudes would
vary depending on the type of action
being contemplated. There was a con-
sensus that any Coalition member plan
to participate in an anti-nuclear
action would undergo (pacifist) civil

being threatened, and the militarism
of which Rocky Flats is an expres-
sion. This list may prove useful to
the men, and also may relieve the
women of much of the burden of ex-
plaining their position.

During the course of this discus-
sion, it was affirmed that the Coa-
lition is an autonomous women's group,
and is not structured to acc-
ommodate men at any level. The Coali-
tion is a support group and power
base for women active in the anti-
nuclear movement, and hopefully it
will empower its members to partici-
pate in that struggle with increased
clarity, strength and effectiveness.

The other major area of divergence
within the group was the issue of
non-violence. Several women are de-
votees of the Hindu philosophy of
satyagraha, which advocates strictly
non-violent resistance. These
women pointed out that there is a
difference between pacifism and pas-

sivity, and that it is possible to MORE ON PAGE 10

Helpful Hints & Recipes from Auntie Porn

Auntie Porn

Although government statisticians would have us believe that crime is in-
creasing at an alarming rate among women, the reality is that many of us lack
even the most basic skills we require for success in one of the most promising
fields of political resistance: graffiti, destruction of property and creating
a public nuisance.

In the face of a multimillion dollar porn industry which promotes lies about
us and violence towards us, we are left with few choices for our self-defense.
We can spend the rest of our lives walking down the street with our eyes
closed. We can work for laws -- always wondering how they will be enforced in
a sexist society. We can employ other useful forms of political resistance:
the boycott, for example. Although that too has its limits. (How many of us
still buy the Rolling Stones anyway?)

Actually, any action, by itself, is likely to be a drop in the bucket. (Do
keep in mind how fast a bucket fills up under a leaky faucet.) However, direct
actions -- the destruction of property which is harmful to us, street theater
or graffiti (the replacement of their images with ours) probably give the best
return on our energy; offer no chance for harmful compromises or cooptation;
generally involve no legal fees, and require no formal training or academic
degrees.

In the spirit of encouraging creativity, Auntie Porn lists the following
suggestions -- some tried and some untried -- which, with practice, can easily
be made perfect. As for the originators, take the silent credit you deserve.
Auntie Porn encourages you to let her know -- in the way you see fit -- of any
refinements or any new ones altogether.

photo by
Deb Taylor

"FILL EGG SHELLS WITH PAINT. If you are cooking scrambled eggs or soufflé,
blow the eggs out of their shells instead of breaking them. This is done by
making a small hole at both ends of the shell with a pin, then blowing very
hard at one end -- the egg comes out the other end. If it doesn't work, make
the holes a little bigger. Seal one end of the empty shells with wax. Fill
them with oil-based paint using a hypodermic needle. Then seal the other end
with wax.

“NON-REMOVABLE POSTERS: PUT THEM UP WITH WHEAT PASTE. Materials needed:
wheat paste (a kind of wallpaper paste which can be bought at a hardware or
paint store), wallpapering brushes and pails. Mix wheat paste according to the
directions on the package. It's easiest to poster with groups of three people:
one with a pail and brush, another to manage the posters, and a third to drive
if you use a car. When postering, one person "paints" the area to posters with
wheat paste -- covering a space slightly larger than the poster. The second

person places the poster over that area, smoothing out wrinkles and making
sure the corners are down. The first person then “paints” over the poster with
another layer of wheat paste. With practice, the whole procedure can be com-
pleted in seconds. After about an hour the paste mixture might thicken -- just
add some water. It usually takes a few hours for posters to dry. Thin paper
adheres best and dries quickest. Surfaces should be flat and smooth; plywood,
billboards, metal and smooth concrete are good surfaces. Posters on glass are
easy to wash off, though it may be worthwhile to put up a poster even for a
short time if it's an important location. Sometimes a little step ladder or a
longer brush can allow you to poster higher for more visibility and lasting
posters.

“MAKE A STINK BOMB. Mix Drano and an egg white in a jar and let it stand two
or three days. It's harmless, but very smelly.

“CONFUSE SELLERS AND BUYERS OF X-RATED VIDEOTAPES. The x-rated movie busi-
ness is changing -- from the neighborhood theater to private homes; the reason
for this change is the introduction of new technology in the porn industry --
home video systems. Women organizing against porn have been able to focus
public awareness on theaters showing x-rated movies and call attention to the
misogyny of these movies, the theater owners and the patrons. But we cannot
picket living rooms. Pornographic video cassettes are sold in “adult” book
stores, through video clubs and through ads in Hustler, Penthouse, etc. The
ads in magazines usually include toll-free numbers. If these numbers were fre-
quently called by women, the lines of communication of the porn dealers would
be clogged. A few of these numbers are:

1-800-848-9107
1-800-%

Leisure Time Home Video (owned by Hustler)
7-3248 Tele-Cine, 99 Golden Gate Ave., San Francisco, CA

Video tapes are recorded through an electro-magnetic process -- a scene is

MORE ON PAGE 10