The Politics of Rape in Denver

Carol Lease

Every day in the city of Denver women are raped — physically and mentally. Physical rapes are an outward expression of male violence against women. Mental rapes are more subtle, are essential to a woman's socialization and are more violent because they rob women of their woman's identity or at least make it harder to discover. Mental rapes hide under rationalizations for survival, psychiatric justification, intellectual elitism.

Denver has had the highest rape rate for a city its size and probably still does despite efforts by rape “authorities” to tell us that Los Angeles now holds that disgrace for women. But the problem isn't that this city has more rapes per capita than any other city. The problem is that millions of dollars are spent on attempts, with varying degrees of success, to treat the result — the victim through counseling and support services, the rapist by creating and improving existing treatment, and the legal machinery so that the rapist can be adequately prosecuted. These programs are all important and essential because the mechanisms of societal functioning must have practical operational procedures. But they only treat the result and don’t even begin to deal with the cause. They self-perpetuate jobs and the prevailing values that sustain rape and keep the system going. They don't recognize that rape is an essential part of this society as is war and poverty. War is aggression between the weak and the strong; poverty between the poor and the rich; rape between the female and the male.

There is no attempt to see the necessity of rape in a male-dominated society. Self-defense classes are seen as an oddity, not as central to the problem of rape and essential for all women. To have self-defense as an integral part of young women’s lives would be revolutionary. And the Law Enforcement Assistance Agency (LEAA) isn’t going to fund anything like that, at least not yet.

Rape Groups Splinter

But another problem is the resistance felt from some organized rape groups. Even the most brief observation of rape groups in this city shows schisms and “rape experts” who consistently try to control all activities pertaining to sexual assault. Egos are being fed and reputations are being made around the issue of rape while women continue to suffer.

There has been lots of energy and ideas and activity in old and new groups that deal with sexual assault since the August issue of Big Mama Rag which was a special issue on rape. Some groups have revitalized themselves, some have grown and expanded services and some have committed suicide. It is not necessarily bad to have died. In fact, it's a natural event when all the energy and ideas have left or been expelled. But it's pathetic to be ignorant of your own death.

The Denver Coalition on Sexual Assault was born last March with the help of people from the Southeast Denver Neighborhood Services Bureau when the victimization program at the agency was flooded with requests from all over the city for speakers and information. It sponsored conferences dealing with rape in the spring and created task forces for specific work such as in counseling, legislation and mass media.

Today the DCSA exists on paper and only when the closed steering committee meets. There have been no open meetings since July for general members and interested public. Even members of the steering committee have trouble finding out when and where steering committee meetings are held.

Women Withdraw

In late August, the entire Counseling Task Force withdrew from the coalition. The men and women on the task force did not agree with the organizational structure of the coalition because “the general membership of the counseling task force had no input into the formation of a permanent steering committee,” and subsequent “attempts at communicating our concerns were not adequately acknowledged.”

The task force felt that the structure was “imposed” upon them and that the steering committee was serving as a “self-appointed regulatory body” rather than doing what it should. Members of the group also expressed their regrets that they couldn't effectively assist the victims of rape and sexual assault while part of the coalition.

According to a former member of the task force, those on the steering committee tried to control “everyone and everything that had anything to do with the coalition. The attitude was that you had to have a PhD or at least bow to one to be listened to. A lot of us are really concerned about rape. We wanted to help women, not just talk about studies and statistics at luncheons and in interviews with the media. But we couldn't even function anymore because of the hierarchy in the coalition. It's hard to get around the “champion of the cause” syndrome that some members of the steering committee exhibit. We felt that we weren’t wanted by the SCSA and that we could put our ideas and energy to work in other places.”

The counseling task force is not alone in its feeling of alienation from the steering committee. A member of the committee found herself out of the coalition after she made an “innocent mistake” in a press release for the DCSA.

Drs. Kathy Saltzman and Carolyn Hursch are among those left on the steering committee of the Denver Coalition on Sexual Assault. Saltzman is the victimization coordinator at the Southeast Denver Neighborhood Services Bureau, and Hursch is a co-director of a rape research project being conducted at the Violence Research Unit at Denver General Hospital.

NOW RAPE TASK FORCE

The Rape Task Force of the National Organization for Women (NOW) has been revitalized and is in full swing. Lots of people with ideas and energy are attending meetings and getting involved with that task force and what it is doing.

Membership in the group is not limited to members of NOW. And what the group can do is not limited in any way to what it is now doing. In other words, it seems to be a free and open group that gets things done and has wisely learned from the mistakes of the SCSA.

The task force has the emergency room volunteer counseling at Denver General Hospital. It appears to be successful and effective. Volunteers are available specific hours for counseling victims who come to the emergency examination room. Volunteers are continually receiving training in counseling techniques and legal aspects of rape from the Denver District Attorney’s office.

The volunteer is there to be with the victim, so that the victim has to go through “the minimum amount of general shit,” according to one volunteer. Volunteers observe both good and bad reactions from doctors and policemen. Letters of commendation are sent and negative reactions are dealt with “informally” but seemingly effectively. “It took time to be allowed in the emergency room and it will take time to educate people about the rape victim,” says another volunteer. Volunteers are in the emergency room on weekend nights. Another woman in the task force is available during the day and there is also an on-call system for weekday nights so that no victim need be alone when she is taken to the hospital.

The task force is working on the proposed legislation for rape law revision in conjunction with the District Attorney's office.

CAPITOL HILL ACTION

Women who work at the Storefront, located at 1031 E Colfax, have decided to do something about the high rape rate in the Capitol Hill area. They are currently attending self-defense and rape prevention classes that are offered in Aurora and will coordinate similar classes in the Capitol Hill area beginning in February. “There is no other program like this,” they say. “We really need to have self-defense and prevention classes for women with some other groups that are concerned with rape and have the support and assistance of the NOW Task Force on Rape whenever we need it.”

It seems, however, that other “rape interest groups” aren't as excited about women organizing and actually doing something on their own. There appears to be a lot of anxiety and fear coming from the established victimization group when new groups attempt to provide services. There is no need where needs are met and the needs of women concerning the problem of rape are not being met in Denver today by agencies that have been funded, either partially or fully, to do it.

SEXUAL ASSAULT REVISION

The Denver District Attorney's office is continuing to work on its revision of the Criminal Code regarding rape and sexual assault. The proposed legislation will be presented to the Colorado Assembly in 1975.

Included in the changes is that any jury instruction would never state that rape is an easy charge to make and a difficult one to defend against, which is the Lord Hale rule.

But the bill allows testimony of the “victim's prior or subsequent sexual conduct with any person other than the defendant” if a written motion is submitted by the defense stating proof of the “relevancy of evidence” of the sexual conduct of the victim. If the proof is sufficient then the court can hear it out of the presence of the jury, and if found relevant allow the jury to hear it as admitted testimony.

This still leaves the admission into evidence of a victim's past sexual conduct up to the discretion of the court.

The word “rape” has been replaced with “sexual assault,” which has been defined as “any intrusion however slight of any part of a person’s body, or any object, into the genital or oral opening of another person's body.”

According to the proposed legislation, a woman can be sexually assaulted by her husband if she and her husband are living apart “whether or not under a decree of judicial separation.” However, if a man and a woman live as “man and wife” regardless of the legal stature of their relationship, the woman cannot be raped by that man.

Many women’s groups, such as the Legislative Task Force of NOW, the Rape Task Force of NOW, Women Against Rape and others are studying the proposed changes and assisting the D.A.'s office with the final draft of the bill.

COMMUNITY COUNSELING

Rape Awareness and Control of High Street Community Center is the grassroots, community-controlled and involved victim advocacy and hotline referral service that primarily serves women in Northeast Denver.

The 24-hour hotline has only been operating since early September but has had good response from the community. Most volunteers who answer the phone, talk to victims and often accompany them to the emergency room and go through other necessary procedures with them live in the community. Workshops to train volunteers are held regularly.

“We're receiving an increased number of calls,” says Judith Nugaris, a coordinator. “Lots of calls to us are initiated by a friend of the rape victim who can't handle what is happening, so they call us.”

Members of the High Street group are speaking at Denver area junior and senior high schools about rape control and prevention. Church groups and many organizations call for speakers and the program is also becoming a resource center for students who are studying rape.

High Street Rape Awareness and Control doesn’t have thousands of dollars in its operating budget. Young people from the neighborhood put on a dance last summer to raise the necessary money for a hotline. The project has no plans to seek more funding. 

More on Page 27