hot briefs

Arrests And Raids

On June 29, FBI agents arrested four Puerto Rican activists in Chicago, accusing them of membership in the clandestine independence organization FALN. The following day federal agents raided the pro-independence Puerto Rican Cultural Center in Chicago's largest Puerto Rican neighborhood. The Center houses an alternative high school and a childcare facility. The FBI ransacked and heavily damaged the building, seizing more than $30,000 worth of equipment.

The four activists arrested - Alejandrina Torres, Jose Rodriguez, Alberto Rodriguez and Edwin Cortes - are being held under bail of $5 to $10 million each. They are indicted on one count of seditious conspiracy, "to oppose by force the authority of the U.S. government."

COOPERAT

iil

-La Cucaracha

Five Sentenced

Julio Rosado, Maria Cueto, Ricardo Romero, Steven Guerra and Andres Rosado, members and supporters of the Movimiento de Liberacion Nacional (MLN), a public revolutionary organization of Puerto Ricans and Mexicanos in the U.S., were sentenced to three years for criminal contempt for refusing to talk to a grand jury investigating the Puerto Rican independence movement. Their stand of non-collaboration and the widespread support they built thwarted the U.S. government's drive to have them jailed for terms of 15 years to life. - (See related story pages 10 and 11)

Mourners Arrested

168 women in Sydney and 9 in Melbourne were arrested as they marched on Anzac (Australian and New Zealand Army Corps) Day, April 25, in remembrance of "all women who were raped in all wars." The women stated that their purpose was to "mourn," not to "disrupt," but as they approached a memorial site, carrying flowers and dressed in black, they were met by members of the Police Tactical Response Group and Special Branch who carried truncheons and were dressed in leather. They were charged with "causing serious alarm and affront."

Apartheid Protested

Suffering from diabetes and not expected to live more than two years, Oscar Mpetha, a 74-year-old Black trade unionist in Cape Town, South Africa, was sentenced to five years in prison June 28. He was found guilty of inciting a crowd to demonstrate and sing protest songs in August 1980 during riots in a Black township.

Meanwhile, two bombs exploded at the entrance of South African government offices June 28 near Johannesburg. Despite the increased security measures of the apartheid regime, the bombs were planted in the Internal Affairs Dept. office and went off within five minutes of each other.

No one was injured.

Yes, It’s A Threat

The following letter was received by two people who were protesting the rapes and sexual abuse of women in MCI Framingham, MA.:

Dear Mr. and Mrs. Meredith:

Your letter of May 31, 1983 concerns me greatly.

I would suggest that any information you may have regarding the commission of a felony within the confines of MCI-Framingham be reported immediately to the Middlesex County District Attorney's Office, lest you risk being indicted for conspiracy after the fact due to your failure to report any such incidences.

Sincerely,  
Peter Argeropulos  
Superintendent,  
Massachusetts Correctional Institution; Framingham

Page 6 - Big Man Rag, August/September, 1983

What's That?

The San Francisco Chronicle, in an editorial praising Senate confirmation of Kenneth Adelman as director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, commended Adelman for his "refreshingly frank admission" that he had never given much thought to the possibility of nuclear disarmament.

Suspicious Types

Doctors around the country recently received from the FBI mug shots of Weather Underground fugitives and their children. Included were tips on how to recognize suspicious patients. Fugitive-types tend to be "conscientious in seeking medical attention for their children" and "seem to prefer" nurses and midwives during childbirth. Suspects’ children are "prone to ear infections" and "allergic to penicillin." Also, suspects' "bills...are paid in cash or bank money order regardless of the amount."

Film Destroyed

When Women Against Pornography (WAP) in Victoria, BC, Canada, discovered that the violent pornographic film Snuff had become easily available in local video rental outlets, they determined that prompt action was needed. WAP invited federal, provincial and local public officials to a viewing of the film, after which WAP members destroyed copies of the film in front of the invited audience.

More Power

Reagan's illegal war plans against the people of Central America were given a boost by a Supreme Court ruling that invalidated a key provision of the War Powers Act, a law aimed at curbing the president's power to commit U.S. troops abroad. The ruling struck down the legislative veto, which gave Congress the right to have final say over certain decisions by the White House. The legislative veto was the mechanism through which Congress could stop presidential moves to send U.S. troops abroad on military adventures. 

Following Orders

In interviews broadcast on the BBC in London July 4, U.S. intelligence agents confirmed that they had helped hundreds of Nazi war criminals escape prosecution after World War II, including the "Butcher of Lyon," Klaus Barbie, now awaiting trial in France for the torture and murder of thousands of people and the rounding up for death camps of thousands more.

"We went overboard to be nice to that guy," Ed Dobringhaus, a former U.S. Counterintelligence (CIC) agent said of Barbie. "We went out drinking beer once in a while."

Herbert Bechtold, another CIC agent, was asked by the BBC whether he thought hiring and shielding Barbie was moral. "I am not in a position to pass judgement on that," Bechtold said. "I was just following orders."

Supporting Their Own Oppression

Did you hear what the New Orleans gays did? They collected money and they donated all of it to the N.O. Police Dept. for them to get bulletproof vests.

Toronto House Raid

On June 13th, the Metropolitan Toronto Police raided a house where support work has been centered for the five people arrested in Vancouver and charged with the Litton bombing amongst other charges (see May '83 BMR). The raid also seemed to be a direct attack against Bulldozer, a magazine written by and for political prisoners, which is produced and distributed by some of the people living in the house. Seizure of the copy for the new issue was specified in the search warrant. Political offences listed on the warrant are "seditious libel" and "sabotage of Litton." No charges have been laid along those lines, but 4 criminal charges were laid on a woman who lived in the house - procuring an abortion, procuring instruments for an abortion and 2 theft charges. These charges are being used as leverage to try to gain information on the political activities of others.