7.

offering the challenge  
of rehabilitation nursing —

Lake Park Hospital, a JCAH-accredited  
skilled nursing and rehabilitation facility,  
is part of the beautiful Flower  
Hospital-Crestview Center medical  
complex in suburban Sylvania. Lake  
Park offers a challenging opportunity  
for the nurse who wants to be part of  
a multifaceted rehabilitation program.  

The goal of nursing and rehabilitative  
services at Lake Park is to assist  
patients who have suffered strokes or  
other serious health problems, or who  
are recovering from accidents or  
injuries, in adjusting to their changed  
lifestyle and reaching the highest level  
of independence possible for them.  

Nursing and medical care to help the  
staff members plan each patient’s  
individualized program of treatment  
and therapy. Each individual rehabilitation  
program is planned so that each  
phase of therapy—physical, speech,  
occupational—is coordinated with  

With an average length of stay of only  
38 days, the majority of patients  
we serve are in an “in-between” facility  
for patients who need rehab services  
after a skilled care hospital stay.  

Rehabilitation is a project that  
involves patient and family care conferences  
and referrals from home health  
nursing services and patient-family  
education, including diabetes,  
nutrition, ostomy care, medications  
and catheters.  

Since Lake Park is affiliated with  
Flower Hospital, Lake Park patients  
have access to diagnostic and treatment  
services at Flower Hospital.  

Lake Park nursing staff members are  
covered by the same benefit package  
as Flower Hospital, including the  
same salary scale.  

If you're interested in becoming part  
of a dynamic, concerned rehabilitation  

Lake Park Hospital —  
offering the challenge of  
rehabilitation nursing  

Become a part of an environment of human caring.  

Caring . . . a simple emotion expressed by so  
many members of the registered nursing profession.  
Here at Parkview Hospital, personalized patient care  
is a commitment practiced every day by our highly  
skilled nursing staff. Parkview's warm, family-  
oriented atmosphere made possible by our smaller  
size enhances one-on-one patient care.  

At Parkview, our nurses are exposed to an added  
dimension of health care . . . the holistic approach  
to medicine practiced by osteopathic physicians.  
And our nurses can practice in their own specialty  
areas . . . intensive care, progressive care, obstetrics,  
pediatrics and medical/surgical.  

Soon a $12 million modernization project will  
replace existing patient rooms with two floors of  
fully-modernized rooms. It's our way of providing the  
highest quality patient care.  

Yes . . . if you are looking for a hospital that offers  
both personal rewards and professional growth, look  
at Parkview.  

Interested in joining the Parkview registered  
nursing staff? Contact Pat Kitzler, Personnel  
Manager at Parkview Hospital, 1920 Parkwood  
Ave., Toledo, Ohio 43624. Or call 242-8471.  

*Salary commensurate with experience; competitive fringe  
benefits.  
Equal opportunity employer M/F/H.  

PARKVIEW HOSPITAL