A Child  
is waiting.  

by PAT BILOW  

A Child Is Waiting is a continuing series  
of articles featuring displaced children  
who are in need of either temporary place-  
ment through foster care or permanent  
placement through adoption. These chil-  
dren are available through the Lucas  
County Children Services Board.  

Meet Jerry. Tall, healthy, 12 years old.  

And very much wanting to be a part of a  
family.  

Jerry has a sister who has been placed  
with an adoptive family. Though he loved  
swimming this summer in the pool at  
Miami Children’s Center, he too would  
prefer to have a family of his own.  

From his swimming activities this sum-  
mer, Jerry developed a nice tan that goes  
well with his already handsome features.  
He reportedly is well behaved in his cottage  
and generally rather quiet. But once he  
feels comfortable enough, Jerry opens up to  
talk more freely with others.  

Last year, Jerry’s teacher from the  
school he attends in Maumee reported that  
his progress in his educable mentally  
retarded (EMR) class was very good.  

Prospective adoptive parents interested  
in Jerry should take into consideration that  
he and his sister would like to maintain  
contact with each other. Though Lucas  
County Children Services attempts to keep  
sibling groups together, this isn’t always  
possible. The agency believes it is better to  
find separate adoptive families for brothers  
and sisters rather than have them remain  
in foster homes or an institution until  
adulthood.  

For more information about Jerry, call  
Children Services’ Parenthood Services  
Unit at 893-4861.  

photo by Tony Biel  

POETRY  
PAGE.  

edited by Mary Pat Carroll  

There is so much to know about St. Charles Hospital.  
We’d like to share with you a little about us. We've  
come a long way. As a member of our nursing team,  
you'll grow in skills, in leadership, and in the ability  
to influence your work environment. You'll have the  
opportunity to work with our decentralized concept of  
nursing care and with nurse specialists who serve as  
resource persons to our staff.  

St. Charles Hospital ... we have a place for you.  

How to Get Started  

- If you’re a senior nursing student, a recent graduate,  
a nurse currently not employed but planning a return to work,  
or just ready for a change,  
please contact our personnel department at 698-2511.  

St. Charles Hospital  
2600 Navarre Avenue  
Oregon, Ohio 43616  
(419) 698-2511  

A Sister of Mercy  
Health Care Facility  

4 CONNECTIONS * OCTOBER 1980