Viany

Shapes  
and  

Sizes  

by HALLE BRUENING  
Photos DIANE HIRES  

Toledo Hospital Pediatric Nurse Ruth Brittain takes a special interest in her young patients.  

The phrase “I’m a nurse . . .” conjures up an image of  
an angel of mercy, clad in white, softly treading the  
hushed hospital halls to minister to the needs of her  
ailing patients.  

Many nurses today practice their skills in just such a  
setting—the acute-care hospital—but others ply their  
skills in extended-care facilities, nursing homes, indus-  
try, education and the community. In some cases, the  
nurses are not employed by the facility where they work,  
but by a separate staffing agency.  

Hospital nursing may be the intent of the newly-grad-  
uated nurse, but other areas of nursing may become  
more appealing to her as her life and interests change  
and grow.  

Twenty-three year-old Ruth Brittain is a pediatric  
nurse at an acute-care hospital. She works the 3-11 p.m.  
shift and likes it. “Evenings are free of some of the  
hassles that days have,” she said.  

Ms. Brittain likes the professional security a hospital  
offers—there is always another nurse or a doctor around  
you know will keep an eye on a patient you're a little  
worried about.”  

Working in pediatrics is especially rewarding for Ms.  
Brittain. She likes the mixture of medical and surgical  
patients found in peds and “. . . playing with the kids is  
the best part.”  

The number of patients who come in sick and get  
better and go home exceed the sometimes heartbreaking  
ones that don’t make it, she said, and provide a happy  
balance.  

A major disadvantage to working in a hospital is the  
necessity of working weekends and holidays. Although  
this is not a problem for Ms. Brittain now, she noted that  
her professional needs will probably change as her life  
serves as a staff nurse in the community for 15 years.  
Ms. Coveney, who spent a few months in nursing  
education before becoming a visiting nurse, seems to  
have found her niche, although it is not without some  
challenges. “. . .” she said. You often have to  
make assessments and decisions without the support of  
the rest of the health care team. “Nobody follows you on  
the next shift,” she added, “and you have to make an  
impact on the first few visits.”  

One real advantage of public nursing, Ms. Coveney  
said, is seeing the patient as a whole. “You remove the  
blinders you wear in a hospital . . .” she continued, “and  
see all the problems the patient and his family must face.”  
Many times a visit may simply serve the purpose of giving  
a patient's family a sounding board, while other calls  
may involve teaching the patient to do some aspects of  
home care himself. Still other times, the nurse may be  
required to give all the care the patient needs.  

Ms. Coveney currently works with elderly patients in a  
clinic and in their homes. She has found working with  
the elderly rewarding because they are so verbal. “They  
have no fear of recrimination,” she said, “so they tell you  
exactly what they like—and don’t like.”  

The elderly, like babies, are very sensitive to touch,  
and are quick to recognize any effort on their behalf, she  
continued.  

So dedicated to community nursing, Ms. Coveney was  
hard pressed to find any disadvantages to her job. She  

CONNECTIONS • OCTOBER 1986