TOLEDO WOMEN IN THE MEDIA

Kathy Lewton

On Oct. 5, 1980, Toledoan Kathy Lewton will take office as the national President of Women In Communications, Inc., an organization of some 11,000 professionals (women and men) in the fields of journalism, broadcasting, public relations, and advertising. When she takes the gavel at the annual meeting in San Diego, she will be, at 32, the youngest person ever to hold that position. Lewton, who is committed to advancing women in their careers, says, “I'm alarmed when I hear young women say, ‘We've got it made.’ Women have an awful lot of catching up to do.” And one of the goals of Women In Communications is to help in that catching up.

Lewton talks quickly and with confidence when discussing the work of Women In Communications, Inc. (WICI). Obviously, she has done her homework. As president-elect for the past year, she has traveled to California, Hawaii, New York, and Dallas. She has spoken at colleges, testified before legislative committees, and attended regional and national meetings. The issues at which she and the organization direct their efforts are twofold—the professional progress of women and the protection of freedom of information and First Amendment rights.

To help women progress in careers in communications, the group holds workshops and seminars, conducts surveys, and publishes a quarterly magazine with information on professional development skills. Along with these educational activities, WICI is totally committed to working for ratification of the Equal Rights Amendment, and Lewton plans to pursue this vigorously. She fears that, if the ERA is not passed, corporate officers will feel that they can forget about affirmative action for women.

“There are some good, solid, factual reasons why the ERA has to be passed,” she says, “but I think psychologically, if it isn’t passed, the message we are giving off is that we are powerless.”

In addition to these issues, WICI is actively involved in the legal fight to preserve freedom of information and freedom of the press. This is being done by contacting legislators, making public statements, and working with other groups in support of these issues. Part of the struggle in this, Lewton says, is to make the public aware that the First Amendment is not just for journalists. “It is everybody's First Amendment,” she declares.

Making contacts for professional advancement is another important function of WICI. Lewton says, “We go out of our way to see that talented women get the jobs and promotions.” Women in Communications’ members have learned to use networking very effectively. She cites as an example a WICI member from Rochester whose husband was transferred to Louisville. She did not know anyone in Louisville, so she called the president of the local WICI chapter and asked if there were any jobs. She was told about several possibilities and then used another WICI contact to get a recommendation for the job she wanted. Lewton states that this kind of thing happens in chapters all across the country. WICI members tell other WICI members about any jobs that are opening up.

To career-oriented women, Lewton recommends that, in order to be successful, they must do more than just make themselves qualified for the job. They need to be the best qualified. Women are still losing jobs to men who have perhaps equal experience but more education or more activities in civic or professional organizations. Women need to pile up so many credits that they cannot possibly be ignored. She feels that groups like WICI can also offer women valuable experience in leadership and public speaking, as well as keeping them in touch with their field. Kathy Lewton’s own resume reads like a pattern for the successful woman. From a master’s degree in journalism at Northwestern University, through jobs as a reporter and editor with a newspaper in Illinois, then assistant director of news services at Bowling Green State University, to her present position. An impressive list of honors and awards (“Outstanding Young Women of America,” “Who's Who of American Women,” “Ten Outstanding Young Women in Toledo,” and numerous awards for publications). Add to this, publicity director for the Northwestern University Alumni Club, board of directors of the YMCA, and activities in several different professional organizations. And to top it all off, Lewton has started work toward a doctorate in organizational communications management at BGSU.

With all of the time and travel involved in her position in WICI and her other activities, what happens to Lewton’s job at Flower Hospital? “The job always has to be number one priority,” she asserts. “That’s the whole foundation of a career. And I owe it to my employer.” To make up for time spent away, she works a couple of nights a week until eleven and often takes work home. Lewton says that she has had to pare certain activities out of her life, and what has had to go is time for relaxation. A friend told her recently, “It sounds like you do everything, you do it all.” Lewton laughs. “I don’t do it all. We have no social life.” She and her husband, John, live in a condominium because a big house would be too much to take care of. They have no children. Leisure time is rare. “You do give up a lot,” she says evenly. She says that as a statement of fact, not regret. It is a choice consciously made.

A NEW CONCEPT IN DENTISTRY FOR ADULTS & CHILDREN

FAMILY DENTISTREE

Cary Dunne, D.D.S. Stephen Pietro, D.D.S.

© The finest preventative & restorative dental care possible

* Convenient weekday, evening or Saturday appointments

© Visa and Mastercharge Accepted

531-2826

In Westgate Meadows 3136 W. Central at Secor.

CONNECTIONS © OCTOBER 1980