edited by Adelaide Deuble  
An annotated listing of important new women’s books  

A Working Mother's Guide to Child Development  

d. Philip Rice, 1979  

Practical help that answers the many questions a working mother asks  
about coping with the dual role of mother and career woman.  

Breaking Out of the Middle Age Trap  

Leslie A. Westoff, 1980 $  

A first-rate, perceptive, supportive guide shows every middle-aged  
woman all the opportunities available to her and how she can make the  

most of them.  

Ever Since Adam and Eve  

Terry Hekker, 1979  

A wonderfully funny defense of the world’s second oldest, but most  
obsolete, profession, housewifery.  

Everywoman’s Guide to College  

Eileen Gray, 1975  

A logical, no-nonsense study of the emotional, financial, and academic  
realities of the returning woman student. Includes how to finance  
yourself.  

The Female Fix  

Muriel Nellis, 1980  
Explores the dilemma of women troubled with problems of prescription  
drugs or alcohol. A compassionate, insightful, important health book.  

Starting a New Publication  

(continued from page 4)  

The pro forma should also include a  
detailed list of your advertisers and their  
commitments. Signed contracts and  
copies of the questionnaire should serve  
as proof of your claims.  

You should provide an estimate of ex-  
penses for one full year of operation and a  
detailed breakdown of anticipated reven-  
ue from ads, newsstand sales, and sub-  
scriptions. If you are looking for less than  
$50,000 in financing, you can handle  
these figures yourself. If you will need to  
borrow more than $50,000, you should go  
to a CPA or to a firm that specializes in  
preparing pro formas and assisting new  
companies in raising capital. The cost for  
this professional help can run up to  
$7,000.  

The amount of detail included in a pro-  
forma also depends on the size of the  
loan. Five to six pages, including finances  
may be sufficient for a $25,000-$50,000  
loan while 50 pages or more may be  
necessary for a very large loan.  

Before presenting your case, talk with  
local business persons, other entrepre-  
neurs, your lawyer, and accountant to  
determine which banks have forward-  
thinking loan personnel and liberal loan  
policies. Go to these banks first. However,  

go to only one bank at a time. If one bank  
turns you down, ask why (specific rea-  
sons) and then adjust your pro forma and  
concept, if necessary, before trying again.  

An alternative to a bank loan is to form  
a corporation and sell stock. In this case,  
you should sell only enough stock to raise  
the required amount of money and be  
certain to always keep at least 51 percent  
of the stock for yourself. If you find you  
need additional funds later, you can sell  

some of your shares or go to a bank for a  

loan as a corporation.  

You can find investors for your cor-  
poration by advertising in the local news-  
paper, by contacting brokers who spe-  
cialize in matching entrepreneurs with  
investors, or by sending letters to well-  
to-do people in the community. You will  
need to explain your idea and offer to meet  
with the potential investors for further  
discussion.  

A final word of caution, try to secure  
the financing for your brainchild yourself.  
If you go to a professional publisher, you  
may find they will either demand control  
or use the idea as their own. It is your  
enterprise, reap the rewards yourself!  

Susan Sybert Carr is a Toledo freelance writer.  

Essie Hobgood  

(continued from cover)  
staff of two, plus “all of the interns we can  
muster.”  

What Hobgood feels is exciting and  
challenging about public broadcasting is  
“the luxury to take an idea from nothing,  
and go with it, and turn it into a radio  
program.” She is pleased that at WGTE-  
FM programming in radio is taken very  
seriously.  

HEALTH CARE SERVICES  

Hobgood still does the weekly Black  
Focus, and she has strong views about  
the continuing need for such programs.  
Although black issues programs may no  
longer be considered “chic,” and there are  
a lot of serious economic and political  
problems one can focus on, Hobgood feels  
the special problems of minorities should  
not be pushed aside. “I don’t think affirm-  
ative action goals and civil rights goals  
have taken yet in this country,” she says.  
“It still needs to be reminded.”  

SET YOUR OWN HOURS AND INCOME  

Our hourly wages are very competitive  

PLUS YOU GET FREE:  

Medical, Dental, Malpractice, Life Insurance  
Up to 5 days paid vacation  

Bonuses for referral and extra hours  
In-service opportunities with C.E.U. credit  
Our Golden O premium program  

CALL FOR IMMEDIATE INTERVIEW  

865-8014  

An Equal Opportunity Employer  

CONNECTIONS © OCTOBER 1980  

15