Balance Point  
from page 1  

planning and doing are more important than  
their achieving the pinnacle of success.  

And parents need to assure their children  
continuously of their value as unique human  
beings — “You are the world’s only living  
example of you!” Parents need to underline  
the fact that children’s real worth goes far  
beyond their accomplishments.  

One of the most helpful, healthy things  
parents can do for their children, Mr. Elliott  
said, is to provide as many opportunities as  
possible for discovery learning. Not all of the  
situations should be particularly structured  
and many should be separate from parents.  
Children learn when they see life from a  
different perspective, perhaps by going to  
camp or by having a new babysitter.  

“A lot depends on one’s ability as a parent  
to act as a catalyst,” Mr. Elliott remarked.  

For instance, if a child has a school project  
to complete, the parent might walk — not  
drive — to the store with her, help her select  
materials she’ll need and then “turn her  
loose,” he suggested.  

By taking the initiative, the parent has set  
the stage for discovery learning. The child will  
learn from the spontaneous element that she  
injects as she works on her project.  

“Parents provide the overall structure,  
children provide the specifics,” Mr. Elliott  
summarized. “However, parents have to be  
careful to avoid overstructure.”  

As an example of overstructure, Dr.  
Hyldahl pointed to some children’s sports  
activities. When he was a child, he  
remembered, he and his friends made their  
own games. They laid out their own softball  
diamonds using old cushions as bases in a  
vacant yard. They learned by doing and they  
were proud of their accomplishments.  

Then parents became involved —  
in their children’s  

sean not too involved —  

eo ae  
ed on the scene to old,  

tched-together variety and games became  
scheduled events instead of spur-of-the-  
moment activities. Sports suddenly seemed  
to belong to the parents more than they  
belonged to the children.  

Lasalle’s Sponsors Seminars  

“Making Work Work For You” is the  
theme of a two-week series of noon seminars  
to be held Sept. 14-25 at Lasalle’s Downtown.  

Nationally-known experts as well as local  
professionals will speak on a different career-  
related topic each day. The one-hour  
program will also include luncheon and a  
question and answer period.  

The series will begin with a panel discussion  
on “The View From The Top — How To Get  
There,” led by Martha Sharon, co-host of PM  
Magazine. Panel members will be local career  
women.  

On Sept. 16, William Donoghue, regarded  
by some as the “guru of the money market  
industry,” will speak on “Investing in the  
Money Market.”  

“About Time” will be the topic of Kay  
Cronkite-Waldo’s talk, the last in the series.  

Other topics include: job burnout, sexual  
harassment, assertiveness, stress and re-  
entry.  

Reservations for the program are required  
and may be made beginning Sept. 1 by calling  
243-8811, ext. 355. There will be a $5.00 fee,  
which includes the luncheon, for each session.  

Simply  
The Finest Jewelry  
im  
Toledo, Ohio  

Things  

Kay & Steve Foster, C.G.  

505 Jefferson Avenue  
Toledo, OH 43604  

Tel 419/255-0337  

Free Parking in  

a  
Commodore Perry Lot ©  

‘Unfortunately, this ne  
children dabble at ments and use -.8  

In that case, the associates agreed, parents  
need to help their children take stock of their  
patterns of behavior and prioritize the  
activities in which they will participate.  
Parents also need to help their children learn  
to delegate their time wisely.  

“Often kids who are very good at one thing  
are very good at other things as well,” Dr.  
Hyldahl said.  

Consequently talented, energetic children  
might need to be encouraged to survey their  
skills and specialize.  

“A lot of studies indicate that we’re not  
pushing our children early enough or fast  
enough,” Mrs. Elliott remarked in summary.  

“However,” Mr. Elliott added, “the results  
of soft abuse — overparenting and parents’  
overinvolvement in their children’s lives —  
can be even more detrimental to kids than the  
results of some child abuse.”  

“Modeling behavior is super important,” he  
concluded. “What you’re doing and what  
balance point you’ve reached in your own life  
are more important to your children than  
what you're saying to them.”  

Lyn Gill, a Toledo ballet teacher, drills  
Whitmer High School varsity gridders in  
basic ballet positions in an effort to  
improve the players’ coordination and  
increase their speed and flexibility. What  
a twist!  

Activities For Families  

by Sandra Elliott  

Television Viewing  

There is no question but what we are living  
in a TV age. It is estimated that before an  
American child ever gets to school, the child  
has watched between two thousand and  
three thousand hours of television, and that  
upon graduation from school will have  
watched several more hours of TV than spent  
in the classroom. No wonder parents are  
concerned.  

TV can and does offer the opportunity of  
living history from time to time —  
appearances of the world’s great leaders,  
crew eoes perounts of momentous 0c  

musicians al ates ' e are al,  
social, and parte programs of many  
kinds — but that’s not the kind of programs  
most families watch.  

To use television constructively, families  
need to be more judicious in their choice of  
programs, and we have to remember that to  
“pull” children away from the TV set we have  
to have some exciting alternatives available  
for them. To turn “off” the TV, we've got to  
have a turn “on” for our families!  

A dinner-table activity could center on a  

‘discussion of what programs are scheduled  

that evening prior to the children’s normal  
bedtime. Each member of the family can tell  
what program(s) he/she would like to watch —  
and why — and then the family can vote on  
what they will watch — preferably together,  
so that parents can monitor the program,  
turning off the set (and explaining why) if too  
much violence, or what-have-you, occurs in  
the program.  

Selective viewing opens up precious time  
for family activities, like reading, studying,  
outdoor play, table games, and other  
worthwhile activities, when there is little  
worth seeing on the air.  

Family control, guidance and interpretation  
of mass media generally are part of the  
total education modern children need from  
their families.  

“different parts of work  

Menu Planning  

Let each member of the family take turns at  
planning the dinner menu (about a week  
ahead is ample) at a Family Council meeting.  

Have it clearly understood by everyone in  
the family (adults included) that this is a  
sacred contract, and that all are expected to  
eat what is on the menu for the evening.  

This can be expanded to include meal  
preparation, too, of course, as children  
become old enough to help.  

It is sometimes a good idea to alternate  
between a child and an adult where possible,  
at t rotation might be:  

on, hen begin  

You might want to keep a dated menu-  
planning scrapbook so that as the children get  
older, you can look back and see how their  
appetites have changed.  

The Housekeeping Game  

Yes, that’s right — an actual way of making  
housework into a game!  

It requires a set of cards and an agreement  
by the family to be together for a period of  
time ‘(like Saturday morning, for example).  
Each card has a single instruction on it — mop  
the kitchen floor, clean the bathroom, change  
your bedclothes, vacuum the living room,  
wash the family room windows, etc. — all the  
things that go into housecleaning, but divided  
up into segments of from 10 to 20 minutes. Any longer and the “fun” goes out of it.  

Along with this set of cards, make up  
another set of “prizes” — like — have a glass  
of juice, eat a piece of fruit, read a book for 20  
minutes, write a letter to Nana and Grandpa,  
etc.  

All you have to do is mix the cards, shuffle  
well, and invite each family member to select a  
card at random and then follow through with  
the instructions. When their task is complete,  
they return to draw another card.  

Volume 3, Number 10 { Connections AUGUST 1981  

CONNECTIONS (USPS 526-270) is published monthly by Stone Communications, Inc. Second  
Class Postage paid at Toledo, OH. Telephone: 419/242-7443. Office: 1018 Jefferson Ave., Toledo,  
OH 43624. Subscriptions are $7.95 per year. Newsstand price is 75 cents per copy.  

POSTMASTER: Send address change to Connections, P.O. Box 113, Toledo, OH 43694.  

Publisher  
Prudy Stone  

Editor  
Halle Bruening  

Advertising Sales  
Billie Silver  

Circulation Manager  
Glenda Littlefield  

CONNECTIONS ¢ AUGUST 1981