INSIDE:

It’s Time To Get Organized plus  
YWCA Fall Program Guide  

AUG’  
(  
hed  

“1981  

ne 08686C0038!1  

for and about Toledo won:::  

NEW WOMEN'S TIMES  
MEIGS ST  
ROCHESTER NY 14620  

What Is Balance Point  
In Children’s Schedule?  

by Prudy Stone  

How organized is too organized for a child  
to be?  

Some children seem to have every available  
minute tightly scheduled with lessons, team  
practices and other planned activities. They  
never seem to have a moment to themselves.  
Other children seem to have too many  
moments to themselves — they rarely seem  
to have any structure to their days and seem  
to slip passively through their lives with little  
purpose or direction.  

What is a reasonable formula? How much  
planned time and how much unplanned time  
should a child have?  

At a staff meeting of his psychological  
services group, Jacob J. Elliott, MA, a  
Woodshed clinical psychologist, said: “Almost  

“Even in our own family, we don’t agree,”  

Sandra Elliott, M.Ed., an organizational  
development consultant with her husband’s  
group, added. “Jake feels that our three  
daughters need time ‘just to lie and look at the  
clouds.’”  

“Childhood should be a time of experimentation.  
It’s a time when a child develops her  
core of effective behavior,” he explained. “A  
child needs time alone — time when she  
doesn’t always have things figured out for  
her.”  

Following that philosophy, the Elliotts  
initiated nothing for their daughters one  
summer, leaving the responsibility of filling  
their vacation hours to the girls themselves.  

“At the end of the summer, the kids said,  
‘This is the worst summer we’ve ever had!’”  
Mrs. Elliott exclaimed.  

In contrast, her approach to summertime  
was to compile lists of possible activities and  
encourage the girls to prioritize the lists and  
pursue the suggestions in which they were  
interested.  

“When they were little, they loved the lists,  
but when they became teenagers, they  
rebelled,” she reported.  

Acknowledging that they did not agree on  
the perfect balance point between a child’s  
being too organized and not organized  
enough, Mr. Elliott and the staff members at  
the meeting discussed possible guidelines for  
parents to consider in attempting to help their  
children reach a happy medium — a balance  
that was workable for them.  

As the discussion began, the group  
members agreed that they were talking about  
the “average” child, the child without any  
initiated or restricted activities in the interests of  
the child and not in the interests of a parent.  

The associates also agreed that in  
every case, the personality of the child had to  
be taken into consideration.  

“Kids provide clues about whether they’re  
busy enough or not,” Dr. Thomas Hyldahl,  
psychological assistant, said. “If they’re  
underfoot a lot, you kind of get the idea that  
they have too much free time.”  

When that happens, children should be  
given the chance to plan for themselves what  
they want to do, Mila Guese, also a psy-  
chological assistant, commented.  

However, schools and other institutions  
and organizations generally have structured  
children’s lives so thoroughly, noted Kevin  
Ricker, another psychological assistant, that  
frequently it takes too long to find a balance.  

“Most kids are happier with goals and goal  
achievement,” Dr. Hyldahl remarked. “Self  
respect comes from achieving goals.”  

Parents can help by encouraging their  
children to assess their abilities realistically  
and set reasonable goals. Since goal achieve-  
ment requires self-discipline, parents also can  
offer further assistance by being supportive  
and reassuring as their children work at  
attaining that quality.  

What about the child who undertakes an  
activity and then decides to quit before the  
project is completed or the goal achieved?  

“Don’t let children quit too quickly,” Dr.  
Hyldahl cautioned. “Act as if no alternative  
choice exists — as if you expect the activity to  
be completed.”  

Admitting that following that course was  
easier said than done, he stressed that, at the  
same time, parents also should reinforce their  
children’s step-by-step progress toward their  
goal.  

Parents should emphasize to their children  
the value of doing an activity because they  
enjoy it rather than because they feel that  
they must become “the best” in that  
endeavor, the associates agreed.  

“Avoid the trap of perfectionism,” Donald  
Doyle, licensed clinical psychologist, warned.  

“We should be concerned with the  
he continued.  
“Parents and their own peers frequently give  
kids messages like, ‘If you’re not involved in X  
number of things, you’re not as neat as those  
who are.’ Or, ‘If you don’t do well, you aren’t  
worth as much as someone else who does.’”  

This sort of achievement orientation soon  
extends into all portions of children’s lives.  
Not only school work and sports events, but  
social activities as well become “non-fun,”  
pressure-packed experiences.  

To counteract this syndrome, parents need  
to stress to children that their anticipation,  

continued on page 2  

Football For Anti-Fans!  

Dread. . . anger. . .  

by Mary Kay Gleason  
There was a time when Americans  
celebrated Thanksgiving and New Year's Day  
as national holidays filled with fun and the  
warmth of family. Nowadays, men look  
forward to such holidays for the marathon  
football sessions they bring.  

“Punt!” . . . “Pass!” . . . “Block!” Women  
hear these commands almost daily, but rarely  
notice how they are practiced on the football  
field.  

Terry Bradshaw. . . “Mean” Joe Greene.  
. Earle Bruce. These names have become  
household words like Ronald Reagan or Tom  
Brokaw, but would most women recognize  
their faces on television or on the sports  
page?  

These commands and names confront  
women at home and at work from August  
through February. Husbands, sons and male  
friends plan their weekly itineraries around  
Friday night high school games, weekend  
afternoon college clashes and Monday night  
professional performances.  

What is it that makes football uninteresting  
to women? Is the sport too complicated or  
simply unappealing?  

Looking at the rules and the history of the  
game, football seems relatively uncomplicated.  

Football, at least in the United States,  
resembles the Englishman's rugby game. It  
allows the players to throw and run with the  
ball as well as to kick it.  

The first American-type football game was  
played in 1874 between Harvard College and  
Canada’s McGill University in Cambridge,  
Mass.  

In 1869 in New Brunswick, N.J., Princeton  
and Rutgers introduced an earlier version of  
the sport, which resembled present-day  
soccer, but American colleges and univer-  
sities were slow to pick it up. The rugby-style  
game amazed the nation and swiftly won  
popularity on campuses throughout the U.S.  

The split-second teamwork of two 11-man  
teams continues to attract millions of fans in  
stadiums across the country each season.  

The football itself, often referred to as a  
pigskin, has a pointed oval shape and  
measures 12 inches long and 7 inches wide at  
its midpoint. A leather casing covers the  
bladder, or rubber lining, of the ball and is  
inflated to a pressure of 12 pounds. The ball  
weighs 14 to 15 ounces.  

The football field is 360 feet long and 160  
feet wide with white lines running across it at  
five-yard intervals.  

This all-American sport features a series of  
plays for 60 minutes between offensive and  
defensive teams with speedy ball carriers  
trying to advance for long runs through or  
around the opposing team’s line.  

A team scores a touchdown (6 points)  
through a series of plays moving the ball  
behind the opponent’s goal line. After scoring  
a touchdown, the team attempts a conversion  
or a point after the touchdown. To score the  
extra point, the team must launch the ball  
from the three-yard line through the goal post  
either by passing or place-kicking the ball.  

A team can score a field goal (3 points) by  
kicking the ball over the crossbar of the goal  
from any point in front of the goal line.  

A safety (2 points) is scored by the  
defensive team if it tackles the opposing ball  
carrier behind his own goal line.  

continued on page 13