RN’S

Frankly, in the past we have not had a problem recruiting qualified profes-
sionals. Many people have been disappointed because we have not had openings when they applied. We know
this is due to our progressive approach to patient care in modern suburban facilities.

Due to a continually high census, a new patient acuity system that better

assesses nursing needs has been developed. Also, we are beginning the implementation of primary care,

an environment in which you can be truly professional. Modern teaching programs are available to prepare
you for primary nursing and new nursing techniques so you may take advantage of this opportunity. Get in
on the “ground floor” of a primary nursing care program.

The opening of St. Luke’s new critical care areas, emergency department,

surgery suites and additional medical/surgical areas is only a short time away. We are now recruiting
registered nurses to supplement our present staff. You will enjoy an excellent benefit package and competitive
salary, not to mention working with a group of super people.

We are also continuing to recruit RN’s to enjoy the flexibility of being a

member of the contingent staff at St. Luke’s. Arrange your own work schedule around personal obligations
and earn a competitive wage while doing it.

from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. to discuss a nursing career at St. Luke’s Hospital.

: St. Luke’s Hospital
5901 Monclova Road
Maumee, Ohio 43537
(419) 893-5936 ©

An Equal Opportunity Employer

The Toledo Hospital

2142 North Cove Blvd.,
Toledo, Ohio 43606
Telephone: 419/473-4389

Contact:
Mrs. Georgia Petrick, R.N.

Assistant Personnel Director

The Toledo Hospital

• Major referral center for northwest Ohio

• Largest hospital in northwest Ohio with 744
beds

• Located in residential west Toledo

• Serves 29,000 inpatients, 40,000 outpatients
and 50,000 emergency patients annually

• Over 3,400 employees
• Broad spectrum of clinical practice
• Numerous specialty and outpatient services

Special Care Areas

• Northwest Ohio Regional Perinatal Center
(intensive Care Nursery, OB)

• Intensive Care Unit

• Coronary Care Unit

• Hemodialysis

• Emergency Department
• Pediatrics and Pediatric ICU
• Orthopedics

• Neuro Critical Care and Neurology

• Alcoholism Treatment Center (open Octo-
ber, 1980)

• Outpatient Surgery Center

• Cancer Treatment Center/Oncology
Surgery and Recovery

• Psychiatric

Call or visit Nancy Gannon, Employment Specialist, Monday through Friday

Benefits

Financial:

Salary ranges to more than $18,000, shift and
weekend differential; on-call pay; 8 paid holi-
days; time and a half for overtime; 2 weeks
vacation after one year, 3 weeks after 5 years;
11 sick days annually, after 33 days accum-
ulated, payment for every 5/12 days over and
above.

Fringe:

Fully paid Blue Cross-Blue Shield for em-
ployee, and 90% of family policy paid by
hospital, up to $1 million major-medical,
dental insurance, retirement program paid in
full after one year, pharmacy discount, credit
union, life insurance, tax-sheltered annuity
plan.

Education:

Orientation program for 2 weeks followed by 2
to 6 weeks special orientation, continuing
education units; inservices; 50% tuition reim-
bursement. A special 18 week orientation
program has been established for those nurses
who wish to work in critical care areas and the
perinatal center. Complete medical library.

Accredited by J.C.A.H., N.L.N.; member A.H.A., and O.H.A.

Affiliated with the Medical College of Ohio at Toledo, The Toledo
Hospital School of Nursing, University of Toledo, Bowling Green
State University, and Northwest Ohio Practical Nurse Training
Center.

An Equal Opportunity Employer

The Toledo Hospital
A Community of Professionals

CONNECTIONS * OCTOBER 1980