Physical examinations and immunizations  
should be part of the checklist which prepares  
a child for the coming school year. Children  
entering school for the first time should have a  
physical and dental exam as well as a series of  

vaccination shots.  

Disease prevention through immunization  
is a personal health responsibility. The  
importance of these vaccines cannot be  
stressed enough. They are simple and  
affordable preventive measures which assure  
a reasonably healthy school year for your  
children, with some effects lasting a lifetime.  

School Requirements  

According to the Ohio Department of  
Health, children starting school must be  
immunized with diphtheria-pertussis-tetanus  
(DPT), trivalent oral polio vaccine, one  
measles and one rubella (German measles)  
vaccine, as dictated by current Ohio  
Immunization Law. Mumps vaccines are also  
recommended.  

School systems are required to be vigilant  
concerning immunization requirements  
because of state laws concerning the health of  
the student.  

Upon enrolling a student, standard health  
forms are provided by the school and are to  
be filled out by a physician who verifies the  
current health status and proper immunization.  
These records are transcribed on a  

permanent folder which follows the child  
throughout his school career.  
Measles Vaccine a Must  

Measles, one of the most common  
childhood diseases, can be avoided by  
receiving a live virus measles vaccine.  
Although this disease can be relatively mild in  
children, it can be serious for both children  
and adults.  

The state-wide campaign against measles  
has been effective, according to a report  
issued by Dr. John H. Ackerman, Ohio  
Director of Health. The figures for the 1980-  
1981 school year illustrate the results of the  
measles vaccine. Only 15 cases of measles —  
involving children from 3 school districts —  
were reported during that period. There are  
approximately 2.3 million children in the  
state.  

Kevin Sullivan, health planning ad-  
ministrator for the Ohio Department of  

Football  

from page 1,  

Each football team includes seven players  
in the “line” and four in the “backfield.”  

The linemen include the center and the  
right and left tackles, ends and guards. The  
backfield men include the quarterback, the  
fullback and the right and left halfbacks.  

The ends catch and block passes. Guards  
and tackles block opposing players.  

The center snaps the ball between his legs  
to a backfield man and then begins to block.  
The backfield (or “backs”) catch passes, run  
with the ball, block and pass.  

Football is played in four 15-minute time  
periods, each quarter beginning with a kick-  
off.  

For A Healthy Start...  

Health, said that this compares favorably with  
figures for the 1979-1980 school year. “We  
have experienced a 97% decrease in the  
number of measles cases during 1980-1981.  
This compares with 436 cases reported  
during the 1979-1980 school year.  

“Since October, 1978, the Ohio Depart-  
ment of Health, in conjunction with the  
Center for Disease Control, has launched a  
nationwide effort to eliminate measles by  
October, 1982,” he said.  

Statistics point out that most measles cases  
could be prevented with proper vaccinations.  
Some people get measles because they  
simply do not get vaccinated or because they  
make erroneous assumptions about a vac-  
cine or history of measles.  

Another report released by Dr. Ackerman  
states that between 1963 and 1967, ap-  
proximately 30,000 to 45,000 Ohio children  
were inoculated with a killed virus vaccine for  
measles.  

The report recommends that those receiving  
vaccines during that period should check  

their health records to be sure that they  
received a live virus inoculation. The immuni-  
ty provided by the killed virus vaccine is said  
to have diminished and it is urged that these  
persons be reinoculated.  

Two Types of Vaccines  

The ability of a body to produce antibodies,  
agents which fight disease, is called “acquired  
immunity.” This immunity may be of two  
types: active and passive.  

An active immunity vaccine produces a  
mild form of the disease causing it to develop  
antibodies which will guard against the dis-  
ease.  

Passive immunity is acquired from injec-  
tions of protective substances produced in  
the body of an animal or another person. As  
an example, mothers pass on immunity to  
their newborn infants against common  
infectious diseases and this immunity  
protects them during the first few months of  
life.  

Vaccines contain antigens which stimulate  
the production of antibodies within the body.  
These antigens may be dead, alive or  
weakened strains working against one or  
more diseases.  

The kicking team place-kicks the ball from  
its own 40-yard line. Members of the kicking  
team cannot advance beyond the ball before  
it is kicked — they cannot cross the “line of  
scrimmage.”  

The receiving team spreads out over its half  
of the field in a defensive formation. All  
receiving players must stay behind the 50-  
yard line until the ball has been kicked. A  
receiver then catches the ball and carries it  
toward the kicking team’s goal line until he is  
tackled or scores a touchdown.  

The clock is stopped after each incomplete  
or unsuccessful pass, but continues to run  
through all complete passes and all running  
plays as long as the ball carrier does not run  
out of bounds.  

Vaccinations can be administered in two  
ways: through injections with a hypodermic  
needle or orally such as the Sabin vaccine for  
polio which is given in a liquid dosage.  

Reactions can be common with some types  
of vaccines. Pain and swelling may occur at  
the site of an injection. A patient may develop  
a low-grade fever or skin rash. The adverse  
effects triggered by a vaccination are far less  
serious than developing problems associated  

with the disease itself.  

The oldest and one of the most effective  
vaccines was designed to eliminate smallpox.  
This vaccine has provided complete protec-  
tion against the disease and it is no longer a  
required treatment.  

Other vaccines which have been utilized  
with success for years include those pre-  
venting diphtheria, tetanus and typhoid fever.  

More recently vaccinations guarding  
against whooping cough, polio, flu, measles,  
mumps and rubella have been administered.  

Some vaccinations are not standard, but  
may be recommended or required for  
travelers entering areas where diseases such  
as yellow fever, plague, cholera and typhus  
are prevalent.  

The timing of vaccinations depends upon  
several factors. The age of the person, the way  
the body will respond or handle the medica-  
tion and the degree and the frequency of  
exposure to the disease under normal living  
conditions.  

The chart below lists a timetable for  
immunizations. Note that children receive  
most inoculations at early ages. Adults are  
responsible for updating tetanus boosters  
every ten years.  

Persons in their twenties who are in the  
crucial childbearing years may lack rubella  
vaccine because it was not introduced until  
1969 and was not a school entrance require-  
ment until 1979.  

Keep Records of Vaccines  

It is wise to keep health and immunization  
records for personal use. This information is  
often forgotten, yet it is frequently requested  
by schools and places of employment.  
Doctors keep accurate records, but these are  
not as easily accessible as those maintained at  
home.  

Vaccinations can be obtained from family  
physicians, health clinics or public health  
departments.  

IMMUNIZATION GUIDE ~  

2 months  

4 months  

6 months  
12 months  
15 months  
18 months  
4-6 years  
14-16 years  
Over 16  

Source: Ohio Department of Health  

Diphtheria-pertussis-tetanus (DPT), Oral Polio Vaccine  
Diphtheria-pertussis-tetanus and polio vaccine  
Diphtheria-pertussis-tetanus  

Tuberculin skin test  

Measles-mumps-rubella vaccine  
Diphtheria-pertussis-tetanus and polio vaccine  
Diphtheria-pertussis-tetanus, Oral Polio Vaccine  
Diphtheria-tetanus  

Diphtheria-tetanus booster every 10 years  

The Women’s Health Page is a joint public education  
effort by The Academy of Medicine of Toledo and  
Lucas County and Blue Cross/Blue Shield.  

The clock stops at the end of a play or when  
the ball carrier is “downed.” A ball carrier is  
downed when the opposing team’s players  
tackle him or when any part of his body, other  
than his hands or feet, touches the ground.  
The ball carrier is also downed when he stops  
progressing toward the opposing team’s goal  
line.  

While the clock is running, the ball is “alive”  
and a period called a down is in progress. The  
team in possession of the ball is allowed four  
downs to advance the ball 10 yards.  

If the team advances the ball more than 10  
yards during a series of four downs, it is  
entitled to another first down, beginning a  
new series of four plays.  

If the offensive team commits a foul or  
violates the rules of the game, a penalty or  
loss of yardage is incurred between downs. A  
penalty hinders the team’s ability to advance  
the ball the necessary 10 yards beyond the  
line of scrimmage of the first down.  

Failure to make the first down will give the  
defensive team possession of the ball.  

The defensive team can also gain posses-  
sion of the ball when it recovers a fumble,  
intercepts a pass or when the offensive team  
punts.  

Clearly, football is here to stay — it has  
become an American way of life. Faced with  
that reality, women might decide to make this  
the year that they give it a chance!  

CONNECTIONS • AUGUST 1981  

13