by Genny Tubridy

Rosemary Collins

She’s young, she’s single, she’s talented and she’s the only evening woman television news anchor in Toledo. She's Rosemary Collins, of WDHO-TV.

“I'm surprised in a market of this size there aren’t more females on the air,” Collins said. How does it feel to be a woman anchor? Collins said it's a good thing because it gives the viewer variety. She said she is treated as an equal by her cohorts but sometimes misses female companionship.

Although she was born in Bolivar, MO, Collins went to school at St. Mary's College, Notre Dame, because her sisters attended that school. She majored in English and writing. Why did she, a writer, go into broadcasting?

“I just fell into the first job.”

“Broadcasting is kind of a bug, it bites you! But in the back of my mind, one day, maybe 10 or 20 years from now, I can definitely see myself writing for a newspaper.”

That first job was with a public television station in South Bend, IN. She wasn’t in news then, but started in promotion and did some on-air interview shows. “I then went to Chicago and had a brief stint at NBC. I was a production assistant and worked on a public affairs mini-series, plus the Chicago Emmys. When I was there and saw a first-class news operation, I decided that I'd like to get into news,” Collins said. The advice given to her on how to break into news was to go wherever she could get an on-air job.

After checking the want ads and sending out her tapes, she landed a job as weatherperson in Greenville, NC.

Her move to Toledo came after a call from the WDHO news director. “It’s common practice when looking for somebody,” Collins related, “to call other news directors and ask if there is anybody at one of the competing stations that you think is good and would like to see out of your market!” The North Carolina news directors mentioned Collins’ name.

Where does she go from here? “I don’t want to end up as a network correspondent. If you're talking about ‘wish upon a star’ type goals, I would be more interested in something like 20/20. I like in-depth features. I would never want to give up reporting, but spot news is not my thing,” Collins said.

Effectiveness Training For Women

Trainer: Dr. Janice S. Roberts  
10 WK-30 HR. COURSE  
Beginning Tues., Oct. 7, 7 p.m.

Attention is Given to:  
Communicating Skills  
Choosing Values  
Asserting Beliefs  
Getting Your Own Needs Met  
Designing Your Own Life

For Information or to Register Call  
885-3666

CONNECTIONS * OCTOBER 1980

“A lot of old movies,” she laughs. What is it like to go on-air? “You have to unwind.”

What is it like to be highly recognizable? “Sometimes people will see you and say very sincere things. Once, a little grandmotherly-type couple at a Mudhens game yelled out, ‘We love you, Rosemary!’ Sometimes I get nice letters and flowers. Truthfully, you get more satisfaction out of doing a report that you are proud of than from the recognition.”

Career-wise, she thinks being single is an advantage. She doesn’t have anyone to worry about but herself. But it gets lonely. She doesn't meet people because she moves around so much. And she works until 11:30 p.m., she goes home to unwind. It’s unusual for her to have a certain amount of nervousness; if you don’t, you probably won't do it! My co-workers agree with me on that. I find it easier to get in front of a camera than in front of a group,” Collins said.

The woman in broadcasting Collins most admires is Bettina Gregory. Collins said she got to the top on her abilities and solid guts and that she does good reports.

Two things bother Collins deeply. The young, pretty-face syndrome and the stereotype of women news anchors.

“You don’t see very many mature women on the news now. What bothers me about women on television is that they, on average, have to be much prettier than men have to be handsome,” she said, drumming her fingers on the table. “You just don’t see older women correspondents. Maybe because they don’t hang in there because somewhere along the line they start having kids and they can’t get back in. But as more and more women are keeping their careers, maybe we'll see more.”

“In an effort to overcome some stereotypes, I’ve been afraid to say what I really like for fear that would be stereotyped. You feel like you almost have to be tough to be taken seriously even if that’s not your style,” Collins said.

Young women going into the business shouldn't have a closed mind about anything, Collins said. “If there is a job anyplace, go ahead and do it even if you don’t like it. You should listen to everybody and throw out half of it,” Collins laughed. “You are going to get so much advice on how you should do your reports, change your delivery, how you should get jobs. You shouldn’t take anything to heart.”

“I've come to the realization that you have to be yourself,” she added.

Reproductive

Pap Smears & VD Tests

Toledo Medical Services, Inc.  
2700 Monroe St., Toledo, Ohio 43606  
Phone (419) 243-8179