YWA  
Gifts To YW  

You don’t have to be a Rockefeller to be a  
philanthropist. Today more and more people,  
regardless of the size of their estate, are  

making provisions for a “planned gift” to the  
YWCA.  

They do so primarily because they believe  
in the ongoing purpose of the YW. Federal  
and state governments encourage such  
support by providing special tax deductions  
and exemptions to those who provide gifts or  
bequests to the YW and other qualified  
organizations.  

For example, a “planned gift” to the YW  
enables you to:  

1. select the YW as a beneficiary;  

2. discuss with YW officials any proposed  
designation for the use of your gift, and  

3. determine the best way to establish a  
memorial gift that will perpetuate your  
family name.  

A “planned gift” enables you to select the  
method of giving that will maximize charitable  
tax deductions. For example:  

1. A bequest in your will leaving funds or  
property to the YW will save estate  
taxes.  

2. A gift of money or property to the YW  
during your lifetime can save both  
income and estate taxes.  

3. It is possible to retain an annual income from them by  
establishing either an annuity trust, a  
unitrust, gift annuity or life estate  
contract. Substantial income and estate  
tax savings may result from such a  
gift.  

Consult your attorney to assist you in  
selecting the estate plan best suited to your  
situation. Or to personally discuss a planned  
gift to the YW, write or call Faith Rein,  
Executive Director, 1018 Jefferson Avenue,  
Toledo, OH 43624, 241-3235. Further infor-  
mation will be furnished without cost or  
obligation to you.  

Residence  
Remodeled  
By Fall  

The YWCA has begun a complete renova-  
tion of its housing facility, Newton  
Residence, located in the YW building in  
downtown Toledo. The YW’s residency  
program is being modernized and upgraded  
in order to meet the more current needs of  
independent working women and students  
faced with consistent housing shortages at  
local colleges and universities.  

The new residence will offer an excellent  
security system, easy access to public  
transportation, lounge areas, kitchen and  
laundry facilities and an abundance of  
recreational opportunities — including an  
Olympic-sized pool, gymnasium, weight room  
and access to classes being taught at the YW.  

For more information, contact Anez  
Thomas or Paula Drew during business hours  
at 241-3235.  

Y'SWOMAN  

Fall 1981  

1981 TWIN Plans Get Underway  

Chester Devenow, chairman of the board  
and chief executive officer of Sheler Globe,  
has been named honorary chairman for the  
YWCA’s “Tribute to Women and Industry”  
(TWIN) program, a two-part project which  
honors professional women nominated by  
their employers. Barbara Applegate, director of  
marketing at St. Vincent’s Hospital, will serve as the  
general chairman.  

The TWIN program will be held on October 2,  
1981 at Gladieux 1 and II. Additionally,  
throughout the year, TWIN honorees  
volunteer their time to act as resources and  
role models in workshops and discussion  
groups with women of all ages, giving insights  
into career possibilities, resume writing, job  
advancement and education.  

Child Care  
Center Gets  
New Look  

In order to meet the needs of growing  
numbers of women returning to the work  
force, the YWCA has begun a major  
renovation of its Child Care Center, the  
only such service in downtown Toledo. The  
remodeling will both modernize the facility  
and increase capacity from 30 to 45 students,  
in time for fall enrollment.  

The Center is open to children ages 2-5,  
from 6:30 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., 5 days per week.  
Basic goals of the Center include an emphasis  
on an individualized, comprehensive,  
educational program while providing a warm  
and supportive environment for children at  
affordable prices. Because of its association  
with the YW, the Center is able to offer such  
unique activities as swimming and gymnastics  
taught by qualified YW instructors.  

For more information, contact Theresa  
Kernes, Director at 241-3235.  

Have A YW Right in Your Office  

The YWCA and Dana Corporation are  
together sponsoring classes in Dancercise,  
Women’s Health, and Teens and Alcoholism  
to be taught by YW instructors at Dana’s  
facility.  

These classes are designed to meet the  
needs of workers on limited time schedules  
and to enhance the working environment,  
creating further job satisfaction. The program  

CONNECTIONS ® AUGUST 1981  

provides time and economic benefits to both  
the employer and employee. Virtually any  
kind of class can be scheduled and can be  
adapted for any business or group.  

To find out how your business or organiza-  
tion can arrange to have classes taught at  
your facility, call Sallie Popovec at the YW,  
241-3235.  

Sarbaka Applegate (left), Chester Devenow and Barbara Eikost make plans for 1981  
“Tribute to Women and Industry” program.  

TWIN is a national YWCA project  
successfully implemented in cities throughout  
the nation. Community Chest funding,  
industrial contributions and the efforts of a  
wide variety of volunteers including Pat  
DeVolder, Mary Flury, Barbara Mauntler,  
Jama Roman, Betsy Bailey, Norma Rogers,  
Rosalyn Pizza, Marjorie Hunter, Nan  
Rossnagle and Jo McKenney, are making this  

Jones Named  

PR Director  
At YW  

Rebecca Jones  

The YWCA of Toledo recently announced  
the appointment of Rebecca Jones as  
director of public relations for the organiza-  
tion.  

Jones’ appointment, the first full-time  
position of its kind in the history of the Toledo  
association, coincides with a major expansion  
by the local YWCA and is part of its effort to  
better reach and serve all segments of the  
community.  

Jones holds a bachelor’s degree in com-  
munications from the University of Toledo  
and comes to the YWCA from Washington,  
D.C., where she served as press secretary for  
the United States Senate Committee on  
Veterans Affairs.  

A  
Community  
Chest  

Agency  

YW Purchases  

Riverwest  

The YWCA of Toledo will purchase the  
Riverwest Motel and accompanying property  
located directly across from the YW building,  
on the south side of Jefferson Avenue  
between 10th and 11th Streets.  

The motel building will be torn down to  
make way for a 120-car parking lot that will  
provide adequate parking facilities for par-  
ticipants in programs and activities at the  
YWCA. The lot will also have space for hourly  
and daily parking.  

BOARD BRIEFS  

Toddy Patoff (Photo by Brian Schrot)  

Every area of the building may be affected, and we may experience a few inconveniences. But the outcome will be  
very worthwhile, a beautiful and functional  
facility for programs and services.  

* We recently purchased the property  
directly across from the YW building on  
Jefferson Avenue, the old Globe Motel. A  
spacious 120-car parking lot being built in  
its place should solve any parking problems we  
may have faced in the past.  

* Our fall program includes many new  
offerings as well as old favorites and offers  
something for everyone. Take just a moment  
to glance through it, pick an activity, and join  
us for all the action!  

* The Junior League and the Battered  
Women’s Shelter are implementing a  
speaker’s bureau. An outstanding slide  
presentation will be ready in September. If  
you know of a group interested in hearing a  
speaker on the topic of family violence and  
the shelter, please call Paula Drew, 241-3235.  

* You can be of assistance to the YW in a  
variety of ways, working directly with people  
who use our services or on one of our  
committees. Most of our planning, public  
action and support functions are done by you — our members — and your help is vitally  
important to our association and to the  
community. If you have time to give please  
call Barbara Eikost, 241-3235.  

* Recently I attended a nationally spon-  
sored YWCA Learning Center which provid-  
ed training opportunities for local level  
volunteers and staff. Valuable information  
and skills were shared; but perhaps most  
importantly, I came away with a reaffirmation  
of the YW as a national women’s movement — one with goals which relate directly to the  
needs of women and girls. After all, we are  
members of the oldest and largest worldwide  
women’s organization; one which is  
dedicated to achieving “peace and justice,  
freedom and dignity for all people.”  

See you at the YW!  

Toddy Patoff  
President, Board of Directors