4

ROB ROY ® WONDER KNIT @ PELICAN @© WRANGLER  
RUMBLE SEAT ® KOALA WAY @ MAY KNITTING  
CALVIN KLEIN JEANS @ DON-MOOR SIZES 0-20  

Get ready...Get Set...  
Go to Lollipop Lane!  

“Our clothes are too good  

to be called used.”  

And our new salesmen’s samples  

are 40% off retail!  

ae Be  

LOLLIPOP LANE  

3521 W. ALEXIS  

iY | te  

camel, wine or grey, sizes P-L, $30.  

PERRY'S LANDING  
109 Indiana Avenue,  
(419) 874-  

474-3207  
2 Blocks West of Secor Monday thru Saturday 10-5  

with the clock.  

~Foulard Printed Corduroy:  
The Season's Prettiest Jumper  

Jumper in grey or periwinkle foulard corduroy,  
sizes XP-L, $78. Turtle neck sweaters in creme,  
navy, laden, dk. roseberry, lt. roseberry, red,  

Call or Write For Free Fall/Winter Catalogue  

by Glenda Littlefield  

Woman Time: Personal Time Manage-  
ment for Women Only. By Diana Silcox and  
Mary Ellen Moore. Wyden Books. 308 pages.  

Are things out of control? Are you feeling  
guilty? Are you a victim of “time robbers?”  
Are your meetings having meetings? Does the  
thought of time management make you  
shiver, shirk and shove it all even farther into  
the closet?  

If the answer to any or all of the above is  
yes, Woman Time presents a provocative  
insight into everything you are feeling and  
what you are doing wrong. It is an excursion  
into why you feel the way you do and offers  
detailed suggestions for making time for all  
the things you want to do.  

Delegating work in the office or at home is  
all right. Saying no is all right. Above all,  
selfishness is all right. Any woman who reads  
this book is going to feel better whether she  
takes her time management very seriously or  
not.  

Woman Time is comforting. Silcox and  
Moore have “been there.” They have  
whipped “morning madness” and “waiting  
room woes.” And they believe any woman  
can do it, too. A woman’s time is as valuable  
as anyone else’s and she deserves better —  
better pay and better treatment! But, as in all  
the other postures of liberation, she’s going to  
have to straighten up and do it herself.  

The reader is warned from the outset that it  
takes time to save time: Simplifying your life  
style, throwing things out and making time  
logs—in fifteen minute intervals, no less—are  
never small steps for any kind of woman.  
Heeding Silcox and Moore’s creative ideas,  
however, can be giant leaps toward feeling  
and getting “in control” of your traffic jam.  

PARKWAY PLAZA  

by Ellen Adler  

At a time when many actresses are  
complaining that good roles are too few and  
far between, Jill Clayburgh is once again  
starring in a film that women everywhere can  
rejoice in.  

First Monday in October, which stars  
Ms. Clayburgh and Walter Matthau, is the  
story of Judge Ruth Loomis, a widow from  
Orange County, California, who is appointed  
as the first female justice of the Supreme  
Court.  

Matthau portrays Justice Dan Snow, a  
liberal, outspoken member of the nine-person  
court. As in so many of the roles which have  
endeared him to the public, he is once again  
casual, messy, humorous and very human.  

Justice Snow has disagreed with Judge  
Loomis’ lower court decisions while praising  
her ability to write well, and he greets the  
news of her appointment to the Supreme  
Court with a Scotch on the rocks and the  
need to lie down on his leather couch.  

Judge Loomis sails through her Senate  
confirmation with answers every woman can  
be proud of. She speaks as the mother of her  
ideas, which she bore, nurtured and raised to  
maturity.  

In First Monday in October, Hollywood  
has produced a topical movie before the  
actual event takes place. This film was  
obviously made before President Reagan’s  
appointment of Sandra O’Connor to the  
Supreme Court, perhaps based on his  
campaign assurance that he would place a  
woman on the previously all-male court.  

This film is upbeat and charged with verbal  
battles. Clayburgh and Matthau are joined by  
an excellent cast of supporting actors, a  
strong, witty script and the vitality and  
excitement of Washington, D.C. and the  
Supreme Court.  

LADIES APPAREL  

9:30-6:00 SAT. -5:30  

CONNECTIONS ¢ AUGUST 1981