Lake Park Hospital Nurse Pam Segur on the job with a patient and in conference

with a co-worker.

did mention the traditional image of public health nurses
caring for the sick poor—an image which is improving all
the time—as something to be overcome.

She went on to say that the concerns about patients
are not something she can leave at their front door and
frequently they plague her over a weekend or longer until
she visits again.

A community nurse must also develop a certain openness, Ms. Coveney said, about people and the way they
live, because she will visit patients from all walks of life
and go into all kinds of areas—rich and poor—in any
community. Many nurses consider this aspect of
community nursing a drawback, but not Ellie Coveney. “I
love it,” she said.

Pam Segur did not exactly choose to work in an
extended-care facility—it chose her. After her second
child was born, Ms. Segur, who had worked in a hospital
before, was ready to go back to work, but couldn’t find a
hospital job working the day shift. So, at a friend’s suggestion, she applied at an extended-care facility—and got
the job. Seven years later she’s still there as a nurse
specialist in oncology.

An extended-care facility, according to Ms. Segur,
provides a busy work situation, but one that is more
hassle-free than in an acute-care hospital. Her day can
be more organized, she said, because treatments and
therapy sessions for each patient are scheduled on a regular basis. There are interruptions, of course, but they
are fewer and farther between than in a hospital, she
said.

She noted that her job is a nice “between-position”—
it has some of the advantages of nursing home nursing
and some of the advantages of hospital nursing. “I won't
lose my acute-care nursing skills here,” she said.

Having the time to get to know a patient is a big
goal for a patient and to work with the patient and his
family to attain these goals. A large part of this portion of
her job is education, she commented.

A major disadvantage, Ms. Segur said, is the staffing.
There are just not enough people to do what needs to be
done. This shortage of help is caused by the funding
problems that plague all extended-care centers, she said.

Rose McKivett has chosen to apply her nursing skills
in a physician’s office for the past 32 years. Although she
confessed she “still missed giving bedside care,” she likes
the long-term rapport she has with patients in an office
setting. She said in her job she can get closer to the
patient—really get to know him, his family and his
problems—and therefore make a greater contribution to
his overall health care than she could in a hospital.

The Monday through Friday daytime hours of most
physician’s offices are a big plus for office nurses, as is
the somewhat more relaxed pace found in an office
setting, she said. There are, she continued, far fewer
hassles—maybe because of the smaller staff.

The salary level of office nurses is usually below that of
hospital nurses, Ms. McKivett said. “That's the biggest
disadvantage.” Many nurses, she continued, do not like
the extra responsibilities—the phone, filing charts and
emptying wastebaskets—that often become part of the
routine in an office with a small staff.

Despite the drawbacks, office nursing is just what
Rose McKivett intends to keep on doing.

Jean Rocchi and Barb Halasz both work for temporary
staffing agencies, which give them assignments when
they want to work. But—they work that way for very
different reasons.

Barb Halasz, who has three young children, wants to
work 3-11 p.m., a time when her husband can assume
child-care, and then only three days a week. She will not
work on weekends, holidays or days when “I think I should be home with the kids.”

“If I say I can’t work on a particular day, it's okay, and
won't look like I’m asking for time off,” she said.

Since people today are

living longer, our society

is in greater need of health

care and more registered nurses
will be needed to provide that care.

Ms. Halasz has worked at the same place—through
the agency—for two years. Her reasons for remaining an
agency employee rather than at the extended-care
facility where she works, are based on time and money.

“The pay is better (at the agency),” she said, “and the
flexibility of the hours is perfect for me.” Although she
misses hospital nursing, where, she commented, “you learn so much more . . .”—the advantages of working for a temporary help agency outweigh any disadvantages as far as Barb Halasz is concerned.

Jean Rocchi works full-time for two or three weeks and
then takes four to six weeks off to pursue other interests.
The only job that lets her do this is one through a
temporary help agency.

In the year she has been doing this, she has had a
variety of jobs including some industrial nursing and
home nursing. After 19 years of full-time hospital nursing,
she likes the flexibility temporary staffing offers. She can
work in a variety of settings without making a permanent
commitment, she said.

It seems like the perfect job—she works when she
wants to, takes time off when she wants to, makes a
comparable hourly wage, accrues vacation time and gets
a uniform allowance. Where's the hitch? ——

Ms. Rocchi said the hitch is that there may not be a
job every time you are available and want to work. She
also noted that some nurses, especially those who work
here today and there tomorrow, may dislike the lack of
continuity this off-again-on-again schedule causes.

“Working the kind of assignments I've had through the
agency has placed me in situations where I've had to
make decisions—because there’s nobody else to fall back
on—that I'd never have had to make in a hospital,” Ms.
Rocchi said.

Nurses come in all shapes and sizes—and so do their
jobs. Whatever her job, the professional, well-trained
nurse has a lot to offer and her skills are always needed.