Being

Assertive

by Susie Shew

In the last decade, you have undoubtedly
read much about assertiveness. Job
counselors often say, “Be assertive!” The
same words come from weight-loss groups,
marriage counselors, and time management
consultants. Do you ever wonder if this is just
another gimmick, a new buzzword soon to
fade? Or perhaps you believe it is a panacea
for an effective life totally free from stress.
Maybe you even wish you had a handle on
what it all means.

If it is a good thing — to be assertive — why
the negative connotation? People who take
assertiveness training classes report hiding
their textbooks from loved ones. Friends
make comments like, “Why are you taking
that course? You’re already too pushy.”

Assertiveness is not just a language that
says “No!” It also implies saying positive
feelings like, “I love you.” “I care for you.”
“You are important.” And saying “Yes!” —
when you want to!

Assertiveness is not a panacea or a new
way to manipulate others for self-gain. It
doesn’t always work. It takes time, patience,
and much practice. Webster defines the verb
“assert” as “to state or affirm positively,
assuredly, plainly, or strongly.” And it’s more.
The behavior is the aspect of emotional
freedom that concerns standing up for your
rights. To do that, you must know your rights,
do something about them, and accomplish
this within the framework of striving for
emotional freedom.

The person who tries to be everything to
everybody ends up being nothing to
herself. She has an overwhelming need to
please everyone. She cannot say no for fear
people will not like her. She often ends up
doing things she does not want to do.

Have you ever had difficulty expressing
your opinion in a group of friends or fellow
workers? Have you needed to give
suggestions to or correct someone who was
doing a poor job of typing, organizing an
activity, or doing household repairs? Do you
self-consciously deny a sincerely given compli-
ment? Have you ever felt verbally abused?
Have you ever avoided asking a favor?

You have no doubt had to deal with at least
one of these issues. And if you are like most
people, you probably felt trapped and
unhappy with how you handled the situation.
When you felt this way, chances are you saw
only two options — say nothing or attack.
Both of these choices did not solve the
problem, and certainly your self-esteem was
not enhanced.

The third option is the assertive behavior
option. You will express what you believe, feel,
and want in direct, honest, and appropriate
ways which respect the rights of others. You
may not always get what you want, but you will
feel better for your honesty.

Over the next months, in this column, we
will explore the language of assertion, how
you can improve your style of communication
and what that means for you.

—Women—NOW—

by Kathleen Buescher

Your boss has just propositioned you —
hinting that it would be worth your while to
take him up on the offer. You sense that it
would not be worth your while from a career
standpoint to turn him down. Plus your
performance review — done by him — is
nearly due. You are not totally surprised at
the proposition, having heard that this is his
habit with the women in his department.

Sexual harassment in the workplace can be
as blatant as that described above, but
according to Marilyn Tomasi, Chairperson of
NOW’s Labor/Employment Task Force,
women may frequently encounter much
“more subtle forms of harassment.” They may
find the environment in which they work so
hostile, intimidating, or offensive that it
interferes with their ability to do their jobs.

Regulations issued by the Equal Employ-
ment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) last
fall place responsibility on employers to
prevent and eliminate sexual harassment in
the workplace.

EEOC defines harassment as unwelcome
sexual advances, requests for sexual favors,
and other verbal or physical conduct of a
sexual nature which is a condition of getting
or keeping a job, or is the basis for a personnel
decision. Further, harassment exists when
the conduct unreasonably interferes with the
person’s ability to perform the job or creates
an offensive work environment.

Bosses and supervisors must be prevented
from using the power of their positions to
withhold jobs, promotions, or good
evaluations from those unwilling to “play the
game.” In addition, co-workers must be
stopped from making the working environ-
ment intolerable through their less obvious,
but more prevalent, methods.

Unwelcome touches, off-color jokes,
derisive sexual comments, kisses, and the like
from bosses as well as coworkers are subtle,
but no less damaging forms of sexual harass-
ment.

CONNECTIONS • AUGUST 1981

This column is an educational effort of the
Toledo Chapter of NOW.

Over the last year, a growing number of
callers have contacted the Toledo NOW
Chapter with reports of being sexually
harassed or discriminated against at their
places of employment.

In response to these contacts, NOW
established the Labor/Employment Task
Force, one of only a few such groups in the
state. The purpose of the task force is to
increase awareness of sexual harassment and
discrimination through educational and in-
vestigative means. Information, support, and
assistance are provided to women who
believe they are being harassed or are the
subject of discrimination.

Women may also receive support from
NOW through making a formal, documented
complaint against an employer. Complaints
are taken and investigated by the task force in
close coordination with the woman or women
involved. When warranted, the task force
formulates a plan of action most conducive to
the needs of the complainant.

This plan of action may include referral for
legal representation or direct intervention
with the employer. It may mean training with
managers and supervisors or presentations
to unions or may focus on helping women in
the company organize so the matter can be
handled internally.

Informational packets for both manage-
ment and unions are being developed by the
task force. A manual of recent court cases is
also being written. These materials will
provide guidance for dealing with sexual
harassment through the development of
policy statements and the establishment of
appropriate sanctions.

The occurrence of sexual harassment is
either more frequent or more obvious as
women move into positions previously the
domain of men. But it is not the price women
should pay — or others should demand — for
their success.

I Education Corp.

Connections
P.O. Box 113
Toledo, OH 43694

$7.95 for 12 issues

242-7443
Name
Address

City State

Payment Enclosed Bill Me* Master Card

Card # Exp. Date

Interbank #

Signature

Hotline Free 885-3121

5700 MONROE ST. • STARLITE PLAZA • SYLVANIA
Mon., Tues., Wed. 10-6 • Thurs., Fri. 10-8 • Sat. 10-6

CAREER TRAINING IN

COMPUTER PROGRAMMING
ELECTRONICS CLIMATE CONTROL

Air Conditioning Heating,

Industrial, Medical, Com-
puters, Television... Heat Pumps...
Job Placement Assistance
Financial Aid Assistance
Approved for Veteran Training
Day or Night Classes

CALL JOAN MICHAELS
478-2674

1606 LASKEY RD.
Ohio Reg. 70-01-0648T

TOLEDO, OHIO

A Division

Quality
of National

Education in
Electronics