Cystic Fibrosis Education Project Underway

by Sue Wallace

The fourth week in September has been
designated by Congress as the first
National “Cystic Fibrosis Week.” During

this time, the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
is sponsoring a massive public education
campaign to alert the public to the symp-
toms and effects of cystic fibrosis. All
major media—as well as public displays,

bulletin boards and pamphlets—will carry

the story of CF.

CF was once thought to be a rare

disease. Now we know that CF is the

number one genetic killer of children and
young adults. Every five hours a child is
born with CF; every eight hours someone
dies from CF.

An estimated 10 million people—or
about one out of every 20 Americans—
are carriers of the recessive gene that
causes cystic fibrosis. These carriers have
no symptoms and currently cannot be
detected reliably by any test. Yet when
two carriers have children, there is a 25
percent chance with each pregnancy that
the child will have cystic fibrosis.

CF affects the exocrine—or outward
secreting—glands which secrete tears,

saliva, sweat and mucus. The CF patient’s
biggest battles are fought with the mucus
the body produces. Instead of being clear
and fluid, the mucus in a CF patient is

thick and sticky—almost glue-like. It
clogs the passageways of the lungs and
creates an ideal environment for infections. It can block the flow of enzymes
from the pancreas into the small intestine
and interfere with digestion.

Despite these general malfunctions, a
quick and accurate diagnosis of CF is
often difficult because the disease mimics
a number of other childhood disorders. In

one patient, symptoms might include re-
current wheezing, coughing, or pneumonia
more than once. In another patient, the
only symptoms might be excessive appetite,
poor weight gain and bulky, greasy stools.

One symptom that is common to nearly
all patients is an unusually salty taste to
the skin caused by a malfunction of the
sweat glands. Sometimes a parent may
notice this symptom when kissing a child.
The discovery that the sweat of a CF
patient contains an abnormally high
amount of salt led to the development of the
sweat chloride test—the most definitive
diagnostic test for CF. With this easy,
painless test, a physician can tell in less
than an hour if CF is a possible explana-
tion for a patient’s otherwise vague symp-
toms.

At present, there is no cure for CF, but
early diagnosis and treatment have been
proven to prolong lives. Twenty-five years
ago, when the CF Foundation was
founded, few children lived to school age.
Today, half of the children born with CF
can expect to live to college age and
beyond...

And they can expect a fairly normal life.
Pancreatic enzymes taken with every
meal and snack aid digestion. However,
most CF patients must limit their intake of

fatty foods as these are the most difficult
to digest and can cause severe gas pains.
For many CF kids, this means no peanut
butter and jelly sandwiches, no chocolate
candy and no pizza or tacos. But life goes
on.

Even with the enzyme pills and a re-
stricted diet, food absorption may still not
be complete and many CF patients are
underweight or small for their age. Vita-
mins are usually prescribed to replace
vitamins lost through malabsorption.

Although the digestive problems are a
bother, the respiratory problems are life-
threatening. In the lungs, the glue-like
mucus can clog the small air passages
and prevent the removal of dust and
bacteria. Repeated infections can occur
causing tissue destruction and inflamma-
tion, which can lead to chronic, pro-
gressive lung disease. As the lungs become
more scarred, it becomes increasingly
difficult to breathe. Lung disease accounts

for about 90 percent of the deaths from CF.

Removing excess mucus from the lungs
is not an easy task. One doctor has
compared it to trying to sweep up
molasses with a broom.

Respiratory therapy called postural
drainage is prescribed for most CF
patients. At least once a day, the patient
lies head down on a slant board or over
pillows while someone claps or gently
pounds on the back and chest to dislodge
the mucus so the patient can cough it up.
Some patients use a machine to help
loosen the mucus. Many patients also
inhale medicated vapors through a face
mask several times a day. Oral anti-
biotics are often prescribed to ward off the
constant threat of infection. Including
antibiotics, vitamins and enzymes, some
CF patients take as many as 40 pills a
day.

In the 12 counties served by the North-
western Ohio chapter of the Cystic Fibro-
sis Foundation, there are about 125 CF
patients. Most of these are treated at the
Cystic Fibrosis and Pediatric Pulmonary
Center at The Toledo Hospital. Here
patients can receive regular check-ups to
maintain good health; parents can learn
postural drainage techniques and receive
expert advice on dietary problems and
young adult patients can receive out-
patient postural drainage treatments. The
center also offers specialists and the latest
equipment to deal with the life-threatening
complications of CF. This center,
which is one of the top-rated centers in
the country, is supported by the local
chapter of the CF Foundation, a Com-
munity Chest Agency.

The Foundation is a voluntary health
agency powered largely by parents and
friends of CF victims. It acts as a support
system for CF families and promotes
public education programs. The founda-
tion also sponsors numerous fund-raising
activities such as the annual Bowl-For-
Breath in November and the annual
Sports Dinner in April. Money raised is
used to improve care and to support
research.

Each summer, CF parents conduct a
medically-supervised camp so these
youngsters can share the fun of summer
camp even though they require special
diets and daily treatments. Recently, The
University of Toledo YMCA sponsored a
seminar in postural drainage to train parents of CF children to take a break from the daily
routines.

Many pieces of the CF puzzle are
missing. Researchers are presently look-
ing for ways to identify carriers of the CF
gene; identify the genetic defect that
causes CF; reliably test newborns for CF,
and improve treatment.

For more information on cystic fibrosis,
contact the local CF chapter at 241-4342.

Sue Wallace, the mother of a CF child, is a
Toledo freelance writer.

Fall Conferences Planned For Career Women

Nov. 15 and Oct. 25 are two dates this
fall that Toledo women interested in their
careers will want to circle in red. On those
two Saturdays, nationally-acclaimed ex-
perts in career advancement will be flying
into Toledo to tell us all we need and want
to know to get ahead in the business
world:

The October seminar, “Career Strate-
gies: A Seminar for Women,” will feature
Jane Trahey, columnist for Working
Women magazine, president of Trahey
Advertising Inc. and author of several
books on women and their careers. Na-
tionally-syndicated columnist Niki Scott
will speak on the incredible balancing act
contemporary women have to perform
every day. Jane Boucher, an adjunct pro-
fessor at Wright State University, will
conduct a workshop on attitudes, self-
esteem and female role counseling.

The 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. seminar is being
sponsored by Ohio Citizens Bank. O-C
Retail Banking Officer Dorothy McIntire
is coordinating this third annual seminar
for Toledo women. Registration coupon

CONNECTIONS * OCTOBER 1980

appears on page 2 of Connections.

The November conference, sponsored
by Women Involved in Toledo (WIT) is
designed to build communication skills.
“Communication Network: Sending The
Right Signals,” will feature Julia Walsh,
president of her Washington D.C.-based
investment firm, and Nina McGuire,
inner-city revitalization expert from Min-
neapolis. The 8:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m.
event also will feature nine workshops led
by Toledo-area communication specialists.

Ms. Walsh says, “The most important
big step for women... is to get out of
isolated roles and into the real meat of the
thing; the conflict, the negotiating, the
decision-making, and the challenging
part.” As president of Julia M. Walsh &
Sons, Inc., she is recognized as one of the
top securities salespeople in the country.

Ms. McGuire says, “I knew from the
beginning I would not be able to plan out a
traditional career path, but I've always
found something I’ve liked to do.” Ms.
McGuire was interim director for the
Warren-Sherman revitalization project in
Toledo, before returning to the Minne-
apolis-based City Venture Corp. She
recently joined Rural Venture, a sister
consortium to City Venture and is involved
in agricultural, social and economic
development issues in rural portions of
Mississippi and Alabama.

In addition to the keynote speakers, the
participants will choose three out of the following nine workshops:

“Female-Male Communications — A
Highly Charged Subject,” James Wil-
cox, Ph.D. and Karen Cowen, Bowling
Green State University;

“Silent Signals — Actions Speak Louder
Than Words,” Erica Serlin, Ph.D., Medi-
cal College of Ohio;

“The Negotiation Process — Asking
Questions To Get What You Want,”
Ethel Wilcox, Ph.D., University of Toledo;

“Strengthening Family Signals — Relat-
ing To Those We Live With,” Jean
Grifka, communications specialist and
Joseph Grifka, Equitable of New York;

“Conflicting Signals — Anticipating
Conflict and Using It Creatively,” Paul
A. Fritz, Ph.D., UT;

“Responsible Leadership — Facilitating
Group Interaction,” Ivan G. Harvey,
Ph.D., UT;

“Signal Interference — Overcoming
Barriers to Communication,” Sue Kincade, Dana Corporation;

“Network Static — Problem Solving and
Decision Making,” Larry Lottier, Dana
Corporation; and

“Tapping The Media — Using Radio, TV,
and The Printed Word,” Barbara Glo-
wacki, producer, WGTE-FM.

The $20 registration fee includes the
workshops, luncheon and parking and all
conference materials. Checks, made pay-
able to WIT, should be sent to WIT, Inc.,
P.O. Box 1993, C.S., Toledo, OH 43603.
Names of workshops you would like to
attend should be included.