pick the best. So I suppose there would have been a good, say, four or five  
songs—but then to call them songs is misleading because they weren't complete and  
I'd normally find that I throw lots of ideas down and then get back to them in a few  
days and see that they weren't as good as they could be, so I would just leave them  
and not finish off the track—and the second side of the album had one and a half  
tracks rewritten really because the flow of the side needed to be changed because  
the whole nature of it kept changing as things were being put on top of the basics.  

TM: Do you ever go back to the songs you rejected, say for the Hounds Of Love?  
Would you ever go back to them again, or leave them totally aside?  

Kate: It's quite interesting going back to them, and I have done, and I tend to find  
little pieces that I think can be re-worked and the rest of it is probably rubbish, so  
I pull out the bits that seem reusable, and though if that isn't used itself it would  
then spark off something that could be used again, so they do get recycled  
sometimes...  

TM: ...can you explain the first single off the album, the “deal with God"?  

Kate: It’s a bit of a cliché at the moment with so many songs called this, but it is  
very much about the power of love, and the strength that is created between two  
people when they're very much in love, but the strength that can also  
be—threatening, violent, dangerous as well as gentle, soothing, loving, and it’s  
saying that if these two people could swap places, if the man could become the  
woman and the woman the man, that perhaps they could understand the feelings of  
the other person in a truer way, understand them from that gender’s point of view,  
and that perhaps there are very subtle differences between the sexes that can  
cause problems in a relationship, especially when the people really do care about  
each other a lot.  

TM: ...would you agree if I said that the first side (of the album) was probably the  
most commercial thing you've done to date? Or don't you like that word  
“commercial”?  

Kate: No, I think especially from your mouth I can accept it—and in some ways  
I think you're very right, it is, and not necessarily so intentionally as perhaps  
I thought. I think the development of rhythm in my music is perhaps one of the things  
that makes it obviously more available to people, and a constancy of rhythm  
perhaps wasn't always there in previous albums.  

TM: That's exactly what I'm talking about. The rhythm tracks I find on this album  
are tremendous. Were you totally responsible for that?  

Kate: No, I wasn't. I think a very big influence was Del Palmer who when I was  
initially coming up with the songs—I would actually get Del to manifest in the  
rhythm box the pattern that I wanted. As a bass player I think he has a very natural  
understanding of rhythm and working with drums and he could also actually get the  
patterns that I could hear in my head and that I wanted, so it's through him we  
started off with the rhythmic bass that was then built upon and was very much  
what I wanted.  

TM: ...what about the idea behind ("Waking The Witch”). To me it’s weird. Do you  
agree—or not?  

Kate: I'm glad you say that because I would be disappointed in a way if you thought  
it was ordinary. I definitely wanted to create a weirdness. It’s all part of the story  
of the second side, that the person is in the water for the night, and they just have  
to try and keep going until the morning. And at this point they've just woken from a  
dream and have surfaced on the water trying not to drown, and it's the horror of  
then being faced with something that wants to put you straight under the water  
again, whether you are innocent or guilty.  

TM: From a personal point of view, did you ever feel that was happening to you in  
the music business?  

Kate: No, not at all! No, I think that's very much something that—  

TM: —people have made up?  

Kate: Well, that it is an outside person’s way of construing the subject matter.  

I think very much this whole thing is tied in with water, and if I was thinking of going under  
water it wouldn't be to do with the business at all, it would be to do with myself as a person,  
relationships, and that sort of thing. They're what concern me, that’s what would make me go  
under I think. No—I haven't—I don’t feel that that is relevant to things in my life because at the  
time when I took that break and I was writing these songs it was one of the most contented,  
happy periods of my life for quite a while, in that I actually had time to breathe and work  
creatively, and I think what's interesting is that I've always felt in the past, and it’s almost a  
sort of code from certain areas of life, that in order to write something that has meaning or  
whatever, that you have to be unhappy, that you should be in some kind of torment, and what  
was surprising was that for being very happy at this part in my life, I felt I wrote some songs  
that were saying very different things from that.  

TM: ...the only other one that frightened me a little bit was “Under Ice”. What was the thinking  
behind that song?  

Kate: It was totally connected to the track that had come before, and they were written  
together—"And Dream Of Sheep” goes straight into “Under Ice” and they were almost  
conceived as one, and it was very much the idea of going from very cold water. It’s getting  
dark, you're alone, the only way out is to go to sleep, no responsibilities, and forget about  
everything, but if you go to sleep the chances are you could roll over in the water and drown.  
So you're trying to fight sleep, but you can’t help it, and you hit the dream, the idea of the  
dream being really cold, and really the visual expectancy of total loneliness, and for me that  
was a completely frozen river, no one around, everything completely covered with snow and  
icicles, and it’s that person all alone in this absolute cold wilderness of white, and seeing  
themselves under the ice, drowning, to which they wake up and find themselves under the  
water.  

TM: Where did that idea come from? It's not something one would usually write a song about.  
Kate: I think the imagery for the whole piece—a lot of it I think came from moving out of  
London, in that I was surrounded much more by elements than by people and man-made things,  
the power of things like the wind in the trees. It sounds corny, but it's very earthy and I think it  
does affect you. Also some war films that covered people coming off ships, out of planes, into  
the sea, in situations where they were alone and frightened, into a huge thing—the sea is just  
enormous, and really so unknown, and very taken for granted. I don’t think that many people  
consider that cruel side of the sea, and how—ultimate it is—and also the whole thing of  
almost—sensory deprivation, where you've been in the water a while and you start losing all  
sense of where you are, whether you're upside down or whatever, and I just found the whole  
thing terribly fascinating and although a very physical event, very much a mental event as  
well in that you are traveling in your head, even though your body is just floating in water...  

TM: ...do a lot of your fans actually write and ask you about the meaning of your songs?  

Kate: No, I think most of them don't have to. I think they actually understand it or if they  
don't, they still feel it, that's really what it’s all about. I do get a lot of feedback from them.  

Extended  
Dance  
Face