many nervous people, that’s why the name is important. It makes the statement that you  
and we readers are not nervous. And that's what you're about.  
Actually, I'm nervous about signing my name, but there is mother. She still listens to  
Tina Turner, so there's always a chance she'll read a copy on her own! (I wish.)  
So just sign me, Lydia Lunch’s biggest fan in Morgan Hill, CA  

Dear BITCH:  

I enclose $15 for a subscription to BITCH for my sister, a bassist or bass player or  
whatever is the best way to say it. If possible, start with #6 because I want her to see  
the fan issue.  

Cheryl Cline tells me you plan to change the name. Please don’t! Well, I know you have  
good reason, but it's such a great name...! I can't imagine another name that would be  
so...well, so perfect for what you are. I know it's a power struggle. I wistfully wish you  
could become so popular so fast that newsstands or anyway record and bookstores  
would HAVE to carry BITCH. Ghu knows there are cruder titles out there (I mean--CREEM?  
But things like JUGS—no I'm not kidding--) that get on the stands because it's okay for  
men to talk like that. How much you wanna bet if a “men’s Magazine” came along with  
the title BITCH you'd see it in every liquor store? Anyway, every porn store (since the  
fall of 7-11).  

I know your subject matter leaves you with a smaller audience than JUGS and thus  
more vulnerable to pressure from media czars in the form of store owners and  
distributors. Sigh.  

I STILL WISH YOU COULD KEEP THE NAME!  

For one thing if you got big you'd take that word right out of their HANDS, you know?  
And smack their little cheeks with it.  

Whap!  

XXX, Mog, San Francisco, CA.  

Dear BITCH: My thanks to you for being BITCH in the first place. How about an entire  

article examining who exactly finds the name controversial? I'll bet objections come  

primarily from those who think Rock is for kids. Fearing the sexualization of children,  

they want to treat even grown women as children! By their logic, a women’s literature  

of Rock cannot exist. As BITCH, you clearly say you're not for TIGER BEAT's readers.  
Sincerely, J. Weiss, Indianapolis, Ind.  

Dear editor: I'm a 34-year-old secretary. Last month, I went over to my younger  
sister's house and she asked me if I'd like to borrow her copies of BITCH. Years ago I had  
shrugged Rock off as “kid stuff,” but I said, “What the hey.” BITCH blew me away!  
I made me wonder where “had all the good times gone” in Rock when I was in my teens.  
Consider me a total fan and have my check for back issues #6 and #9. BITCH rules, and  
if you understand that, then you know it has to remain BITCH and not be changed to  
anything else, ever!  
Rockin’ again, Theresa B., Miami, Florida.  
P.S. I'd like to read more on Janet Jackson! One paragraph (issue #11) wasn't enough!  

Dear BITCH: Praise of Kim Fowley (Issue #10) arouses my suspicions, such as, should  
the writer have his head examined? As to the allegation that “Sex People” is like “a  
female Frankie Goes To Hollywood"--gag me with “Relax"! A true Runaways fan would  
say, “Who the hell WANTS a female Frankie Goes To Hollywood?" Kim Fowley maybe  
gave the records their sound, but to me the Runaways were first, last, and always a  
performance band. Jackie and Vicki may not have played on the records, but I never saw  
a BAD Runaways CONCERT.  

On a more positive note, BITCH is doing the right thing to review these bands no  
matter if the promoter is sleazy. Unfortunately, sometimes the sleazy ones are the  
only ones to give female Rock musicians a chance! If you don't like what he does to  
bands, why punish them for BEING exploited, okay, Shandi? They could all go on to be  
Joan Jetts! No, I guess there's only one Joan, but if even one Joan came out of what Kim  
Fowley has done, then the potential for the rest of them must be respected.  

Love, Carol Kao, Oakland, CA  

BITCH continues to be impressive, but in my opinion you shouldn't print letters from  
people who are afraid to sign their names. I'm talking about the letter against Kim  
Fowley from “Runaway Jett,” obviously not Joan Jett (issue #11). It doesn't take a lot  
of courage for a writer to say “I SPIT in your face” if she isn't going to sign her real  
name. “Runaway Jett," whoever you are, show the courage of your convictions by  
telling us. Otherwise it's a bit hollow sounding.  
I really enjoyed the story on Girls Night Out, by the way, and I especially liked the  
joke that cast them as a Van Halen Tribute band. Didi Stewart could sing a version of  
“Jump” that would way cut the original.  
Keep Rockin’, Vince Franklin, Los Angeles, CA.  

LADY KILLERS  

Dear BITCH: Howdy! Thanx for running my LADY KILLERS record review. Some of the  
bands featured on that compilation LP have written to me saying they saw it. Brenda  
Barboni reads BITCH and says Lydia Pense is one of her favorite singers! Brenda left  
Syren recently to form Manta. Hellion, Jaded Lady and D.C. Lacroix also wrote. I loved  
the photos of Malibu Barbi and Leathur Panteez in issue #11. Bands I would really like to  

Attention Editors! Please Spread The Word.  

Very sad news to report: Kate Wolf, the popular California folk singer, has  
leukemia, a form of cancer that may or may not be immediately fatal. She has just  
gone into the hospital for bone marrow transplants. Her insurance covers the  
treatments, but she will be unable to work for at least a year, and is likely to  
need help caring for herself and her son. A number of people on California's folk  
circuit are or will be doing benefits for her (check with clubs like Freight &  
Salvage in Berkeley). These benefits are being organized independently, no one  
has a Kate Wolf committee; they do them and send a check made out to Kate Wolf  
c/o her record company, Kaleidoscope Records. The company is planning to  
release a sort of “Greatest Hits” album soon, probably to be called Golden  
California, which will also contain previously unreleased recordings, such as  
“Give Yourself To Love," a song that's been popular in concert. Her other albums  

are available through Ladyslipper (see classifieds). If you'd like to send a check,  
make it out to Kate Wolf and send it:  
c/o Kaleidoscope Records, P.O. Box 0, El Cerrito, CA.  

read about in BITCH are Toto Coelo, Addie and Heroines. And yes, you should change the  
name of the magazine...to “Queens Of Noise.”  

Gene T., San Francisco, CA  
EDITOR'S NOTE: Now, now, Gene, you're partial to that name because you're a Runaways  
fan! But we do have a story on Addie/Heroines this issue.  

Dear BITCH: I just purchased the LADY KILLERS album after reading the review in BITCH.  
It is one of the best albums I’ve ever purchased! I especially liked the Jaded Lady track.  
Please extend my thanks to your reviewer, Gene, for bringing this HOT album to my  
attention. Keep those “femetal” reviews coming!  
Rock on, Cassie, San Francisco, CA.  

P.S.: Leathur Panteez guitarist, Shandi, looks like Shay from the Orchids—are they the  
same person?  

EDITOR'S NOTE: Shay? Oh! Che Zuro! No, they're not. Anyone else interested in the LADY  

KILLERS compilation, please see the boxed note about it on p. 2.  

Assorted Missives  

Dear BITCH: I've been a Go-Gos fan since I was 11. I'm still one even though they broke  
up. Well, I read the interview with Separate Checks (issue 6) and I'm happy to see  
somebody finally give them credit for inspiring other girl Rock musicians to know they  
can go out and get it if they just try! So thank you, Mary, for saying the Go-Gos inspired  
you! What about everybody else out there? I know the Go-Gos have influenced a lot of  
girls, but I wonder who else will admit it? Come on, people! Manifest some integrity!  

Some of us still have the beat! Joan South, Washington D.C.  

Dear editor: I enjoyed your BITCH hints in Issue #9. (So far the first and only issue  
I've seen, but I'll get more.) Although he may have been guilty of moral turpitude, John  
Bonham was a great drummer, and I'm glad to see you don't exclude him as a role model  
for women drummers. Humor in feminism is a rarity, and some of BITCH is  
side-splittingly funny.  

R.A. Bell, Houston, Texas  

A BITCH from me--have you ever noticed what wimps some of the tough girls really  
are? NO NAMES! I DON'T WANT TO PUT ANYBODY DOWN! But I was looking at  
you-know-who's video where she looked so tough until she got almost NAKED. WHAT A  
MISTAKE! I said, ‘My GRANDMOTHER could beat her up! Oh, well—guess being tough is all  
an ACT with her. Sigh.” Ever look at Madonna or Wendy O. Williams's arms? Say what  
you will about their music, those girls have real muscles. Madonna isn't even trying to  
come across tough, and she's buff. I hope I never see Chrissie Hynde in a bikini. If she's a  
wimp, I just don't want to know. As for the rest of you who flaunt your squishy bods,  
put some clothes on! Take some exercise classes! Or just stop pretending to be so tough!  
If you're going to be a wimp be honest about it! Be who you are! Otherwise you may see  
me in the front row with my friends yelling, “Put it ON!”  

Scooble doo, Tracy from Boston.  
P.S. Okay, okay, here's a name. IVY OF THE CRAMPS! Love yer stuff, babes, but the  
attitude does NOT match what the body is limited to! PAT BENATAR! Put on a shirt,  
girl, or the world knows your secret! And remember what happened to Karen Carpenter!  
EDITOR'S NOTE: We heard Ivy had poison fangs in case she felt like inflicting  
damage...and that Benatar carries a concealed armored tank division in her compact...  
(for those who wondered, Karen Carpenter died of anorexia).  

Dear San Jose press: I really loved BITCH and here is $15.00 for one subscription.  
I may order more later for others. Can't wait to read more!  
Cheers, Larry Rodriguez, Baltimore, MD.