wacky friends, and my bookings were always scheduled  
for 8 in the morning. I managed to get there, though,  
'cause I didn't do drugs and I was not much of a drinker.  
And that was another thing that kind of made it hard for  
me to fit in! That's why I moved to Maine. I mean, I'm not  
a stick-in-the-mud, I like to have a good time, and  
occasionally, I like to be decadent. But mostly, I like to  
take care of my voice, to eat good, to get up in the  
morning and go to bed at a reasonable hour. And I have a  
big giant apartment I have to keep clean, and I have a kid!  
And a band, and all kinds of other stuff I have to worry  
about, so New York and L.A. were kind of a big strain on  
me, because your social schedule outweighs your  
priorities when you're in those places. So I knew if I  
really wanted to make a serious career out of the thing I  
wanted to do since I was 10 years old, I was gonna have  
to detach myself from the media that wasn't  
understanding that. Not because I didn't like that media,  
but because I couldn't stand another drop of press about  
who I dated. It was starting to get to me, and it was  
starting to affect my family. It was upsetting my  
mother, it was upsetting my family who believed in me a  
lot more than that. And it was upsetting my agent—I  
never had a manager, but I have an agent that books live  
performances...it was making things hard. And to get  
back to Patti and PLAYBOY—I was a kind of successful  
young model. My face appeared in the younger  
magazines, like GLAMOUR, MADEMOISELLE, and  
SEVENTEEN, rather than VOGUE—  
Tw: Right, all-American girl.  
Bebe: Well, I think the funniest description I've ever  
read of me was, “Brooke Shields gone bad.” That's one of  
my favorites...I really didn’t like my image, it didn't fit  
my personality. Patti always used to say to me, “You  
should go to London...they understand girls with bangs in  
London.” So finally Lynn Goldsmith, [top Rock  
photographer] and I drank a bottle of wine together one  
day, and she started taking photographs of me. She said,  
“Yeah, Patti just took these incredibly sexy ones, and I  
wanna compete.” We were laughing, because Patti had  
these nude photos taken in the loft, which turned up,  
somebody found them [and published them in CELEBRITY  
SLEUTH mag], and those are the very nudes I'm talking  
about, they were taken when she lived in that apartment  
building right next to the Chelsea Hotel in New York with  
Allen. We were laughing about it, and Lynn said, “Yeah,  
let's set the camera up and take pictures of ourselves!”  
So we took off our tops, and we were running around the  
house...Todd came home, and he was going, "WHAT are  
you girls UP to?! What are you DOING?!" And I said,  
“We're taking photos!” And he said, “Oh, great!” And so  
the photos came back, and they were really kinda good.  
Kinda arty! Kinda fun. Patti saw them and said, (raucous  
voice:) “Boy, you oughta send those to one of the SEX  
magazines!" Then she said, “But be careful, don't send  
them to anybody but PLAYBOY. 'Cause the rest of them  
are just sleazy.” So Lynn goes, (genteel voice:) “Well,  
I wouldn't allow them to be in any magazine but PLAYBOY  
anyway.” Being Lynn of course. Lynn decided, “I'm going  
to sell them to PLAYBOY.” So she sent a couple of them  
to one of the editors, and they called back immediately  
and said, “We want to test her for a Playmate.” I'm 18  
years old, I'm like, “What does that mean?” [Lynn  
Goldsmith didn't take the final shot, that was by the  
PLAYBOY staff]...to me, it's like a small portion of my  
life, it's like one of the Jimmies on top of my ice cream  
cone. There are a billion jimmies on there, and that's one  
of them. So I flew to Chicago, did the photos, and I was  
really kinda surprised about how professional it all was.  
You had all these women doing your hair and your  
make-up, and then you just go in and you do the pictures,  
the guy doesn't even act like he cares—obviously not,  
he's been photographing nude women all of his career. The  
photographer I worked with was a really nice guy, and  
his wife was his assistant. It was all really kinda  
home-spun...at the time I posed for PLAYBOY, too, total  
frontal nudity was not permitted. It wasn't nearly as  

risqué as it is now.  

Tw: Even so, I'm always surprised at how seriously people  
can take that.  

Bebe: Especially for me, 'cause I did it as a lark! You know,  
I did the photos, they came out, and I'll be honest with you,  
I never really thought about it much again. Because I never  
did any of the Playmate promotions, I never acted like a  
real Playmate. I never hung out at the mansion with Hef,  
never did any of that stuff at all. I was still me. But it did  
hurt my modeling career.  

Tw: Oh, yeah?  

Bebe: Well, considering who my clients were!  

Tw: Right!  

Bebe: They kinda went, "What—that's our little Bebe?! Oh,  
my God! We knew Rock’nRoll was driving her crazy, but we  
didn’t know it would drive her to nudity!”  

Tw: I'm always surprised by how one can do something like  
that as a giggle, and people can react like it was the most  
major, serious decision about how one wanted to present  
oneself for the rest of one’s life, an image graven in stone.  
Bebe: Yeah, I was branded, man, I felt like a horse that got  
branded on its ass, because from the minute I dated my  
first peer—I mean, I consider any man like Todd that I lived  
with for centuries and had children with, my peer, for  
chrissake—not just my “boyfriend”, that man was a major  
chunk of my life, so why should I be ashamed to talk of him,  
you know? It just irks me! If Rod Stewart sits around and  
talks about his years with Britt Eklund, or his years with  
blah blah blah and bluh bluh bluh, this blonde and that blonde,  
he gets 20,000 new feathers in his hat, 30,000 new bullets  
in his holster.  

Tw: And when you think of how many Rock stars do  
specifically look for models to date—  

Bebe: I don't wanna put down anybody, because it's a  
vicious circle and why should I? But 9 out of 10 times,  
believe me, in my early 20's...it was people being very  
disrespectful of my relationship with Todd, and pursuing  
me. It was really kinda rude on occasion—I'm not gonna  
(laughs) a couple of—  
what people would call “mega-super star type dudes”, that  
used to call my house at 4 in the morning when I was in bed  
with the man I loved, trying to get me to go out for sushi!  
I mean, come on! I'd say, “Look, I live here with the man I  
love, why are you calling my house? Why are you tempting  
me? You're somebody I liked when I was 8 years old, it's  
very difficult for me to turn down this sushi date!”  

(Laughs.) “I kinda dug you when I was 8, but you  
know—you’re kinda weird!” It put a big strain on my  
relationship with Todd...'cause he got me in the “brat”  
stage, when I really was growing up and becoming the  
person I developed into. He went through a lot, I don't know  
how he put up with me for 6 years, to be honest with you.  

Tw: I wonder how much snide press reaction comes from a  
kind of jealousy, because no one's calling [the snide ones] at  
4 in the morning while they're not sleeping next to Todd.  

Bebe: It was kind of funny to me, but then, as I got older  
and wiser—or whatever you want to say—I put it all  
together and realized it's no different now. All the hot  
models now all go out with Rock stars, too. That's just the  
way it was. If you were the hot model in town, they all  
wanted to know you. It was more the guys, really, believe  
me...it's like Mick Jagger and people like that, they always  
made sure they knew who the new beautiful girls in town  
were, they're like the Warren Beattys of Rock’nRoll.  

Tw: They don't make any secret of it, either, but no one  
says, “Oh, Rock stars are groupies for models.”  

Bebe: 'Cause they're men...but people have to understand,  
too, I didn't have a butterfly net...I didn't go out going,  
“Okay, next!” Swoosh!...I look upon the prominent people in  
my life, that affected me the most, and it was all meant to  
be. You can't plan your life, you can't plan who you're gonna  
date and who you're gonna meet, and what you're gonna do.  
You can dream and you can hope, and you can sort of have  
an idea of what you wanna do for a career, but you don't  
plan who you're gonna meet and run into and become friends  
with...it was real different, in the early 70's, Rock’nRoll  
social consciousness was different—and groupies were not  
as tacky as they are now...I think the word “groupie” should  
be dissolved. You're either a fan, or you're a prostitute.  
Tw: We're gonna talk to one of the women from Backstage  
Pass—  
Bebe: Which? Spock?  
Tw: Yeah!  
Bebe: Oh, I love her!  
Tw: We wanted to ask about their saying, “Oh, we're  
groupies, that's why we're Backstage Pass—  
Bebe: Well, see, they were such cool girls—I mean, look at  
Spock now...she was always a brilliant girl, not a sleazy  
girl. I'm not saying she never got dressed up sleazy and  
went to the Stardust...because she did, but Spock always  
had a brain, a head on her shoulders. She went on to develop  
a great career for herself. I mean, she was an A & R  
person for CBS for years, and what is she, a manager now?  
Tw: Yeah, E-i-0 and Redd Kross.  
Bebe: Yeah, I mean, she's a really cool girl, and she knew  
what she wanted. I mean, the GTOs all said they were  
groupies, too.  
Tw: I love the GTOs’ music!  
Bebe: In the 60's, people like Patti Boyd (model, married  
George Harrison, then Eric Clapton) and Anita Pallenberg  
and Marianne Faithfull, they talked openly about being the  
luckiest girls in the world, because they went out with the  
coolest guys in the world. But it was different. There's a big  
difference between Iron Maiden and the Rolling Stones! I'm  
certainly not gonna tie one on to go meet Iron Maiden! But  
maybe if I'd been a girl in her 20's in the 60's, I wouldn't  
have minded wanting to meet the Rolling Stones...  
Tw: Well, now that I've asked you all these questions about  
stuff you say you never wanna see in print again—  
Bebe: I'm not gonna say I never wanna see it in print again.  
It's the way it was presented that I never wanna see again.  
If people fit it into my life as part of my chronological  
time-table, just like a man, okay, like if a guy is becoming  
a Rock’nRoll singer, and he happens to have the good  
fortune to be a roadie for Jimmy Page—these are  
nobody bats an eyelash, 'cause he’s a guy! But  
if a girl who aspires to be in the entertainment business,  
has a lot of friends in the same business that she aspires to  
be in, immediately they piece together, “Oh, God, she must  
be fucking them!” And it's very unfair. If my talking about it  
can possibly make it go away, great.  
Tw: Lots of people who go through this on a much smaller  
level. “That's not why I'm here, why I'm backstage, I'm not  
the drummer because I'm sleeping with anybody in the  
band,” and I think it's comforting to know they're not alone,  

Because BITCH could have brought  
you stories on Pantera, Bitch, the 4  
Clams, Das Furlines, and Fifth  
Column this issue, too, if we'd had  
the $$ for the extra pages. Not to  
mention more cartoons (look for  
a piece on/by Luna Ticks next ish),  
reviews, and essays.  

Wouldn't that have been fun?  

Yes, I want to see BITCH be full of it  
(stuff). Here's my $15 for 12 issues  
to San Jose Face, Suite 164, 478  
W. Hamilton Ave, Campbell CA 95008.  
ADDRESS  

CITY.  

Foreign: $30.