IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Sue: I went through that all the time. “What have I done NOW?” Still, I'm
always afraid I'm gonna erase what I've done. When I got the computer (she has
an IBM PC), I'd never touched a computer before taking it home to do this MIDI
thing. I felt overwhelmed....and that's another thing, manuals! They write them
assuming you have knowledge that most of us just don’t have unless we've gone
to extended school in MIDI or that kind of thing.
Tw: Using terms that aren't yet in dictionaries, so you can't look them up!
Swe: Right, you want to learn to use them, but to do that you have to already
have a working knowledge of what these things are. But I'm getting over feeling
stupid for asking questions all the time, and I'm learning to look for help. Like,
I'm about to do my second album, and I wanted to find a good producer, I didn’t
know how to find one, but I knew I needed someone who knew this MIDI stuff in
and out, and who had a very elaborate system of their own...) wanted it to be
more commercial than what I'm already doing, so I was reaching out for
help--SUCH a job! I went to see 20 producers! Interviewing them. And they
were all hype and nothing behind it...people who were all talk and no ears! We
were given one mouth and two ears, but a lot of us don’t use them in that
proportion... finally found somebody I wanted to work with, but first I had to
learn to say, “No!” We have to learn to trust our intuitions.
Tw: Was it hard for you to learn to say no?
Sue: Oh, terrible! I grew up believing that if someone said, “You'll do this,”
you're supposed to do it! It was very difficult for me to learn to trust myself
instead of other people. That I knew best, what was gonna work for me. So this
whole interviewing process was, instead of letting myself be intimidated to the
place where they were gonna audition me to see if my music was good enough
for them to produce, I went out auditioning them, and I kept that attitude about
it...
Tw: You've said people have to learn not to be afraid of technology--were you
afraid of technology because it was technology?
Sue: Oh, I'm sure I was. I remember my high school counselor telling me I
shouldn't take any more math/science courses, I had no aptitude. And he was
probably right. I excelled in things that were intuitive, and language skills. I
mean, I had trouble with 2 + 2.
Tw: Was this actual lack of aptitude, or math anxiety?
Sue: I really don't know...I'm sure partially anxiety...
Tw: One of the nice things about synthesizers, is one doesn't have to approach
them as technology at all, but just turn them on, like a light switch...if you
press the right switches, you get noises...
Sue: I look on it as the Grand Experiment. Press this button and see what
happens--and you have to take the attitude that you can't get in too much
trouble. I mean, what could go wrong? There's enough “protect” things on there
that you're not gonna lose your memory...I had this idea that if I couldn't handle
(synths), there was no way I could go on in my life as a musician, I wasn't
gonna be able to compete in this world, and that I was just too fragile to be able
to handle it...it was the adventure. My concerts are like that, too. I try to teach
people that taking a risk is worth it. Even if it ends up in a mess--what's the
worst that happens? You're depressed for a while till you get it back together
and get on to what you're gonna do next. At least try, so you don't look back at
85 and say, “Gosh, I wish I had.” So you press a few buttons, and maybe you
press the wrong one. Eh.
Tw: I know at one time in Womyn's Music there was an awful lot of prejudice
against synthesizers—
Sue: Oh, there still is...
Tw: ...I thought that was a daring thing right there, to go among Folkies with a
high tech instrument.
Sue: Yeah, I'd say the Womyn's Music market is primarily a Folkie market, and
so I'm phasing out of that market. I still enjoy doing concerts for women, and
that's still an important part of my life, because I think it's a wonderful example
for a woman to get up there and be using technology, and show that we can do
it by ourselves, but at the same time it is a basically Folk market. That
audience has been trained to want to hear it, that very simple kind of
presentation, and I'm into education...) try to do a lot of explaining, when I'm up
there and they don’t understand why so much sound is coming out...but I'm also
having fun in going into your basic overground, mainstream clubs...because
there's more of an appreciation for that kind of music, and while I'm into
pioneering, I also want to make a living...I think about all the reasons why I
shouldn't do something—“Oh, you don't even know how to go about finding a
producer! Or using a sampler! What are you gonna do—go take a class now?" I
mean, I feel overdone with school now--to the max...I've done so much school, I
could open up an institute for lower learning...just keeping up with current
technology is a full-time job, and I'm finally starting to feel like I don't have to
do all of it myself. I've had to learn how to play the instrument, learn how to do
my own recordings, how to do my own bookings, my own records, play every
note myself. And I'm beginning to feel I should go for my strengths, and find
people who can help me, who can work on parts that aren't my strengths. To
say, “Is this my strength, or can somebody else do it better?”
Tw: Is that a way of being in control?

Sue: A lot of people have asked me that. It's more that I just didn’t know where to turn for help,
so I felt I had to do it myself, learn to ask questions, to feel okay about making a fool out of
myself...I sort of preach this in my concerts, I certify my audiences as outrageous, to go out and
make fools of themselves that way--that's the only way we grow, is to take that kind of
risk...I've never done it in print before. I've done a lot of radio healings, where I have them put
their hands on the radio--which is hard when you're driving. But I hypnotize them...) suppose I
could certify a paper outrageous...I'll do it for you in print right now, okay? I know you're
reading along in this newspaper, reading it month after month, but now you've run across
something that's going to change your life forever. If you read this page, your life will be changed
forever, and BITCH will be engrained upon your soul. But you have to follow a few basic steps.
First, lay your right hand across the page so that the newspaper print is almost embedded in your
skin. Just feel the presence of the paper so that my words jump out to you as we read on. Take a
moment before you read the next paragraph to breathe in and breathe out three times. Now
you're feeling relaxed, imagine white light coming in from your heel or booted foot, going up your
pant leg, passing your midriff area, past your belly button, passing your throat and nasal
cavities, raising a purple crown above your head. You have a sense of total relaxation and peace.
You see the most incredible vision in your mind. You see what you imagine Sue Fink looks like,
floating with you on a gold lame carpet above your home. You are feeling a sense of freedom that
you've never felt before. And you look into my eyes...and I look into your eyes, and you look into
my eyes, and I look deeper into your eyes, and suddenly you know that you no longer have to be
afraid of technology, you no longer have to be afraid of asking questions. You know that deep
within you is a fabulous monster soul wanting to come out of you, that you wanna reach right
through the page and go for your dream. Perhaps it's buying a synthesizer and learning how to use
it, or a computer, or maybe you're not a musician at all, maybe you just wanna go for that job
that you've always dreamt of having, or that love affair that you've always dreamt of, or to get
out of that affair that you've always hated. And suddenly you know that all things are possible.
You can do anything you want to do. And I whisper into your ear, “You are certified outrageous.”
Now, as you read on through the rest of this article, you have the sense of joy in knowing that
you and I are experiencing the same mystery of life, the same true life adventure, and that we
can go on and be whatever we want. There. Doesn't that feel better?

Victory Music Revue: Yow!

Folk-a-rama in the Pacific Northwest! Breaking into the music biz?
Great regional rag devoted to Folk, Jazz, Trying to get a band happening?
Need some connections?

Irish, Modern Acoustic, Women's Music,
Blues, and Ethnic music in Washington and
Oregon states, 10 years old and still
truckin’. They're not just folkin’ around
(their pun), this is a serious scene ‘zine,
every possible where-it-is, who-does-it,
and why-it-is in their time zone. If you
want to folk around in Tacoma, you MUST
check this mag out (and subscribers get
discounts to their events). $15 a year
from Victory Music, P.O. Box 7515,
Bonney Lake, WA 98390.

Get your talent in gear for the small fee
of $30. We'll send you a membership
application and some info if you send us
a S.A.S.E. to BAWIM c/o Rebecca Cross,
22470 Foothill Blvd Ste. #34 Hayward,
CA 94541 or give us a call: (415) 538-0799

HE DOESN'T MAKE THE RULES

Overheard in London Snack Bars,
the latest in the Overheard series, is out as of
March. Cartoonist Susan Catherine has returned
from a four-month residence in Britain in order to
bring the American public this rare glimpse of the
British with the lace curtain pulled aside.
This 64-page mini can be ordered directly from the
publisher for $3.00 inclusive:
Cherry Stone Press
4715 16th NE.
Seattle, WA 98105