on albums: the Bangles; Alison “Alf” Moyet (also getting  
ready for her first real U.K. tour since ‘84, before having her  
baby); Lydia Lunch, working with Jim Thirwell of  
Scraping Foetus Off The Wall; Suzanne Vega; Ricki Lee  
Jones; Patty Smyth, with or without Scandal; Laurie  
McAllister (ex-Orchid, ex-Runaway) on Bomp, doing lead  
vocal, rhythm guitar, and bass, with lead guitar by Frankie  
Infante (ex-Blondie)...Records out: the new Marti Jones  
album, Match Game; Helen Terry (who used to duet with Boy  
George; Anne Dudley of The Art Of Noise, and Stanley  
Clarke guest), the debut from the all-female trio Krystol;  
Human League's first new one in 2 years (to be followed by a  
world tour); Greetings From Timbuk 3, by Timbuk 3, the  
husband and wife duo of Pat and Barbara K. McDonald;  
English soulster Jaki Graham's second; Poly Styrene’s  
“Trick Of The Witch"; “Take Me Home Tonight", the new Eddie  
Money single, in which Ronnie Spector adds choruses,  
invoked as a sort of primal love Goddess...And the first album is  
out from Boomerang (Adriana Kaegi of Kid Creole & The  
Coconuts, Perri Lister, who was the ballerina in Billy  
Idol's “White Wedding" video, and Chery! Poirier). They  
cover Nancy Sinatra’s “These Boots Were Made For Walkin’”;  
popular song, Separate Cheeks covers it on their single and  
Leathur Panteez does it in their act, too...What were the  
makers of the film Sid & Nancy afraid of? That they made their  
“Nancy” so much more Hollywood cute than the real one was, we  
mean. What Nancy Spungen looked like was part of her life, and  
what she looked like was not like that.  

Joan Sutherland Injured  

Madelyn Renee, left, was the last-minute sub for Opera star  
Dame Joan Sutherland on the “Silver Jubilee” tour, when the  
latter suffered a perforated ear drum shortly before the  
tour's opening at the Oakland Coliseum Arena, apparently in  
the course of landing at San Francisco airport. Over 13,000  
concert-goers, paying up to $100 a ticket, had turned out for  
the opening night, which was to feature Luciano Pavarotti and  
Sutherland in their most popular duets from 25 years of  
performing together. Renee, a Pavarotti protege and, at a  
mere 30, a new kid on the Opera block, was on a visit to the  
area, but dropped other plans for last-minute rehearsals. The  
entire program had to be revised (Sutherland is a tenor  
coloratura, Renee a light lyric soprano), and now contains  
only one duet (from La Boheme). Sutherland's husband,  
Richard Bonynge, was to conduct, but pleaded inability to  
learn the new program in such a short time, and was replaced  
by Emerson Buckley. Audiences received her well; she was  
liked, although generally felt to be not in Sutherland's league,  
and few asked for refunds (though that's held to be a sign of  
Pavarotti’s popularity), and she was applauded as gutsy for  
making her Bay Area debut on short notice under such difficult  
conditions.  

MADELIN  

the 1,831st star (sponsored by Columbia Records;  
sponsors pay the Chamber of Commerce a $3,500  
fee to consider a nomination for the walk), and is  
between the stars of Frank Fay and Lowell Thomas.  
We know who Frank Fay and Lowell Thomas are, and  
you don't--nyah, nyah! On the other hand, you  
probably don't care...That day was also declared  
Tina Turner Day in Los Angeles, for which she  
accepted a plaque.  

Gloria Loring, who plays Liz Curtis on the soap series, “Days Of Our Lives”, decided to use her 10  

Malibu Barbi  

Due to a mix-up with  
the Post Office,  
Malibu Barbi's mail  
was all returned to  
the senders.  
Annoying?  
Just a little!  

The new address  
is: Malibu Barbi,  
Box 421773,  

San Francisco, CA  
94101. They say  

here: BOBBY CASTRO  
P sorry for the delay!  
>>Frightwig have added a new member, Rebecca;<-  

fr  

If you ordered the  
Ladykillers compilation  
(reviewed last issue) and  

didn’t get it, be warned that  
PARADOX and GREENWORLD  
have gone out of business.  
To get info, send an SASE to  
New Renaissance Records  
P.O. Box 11372  
Burbank, CA 91510  

”  
USA TODAY's national survey on the favorite  
leisure activities of Americans, brought  
“listening to music” in at 64%, behind only  
watching TV, at 81%, and just ahead of “lawn  
care” at 63%  

They didn't ask what & listened to music  
while they tended their lawns. Quick,  
Someone--a potential market!  

ak kk ee ee ee  

Tr I tri  

Ibis  

: No, no  
not the band, this is a 24 hour hotline to help real  
California runaways find shelter, get counseling, or  
send messages back to their families. The state line  
is modeled after national lines in Houston and  
Chicago, which receive 45,000 calls a year from  
California runaways.  

The number is 1-800-843-5200.  

Snore eee S  

million soap fans to get the record hit she’s always wanted (she made three albums in the 60's without  
having a hit). Record companies were not interested; near 40, she was considered too old, and her  
material was considered too supper-club-y. So she had a story line involving her character written  
around the show's "Friends And Lovers” love theme, and wrote cabaret performer Carl Anderson into  
the show for her to duet with (her first choice, Al Jarreau, was unavailable). Despite lots of TV play  
and strong viewer response, Gloria still couldn't get an album deal. She finally made a deal to release  
the single only last May on Carrere-CBS. It sold 94,000 copies immediately, and she still couldn't get  
an album deal. It had to sell a lot more before, finally, she got an album deal with Atlantic. She told the  
LOS ANGELES TIMES, “What a jungle the record business is. I thought TV was bad, but it's nothing like  
the record business.“ She is leaving the series, however, to pursue her singing career, basically  
dreamy Pop aimed at those in their thirties and forties.  

5 WA Cy  

=  
ox