10

se es Ds  
don't they feel it, that’s really what it’s all about.  
I do get a lot of feedback from them, and it's  
important to me and it's very interesting, just  
what strikes them, what they like.  
TM: ... do you get a lot of ideas from  
films?  

Kate: I think whenever I have the time to read I'm  
always inspired by it. The problem is that I just shun it, &  
I just think that there are more important things to do  
with my time. It's rubbish, really, but I do always feel  
guilty when I sit down and read a book because I think I  
should be doing other things. It takes me such a long time  
to read, but in a way there is no other experience like  
it, an intimate relationship between yourself and a book.  
It's incredible, and it's very sad that things like  
television and films, although encouraging books by  
using their scripts for films, are taking something away  
from that whole world of books. But particular films do  
inspire me. I've always had a television, I always used  
to watch lots and lots of television when I was a kid, and  
I really enjoy watching films.  

This has been excerpted from the fanzine HOMEGROUND,  
issues 22-25.  

Best press kit yet; Reckless Records sent out a “Trick  
Or Treat” promo. The note read, “Here is a Halloween  
loot bag for you scary people from us ghouls at  
Restless/Pink Dust Records in thanks for your support  
of our priority projects...(we) supply you with all the  
necessities for a happening Halloween haul. No need to  
worry about Snickers with razor blades, cyanide-laced  
apples or getting flattened by a Mack truck while  
crossing the street. You'll find enclosed assorted  
playthings and enough sugary treats to rot your teeth  
and leave you in a glucose coma until Thanksgiving.  
Enjoy and don't forget to floss. PS. You kids made out  
like bandits!” Enclosed, we found a whistle, candy,  
cigarettes and charm bracelet, assorted bubble gum, an  
eyepatch, and Mick Jagger-sized wax lips. Well, we  
were more than ready to hand out some PR. But the  
kicker is this--we've been trying to set up an interview  
with Reckless-distributed band Zeitgeist, anyway. So  
far, without success. What avails all the wax lips in  
creation, be the band unready to pick up the phone?  

Hi Fans!  
GOLDMINE, the collector's magazine, runs info on fan  
clubs. Write to them and get announced in their mag.  
Send a self-addressed, stamped envelope, and a note  
saying you're a fan club who'd like to know how to get  
listed, and they'll send you a form to fill out.  
Meanwhile, their Nov. 7, 86 issue has complete Patti  
Page (the singin’ rage) discography and history. The  
address is GOLDMINE, Krause Publications, 700 East  
State Street, Iola, WI 54990.  

Unreleased Cassettes of Kim Fowley Girls:  
Gene of the ‘ine NEON ANGELS has gotten  
permission from Kim Fowley to sell cassettes of so far  
unreleased material by KF artists, including the  
Runaways, the Orchids, the Dreamers, Juice, Lollipop,  
Dyan Diamond, Venus & the Razorblades, etc. For the  
complete list (he's selling the songs $1 a track) send a  
SASE to Gene, NEON ANGELS, P.O. Box 421773, San  
Francisco, CA 94101.  

Eastern Block Under Big Mac Attack:  
McDonald's is opening fast food burger places in  
Yugoslavia and Hungary, their first in communist  
Eastern Europe.  

Okay,  
Runaways fans!  

Tygram/Mercury is planning to release  
Runaways compilation album.  

FANTASIES  
Go ahead,  
tell them you  
want it!  

And designer Anita Mack Farland--  

Presents a Fashion Show Benefit  
For  

Bay Area  
Women  
In Music  

BAWIM  

and entertainment fields--musicians,  
agents, engineers, DJs,  

0 BAWIM events  
hops on  

stings, discounts,  
seminars and workshops.  

For info, write to:  
BAWIM  
201 Hoffman Street  
San Francisco, CA 94114.  

Yes,  
members.  

Gowns inspired  
by Erte, Las Vegas,  
and the x  

@ non-profit networking organization for  
women and men in all facets of the music  
industry--promoters, etc.  
Members receive a quarterly newsletter, job  
listings (such as different  
aspects of the industry), and a listing in the  
BAWIM directory. Membership is $30 a year.  
If you're interested but don’t plan to join  
now, you can still get yourself added to the  
BAWIM mailing list for updates and more.  

BAWIM does take out-of-the-area  

Monday, December 22, 9:45 pm. Doors open at 9.  
Tickets: $4 general, $3 BAWIM members.  

The Women’s  
Rock Mag  
With Bite  

Among the models will  
be BAWIM board  
members--  

-- ADDIE (guitarist)  

-- Teri Danz (vice  
president, singer)  

-- Sheila Rene  
(Chairwoman, Rock  
journalist).  

Special effects by  
William Wizard!  

Fantasy Fashion  

YUM,  

At One Step Beyond,  
(408) 727-0901  
1400 Martin Ave., Santa Clara, California.  

Surprises!