different because Rob Tyner, the lead singer of the  
MCS, has been working with our band, we were lucky  
enough to get him to sit in on a couple of gigs, ‘cause he  
lives around here--so he wrote a song for us, it's a  
feminist song called “Take Back The Night”, and we're  
gonna be recording it as a single real soon, and he's  
gonna produce it.  

Tw: Is it about the “Take Back The Night” protests? (A  
series of feminist marches aimed at making the streets  
safe for women to walk on at night).  

Paula: Yeah, pretty much, the words pretty much deal  
with the fact that women can't walk down certain  
streets at night, you know, that type of thing. It’s a really  
good song. And it's so catchy! We played it on the East  
coast and people went NUTS.  

Tw: Do you consider yourself a feminist band?  

Paula: No, not really, but I think if need be we would  
stand up for that kind of stuff. But right now we're not  
into any politics or anything.  

Tw: We're finding that definitions of “feminism” have  
changed a lot over the past ten years—  

Paula: Yeah, I think so. It's not abnormal for women to  
be in bands anymore. I mean, I've been in bands for a  
long time. Six years ago, it was like, I'd go and audition  
for a band, and it would be, “Well, you're a girl!” “Yeah,  
no shit.” A long time ago, it was hard...but now, it’s not.  
Now, everyone thinks of it as a novelty, and that drives  
me crazy!...you know, most interviews—“Oh, being in an  
all-girl band, does that help or hurt?” It’s like—don't give  
me this question again!  

Tw: You get asked the one about ‘Do you have male  
groupies’?  

Paula: No! I wish they would.  

Tw: Yeah?  

Paula: We do, we get some wild groupies. On the road,  
man!  

Tw: Well, should we send our male readers your way?  
Paula: Yeah! We have a little fan club that we keep  
informed, we send them all kinds of junk. We make these  
pins, and little fun packets, balloons...there are several  
versions. One of them is a “Summer Fun Packet",  
includes pins of the band, balloons, and a miniature  
poster. It's all in, you know, the smallest, smallest  
baggies you can buy? Stuffed in there...and we have a  
Halloween one out, “Trick Or Treat With The Vertical  
Pillows”, and inside it's got a vial of fake blood, a fake  
spider, a pin with black thread, and a rubber bloody  
hand, a little one. Or a nose or an ear or a foot...we  
usually give them out at shows. We took a bunch on the  
road.  

Tw: If somebody writes in to get in the fan club, should  
they send you some bucks for postage?  

Paula: Oh, no, it doesn't cost that much to mail it.  
They're really tiny, they don't even weigh nothing...On  
the single:) That record, believe me, does not capture  

Recent Press  

"Vertical Pillows” by Karen Rose. Michigan  
Voice, Sept 1985, p28.  

“The beat goes on for talented area —  
cians" by Garaud MacTaggart. The Daily  
Tribune (Royal Oak, Mich), Oct 17, 1985,  
p20.  

Interview and review by Jim Thompson.  
Central Michigan Life (Univ of Central  
Michigan), Oct. 28, 1985.  

“Music Awards '85/The Winners". Metro  
Times (Detroit), Nov 13-19, 1985, p17.  

"Are you sick of fashion ...." The  
Michigan Daily (U of Mich), Dec 2, 1985,  

Review in “Airwaves Reviews" by Anne  
Clark. Dec 6, 1985, p1.  

“Some local bands put their best on  
record" by Gary Graff. Detroit Free Press,  
Jan 9, 1986, B-11.  

Review in "Rockearama” by Bill Holdship,  
Creem, March 1986, p32.  

our live spirit. When this next record with Rob Tyner  
producing comes out, it's gonna ROCK!..we're gonna do  
two singles right in a row, record them at the same  
time, release ‘em like a month apart..(on their  
audience:) we do get quite a cross. Because we're kind  
of 60's enough to appeal to those people even though  
we're not, we're more of a heavy—like, you  
know—IGGY, MCS, that kind of stuff.  

Tw: Sounds like you must be heavier in performance  
than you are on the single.  

Paula: Yeah, we are, which is why we got Rob in to  
produce us. It's gonna be LOUD! GOOD!  

Tw: Dana's leaving—how does that affect the music?  
Paula: Oh, it's gonna be better. When it started out, it  
was a FUN thing, but then when I joined, it got real  
serious, and she couldn't handle that...this other bass  
player is better, anyway...  

Tw: Have you gotten any label interest?  

Paula: Yeah, we have, Capital and Chrysalis both called  
me a few times. But, you know—"Send more, send  
more--keep sending more.” Right now I'm just  
concentrating on our doing this single, trying to get picked  
up by a distributor...what we're gonna do next Spring is  
do a big tour, hand these records out, set it up right,  
and do it. In the Spring, when it’s warm. We'll probably  
make it out (to California). We're hoping to...  

Tw:...Your pins that say “LIVE AIDS". What does that  
mean?  

Paula: Aw! See, the guy that made those, makes  
everything (in the fan packets), Allen Bukoff, he's a  
social psychologist—a weird one, into quirky kinda  
things, you know? HE made all that stuff!  

Tw: So YOU don't have to explain it?  

Paula: I don't know HOW to explain it!... (About their  
image:) We're really sincere, what we sing about, we  
mean, or has happened. I think that really shows a lot.  
People really can sense that, pretty strong to people.  
Real strong, with a real bang. It just grabs  
their attention...(their tour took them through much of  
the Midwest, South, and New England).  

Tw: While you were up in Maine, did you see the Brood?  
Paula: No! I wanted to! We hung out with them, though,  
cooked lobsters together. Went out to the island the  
keyboard player lives on and cooked lobsters. They  
weren't playing at the time. I tried to set something up,  
but they'd just gotten a new drummer, apparently...When we  
went up to Montreal, Toronto, it was like an  
all-female--it was us, the Tetes Noires, the Das  
Frauleins, and the Maneaters--we were like all playing  
the same clubs the same weekends...and that was pretty  
cool, actually!..We stay with a lot of wild people on the  
road, people that we just go meet...(Our friends) The  
Hysteric Narcotics were on the road, came back and told  
us all about the all-girl band in Portland, Maine! Then I  
heard their flexi in 99TH FLOOR, really liked them, and  
looked them up when we went out there. When we go  
back, I definitely hope to do a gig with them...  

Tw:...So if a band from here goes out to Detroit, should  
they get in contact with you?  

Paula: Yeah, if the bands are doing stuff like what  
we're doing!  

Tw: How would you describe what you're doing?  
Paula: What we're doing, is we're being in complete  
control. (Laughs). What we're doing is called  
“struggling”. But we're doing it with a smile! Control!..  
Tw:...what is this quote about guitar pulling you through  
the fourth grade?  

Paula: (cracks up) I made those quotes UP!  

Tw: (cracks up too) Well, it worked, you got my  
attention!  

Paula: Those are funny. What? “When I was a kid, I  
played piano in the first grade, clarinet in the third  
grade, and nothing was working out, and fourth grade's a  
rough year but that old guitar pulled me through it!” I  
like to have a little humor, sometimes. With the band, on  

between songs... real relaxed in front of a  

microphone, I look at the audience like one person that  
I'm talking to...{About meeting Rob Tyner—by  
recognizing him and walking up to him:) MCS were like  
our big heroes, so we were already doing MCS songs,  
two covers, so we asked him to sit in on them. And he  
did, and he liked it, very very much--and he's been  
sitting in almost every gig!...they had this Vietnam  
Veteran's benefit called Guitar Harmony, and all these  
old Detroit bands got together--Rob Tyner,  
Spirit—well, I don't think they were a Detroit band, but  
they got together—and Mitch Ryder and the Rockets and  
all these bands—and Rob did “Lookin’ At You" which is  
what we do, so we had to go tell him we did it, and  
started talking to him...and later he remembered us,  
because we were pushy little chicks. He likes it, though,  
we're his “warriors on the battlefield", that's what he  
calls us.  

Tw: How come?  

Paula: Everything is warrior-aspected with this man!  
I don't know what his bag is lately, but we're his  
warriors, man! You know, the Rock 'n' Roll tough  
image...(About there being lots of places to play in  
Detroit:) We play all the time. I heard this on the road,  
clubs closing down everywhere, and I had to laugh.  
Everybody's looked down on Detroit for so long, but I can  
think of over ten places I could play right now (Editor's  
Note: it’s 11 at night on Sunday, her time)...I think what  
happens, is in other cities, people, when they open a  
bar, they tend to take a lot of chances, like in New York,  
if they flop, they flop, while in Detroit, people want to  
be safe, and they won't do it until it's a sure thing. And  
all these clubs have been open so many years—other  
cities, they pop up and then they close a year later.  
These clubs here have been open for years and years.  
Somehow, they just stay open!  

Tw: So it’s a tradition there, rather than a fad thing.  

Paula: Yeah, exactly. Like, we went to Atlanta, there's  
two clubs to play at, Metroplex and 6-83. Metroplex  
has closed, and 6-88 is gonna close!..(On overall  
sound:) I like guitar bands, I would never have a  
synthesizer play in this band.  

Tw: How come?  

Paula: I don't like that techno-stuff. I would have a  
keyboard player if they played a Leslie speaker and  
sounded like Deep Purple or something. You know,  
grungy? I HATE that high-pitched Farfisa stuff, oh! it  
drives me crazy!  

Tw: Just as well you didn't hear the Brood play, then.  
Paula: Why? They got—oh, that one girl, the girl we  
ate lobsters with plays keyboard! I like it if it's used  
subtly, I can handle it. But I hate when it  
screeches!..(On Monic’s being a Miles Davis fan:) She's  
into Jazz... Monic had never been a Rock fan, before us.  
Nobody played her this stuff before, we introduced her  
to it--she'd never heard MC5's “Kick Out The Jams“!  

Discography:  
>“[ Dig You" on the compilation of  
Detroit bands, When Monkees Were  
Gods, 1985, Tremor Records (403  
Forest, Royal Oak, Mi. 48067).  
>Single, “Jump Back"/"R.U.N.", 1986,  
see address, end of article.  
>They'll also be on the upcoming End Of  
(Tremor), which  
will have their “Born To Love" (Now  
that song is really Funky, it's the only  
Funk song we do, but that's a thing about  
our band, not all songs sound the same.  
We got a Funk song, we got Rock songs,  
a couple of 60's kinda things. We don't  
like all our songs exactly alike, we're  
not strictly a FAST LOUD BAND.”)