“13 THAT BON JOVI?" mentioned, is between mother and daughter. Amongst other things Mom loathes the fact that

movie review: LIGHT OF DAY her only grandchild, Patti's kid, is a bastard. Critics are praising Joan Jett’s crack at the bat; but others are complaining that the movie has no specific plot. It’s too bare, they say. People seem to be having a problem figuring out just exactly what it's all about. A few years back Gena Rowlands starred in the modern-day gangster flick: Gloria. Rowlands played a hard lady whose mafia friends turned unfriendly on her. Because there is so much acting in Light Of Day everyone is taken aback. Face it folks, there's no heart-stopping piece; no knock on the door. Believing. The job has flashy cars flipping off the side of cliffs. There's no hot & heavy sex scenes. No drug abuse. Finally caught up with her, Gloria pulls out from her purse a Colt .45 and to her 8-year-old sidekick she deadpans: “Okay, don’t be scared...it's nothin’ for me to blow somebody's brains out--believe me. I just hope it's someone I know...” and actually pay attention to the dialog? There's MEANING to the movie?! Oh, no wonder movie-goers (who butcher this film to pieces) are dumbfounded: What? You mean we have to sit and actually pay attention to the dialog? There's MEANING to the movie?! Oh, no wonder in Light Of Day Gena Rowlands plays a religious fanatic mother. A gritty, Sylvester Stallone ain't in it...” Yeah, Light Of Day is a story of life that isn't so pretty. Joe for the most part. A far cry from “Gloria.” Her performance here is truly incredible. The lady plays her part to the fullest. Rowlands’ “confusion” as they, Patti Rasnick (Fox/Jett) are siblings in a rock band who simply play for the LOVE of music. Not money. Not fame. Why that’s so hard to conceive is a kick in the head to me. Paul eats at the table for her well-being. While, Eden Shrader, the film writer/director, makes some brutal statements about religious faith that I personally agree with, segments her verbal stabs of disapproval of her daughter will have you bunched up in fits of rage. Gena Rowlands is undoubtedly in the same class as Bette Davis and Susan Hayward, whom are the awesome stars. The teary/bitter-sweet conclusion. For the skeptics: Light Of Day at least shows a side to rock’n’roll that isn't often spotlighted, but exists just the same. You may have seen the rest before, but probably not as moody as these actors come across.

I wasn't impressed with Michael Fox in Teen Wolf, so I didn’t bother seeing his hit Back to the Future. But when I learned he'd be starring opposite Joan Jett I became slightly curious again and checked out a few episodes of his TV show. Basically, in my eyes the dude plays a jerk that for some reason America loves. Why isn’t this guy winning any points with me? From what I gathered Fox is a comedy actor of sorts. How is he gonna even out with the well-publicized sternness of Jett and Rowlands? I wondered. But I'll tell ya, Mikey surprised me. He had a whole new face on that I'd never expect from HIM. There's just so much cutesy hype on the dude that I envisioned the movie turning out as a big joke. America’s bad girl meets America’s wholesome boy...sounds like the title of a Japanese B-flick, right? But Michael J. ROCKS, as he's being called by the local Jettheads, is an actor. A good one. He does it on cue—whatever has to be done. I think I'll rent that hit movie of his now...gotta run.... Fiona was supposedly offered the role of Patti Rasnick initially. The same rumor mill schedule was too full. After seeing the movie I feel there is no way in hell Fiona could have pulled it off. I've seen her act in something, can't remember what, but I think Patti would’ve come off too whiney rather than gutsy, like Jett portrayed her. Fiona may be good but this particular part probably would not have been a smart move for her or Shrader. Sure, she can play the banjo but is that the same as the electric guitar? I know what you're thinking: Aw, she’s just a fan of Joan Jett. And you're right. (Ha, ha.) But I could also see Chrissie Hynde playing the part just as well, though with all respect I guess it'd be hard to McNichol (remember her), or Laura Dern could have played a part that was not ever focused on heavily. But the director got lucky with Joan Jett. She plays her own instrument but she was also able to act out the explosive personality of her character. At one point the movie calls for the tough, outspoken Patti to be the listener in a quiet moment. With the intensity of the scene a single tear creeps down her face. Pretty soon a stream. REAL tears. Not the fabricated kind that come pouring out from the corner of the eye every time the camera zooms in for the close-up. You can actually see the emotion building up in Jett for that reaction. Light Of Day isn't really all morose. There are some pretty funny lines, mostly sarcastic, but humorous nevertheless. Michael McKean, “Lenny” on Laverne & Shirley, in the opening credits when Joan Jett’s name appears, scattered applause and “OWs" are heard. But the sources are unidentifiable when the house lights go on... During the live band performance a man of about 45, in an unsuccessful attempt to whisper to his companion: “She's not really singing...” An older married couple talk throughout the movie, Here's their most memorable argument: WIFE: “Look how she goes to the hospital!” (Jett’s tucked into hot pink pants, a badly shredded black t-shirt, leather boots, studded have responded to critics that female artists should not be separated out from other galleries by saying that unfortunately, that's already the case; that work by female artists is often relegated to basement storage and not catalogued. Only 3% of artists in major U.S. museum collections are women. Wilhelmina became interested in the subject after acquiring a 17th-century painting by the Flemish Clara Peeters, and then discovering that neither she nor other female artists of the period were even mentioned in most histories. BITCH's artist readers might consider contacting them about donating work.

Apparently in Anita Baker's first year on the road, she has gone through five different sound companies, a high number indeed. There was enough backstage tension for some veterans of the music profession to wonder if she'd go through five more this year--all was not sweetness and light. Four-hour sound checks daily—that's more than even the most technical sounding musicians may use. But not Ms. Baker. The majority of her Bay Area performances have been sold out, because of or in spite of this attention to detail. We saw her at the Oakland Paramount, one of the most beautiful theatres in Northern California, a definite tribute to the city of Oakland. Baker's special guest for the evening was renowned percussionist Pete Escovedo (ex-Santana, father of Sheila E.), who sat in on congas and drums. One of the highlights of the evening were the Perry Sisters, back-up vocalists for the show, all very new on the scene, with voices that sound like gold. Look for their new album, and watch out, Pointer Sisters! As evidenced by the mixed crowd, Baker's music not only appeals to the black community but to all Pop fans. For the most part, the HUBBY: “So what! She's going...she looks great.” WIFE: “She does?!” HUBBY: “You should get your hair cut like that...”