R |
@
R
O)

a 3 eg Ga)

Oo =

{We had a lot of records waiting to be reviewed, so we had a record reviewing party. 
Among those reviewing: Eric Lindberg, WBA IV, Twersky, Danise, Anita Mack Farland, the 
Masked Blueberry, and R. Possum. Not everybody reviewed everything because people 
were wandering in and out, and some people didn't review anything! We don't recommend 
this as a way of getting anything done.]

> Wilma, album (Subterranean).

Eric: Instrumentals sound like a bland version of the Residents. “Brechtian” is a good 
description of the vocal sound. It is not a typical Pop sound, but shouldn't be dismissed just 
because it can't be danced to. “Alexander Haig” is a clever piece; when you know the title 
it has a vaguely Western sound with a warped, science fiction overtone. “Georgie Girl” is 
also very good--emphasizing the inane music and lyrics. It then brings in a marvelous Punk 
interlude that releases the frustrations built up by the grating lyrics and repetitive theme 
(then what exactly is Punk?)-~hmmm...Much of it, despite being very Avant-Garde, seems 
irritatingly familiar.

WBA IV: Well, this is anti-music and I'm against it. Their “Georgie Girl” cover is engaging 
until it gives over to rant. You can take it as satire. I think they do, but it’s also a spirited 
rendition--all leer, like a Dave Roth cover.

Twersky: Except for the Brechtian vocals, very spacey, like the psychedelic interludes in 
really obscure 60's acid art Rockers like SO Foot Hose. It’s all too slow: speeded up, a lot 
of it would be danceable and catchy (I get the feeling “catchy” is a dirty word to them.) 
More Avant-Garde stuff that sounds like the “warning--danger!” themes on 70's cop 
shows. “Alexander Haig” is fast enough to be interesting and could be used as a dance tune. 
The vocals on “Georgie Girl” should be shot. I prefer the vocals on “Life Without 
Adjectives”, which are as affected without being as annoying.

2 i ingle. (Staccato D:

Eric: “Keep Walkin“--good instrumental intro, but it really doesn't go anywhere.

Masked Blueberry: “Keep Walkin™-~I would buy this in a second! The intro was the best. 
Excellent musicians. Sounds like “Fine Print”. “Lullabye“--doesn't do anything for me 
either way. A-side is 100 times better. This is 60's music and the 70's are my decade. 
Danise: “Keep Walkin'"--a cross between the B-52s and somebody else--gong. But I do like 
the B-52s. “Lullabye"--I would put this one on my playlist, definitely. Go-go dancing on 
acid.

Anita: I like this, starts off really good, good beat.

WBA IV: College New Wave with less than industry-standard entropy. It does sound 
vaguely mechanical. Like the music 60's TV shows gave to dance clubs where hippies hung 
out. “Lullabye”--this is the first song tonight I would remember the tune to (now 
forgotten.)

Twersky: Another semi-60's Hard Rocker--nice crunchy beat, danceable.

> Master /Slave Relationship, The Heaviest, cassette (Cause And Effect, P.O. Box 
50383, Indianapolis, IN, 46230)

Eric: So far none of it sounds recognizably worthwhile.

Masked Blueberry: “10 Years” sounds like the music in Lipstick, a movie where Margaux 
Hemingway and her baby sister Mariel both get raped by the same man. Early 70's 
soundtrack music. Not at all like a Becky Bondage tune, like I thought it would be. “Under 
The Whip"--isn't this the same song slowed down? I can't be fooled!

Danise: Sounds like one of my headaches.

Anita: I LIKE THIS! Good for video dance performers. I don't like the second song as much... 
(Anita and Twersky discuss how music like this can be a lot of fun to make, easy to get 
into in the studio, inducing a kind of hypnotic trance thing during the playing, that doesn’t 
translate to an audience and isn’t experienced by non-players.)

WBA IV: Bah.

of in Flounder istri kless Ri

Eric: Good Pop sound. Psychedelic--New Wave, possibly even a Ska beat. 
Masked Blueberry: “Briefcase"—-sounds like Tex & the Horseheads. A band I hate, thank 
you very much, next! Cow Punk without the cow...or the Punk. Rest of LP is worse. Pass 
the chips.
Danise: “Briefcase” was totally cool, but the rest of side 2 doesn't faze me.
WBA IV: Maniac energy, Power Pop, raw mix of Airplane/Byrds.

> The album (4 AD)
Eric: More musically apt than Fetchin Bones--similar. First group we've 
heard so far that sounds commercially promising (what a terrible thing to 
say!) “Rabbits Dying” is a lot of fun.
Masked Blueberry: I can get into this. I could dig it. The best thing I heard all 
night, with the exception of Mechanical Bride. Sounds like Holly Beth Vincent. 
Get it, girl!
Danise: Sounds like Siouxsie & the Banshees. Easier that means. I could 
deal with this if I had to. You could even hear the guitar! Actually this band is 
very good. The music is consistent.
WBA IV: “Green"--Great, flippant, off-hand chorus. They have a cohesive 
idea of what they're doing. It's like very early Jefferson Airplane. 
Commercially viable college 
music. Good bass player.
Twersky: Maybe I'm just tired-- 
28th Day, Fetchin Bones, Throwing 
Muses, and Zeitgeist have all 
blended into one band for me, all 
sounding like good opening bands 
for REM, all a bit Folk Rock and a 
bit New Wave, all collegiately 
intellectual, all pleasant, all 
faceless. The only one that really 
sticks in my mind is some of the 
passages from Throwing Muses, 
because of the energy in the 
vocals--dynamic approach. But the 
tunes need to be stronger. 

Nothing 
wrong with these bands--I'd never 
object to any of them playing in the background--but I can't focus on them as 
individuals rather than as an emerging genre.

> Jeitgei i 2 ial In

Eric: Easily the best band so far (of course I'm a bit prejudiced because it’s 
the only band I've heard before of all of these.) For one thing, it has a decent 
bass player and singers who are capable of singing harmony properly. Also, 
the production is done better, which may not be a proper way to judge it 
against the other artists.

R. Possum: Sorry. I'm a sucker for melody. Good lines work with any 
production, especially if it's good production.

WBA IV: Now this is fun. A feedback solo! Up front vocal mixing, vocal 
arrangements. Good Rock tunes. Lots of loud/soft dynamics, different 
rhythms on different songs, individual voices.

> Vi 6 The Acti C Effect, P.O. Box 30383 
Indianapolis, IN, 46230

Eric: Artsy Punks who have gotten above themselves.

Twersky: Get what action? There isn’t any--at least, there may have been 
for the people making it, but they've excluded this audience from it.

> 28th Day, album (Enigma Records)

Eric: REM type of psychedelic Rock. What little I can follow of the lyrics, 
I am very impressed with (in fact, the lyrics are very easy to follow, but it’s 
the circumstances that made it difficult for me.)

WBA IV: Similar to Suzy Saxon & the Anglos.

sasciesceessstersssssstsstassesssasneasessseese

SSS
cena BITCH Hints
Tee ]

SIILSTRess

“Keep a sack of banana chips with your stage gear.

They're good energy boosters if you start getting—

tired. hBris Horn of the Brood deals with
—_ me.

Arty bands I said! I eel concert fliers off at:

galleries as well as record stores...
[———_—_________________________ EEE