By Natalie Kerr (BLIND ARMADILLO)

(Consider THE BLIND ARMADILLO. What? BA is a snazzy
fanzine, often hand-colored, out of Oklahoma. This sample of
their style is by editor Natalie Kerr, heavily edited to make it
fit this issue [whole interview in issue *1]. About the New
Wave scene in general, they cover a lot of female Rockers
{send them p.r. and tell ’em BITCH sent ya, like the Ruggedy
Annes, Jane Wiedlin, etc.}

What does it take these days to make good music that's
interesting and fun? The Tomboys have the answer...most of
them started playing their instruments a little before or at the
time the band was formed. Ann Loureiro (guitar, vocals)
started playing guitar three years ago, Sally Horton (bass,
vocals) has been playing the bass for three years, Debbie
(drums) said she has been playing drums “for about 26
years” and Karen Slayton (keyboards) started

Keyboards
of Pop that’s

influences

SOURCING with ‘data

will bring out the
upbeat handclaps and sound...the... group... interviewed themselves... for... BLIND.

ARMADILLO (with the help of a list of questions).

TBA: Is the present line-up the original line-up?

Tomboys: Well, we first started off with a couple of back-up
elephants, but we decided it was too big to get into the back, so
we hired a ferret instead. A ferret! But it is an original
line-up: we are very original.

TBA: So you’re all the original members—nobody is a new
member—nobody replaced anyone?

Tomboys: David Bowie used to play, but he quit. He started a
solo career so we went on without him. We said, “We know ya
gotta go!” We were only two (years old)...

TBA:...I read that Sally auditioned for the bass player
in the Go-Go's. Is that true?
Tomboys: NO!

(Everyone giggles.) We're too good for that—come on!

TBA: If she did get the job what would the Tomboys have
done?
Tomboys: After we celebrated? We did have a very

true answer to this. Yes, we felt that Sally's right arm
was getting a little slow. She wasn't plucking as fast as
she should be plucking, so we were going to trade her for
Fernando Valenzuela...

TBA:...What are the Japanese videos you appear in?

Tomboys: (in Japanese accents:) They're pornographic
and we don't like to talk about them! Well, they were
pornographic and we would like to leave them out. What
was the question? We appear in two Japanese videos for
Japanese television—Racer X and the White Lion. Who
played Racer X? We're not allowed to divulge that
information. They are in circulation in Japan only. If you
want to see them you’ll have to go over there to see
them. If you have poor blood circulation, just watch one
of our videos and you'll die. We did one with Phast
Phreddie and the Precisions and the Three O'Clock which
was a big hit, and we also did a Santa Claus one for
Christmas which will be coming out, hopefully, sometime
next summer. (They all laugh.)

TBA: Do the Tomboys have any definite role models or
favorite bands?

Tomboys: Well, I do like Bisquick. Let's hear from
Karen. Who's your biggest influence? Karen—wake up!
Talking Heads—you can tell that from the way I play. And
the way she moves on stage. That big suit I wear...

TBA: What's your favorite—

Tomboys: Wait a

minute!

Don’t we get a turn?

Tomboys: No, it’s a yes or no question. On. Maybe. Who's your
influence? Stewart Copeland. (One Tomboy claps and
comments on how cute he is.) The Beatles for Sally. The
Beatles? So you take after Paul? No, just the music. We
can answer for Ann if you like—(they all shout) R.E.M.!
(One yells “Tom Petty!") Tom Petty is in there too
somewhere. Somewhere...

TBA: Since you write your own songs, what
does a song go through before becoming a Tomboys
song?

Tomboys: A wash cycle, a rinse cycle,
metamorphosis, osmosis, and cell division...
TBA:...Do people dance much at your shows?
Tomboys: All the time. It's like, Dick Clark, eat
your heart out...

TBA:...Do you want to become famous or do you
want to just stay a local band?

Tomboys: A file clerk. That's my goal. We wanna be
famous. What kind of question is that? Do you think
we do this for fun? (they all laugh.)

TBA: If you could have one wish, what would it be?
Tomboys: (Ann:) Peter Buck. (Sally:) A gold
record. (Karen:) World peace. (Someone says,
“That's a Bangles answer!") No—to be a touring
band...

TBA:...Do you have plans to put out another single?
Tomboys: No. Never. We're just doing live shows
for the rest of our lives. Hopefully when we get old
we'll get into Country/Western like the Osmonds and
by that time we'll be tight and Marie will be dead.
TBA: Seriously—are there any future plans for
another single or an EP?

Tomboys: We're making an EP with four songs and a
cover tune.

TBA: When do you think it will be on the market?
Tomboys: Oh, 1989. Within the next ten years—a
safe guess. When Sally comes up with the money.

TBA: Anything else to add?

Tomboys: 5762 Wilhelmina Ave
Woodland Hills, CA 91364

The Blind
Armadillo

P.O. Box 23385
Oklahoma City, OK
73123

Subscriptions
$6/year.
Single issue
$1.75.

Make checks out
to Natalie Kerr.