She loved it! We played her everything from Metal heads  
to Alabama—she went nuts over Heavy Metal, she loved  
it! She'd never been exposed to half this stuff, not at the  
time our first interviews took place. We exposed her to  
a lot in the past year!  

Tw: Why had she wanted to be in a Rock band, when she  
hadn't been into music like this?  

Paula: She was really turned on to the idea of starting  
a female Rock band...sometimes she adds these little  
things in that are really jazzy, it's really cool. You  
know, it’s not all pounding. She's an excellent drummer.  
People see us and freak out on this chick, her arms are  
so big! She's really wonderful, and she's really tiny.  
Short. An amazing player...Mary was born in Costa  
Rica, and she talks faster than anyone I know. With a  
Spanish accent—she makes noise like a Spanish-accented  
bumblebee. AND SHE'S IN LOVE WITH IGGY POP.  

Tw: Does she do Iggy stuff on stage?  

Paula: No. She just likes him...we're still learning about  
the new player. I know she's into the Police and stuff  
like that.  

Tw: Got any words of advice for someone else who  
might be running band business?  

For a copy of the single, send $3 to:  

K.A.T. Records  
25519 Wagner  
Warren, MI 48089  

This is also where to write to, to request their fan  
club packets, or to get on the mailing list to hear about  
the next single. For booking info, call: 313/259-2321.  

When the new Chastain record came out the last week of August (featuring vocalist Leather,  
ex-Rude Girl) I only had $6. Albums generally cost $7.98 where I live. I was not happy. It was the  
middle of the week and I wouldn't have enough money to buy the LP until the weekend. But instead of  
brooding in a corner somewhere by myself, I went out and caught a $6 gig in S.F. And I sulked there.  
“When me and my friend got to the Stone, Club G, Wiler Bob yanked us outta line, "NOW what'd we do...”  
was my immediate thought as Bob escorted us into his club. At the burly club owner's command, the  
doorman stamped our right hands, then Bob told us to get lost (Translation: Enjoy the show.) Realizing  
she now had extra spending money due to Bob's gesture, my friend said, “I LOVE Rock’nRoll...” We  
headed straight for the bar.  

The very next day I wasted no time in scraping up $2 in change to add to my intact $6, and rushed  
to the nearest Tower Records to get myself a copy of Chastain’s Ruler Of The Wasteland. I'd been  
waiting for this record for a year and a half, ever since Leather’s vinyl debut with Chastain, Mystery  
Of Illusion, was released. I became a fan of Leather’s singing when she surfaced in the S.F. band Rude  
Girl, three years ago.  

A Rude Girl gig was the place to be on a Friday or Saturday night. On stage, when Leather wasn't  
enchanting you with her singing, she'd enthrall you with her provocative yet tough, don't-even-think-  
about-touching-me-buddy dancing. Her expression gave you fair warning. You can’t get any better  
than Leather. I was floored by her amazing performances in studio work and in concert. Whenever  
I play her tapes, or more recently, albums, people are quick to comment favorably on her incredible  
high notes. She can reach highs that Tiny Tim can only dream of. She doesn’t abuse the gift, though.  
Leather blends her piercing screams, demonic growls, operatic vibratos, and powerful delivery so  
brilliantly that the finished product is a genuine work of art.  

Rude Girl was definitely unique. Ex-Runaway Lita Ford made the mistake of saying “Rude Girls.”  
The intrigued guitarist was quickly corrected. “It's a concept,” Lita was informed. Yes. A beautiful,  
beautiful concept it was. Rude Girl creations were not your average “female” conceptions. The music  
was hard and forceful; sometimes mystical and frightening. Lois LaRue’s lyrics were puzzling. The  
meanings of songs were often hidden behind the twisted words. You had to dig deep into the music to  
see what was really going on in there. The songs talked about being true to yourself ("Free"), about  
heated nights (“Going Down"), about politics ("Assault"), about having courage ("Take Aim”). The  
songs were about you.  

The close of the show was always the same. You'd expect a high energy, headbanging number to  
get ya movin’. It'd be the last call for alcohol. Everyone is supposed to party the hardest during the  
encore, right? At a Rude show you stood petrified—watching and listening. The stage was black  
except for one or two blue lights highlighting the dry ice fog that crawled toward you along the  
stage floor. Eden began a steady, morose rumble on bass while Sandy Sledge started up  
a soft, almost distant rhythm on drums. What she did here always made me think of  
something you'd hear during a sacrificial ceremony. Then Lois chimed in with an eerie ringing  
of the guitar. If you closed your eyes at this moment, you'd seem to see a shadow of this  
Leather, vocalist, guitarist standing on top of a mountain with an orange, whirled-cloud sky behind, allowing her guitar  
to cry out a beckoning wail. By this time Leather’s voice was all that was needed to lure you closer to  
the stage. The song was “Gallows.” Staying pretty much at this sullen, moody pace with a sudden  
crash/rush here and there when a significant line came up, this song was one of the best tunes ever  
written, intensifying to the point of no return, it dutifully worked you up into the frenzied state you.