and review  
of Berkeley show  
by Danise  

Sometime last Spring I had an encounter with a  
band called the Pandoras. Talking with the  
singer/bassist, Gwen, I found out they had a  
record but she advised that I not bother myself  
with it. Real good plug for her own band, I thought.  
But her reasoning had something to do with the  
Pandoras having a different line-up at the time of  
recording from who played on-stage that night.  
And now the ex-singer is making trouble for this  
band, blah blah blah. In other words, a most major  
feud was goin’ on. I had my own problems to deal  
with, so I didn’t bother with theirs.  

Weeks later I happened to stumble across ‘that’  
Pandoras record. What the hell—I bought it. The  
album is called It's About Time and features Paula  
Pierce, lead vocalist/guitarist. Gwen, doll, I  
thought this record was terrible. I loved it. In fact  
it's still on my Top Ten playlist, gawddammit.  
Immediately, I fell in love with  
Paula's voice. The music is  
raunchy, yeah, but the  

Paula Pierce with glowing legs; Karen at drums; Melanie  
makes a fashion statement; A salute to the statue of  
liberty, or is it “Beam us up, Scotty”?; Kim, the shy member  
of the group (every group must have a shy member)  

singing is raunchier. This chick must gargle  
with broken eggshells every day. Sounds  

like the album was recorded in the garage!  
(That's a compliment, kids!) It actually  
sounds even better when played on a toy  
phonograph. The absence of stereo adds  
a lot. NOTHING could beat this record. I was  
sure. No fucking way.  

Six months later Gwen's Pandoras turn  
into something else, and Paula puts out a  
record by the Pandoras with a gang of girls  
I’d never seen before. Okay, so now I’m,  
like, really confused. I wanted to buy  
Paula's new record, entitled Stop  

but I figure WHY should I?  
Couldn’t possibly be as good as the first. I  
usually hate most bands' second albums  
anyways. But I softened up and bought the  
damn thing. And ya know what? It's bloody  
GREAT. It's great on every level. Some of  
the best Rock 'n' Roll of this decade. The  
back-up singing is outstanding to say the  
least. Paula was fortunate to find these  
girls. The music ain't as trashy but it's  
definitely A-T-L-V-E. A lil’ bit cleaner  
sounding. They may have recorded this out  
on the driveway. So I'm thinkin’: I’m set for  
life. I mean, I get carded every time I buy  

liquor, I have friends in both L.A. and New York, and now I own another  
Pandoras record. This is the best.  

So now it's, what, mid-1986? And Pandoras are back in town after  
being here in the Bay Area twice already this year, performing a  
handful of gigs each visit. Blown? COMPLETELY! I was very pleased,  
I must say. This time around, though, the band has the support of a  
major record company, Elektra, which means a brand new album  
soon—with new songs! Still the stubborn one, I instantly doubt the new  

material will live up to the first two Paula  
Productions. There's just no way, dude! It  
was inevitable, though, that I’d show up at  
their gigs.  

Pandoras had everyone at their shows. From  
people who looked like they just walked out of  
1966 to college campus fashion plates to  
derelicts like me who never know what's in or  
what's out. An occasional appearance at the  
front of the stage by a spikey-headed punk and  
plain-clothed adult—note I made no specific  
references to AGE—rounded out the audience  
(EDITOR'S NOTE: In an earlier issue, another  
writer castigated Danise for ageism). Don’t let it  
be said that our local celebs didn't come out to  
see L.A.'s rage. Among the more popular S.F.  
Rock musicians that bopped with the Pandoras  
were members of Jetboy and Leathur Panteez.  
Paula and her pals played Berkeley, Santa  
Cruz, and San Francisco between August 13 &  
16. I only caught the encore in S.F. (Fashionably  
late much?) so I’ll talk about the Berkeley  
Square show. Right from the start Pandoras  
chucked the new songs at us. They barely  
dotted the night with stuff from Stop  
Pretending and saved the older material for the  
encore. The girls were forced to come back out  
twice and filled both encores with no less than  
three songs each. We can’t say for sure what  
would’ve happened if Pandoras didn’t come back  
out—probably a bloody, near-fatal,  
out-of-control riot. The new stuff? Well,  

what... LIKE IT. From listening to some of the lyrics  
of those songs I’m gonna take a stab in the dark here  
and guess that Paula is responsible for most of ‘em.  
There are songs called (okay, I managed to grab the  
song list, and the songs are pretty much  
abbreviated on it, but I think you’ll get a clue of  
what they are about—): "Never Enuff", “He's  
Cuming", “Craving”, “Hungry”. There's one called  
“Take The Lead” where Paula's raggin’ that it's time  
for the guy to, uh, get on top and, uh, you know,  
take over...well, you know! One thing about Ms.  
Pandora is she doesn’t mess around. She gets right  
to the point. My kinda gal. The band has a ballad,  
too, “Walk Away”, which came as a nice surprise.  
It's real pretty as one acquaintance of mine put it.  
The songs in the package are very original sounding.  
Doesn’t seem to be as much of a reliance on other  
people's music. At least it ain't obvious to me.  

Being the veteran of Pandoras concerts that I am, I’ve noticed Paula's band never performs the  
same live set twice. Along with the great originals,  
there are also dozens of choice cover tunes Paula  
has picked up over the years, so that each  
performance has different outside songs woven in.  
She still does “The Hump” from her days with Gwen  
and that lot. Sometimes the set includes the  
Mindbenders’ “It's Getting Harder All The Time”,  
which is a song featured in the way-cool flick To  
Sir With Love. But what has already become a  
favorite with my friends and me, is Paula's version  
of the standard, “Gloria”. The Pandoras’ singer asks  
the ecstatic crowd, "Do we have any Big Time  
Wrestling fans here tonight?.... I know I’m one...”  
Then the girls body-slam us with Them's ditty, but  
Paula calls it "B-R-U-T-U-S”.  

‘good even when she ain't playing. Wait a sec, that didn't come  
out right. Forget I said that. Karen's very strong. Sometimes  
drummers almost get lost sittin’ way back there, but not this  
one. She's amazing to watch in action, never boring.  

On the last tour at the beginning of the year, the first night  
Paula played S.F. she sang so HARD she blew her throat. The  
next night she wasn’t able to do certain songs (like “I Didn't  
Cry” and “High On A Cloud"), so the band stuck to performing  
what they called their pop-y songs. As far as I could tell Paula  
had no problem this tour. She sang as coarse and sultry as  
ever. How such a tiny person belts out such a BIG sound is  
beyond me. She must take the same “loud pill” as Eric Burdon.  

Pandoras don’t have any real choreography  
incorporated in their live performance. The girls  
just do whatever comes natural—lots of  
headbanging! Their live singing has the same  
pleasant quality as on record. A lot of singers  
have trouble sounding halfway decent live. But  
the Pandoras are good. They can do ANYTHING.  
Their playing was tight. Melanie's keyboards  
rocked! Melanie also plays a mean tambourine  
while go-go dancing during her keyboard breaks.  
When she finally wiggles back to her board, Mel  
carelessly tosses the tambourine over her  
shoulder. She's too cool! That's one of the  
highlights of a Pandoras concert—watching to  
see if Melanie rings the thing around a roadie's  
neck. She'll get him one of these days. Kim's  
bass playing has improved. She's probably the  
perkiest member of the band. Just watching her  
pogoing around having fun makes ya wanna go  
right out and pick up a guitar too! (I’ll say.)  
There ain't a whole lot I can say about Karen.  
She's just an excellent drummer. On record, off  
record, live on stage, on telly...she's probably  

and Roger Daltrey. I’ve heard Paula's speaking voice  
and it's similar to the husky, raspy voice she sings  
in. I’m sure that surprises most people at first  
meeting. When in action (on stage that is) she doesn't  
just spurt out a mere “Oooowwwww!" Nope. No way.  
Not Paula, nope. Uh-uh, no way. NOT Paula,  
1000000. She takes some heavy chomps on her wad of  
gum before taking in a deep breath, then screams a  
terrifying "WOOOOWWWWW!" Geez, it can  
really rattle your brains there, y'know? It's  
awesome. And when she isn't whipping her ponytail  
around violently while recklessly tearing out leads,  
or when she isn't balancing herself at the edge of the  
stage while flirting and givin’ ya a shot, Paula  
dominates the scene by spitting out her sassy lyrics  
and viciously humpin’ thrashin’ her guitar. ALL  
right.  

One day a friend and I were sitting around in  
my bedroom listening to side 2 of the Pandoras' first  
album. Every couple of minutes my friend asked,  
“Did you change the record?” He commented that  
Paula's singing was different during every song. And  
this is true. In one tune she'll seduce you with her  
moaning of the words. In the next one she'll scream  
and shout at you, then later she's calming you in a  
sedate voice. It's almost mental abuse in the skittiest  
form. That's exactly the point I'm always trying to  
get across about singers being versatile. I really  
believe a band is fortunate if the singer can attract a  
motley crew as the group's audience. That's just  
what the Pandoras have. Everyone's a critic. Ya  
gotta be prepared. Paula is obviously prepared. The  
front here is that I kinda get the feeling that she