doesn't really give a shit whether you like her or not. Oh, well. What a gal. 

(There's an interview with Pandora Kim Shattuck in BITCH #5; send in $2 for back issue and specify you want #5).

DISCOGRAPHY

LPs:

> It's About Time, Voxx Records-1984  
The line-up: Paula Pierce (lead vocals, guitars), Gwen Kelly (organ, backing vocals), Bambi Conway (bass, backing vocals), Casey (drums).  
> It's About Time, Closer Records-1984 (French pressing).  
Has 5 different tracks, including “The Hook” (“The Hump” re-worded) & original version of “That's Your Way Out”.  
> What Surf Is, What Records-1985 (compilation, various artists)  
The line-up: Paula Pierce (lead vocals, guitars), Melanie Vammen (keyboards, backing vocals), Karen Blankfeld (drums, backing vocals), Julie Patchouli (bass).  
One song, “Thunder Alley”, plus Paula plays guitar on two tunes by Davie Allan & the Arrows. Pandoras pictured on back cover.  
> Stop Pretending, Rhino Records-1986  
The line-up: Same as above, except with Kim Shattuck taking over on bass and adding backing vocals.  
Contains re-recordings of “That's Your Way Out” and “You Don't Satisfy”.

> “Hot Generation” / “You Don't Satisfy” (Original version)  
Voxx Records-1984.  
Line-up as for What Surf Is. Nice color picture sleeve, front and back.

> “In And Out Of My Life in A Day” / “The Hump” (still a third version).  
Rhino Records-1986.  
Present line-up. Nice color picture sleeve, front and back.

The Cherry Bombz recently played the Stone in San Francisco. The all-woman Jazz band of the ‘40s, and the 

“the first all-woman, multiracial (though mostly black) Jazz band, who were the most successful and most critically acclaimed today. The film contains both interviews with band members today, and footage of them in performance back then, and was made by Greta Schiller and Andrea Weiss with assistance from Rosetta Records (which carries some of the bands' recordings). THE CHICAGO READER (Sept. 12, 86) has a good history of the band by Marcia Froeike Coburn, including interviews with Sweethearts Ernestine “Tiny” Davis (trumpet) and Helen Coston (baritone sax), and background info on the film. The Ladyslipper Catalogue (see classifieds) carries their albums.

After Anita booked from that group to join Cherry Bombz with Nasty Suicide and Andy McCoy (ex-Hanoi Rocks), Lindsey, Lacey, and Roz dumped Sheen and continued releasing hits in Europe as a trio. Where was I? Oh, back at the gig: Andy McCoy was so wasted on stage, Anita had to say to the audience, “I wish I could tell you he was faking it, but he's not.” Andy almost hit her a few times with the neck of his guitar. Maybe the fact she kept falling out of her top was distracting the coy McCoy? Guitarist Nasty Suicide is also known as Nasty Superstar aka one-half of the Suicide Twins and sometimes even just simply NASTY! For an encore they did “Gimme Some Lovin’” which just happens to be the new Toto Coelo single, the “total white orchids” cut WITHOUT Anita! So far the Cherry Bombz have released seven songs on vinyl; “Hot Girls In Love”, “100 Degrees In The Shade”, “Feline Feeling”, “Oil & Gasoline”, “Pin-Up Boy”, “House Of Ecstasy”, and “Running Back To Your Lover”. 

Gene Rupprecht expresses the perceptions of women, which re: 

Creata ROCK DOLLS  

These sassy dolls have flashy smiles, big eyes and lots of color-streaked hair. Dressed in glamorous costumes, they have the right music video look. Three to choose from.  

ROCK STAR FASHIONS  

6 styles include studded leather, dangly earrings, layered clothes, lace stockings and high, high heels.  

$29.99  

If you ask us, we can direct you straight to the excellent HOT WIRE, which covers every aspect of the Women's Music scene, and what it is, is what HOT WIRE's writers argue about. Good in-depth artist stories and musician biz how-to pieces, and the essays, as they should, run from the enlightening (get the July ‘86 issue for a great look at Redwood Records and a status report on the business side of the scene) to the totally infuriating (separatism is sexism) to the silly (“Laadan, a language constructed to express the perceptions of women”).  

Subscriptions $14 for 3 info-packed issues.  

“What IS Women's Music?” Some of you ads like a list of characters from Conan the Barbarian;  

Fundamentalists may be yanking Rock magazines from under the very noses of little girls, but all the same there's a strong counter-current with a “Little girls want Rock” message. Last month we told you about the Barbie Rockers, and the month before that, about JEM, and now Creata have also come out with a line of Rock singer dolls (looking like a hairier Belinda Carlisle).  

Now if they can only be persuaded to provide them with accessories like guitars, amps, and mixing boards as well as mics...