I'm glad you asked what readers  
thought of the name BITCH. Your last  
issue reaffirmed my belief that there's  
more than a few women Rock  
performers out there. Thank you for  
pointing it out, it's an avalanche, I think  
of all the performers who haven't even  
made it into BITCH yet, and of the  
performers who get coverage in the  
“big” magazines, and I know I've got  
plenty to BITCH about! Everybody is  
entitled to their opinion, but Cher? Patti  
Cabelle? Amy Grant?! BITCH readers  
seem smarter than a lot of other Rock  
fans, so they must have been doing  
something intelligent to pick up a  
magazine called BITCH in the first place.  
How about articles on Teena Marie and  
Klymaxx? You need more that isn't  
Heavy Metal.  

Georgie, stuck for the summer in  
St. Louis, MO, WHICH I HATE.  

Dear BITCH:  

Thanks for BITCH again. I must say I  
was kind of surprised to see my letter  
therein. I liked BITCH again and will show  

it around to friends and interested people -  

and all of that.  

My main comment has to do with your  
“topic for the day”, the fact that you  
think you could get wider distribution  
with a name change. I am pretty  
surprised that there's a Rock store that  
would make such a request. Has anyone  

actually said they would distribute BITCH if you had a different name? I would  
suggest that you try to get into stores or distributed by companies or networks that  
advertise in OPTION or in MAXIMUM ROCK 'N' ROLL--Systematic, New World, Dutch  
East India. Also, it might be possible to get into a network of women's bookstores and  
the like. You can take these suggestions at whatever level you might want to. I like  
the name BITCH a lot, get a male-power-oriented kick out of addressing a letter  
“Dear Bitch” (oops, you all decided that was a good reason to change the title.  
Hah!)...whatever reaction I have, I think the name BITCH is both tough and  
appropriate. Yeah! I think with a surprisingly small amount of effort you could get it  
distributed to your target audience with no name change.  

This will probably sound wimpy, but even though I think you should do what you can  
to keep the name, still there's the old epigram that a rose by any other name would  
still smell as sweet; in this case, a bitch by any other name would still bark as loud.  
Haht  

One thing that interested me about this issue was the contrast between the  
interviews with Leathur Panteez and Girl's Night Out. They have such different  
approaches to their music, but are still trying to do the same thing--what they feel  
they can do best. I have the feeling that Leathur Panteez would play at the club I could  

afford. Hah! Oh well...  

I also liked the reviews of Home Of The Brave. I found Twersky's comments the  
most illuminating because of the extensive background in Performance Art. Other  
people had other points with which to relate to this movie. I don't think it's played in  
Mpls. or the Twin Cities yet. Oh well. Okay, well time to go...  
Luke McGuff, Mpls, MN.  
EDITOR'S NOTE: Minneapolis is one of the few places where we do have a distributor  

(Donald Olsen). Haven't tried the ones  
you name yet. Getting distributors is  
the problem. Had we bucks to mail  
samples to a zillion stores, this would  
be easy. We don't. We do have stores  
from readers who said “Carry this”  
(thanks, Jerome & Livil). Tower, which  
carries us, gets customer complaints  
about the name. We don't always know  
what's up; radio station KOME had a  
Rock Fair, we asked to drop a stack off,  
the contact man said he was worried  
about the name. At KOME?! “The  

KOME spot on your dial”? He said they were  
trying to change their image; give him  
review copies. We weren't actually turned  
down--he just never returned our calls. All  
the many women's bookstores we tried,  
turned us down without explanation. We  
think that isn't the name; theories range  
from lack of political correctness to “no  
Holly Near=no sale”. Our most effective  
distributors are people who praise it to  
friends (Hi, Gene & Cheryl!).  

BITCH: My compliments to Twersky,  
Sumac, WBA IV and all the others who made  
BITCH's July issue (#11) something that  
mattered. WBA IV's Fiona review deserves  
special praise from my vantage point. I  
can't stand Fiona, but now I understand why  
someone else might. I xeroxed the drug  
piece to keep at school. Didn't want to cut it  
out and spoil the issue! As for the fuss over  
your name; you have to keep the name  
BITCH. it's a beaut. Believe me, I  
understand. I'm 16 and have to hide the  
issues from my mother. If she actually sat  
down, read it, I think she'd understand and  
approve, but I know she could never process  
the name. She's too nervous. There are too  

THE Women's  
ROK  
a a THE WOMEN'S Ro  
NEWSLETTER WITH  
Not SPEAK BITE—ANY Possibly  
ITS NAME RABIES