Addie:—we wore boots, and our chains around our boots  
with our little bells and our little beads, and we had a certain  
walk we did when we came into a place—-  

Lois: Oh, yeah! [Snaps fingers] It's the gang, man!  
Addie:--our leather jackets, man, we thought we were so  
tough!  

Lois: Don't fuck with me!  

Addie: I had my motorcycle on the road with me, man,  
Jeanie and I used to ride—Jeanie and I were basically best  
friends--Jeanie and I would go everywhere on my bike, man.  
“Let's go to a gig!” Throw our guitars on our shoulders.  
VRROOOOM!! You don't forget that feeling.  

Lois: I'm sure the Runaways did that, even the Go-Go's,  
with their trip. And I look at that now--I'm such a tomboy,  
and you know, we have a guy bass player and drummer, we  
fuck around together and stuff--and it’s not quite the same  
as when me and Addie go tripping off together. You know how  
that is? It's like--something or other--teenagers, man.  
Addie: Yeah. (Valley Girl voice:) “They're guys. They're  

Tw: Speaking of boys--the Rolling Stones audition.  
Addie: A trip, a trip...I did audition for them in '75...all  
these groups, the Allman Brothers, the Rolling Stones, Led  
Zeppelin, who else? All these bands that have done Willie's  
material, because, you know, he wrote “Spoonful”, “Little  
Red Rooster”, “I Just Want To Make Love To You"--you  
probably know his catalogue. He wrote “I Can't Quit You,  
Babe”, all the great Rock’nRoll Blues hits, you know. He was  
the father of that stuff. When they come to town (Chicago),  
they bring their limos down to the end of Racine--you know,  
Trooper Street, do you know where those are, 87th, 66th?  
They were in town, they'd all come to Willie's house! And his  
wife, Marie, would fix us chitlins and everything, and have  
barbecue, and everybody eats, and then we'd all get in the  
limousines, and since I was there, I got to go all these places  
with all these people. Get in the limos and go to the gigs.  
Well, when the Rolling Stones came to town, as the New  
they...came over to  
Willie's, and invited us to come to the New Barbarians  
concert. So we're backstage, and I got to meet Keith again,  
and I said, “Remember when I auditioned for the Stones?”  
And he said, “Of course, I wouldn't forget that one!” And  
I said, “Ronnie, you took my gig! I'm supposed to have this  
gig!” So I went hamming it up, cracking up, having a good  
time backstage! And so that was like the second time I was  
with them...So I called New York last month, ‘cause I have  
this '31 Tely (Telecaster guitar), black-~  

a  
Topper pom tread bands,  
wsten “Amematies Taberishos  

aR i Georacs”  
BACKROOM  

: PCARROL, ay  

a)  

LE Pcs EXRES,  

YDERS, AGIT P POP,  
my ‘local groups, and  

underground -art videos submitted  
Bpyhs BE i  

roel from around the  
———  

To have your video considered  
for play contact:  
REAL GEORGE'S BACKROOM TV  
PO Box 724, C.P. NY 12065  
(518) 489-0658  

Lois: (Reverently:) It's a cool guitar!  

so embarrassed! I can't even think of it,  

I get  

Addie:——it's a collector's item, but it's not quite for me. embarrassed all over again! (All of us have cracked up).  
I've got a '52 Tely, and this one isn’t quite what I want. As you know, Ron Wood got the job...(she’s said  
But it's a high price, because it’s a collector's guitar, and elsewhere that with all the groupies and hangers-on  
nobody around here could afford it. You know, I gotta sell it to a Rock star! And I see Keith playing them all the  
Lois:..  

That's ludicrous, though. Addie’s way too good for  

time, I said, “Okay, I'm gonna talk to Keith, see if he the Rolling Stones. Musically she’s up there somewhere,  
wants this guitar.~...(On her plans with Lois:) We're not and they're down there doing their Rolling Stone thing.  
sure what we're gonna do right now. What we're doing is And It’s real nice, Rock’nParty, lame music. I mean, It's  
fun, we are gonna go in the studio—~I think RocknRoll, just not challenging...I mean, they're a lot of fun—-  

and like, (snaps fingers) making it, takes on a different Addie: Oh, hey, I like that kind of stuff!  

perspective after you've been through the gamut a couple Lois: Yeah, puts a smile on everybody's face. [Dumb  
of times. It's not like such an anxious hurry to--you California punk voice:] "Oh, boy, THE STONES! Now I feel  

know, we do many things, career-wise.  

Tw: Aren't you the only woman who's ever been asked to  
audition for the Stones?  

Addie: Uh-huh. And as a matter of fact, my friend Burt  

grounded. I hear the Stones, yeah, that good ol Rock band,  

yeah!" But as far as Addie jamming with the Stones--  
Addie: I think I would be bored real quickly. But  

anyway——  

Cohen, who handles Frank Zappa, used to handle Linda Lois: It would turn into a really different sound.  

Ronstadt, Tim Buckley, Wild Man Fischer, all the crazy  
people, told me what happened after the audition—they  
kept saying, [drops to crotchety voice:] “A woman in the  
Rolling Stones? A woman? I don’t know--A WOMAN?” He  
said, [deep, stern voice:] “You know, you could sue  
them.”  

Tw: (Laughs) Sex discrimination case!  

Addie: Exactly! That's what he wanted me to do! And I  
said, [Are-you-nuts voice:] “Sure! I’m gonna sue the  
ROLLING STONES! Right!  

Tw: It would have been a great publicity move. And then  

Addie: (Laughs) Exactly! That's exactly what I told him!  
I said, “There goes my career, right now!” He wanted me  
to sue them, and I said, “Uh-uh!" Just the  
experience--because that was the first time I'd met  
them--and having Keith Richards call me on the  
phone—because DIG THIS! I had been doing this gig—-I was  
down, I had done a lot of session work at this particular  
time--but for six months I'd been working at a  
in a trio playing keyboards and guitar, with this TERRIBLE  
band--getting a good paycheck, you know, every  
week--HATING IT six nights a week—  
Lois: (Grimly:) That's What You Do Between Bands!  
Addie:—going [mutters:] “Here I'm trapped.” So here I  
am, the last night of the gig, my manager calls me and  
says, “You're not going to believe this--Keith Richards  
called, and you have an audition with the Rolling Stones  
tomorrow.” I ALMOST LOST IT! (Mimes collapse) I was  
shaking, I was like, [Squeaks:] “Oh, my God! Oh, my  
God!" I was walking through the crowd, going, “I can't  
believe it, here I am in this dump—if I told anyone in here  
I had an audition with the Rolling Stones, they would not  
believe me! They would just not believe me!" I told the  
bass player and the drummer, I said [from the side of her  
mouth, low:] “You're not gonna believe this—I have an  
audition for—-" [Loud:] “Oh, SURE! So I got all my  
nervousness out of the way, so the next day when I went  
down and met them, at this L.A. house--oh, God!.. Keith  
comes out and he says--now, people were warning me,  
“They're really rude, they're this and that, and they  
might ask you to give them head or something before——*  
you know, really getting down and getting nasty, and I'm  
saying, “I don't think they'd do that!” And they'd say,  
“Just be careful of them, because they're like, really  
rowdy guys.” So I go to the interview, and Keith comes  
down the stairs, you know, in all of his leathers, and  
goes [deep, suave Keith voice:] “Do you blow before you  
play?” My face turns bright red. I think, “Blow before I  
play? What does he mean?! He wants me to give him head  
right here?!" And I say, [dead-pan cool:] “No, man, I  
blow while I play.” You know, I'm sitting there playing  
my guitar, sitting on top of the amp. He says, [puzzled:]  
“You're sure you don't blow before you play?” I say  
even more cool, raspy-voiced:] “No, man, I blow while I  
play.” He says [shrugs] “Okay,” and he brings this vial of  
coke out of his pocket and says, “I guess you don't want  
any of this, then, right?” (Clutches her head) OH, GOD!  
Like this-{she covers her face, mimes collapse). I was  

Addie: It was fun, though...oh, yeah, I was telling you,  
they would charge me so much for a drink. Well, after a  
while, I didn't have to show up with Willie anymore, I  
could just walk in by myself, or with my brother, he was  
on the road with me, and they'd say, [Does NOT imitate  
accent:] “Miss Addie’s in the crowd! Miss Addie!” It was  
like a celebrity coming in, it was my first experience as  
a solo performer being recognized, which was quite a  
thrill. They would say, “Sit in!” So what happened was,  
Fenton Robinson, who wrote “Loan Me A Dime”, which is  
a tune I still keep in my show, I used his back-up  
band--real hot players, in fact, they were just in town,  
I sat in with them at the Last Day Saloon, last Sunday  
night, Jimmy Johnson Band—-so Jimmy's band, Sun  
Seals, Buddy and Junior--Albert King I usually sit in with  
a lot, he was the one that broke me in Chicago, ‘cause he  
let me sit in for a whole show with him. I was just gonna  
sit in with him for one song, ‘cause I'd met him with  
Fanny back in the Fillmore days, in about 1968. And he  
said, [again, no imitation of accent:] "I remember those  
girls! Yeah! Come on up and play!”  

Lois: We don't ever do that here. It's curious to me.  
Addie: Well, I brought that back from Chicago.  

Lois: Oh, yeah, you, “Come on up and play!” You do, but  
most--this real cold, “Okay, we're gonna do our  
number,” WHAM! And then leave. You know?  

Addie: I brought back that feel from Chicago, I started  
people’s careers in Chicago, and it made me feel so good.  
Some little harp player would come up, “I can really  
play,” would play a little bit for me, “Can I sit in?”  
“Sure, man! C'mon and party!” He'd sit in, somebody else  
was in the audience who was looking for a harp player,  
and he'd come up to me after the show and say, “Because  
of you, I've got this job, I'm in a band now, these guys  
want me to play with them.” I can't tell you how that  
feels! You just go, "Oh, my God!" It's wonderful. ‘Cause  
they don't have any other platform to play on--  

Lois: Lots of musicians don't. It's like, we have to help  
each other...this is my first experience with, "Oh, sure,  
come on up on our show and play.” So far, with Addie, I  
have yet to do a show where somebody from the audience  
hasn't come up on our stage and jammed on at least one  
tune.  

Addie: And if they're embarrassing themselves, or  
they're not real good, you just wind up the song and end  
it, and I say to the audience, [party voice:] “Alright, put  
your hands together for whomever, as they leave the  
stage!”  

Lois: (Mimes patting someone on the back) Thank you,  
thank you!  

Addie: And goodnight!  

Lois: I dunno, sometimes we do really quick versions of  
some of these songs!  

Addie: Lois will look at me and go, “What? How come we  
didn't finish that song?" I go, (mutters behind hand).  
"Oh!"  

Lois: Thank you, goodbye!..  

Tw: (regarding Addie’s position in the Chicago Blues scene:) How  
did the younger black guys feel about that?