expected to be in. Rude Girl was just lingering with the goods. But isn’t waiting the best part of anything
it is that you want? I still get chills when I hear the song.

Rude Girl was a band truly sent from beyond this world. The Rudeness is gone, for reasons not
completely clear in anyone's head. There hasn't been a band yet that has been able to match the
magic of those troupers, and I really doubt there ever will be.

Last February, I turned 22. But I argued with my mother that I was just too “grown up” to
celebrate or to be pampered with special attention. So there I was, sittin’ at home on my birthday.

Upon our arrival we found out that Heroines had cancelled their gig at the very last minute. Okay.
Later in the year, again, we attempted to see the band, but the show was cancelled due to personnel
mishap. I think that was the rumor. Being the very funny joker that I am, after that, any time I saw
an ad for Heroines, my friends and I discounted the idea of goin’. Ah, they’ll probably just cancel,
ha, ha. Just recently, though, I got the BIGGEST urge to hear Heroines. I'd been keeping track of
their summer gigs by the itinerary they'd sent me. Prolonging my non-attendance was just
ridiculous, I finally realized.

Before I go any further I gotta say this. When I first heard that Lois was working with Addie,
I was not fazed. I mean, I guessed that was cool. I'd met Addie before and she was very nice. I was
glad Lois was working with a very nice guitarist. Then, a ways down the road, while conversing

with a Blues guitar player from the Bay Area. “Oh. Far out,” I think was my most enthused response. I
couldn't really appreciate that, not being a guitarist myself. What impressed me was reading
Addie’s press kit. I found out just how “well-known and respected” she is. I can’t even begin to tell
ya. I'm not even gonna try...but she was asked to audition for the ROLLING STONES, okay?! Geez,
what do I have, shit for brains?

August 22 was the night I finally saw (this is how the band’s billed) ADDIE/Heroines. Before they
went on stage I sat at my table wondering what to expect. Would it sorta be like Rude Girl,
take-two? Or something more along the lines of Black Sabbath meets Elmore James? I had no clue,
but was eager to find out. I met two dudes that night who had just arrived in San Francisco from
Kansas City. We chatted for a bit about the local Heavy Metal scene. Seems they stumbled into the
wrong club but were having a few drinks while mapping out their next excursion. When Lois &
Addie’s band started, the two out-of-towners decided this was NOT their bag. They declared they'd

finish their imported beers but then they'd be OUTTA THERE. Three songs later, after the band
performed an instrumental version of Iron Maiden’s classic “Trooper”, the two Midwestern boys
ordered another round of Mexican beers and looked like they were gonna stick around a while
longer. The fellas were obviously taken aback.

ADDIE/Heroines played some original stuff as well as some Blues numbers. The original material
is very much developed from Addie's influences. They re-worked a couple of Rude Girl songs, too,
“Hungry For Your Love” and “Operator”. The band did a fantastic, geez, musta been a 10 minute
rendition of Willie Dixon's “I Just Wanna Make Love To You". Usually when a band chooses to
improvise on a song for that length of time the listener becomes a little restless, skittish, and begins
to play guessing games of where the working waitress shops for daily groceries. I actually once
experienced a 45 minute version of “Louie, Louie” and I was not having fun. But what Addie and
friends did for this song--I was sittin’ on the edge of my chair goin’ "YEAH!" The band never
allowed your attention to wander, I think the main reason for that is because the musicianship is just
engulfing. All players KNOW what they're doing.

In its birth, I remember Heroines being a female outfit. Now there is a male rhythm section.
Steve Hazelwood is the bass beater and on drums there was Bobby Rydell ("...not the old Bobby
Rydell, the new one!") I figured, “Back-up musicians...yawn...” but these guys are H-O-T. I was
relieved to find out that Lois still plays lead guitar. I assumed Addie would take care of that job
alone. But the two axe ladies switched off doing solos and sometimes even gave us a double assault.
I was told the band arranges its set to the audience situation. For example, one night the band
performed a more Country Rock sound. I think the roots of the band though are basically Inner City
Blues, Louisiana Boogie Blues, Texas Boogie Rock, with just a hint of California Metal. Addie may be
an excellent guitarist but her singing deserves just as much praise. She's been compared to Janis
Joplin and Tina Turner, and I think that's pretty accurate without being limited. Personally, Addie’s
throaty soul attack reminds me of Etta James.

There's an instrumental that Lois composed called “Fly” that I really enjoyed. Backstage Lois
explained the piece as being about the dreams that occur in the deepest state of sleep. I, of course,
could not fully conceive Lois’ thoughts but was pleased just the same that she has not shied away
from producing enigmatic thrills. Call up your friends and go check out the scene because it's a party!

You Hussies Have
ANOTHER THINK
COMING IF You
THINK You WERE
RUDER THAN I AM.

XQ
by Cheryl Cline
BREAKTHROUGH is a classy trashy fanzine devoted to Punk garage band
psychedelic sixties Rock and Roll like Richard & the Young Lions, the
Trashmen, and the Chesterfield Kings. Also to such cult figures as Richard
Widmark, Mister Ed, and the Jetsons. Real highbrow lowbrow stuff here. I
gave it to my Significant Other, and he kept it in front of his face for a
whole evening and a good part of the next morning—and not only that, but
he gleefully read parts of it out loud while I was trying to read The Case Of
J. Since this is a man who has memorized all the
lyrics to that legendary one-off midwest hit, “Little Black Egg”, you know
BREAKTHROUGH has to be good. Issue #1 came out ages ago. editor Todd
Abramson says, “#2 and even #3 and #4 would have been out long ago,”
but this world isn't perfect, and we've only got one issue to help us through
it. Single copies are $2. No subscription because “why subscribe to a mag
when you never know when it's gonna arrive, lady?” The address is P.O.
Box 212, Gillette, NJ 07933.
In KICKS #3, co-editor Billy Miller editorializes: “We don't deal in
ROCK MUSIC here at KICKS. If you're a fan of David Bowie or Devo, take
this magazine back to the store. You've obviously bought the wrong thing.
To me, Rock music means asshole Roger Daltrey swinging a microphone
around his head while leagues of stoned-out squares gaze in wide-eyed
ecstasy waiting for MTV or Lisa Robinson to tell ‘em where they oughta
take their zombie butts to next. Ever see those questionnaires where they
wanna know what records you'd take to a desert island? Shit! Guys who
pick Eno records DESERVE to be on a desert island! The only connection
with “Rock” that I can detect in a lot of this new music crap is the one these
snakes crawled out from under! WHENEVER YOU BUY A RECORD BY DURAN
DURAN YOU ARE SPITTING ON THE GRAVE OF EDDIE COCHRAN!“
The folks at KICKS also believe the Beatles' career after 1966 amounts to
diddly squat. What they want to hear is Esquirita, the Flamin’ Groovies,
the Collins Kids, Wanda Jackson and Dave Edmunds, not to mention those
Rockabillies and sixties punks who are so obscure that only one hundred
forty-three (max) people even know about them. Like the Phantom, Tyrone
Schmidting and Hasil “the Haze” Adkins’ classic cult puzzler, “She Said”.
Send $4 to KICKS (Billy Miller and Miriam Lina), PO Box 646,
Cooper Station, New York, NY 10003.
If you're wondering what's up with Iron Butterfly these days (what the
heck, why not?) you might send for Rick Gagnon’s UNCONSCIOUS POWER:
THE IRON BUTTERFLY FANZINE. The August issue contains an interview with
Eric Braunn (trivia mongers take note: his real name is Rick Davis and only
his mother ever calls him Rick). Back issues are available, and each one
has an interview with an Iron Butterfly band member within, so collect ‘em
all! A buck each from UNCONSCIOUS POWER, P.O. Box 1658,
Fontana, CA 92334. in-A~Gadda-Da-Vida.
Get this swell ‘zine: SIDNEY SUPPEY QUARTERLY / CONFUSED PET
MONTHLY, edited by Candi Strecker, is the place to go when you want the
real low-down birds-eye view of Performance Cussing (aka, filthy black
party songs) or a basic Three Stooges library or the cult of Martin Denny.
You have to see the cover of the latest issue for her “tribute to the
mid-60's AM Radio music that in many ways Changed My Life"--a set of
Heroes of the Garage “trading cards" modeled after R. Crumb's cards
(HEROES OF THE BLUES, EARLY JAZZ GREATS and PIONEERS OF COUNTRY
MUSIC). So, who Changed Her Life? Paul Revere & the Raiders, ? & the
Mysterians, Mitch Ryder & the Detroit Wheels...SSQ/CPM is a window
onto the world of highbrow lowbrow, or Low-Life-Scum (read about it in
SSQ/CPM) with ‘zine and book reviews, music highlights, and Just Plain
information. Send money (a dollar or two) to: Candi Strecker,
590 Lisbon, San Francisco, CA 94112.
INSIDE JOKE: A NEWSLETTER OF COMEDY AND CREATIVITY isn't always,
but it has its high points--Anni Ackner's column “Diary Of A Rock Fiend”
being one of them. It's rarely about Rock music, though, as this Rock
fiend's passions range all over the place. Her English translations of
Personals Columns ads are spot-on and funny. The rest of INSIDE JOKE is
devoted to such Low-Life Scum (see SSQ/CPM) interests as the Monkees
(Charles Rosenay reviews a concert by the recently rehashed group),
movies, pre-Punk Punk, spam, and the like. A dollar an issue from Elayne
Wechsler/INSIDE JOKE, P.O. Box 1609, Madison Square Station,
New York, NY 10159.
Luke McGuff, intrepid Minneapolis science-fiction fan, punk letter-writer
and off-and-on fanzine editor, publishes LIVE FROM THE STAGGER CAFE, a
small political and personal fanzine, less a magazine than a kind of “open
letter.” In issue #2, he includes a blank page and invites readers to fill it
up with “ANYTHING: writing, cartoons, graphics, nonsense or even
fuckheaded rants AND send me a dollar (the bribe is important)” and he'll
Continued on Pp. 16 >>>>>>>>>2>>>>2>999>