IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Excerpt from the novel in

progress, by Twersky.

The phone rang

France sort of woke herself up and answered it. A
look at the clock--4:30 a.m.

“...get something bloody organized, won't we?”

said the voice on the other end of the line, apparently
not to her. “What do you mean? What time is it?
‘Allo, ‘allo, is France there?"
France: This is me. It’s 4:30 a.m.
Voice: Jesus shit! In the morning? Oh, I am sorry,
dear, thought it was, you know, ten at night or
something, but I suppose you wouldn't have been
home then, would you? Ha, ha! You'd be out partying,
wouldn't you? Ha, ha, ha! Well, you remember me,
it's Arfur Smiff. I saw you at Damn’s party but didn’t
get a chance to say hello, did I? Hello!
France: Uh, yeah, I don't even remember seeing
you there. Hello.
Arfur: Right! Well, here, this is business, is why
I'm calling. That chili Damn had whoever do, it was
shit. Remember your chili? Well, of course you do,
but so does everyone else. Everyone agrees that your
chili was, well, you know. Much better. Great chili.
So I said, we don't need that shit chili, do we? What
we need is France doing the cooking, don't we?
Because all these professionals you've been getting,
they're just a bunch of stupid bints, aren't they? I
mean, it’s a special occasion, we don't want all this
shit. Let's send for France! She'll do us!

He pronounced her name as if she was a city in
Germany: Frontz. Somebody took the phone from
him, a man who pronounced her name as if she were
an obscure lace-making technique: Fraience. Some
American. He started right in talking business,
seriously organized (obviously not a musician). —
Guy: ...and so we're having a party to celebrate his
solo album. Sunday night. I know it’s short notice,
honey, but fuck, it's what he wants, okay? You
wouldn't believe the shit fits he’s been throwing over
the arrangements, and I gotta get some sleep, so let's
see if we can wrap this up. He wants your
chili--something about Swamp cakes, does that make
sense to you?

France: The cakes we had at Swamp’s wedding? We
had almond and chocolate. Um, where is this
happening? ‘Cause I don't have transportation--
Guy: My place in Monterey. No problem, we'll send a
car for you. Come on, do this for me, honey, he's
being a real pain in the ass.

Before she could ask who he was and why she
should feel like doing anything for him, he named a
sum of money. A sum probably not very large to him
(less, she knew, than the caterers had gotten) but
which was a lot to her.

France: Okay. I'll do it for that, if I don't have to
buy the supplies out of it. I mean, the timing on this
is pretty tight, I really need the supplies waiting for
me in the kitchen when I get there. You do have a
kitchen I can use?

Guy: I guess so. Yeah, mine. What supplies do you
need?

France: I don't know, I'll have to sit down and work
it out.

Guy: Jesus, sweetheart, I gotta, seriously gotta,
get some sleep. Why don't you pick the stuff up on
the way, and I'll reimburse you later?

France: No.

What a pack of hippie “don’t you trust me?” guilt
trips he pulled out then, but that was tough, too bad.
She had no reason to trust them. She had no reason
to trust anyone connected in any way, shape, or
form to musicians. She almost hung up on him.
Instead, she insisted on the money in advance,
because the more he asked her to trust him, the less
trusting she felt.
France: Arfur knows I can be trusted to deliver--if
that’s not good enough, find somebody else. I want
supplies waiting in the kitchen. I want transportation
both ways.

But if they blow that, (she thought.) Monterey is
close enough to hitchhike home.

Every objection, she met with “Find somebody
else.” She wanted the money, but not if she had to go
through a giant hassle for it.

Complaining all the way, he agreed to her terms.
Guy: ...but I'll be sleeping. The driver will have the
money.

Next month: the driver says he doesn't have the
money.

All About Images: Quotes

from Female Rockers

I'd always wanted to sing in the past, but nobody
liked my voice. If ever I went to auditions, people
always wanted me to sound like somebody else --
you know, ‘Sing like Chaka Khan . . .’ — so I'd stuck
with the sax instead...A lot of people have got the
wrong impression of me; they think I'm very
calculating, that everything has been worked out to
some kind of master plan, deliberately arranging to
have things sound the way they do. But ninety
percent of the time that's just naturally how it
comes out.

----Lene Lovich in Rolling Stone August 9, 1979
(p. 13)

Who sings about their guardian angels anymore? It's
all about ‘screw me, baby, and I'm tired of that.
-----Angela Bofill, Rolling Stone January 24, 1980
(p. 18)

>Recording industry executives say all these nasty
things about women. They say women go crazy, get
freaky and may decide not to sing. They think
signing women is a risk because you can’t count on
them. That's crazy.

>Some of the record people are just sexist fools.
The record industry is part of the society, and a lot
of men in society think women can't do a good job.

---Shirley Jones
--The Jones Girls, Rolling Stone Magazine,
November 1, 1979 (p. 33)

> I was not comfortable with the warmth and
adulation I got. My music was a sedative, made to
cool me out, and when people screamed, it seemed
left over from someone else's act.

>To be a woman in the field, you have to be twice as
good, and to be a woman who has proven herself in
another field, you have to be twice as twice as good.
And I'm not that good yet.

-----Joni Mitchell, Rolling Stone, November 25,
1982 (p. 27)

I'm the pretty-girl-who-can-sing stereotype. I
never knew I was gonna get it this bad. All of a
sudden you realize, ‘Shit, people are looking at my
crotch. This is embarrassing.’

----Pat Benatar, Rolling Stone, January 8, 1981 (p.
83)

Do you think it's cool to worry? Maybe the kids will
think it's uncool to worry. Aw, you're right --
teenagers worry more than anyone else in the world.
Maybe they'll feel better to know that Patty does it.

----Patty Smyth, Creem, January 1985 (p. 55)

I'm not Miss Party anymore. I still like to have a
good time, but my responsibility to the movement
has taken over.

----Bonnie Raitt, Rolling Stone, February 21, 1980
(p. 25)

When I'm performing, I feel like some sort of cartoon
character.

----Pearl Gates of Pearl Harbor, Rolling Stone,
February 21, 1980 (p. 20)

I think it's easier for a woman, really, in the
beginning, but it’s difficult to maintain this interest.
You can get a little bit of a start initially, because of
the novelty value, but to actually achieve a lot is
very difficult still, I think. Because all along the
way I think there are a great many more distractions
for women. I think it’s harder to maintain your own
feelings without getting discouraged, or upset, or led
astray. It's just harder to keep at it with the same
intensity that you started out with.

----Lene Lovich, Creem, May 1980 (p. 60)

I mean, that’s the point to me, you are fantasy,
whether you're a guy or a girl, and you're there to
entertain and take them from whatever place they're
in and put them someplace else.

----Pat Benatar, Creem, May 1980 (p. 60)

..She dismisses the commonly held notion that
because the music business is male-dominated, it's
therefore easier for women to get a foothold: “In
fact, it’s much harder. It's definitely not a woman's
business. It's pretty easy for a woman to be a lounge
or cabaret singer, but the pop world has never been
that open.”

----Debbie Harry of Blondie, CREEM, December,
1981

“Strong independent female instead of sniveling
dependent female. Just a few years ago you were
hearing those ‘I can't live without you’ type lyrics
coming from a woman. I'm tired of that approach, the
subservient woman thing. And Marv knows me so
well, it's so much fun for me to have someone that
can write lyrics from that point of view. I feel very
lucky.”

----Rindy Ross of Quarterflash, CREEM, June,
1982.

“There's something special about leather. It's not
an image, it's a thing...it’s not an image, it’s...me!"
----Joan Jett, CREEM, June, 1982.

“I can actually talk to people and they act quite
surprised, they go ‘Oh, shit, she’s not going to bite
my head off.’ I don't know where they got that idea.”

----Joan Jett, CREEM, June, 1982.