by S.J. McCarthy

When Folk music was big, Lu Mitchell worked  
regularly. When Folk music went away, she hardly  
worked at all. Now that “Those of us who do  

of a rebirth of interest in Folk music,  
Lu Mitchell is working hard again. 62 years  
old and a “mother hen” to younger Folk singers, she  
writes most of her material and was the winner of  
the 1983 Mesquite Folk Festival and the 1984  
Kerrville Folk Festival.  

McC: How did you get started in folksinging?  

LM: Well, if you want to really go way back, when  
I was a kid in Girl Scouts, I particularly liked their  
music program and they had all the Folk songs in  
their books, and when we would go to camp, we  
would draw on that material to sing in groups. So,  
very fast, because I was very musical even then, I  
built up a large repertoire of Folk songs, just from  
Girl Scouts. So I had that in the back of my head.  
Well, then, of course many years in between I did  
nothing with music, but I always knew these songs.  
And when I met a man in Dallas, Texas who was an  
attorney, but his hobby was singing folk songs at  
colleges and places like that, and he played the  
guitar. Anyway, he immediately knew that I would be  
helpful to him too, with my large repertoire of  
songs, so he encouraged me to learn to play the  
guitar, which I did. Now we're talking about 1959,  
somewhere in there. Maybe even earlier.  

McC: Did you take lessons?  

LM: He didn't give me lessons! He said he was too  
busy. But he said, “I think that you have a real flair  
for this and I think that once introduced to this  
instrument, you will teach yourself.” So he gave me  
a book. And indeed I did! I took to it like a duck takes  
to water. So even though I had an office job in the  
daytime, at night I would get out my little book and  
my guitar and I would work and work and work at  
this, because I loved it! You know, I already knew the  
songs, all I needed was to learn accompaniment. Well  
then, about 1960, the coffeehouses began to come on  
the scenes all over the country. Well, in Dallas,  
Texas—I mean they were looking for folksingers  

then because everybody wants to get on the  
bandwagon. So right away I got lots of calls, “Will  
you come down and sing at the coffeehouse?” “Will  
you come and sing here?” because I was one of the  
few people around here who did that. We also had a  
society of people who used to meet and swap songs.  
At that time there were only a dozen of us, say. And  
we would go to each others’ homes in what has since  
become known as hootenannies. You know, when you  
get a bunch of pickers together and you play your  
instruments and you swap songs, right? And that  
group, then, we became the performers in the  
coffeehouses during the 60s. Here in Dallas anyway.  

McC: And at that time you were doing all traditional  
material?  

LM: All traditional! I was doing “Barbara Allen” and  
“Sir Patrick Spence” and “Froggie Went A-Courtin’”  
and all that. But what happened was, one night, just  
because I was, you know—I don't know why I did it—  
I happened to write this song about Billy Sol Estes,  
who was in the news at that time, having embezzled  
a bunch of money from the government. And I took a  
very humorous attitude toward this song, so it came  
out as a very funny song. And the people just loved  
that song. So everybody wanted the words. Well,  
I would type out the words. Then I began to add  
another song here and there, about things I saw in  
the news, topical things. And the more I wrote the  
songs, the more the audiences would encourage me to  
do more... So, more and more, my programs were  
my own songs, but I would always sprinkle them  
with the traditional things too. So I never really  

abandoned that.  

McC: Do you still do the Billy Sol Estes song?  

LM: No, I don't do that! Unless someone asks me for  
it, but sometimes I will go back, if I have an audience  
that I think remembers certain things, like there was  
a—remember Woodstock?  

McC: Uh huh.  

LM: Okay. About a year after Woodstock, we had in  
Dallas, Texas the chance to have a rock festival.  
Well, the city fathers said, “No, you can't bring that  
trash to Dallas.” But the promoters found a little  
suburb in Dallas [Lewisville] who said, “Yeah, you can  
do it here.” So they brought the rock festival. Well,  
there was a big controversy over it, and I wrote a  
song called “Lewd and Loose in Lewisville,” which  
was a satirical attempt to make fun of the city  
fathers for, you know, bringing all this trash to  
Dallas, Texas... to this day people ask for that song.  
And that was 1972 or 1971 or something...  

McC: Have other people covered your songs?  

LM: Well, locally, yeah. Now, I... had one of my  
songs, which I wrote back in the 60s, floating around  
up there in New England. Unbeknownst to me, that  
this song was passed around up there... Twenty  
years later, I get this phone call from someone who  
says, “Are you the Lu Mitchell that wrote this song  
about the Kuglesburg Bank?” It was about an old lady  
who embezzled money from a bank. It was from a  
newspaper story, you see. The town is fictitious,  
although originally it was a real true town. But when  
I did the song I wanted to put a funny name so I made  
up Kuglesburg. Anyway, what happened, the people  
up around the New York City area who had folk clubs  
like down here, somehow got hold of an old album of  
mine which had that song on it, and they began to  
sing it and pass it around. And twenty years later,  
I got this call about some guy in Connecticut who  
wanted to record it. I couldn't believe this! “That old  
song? You're still...?” “Yeah, but,”  
“that song is part of our repertoire. We never get together  
up here but what we don't sing that song.” So they  
were happy to get together with me and he went  
ahead and recorded it and another woman recorded it  

too. So—that's the way folk music gets around.  
That's the only song of mine that I know that’s been  
recorded by someone else...  

McC: When the coffeehouse scene diminished, did  
you get fewer places to play?  

LM: Of course! You know, all the coffeehouses dried  
up. And there were really no public places for us to  
do—there was no demand for this sort of thing. But,  
our folk music groups continued to meet in homes as  
we had been doing all these many years. So that  
never dropped off... What happened to me was, I was  
working for a big corporation [Kodak] as a  
secretary. And I kept writing songs—for them! Like,  
they'd have a sales meeting or a retirement party or  
something, and they would always say, “Lu, can you  
come up with something?” and I would... So I kept  
writing songs that way. But not for the general  
public.  

McC: And what kind of places do you play now?  

LM: Well, now I've been doing some folk festivals,  
and there are two places in Dallas where they feature  
folk music. One is Poor David's Pub, which is a night  
club, and the other is Uncle Calvin's Coffeehouse,  
which is a church auditorium and every Friday night  
they turn it over to make it into a coffeehouse, and  
it's been extremely successful... And we sense, those  
of us who do this, we sense kind of a rebirth of  
interest in folk music. Because we get more calls and  
we get larger audiences, and I, personally, have  
more places to sing that I can handle.  

McC: What kind of places besides the two venues  
you mentioned?  

LM: Well, I'll tell ya.  

There are a lot of  

organizations. You know... the League of Women  
Voters and all these other organizations. They want  
programs. Also AARP, you've got those  
everywhere, and they all need programs. Well, if  

they get your name, and you have a successful  
program, they pass your name around. So,  
someone's been passing my name around, because I'm  
getting all these calls all the time. As far as folk  
festivals, somehow or other they get your name, and  
they ask you to come and play. The one in Louisiana,  
I don't know how that fella heard about me,  
somewhere, and the one in Pennsylvania, I happened  
to know there was a new festival there, and I sent  
them my album... And they, on the basis of that, used  
that as an audition and said, “Yes, we do want you  
to come up here and do that.” So two years in a  
row I've been invited to sing at that music festival.  

McC: Do you tour, per se?  

LM: Well, the thing is, I have—I'm not physically  
real strong, so I have to limit that. However, last  
year I made two trips, one to Louisiana and one to  
Pennsylvania, and the year before I went to Arizona  
to sing at Sun City. And my dream is to sing in  
Canada, because they have a wonderful love and  
respect for folk music up there, and I think they  
would love what I do, and so I will have to take the  
initiative on that... But I don't really go on the road.  
I'm a 62-year-old woman, and I have a husband here,  
and I do not imagine myself in show business. See,  
I really don't—I wouldn't want an agent who made you  
go here and there and everywhere and ran you  
ragged. I want to sing when I want to sing, and if I'm  
too tired, then I won't take an engagement for a  
couple of weeks, see what I mean? I do it at my own  
time, and I'm not trying to become world famous. I'm  
just trying to make my statement about society and  
have fun doing it. It's all, really, I've been trying to  
do.  

McC: And yet you mentioned that you were possibly  
working more hours than you had been at your office  
job.