TT el hte ttt ttt tet tt tt ft th te th th  
photos by Steve Shaw  

at <  

i  
g Vertical Pillows has been playing together for 2  
years, quickly rising to the top of Detroit's club  
circuit—and if you think that's easy, you try it. Last  
year Paula, the group's vocalist (and one of the  
guitarists) won a local weekly’s award for Best Female  
Vocalist in the Detroit area. She writes most of the  
material with Mary (the other guitarist—they trade off  
lead), and tells me that in performance they’re more  

Skeid tbe the ttt ee ee tt ee  

eer : A‘ -  
The Pillows left to right: Dana Mendelssohn (bass; just replaced by Terry Stimac), Monica Reynolds  
(drums—she also plays sax, clarinet and flute, but not on stage), Mary Monroe/Restrepo (guitar), and  
Paula Bouffard (guitar, vocals).  

before? EVERYWHERE! Somebody has to teach us.  
engineers not to clean up the presentations so carefully  
unless cleanness is actually DESIRED...). The single is  
real ‘60's Garage Rock meets New Wave; live, they  
show more influence from their faves, the  

raucous than the single lets on (where have I heard just  

Watchband (they cover “I Don't Need Your Lovin’ Any  
More”), the Velvet Underground, Iggy Pop & the  

Stooges, and, above and beyond all others, MCS, the  
hippie band once equally notorious for involvement with  
the White Panthers and other leftist heavies, and for a  
noise assault that left many of those same leftists  
complaining, “This invites people to party, not to the  
Party!” Departed bassist Dana based the band’s name on  
a dream of hers involving an Italian guy with vertical  
pillows in the back of his car (history draws a merciful  
curtain over the rest of the dream). I talked to Paula,  
leader of the group.  

Tw: I was interested in some band dynamics, here, in  
that while you’re the newest member, you seem to be in  
charge of the group.  

Paula: Yeah, I had more experience in the field, I was  
in another band called the Roommates. We did a lot of  
traveling around, playing a lot, we were real popular  
around the Detroit area. I learned a lot from that, and  
this band—they were just in the basement, they were  
doing nothing. And I really saw something there, kind of  
put two and two together, and it worked out pretty  

good.  

Tw: Are they going to like your saying they were in the  
basement?  

Paula: Um...NO! (laughs)...they never played a bar or  
nothin’. Maybe once or twice. So I started to manage the  
band, started writing a lot of songs, sitting in, playing  
guitar...) had gotten out of my last band, had an ad in the  
paper, and Mary called me—she just wanted me to come  
see them. So I went, and it just so happened, the singer  
had quit a couple of days ago. Mary says, “Try out as  
singer, what the hell.” I said, “Alright.” I try it, they  
said [uses heavy sneer:] “Naaashhhh...” They said,  
“Well, why don’t you play guitar!” So they kicked the  
guitar player out so I could join. What they did, for my  
audition, they played a song and I had to make up words!  
And they liked it, I was real creative about it.  

Tw: (Laughing) That's a tough audition!  

Paula: Yeah! It was. We used to have another singer for  

a while, and she wasn't very good. She wasn't rough  
enough, you know—she was kind of—sleazy. We're not  
really sleazy. We're more rough than we are sleazy.  
Tw: Well, I thought it was funny you'd been turned down  
as a vocalist when—  

Paula: Yeah, I know!  

Tw:—you also won Best Female Vocalist award (from  
Detroit's weekly METRO TIMES)...  

Paula:...Yeah, that's really ironic. I bring that up quite  
often!  

Tw: This sounds like a combative band.  

Paula: Noooo, we get along great. We just got a new  
bass player.  

Tw: Oh, so it's no longer the one on the single (Dana  
Mendelssohn).  

Paula: Right. She quit. We went on the road this  
summer, and she quit in the middle of the tour.  

Tw: In the middle of the tour? How come?  

Paula: Aw, she said she wasn't having any fun, and we  
were going down South and I don’t think she wanted to go  
down South—it's really hot—and she really wants to go  
to school...but we got a new bass player, she's really  
good, and everything's like GO!..She’s never played in a  
bar before, she’s brand new, but she learns really fast.  
She wasn't in the band two weeks and we had already  
done two shows...Her name's Terry Stimac...  

Tw:...there seem to be ‘60's influenced female bands  
springing up all over the place.  

Paula: Uh-huh. We're not, though. Our record cover  
may look that way. We lean more towards the Rock.  
MCS are our idols.  

Tw: You call yourselves VP4?  

Paula: (laughs) Yeah, sometimes.  

Tw: Why MC5?  

Paula: (Solemnly) Because they're the greatest Rock  
band ever.  

Tw: So what do you see as points of correlation  
between VP4 and MC5?  

Paula: Loud guitar Rock—but lately it's been kind of