Record Review: PAGE 13, IF YOU ——
In Pursuit: Standing in Your Shadow MUST KNOW..-
One Review by Ron Cook MLR RARAR

I've listened to this four-song EP a dozen times now, and I still come up 
with the question: to whom in the Mary Tyler Moore organization are 
these kids related? I mean, how did this group land a recording contract? 
Sure, the instrumentation is tight and the vocals are passable (nothing 
great but they do stay on key), but Jeez, we've heard this type of music a 
thousand times before. Nearly every lounge act in the country has this 
sound; music with a good beat and lyrics you don't have to listen to, or 
would want to.

No, In Pursuit isn't any kind of breakthrough group that will rock the 
airwaves with a new sound. There is nothing innovative here; just safe, 
traditional, MOR senseless pap.

In Pursuit’s EP, Standing in Your Shadow, was released on the MTM 
Music Group label and distributed by Capitol Records. MTM, for those of 
you that haven't watched television for the last twenty-five years, 
stands for Mary Tyler Moore (probably the best business person in the 
television industry), and listening to In Pursuit is like watching Mary 
Tyler Moore Show reruns for the twentieth time; you know exactly what 
to expect—boredom. 

Before going any further, I should mention that In Pursuit is a 
male-dominated group. The young nameless lady (no credits of any kind on 
the cassette) that graces the cover supplies only texture for the male 
vocals. In the first song, “Counting on Monday,” she has one small lead 
part, and in the insipid “Only for You,” she repeats over and over 
(again and again) “All my life, I've been searching all my life, Only for 
you, Only for you.” (I hope they'll be happy together.) 

If you do happen to sit down and attempt to decipher the lyrics, prepare 
to get depressed; every song seems to portray someone with a defeatist 
attitude. (I almost said this song has a message—there are no messages 
in these songs.) Some examples: “There's no one here but the telephone 
lines and a trail of tears.” “I wish I was in a different place in a 
different time.” “Monday morning and it feels too late, How can I deal 
with the hands of fate, Running circles, running down the city/town to 
you.” You know, what really bothers me about all the negativity is that 
the up-tempo instrumentation is contrary to the lyrics; it would go 
better with positive, happy-ending songs. Being negative is one thing, 
but do it properly. Yeah, enough. This EP is a poor showing for In 
Pursuit and the MTM Music Group. In my mind, Mary Tyler Moore plus rock 
‘n roll just does not compute. If this is the style of music you want to 
push, write it off, Ms. Moore, and stick to your sitcoms.

HOMEGROUND

Subscription rates

Annual
United Kingdom £4.50
Ireland and Europe £4.70
USA and Canada £7.30

Include SASE or Reply Coupon.

HOMEGROUND
c/o KATE BUSH fanzine,
03'Se3 SS Whippendell Way,
Orpington, BRS 382,
United Kingdom.

happening. I started writing my own songs and went about with the 
attitude that I would end up in the band I always wanted, and used to 
visualize what I wanted, as well as doing “Words of Power” 
statements every day, in which you state what you want, and 
affirm it at the end by saying “for the good of all and according to 
free will," so you're putting out a psychic call to others and not 
manipulating anyone to get what you want. After about one or two 
months, GASH just fell together like it was meant to happen. Above 
all, you've got to be positive and know that you will achieve what 
you want...to learn more about “Words of Power” you should read 
a book called “Positive Matic” by Marion Weinstein, it's 
published by Phoenix Publishing in Washington or New York.

LO: Smeer, as the only guy in the band, do you ever get static about 
it?

Smeer: No, I don't worry about it, I'm glad I can help the girls out 
as I also keep busy with DEPRESSION so I don’t get frustrated about 
playing in a band with girls and try to consider everyone to be equal 
as to play together is the main aim of the band.

LO: Tell us what to expect from the new album.

GASH: The album has 16 songs on it, including the ones on the demo 
tape. It was recorded on Smeer’s four-track and has a live raw 
sound. Since then we've done a four-track E.P. with a cleaner studio 
sound, but still sounds live and real...The L.P. will be out in the U.S. 
through Flipside magazine with GASH on one side and DEPRESSION on 
the other. The E.P. will be out through Rough Trade I think. If you can't 
wait for the U.S. release write Reactor Records, P.O. Box 623, 
Camberwell, 3124. Victoria, Australia. As for our demo tape, write 
us at Hardcore House, 25 Mimosa Rd., Carnegie, 3163. Victoria, 
Australia.

LO: Do you see GASH getting any radio play?

GASH: We get lots of airplay here on the FM public broadcasting 
stations, especially 3 PBX FM, which have four hours of punk shows 
each week. We're not interested in getting airplay on the 
commercial stations as they wouldn't play punk anyway.

LO: Will there be any chance to see GASH in the states?

GASH: We'd love to come over and play, but can’t afford to. We'd 
have to have a promoter finance a trip for us, or if our record sells 
well and we make some money, we could use that to come over. We'd 
really like to play in Europe and the U.S.A.

Girls Against Sexist Hype is Liz (guitar and vocals), Vera (bass), 
and Smeer (drums). Anyone with a taste for the hard and fast owes 
it to themselves to check out this super hot band!!

LO: When was GASH conceived?

GASH: GASH formed in June of '85 at a gig, we got together with 
the intention of doing only a few songs for fun, and had such a good 
time, just kept on going.

LO: In the time you played together how many gigs have you 
played?

GASH: There's been only about six months where we were playing 
around, the rest of the time we were rehearsing and writing new 
songs, and in that six months we did about ten gigs.

LO: Is there a GASH following, any sign of a cult audience?

GASH: Yeah, a lot of people who like thrash metal and punk/metal 
seem to like GASH. A lot of girls as well.

LO: Have you received many responses from other countries?

GASH: Yes, lots, we had an article in Maximum Rock N Roll earlier this 
year and gave our address so we got responses from the U.S.A., 
and from Europe, mainly England and Germany.

LO: How about negative responses to your shows or hassles from 
police?

GASH: We haven't had any negative responses from anyone at gigs, 
and police don't hassle us anyway.

LO: Do you have any trouble being accepted or taken seriously being 
a mostly female hardcore band?

GASH: No, and I'd be very angry if we weren't taken seriously. We 
have a professional attitude and try to play well at gigs, and we 
don't wear revealing clothes or flaunt our sexuality on stage, we get 
up there, play our music, and I think everyone respects us for it.

LO: Is there any female band that you are influenced or inspired by?

GASH: I used to like Girlschool a lot but there aren't any female 
bands that I know of that are heavy and hardcore. We mainly listen 
to male bands.

LO: Liz, I understand you played a key part in the origin of the band. 
What did you do and could it work for anyone?

Liz: I'd been playing bass in bands with guys for four years before 
GASH, and always wanted to be in a band with other women, but 
never came across any who were dedicated enough to get it.