5 eae

»

Madonna-

Madonna Louise Ciccone (Penn) is probably the most
influential female singer-personality upon the
consciousness of today. Half the people in our media-
crazed society seem constantly disgusted with her, the
other half amused, but both groups seem just the least bit
fascinated nonetheless. Some profess that all she’s doing
with her gyrations and semi-clothing is putting us on, and
they've no idea why the rest of us don't get the joke.
Some insist she’s being victimized, stereotyped and
underrated all the way to the bank, exhibiting a strange
mix of pity and envy for the poor, rich enigma.

The truth is, nobody owns a summer home in Madonna's
head. No one can say for sure if her obvious admiration
and imitation of the late Marilyn Monroe is mere hero
worship (similar to the hordes of dress-alike
preadolescents christened Madonna Wanna-Bes),
pathological fixation, or--again--still another in-joke.
Everybody seems to know the latest about the Penns’
present marital state, but not a soul will admit to caring.
The public-at-large, that anonymous They, can't make up
their minds on the Madonna verdict -- is she to be the
abused (a woman-child trapped by stereotyped
expectations, leering photographers and fans dying to
touch the hem of her garments, if they had any) or the
abuser (spiteful, ungrateful, clever brat who, with her
male counterpart husband, refuses to acknowledge the
little folks who put her where she is)? And what about
her music/video/acting talents? Do her albums, as Dave
Marsh writes, “achieve the fusion of girl-group pop and
dance-rock that Donna Summer and Cyndi Lauper only
dreamed about,” or is she spewing out more of the same
disco pablum fed by the corporate machines to an
undiscerning mass of young urban(e) fools looking for good
dance tunes by which to dance and pick up their dates for
the evening?

I live in The Land That Cable Forgot, and thus have no
MTV on which to view Madonna's “controversial stances”
on whatever subjects her supporters and detractors think
she’s interpreting. Thus, this analysis must forego any
impressions of the unviewed “Papa Don't Preach”
(supposedly hailed by Tipper Gore of the PMRC for its
inspiring message that women who have sex out of wedlock and
become pregnant -- a major concession for the ol’ Tip, I'd
say — should bear their children) and “Open Your Heart”
(which, ironically enough, the New York Daily News'
music critic Jim Farber calls “Tipper Gore's ultimate
nightmare” and also “a bold meditation on the innocence of
raw sexuality” and has certain prudes up in arms, a
phenomenon that’s hard to understand given that bumping
and grinding are not recent additions to Madonna's
repertoire). Also, I never saw either of her movies (I
make conscious efforts to scrupulously avoid
Sleazy-But-Cool-And-Trendy—Underside-of-New-York
movies, as well as not to view anything involving any
Brat-Packer), so my estimation of the woman's acting
talents is limited to a guest hosting of Saturday Night Live
in which she did a surprisingly (considering her
aforementioned admiration) bad impression of Marilyn
Monroe in a stupid sketch involving the Kennedy brothers.
Nor can I comment about a bunch of songs that all sound
alike to me, especially since I tend to only hear things at
the local health spa, where I'm more intent on sit-ups than
music appreciation. What fascinates me the most is
Madonna the Image, and I feel that’s what will remain of
her when the music and pictures have long gone.

An Image has its basis in a Costume and/or Attitude.
The Costume usually consists of an unusual, attention-
getting ensemble featuring one or two memorable
accoutrements. Mr. T's mohawk comes to mind here as a
prominent feature (his Costume being the khaki and chains,
his Attitude being Baaad), as well as Michael Jackson's
trademark glove (and surgical mask) being more
remembered than his Sergeant Pepper gear. Once a
Costume has helped an Image define his/her Attitude, that
costume may be lain aside permanently or temporarily
(although Lauper's first album received much acclaim, she
was still more Image than singer; now that her Costume
feature of checkerboard orange hair has grown out
blonde-white she is perceived to have “settled down,” is
no longer seen as outlandish or threatening to the status
quo, and finds her Attitude thus accepted). While some
fans of the image see this as Selling Out, it is often hard to
fault an artist for abandoning an Image and/or Attitude
that may have been adopted more for the sake of
convenience and easy recognition than actual
nonconformity to begin with.

Many artists find that cultivating an Attitude brings
more long-lasting respect for their craft than a Costume
alone. Few question the vocal talents of an Annie Lennox
or a Tina Turner; one never felt a pressing need to see if
David Bowie or Peter Gabriel could perform as well
without the fancy duds (although one may have had doubts
about Elton John during that 1000 eyeglasses/platform
shoes period). These people are constantly costumed in
Attitude and, more, in presence. When you have no
presence, you need an impressive cover-up. The less
substance you have, the more style you require. Presence
is Attitude with substance behind it.

Costumes are the most fleeting aspects of Image.
Already the media confuses Madonna Wanna-Bes with
Lauper Wanna-Bes, and who still remembers when people
equated Pat Benatar with Spandex? Does it matter
whether America’s Working Class Hero duds wear best on
Bob Dylan, Bruce Springsteen or John Cougar Mellencamp?
The trendier the Costume, the more likely it is to be swept
into the back recesses of the attic of mass consciousness
with all the other Costumes once the newest fad comes
along.

Beyond the Costume, then, how solid is Madonna's
Attitude? She has continually, purposely evoked Marilyn.
Does she believe herself to be a modern reincarnation of
sorts, replete with choreography and sultriness? If so,
the differences between the fabled 50s sex symbol and her
cloney-come-lately become even more glaring. True,
Madonna's training as a professional dancer has stood her
in good stead to emulate every step from a Gentlemen
Prefer Blondes number in doing “Material Girl.” But
Marilyn's image suggested childlike, vulnerable innocence
in spite of sexual knowledge, which society saw as a
contradiction and a mystery.

Madonna's sexuality, by comparison, suggests more the
cheap floozy, the one-night stand picked up in the same
bars in which her music blares. There is no mystery
about the “what” of her, only about the “why.” The first
Madonna video I saw consisted of this (and may Gloria
forgive me for saying it) chick I'd never seen before,
dressed in what appeared to be ripped underwear,
writhing someplace in the middle of a road. I stared in
disbelief at this embarrassing display of sleaze and
pretentiousness and wondered how anyone ever mistook
the accompanying non-music for something worth putting
on the air in the first place. This woman wasn't hinting
“Come on up and see me sometime;” she said “Fuck me
fuck me fuck me now.” I felt like glancing on top of the
television after it was over to see if someone had left a
$20 bill! It seemed to me everything the feminist
movement was trying to obliterate when it strove once
upon a time B.P.B. (Before the Pornography Brigade) to
make sex more erotic and participatory than objectified.
This was a self-admitted “Boy Toy” object.

Thus the word “virgin” shocked the listening public again,
not because it was one of those words you never heard on
television in the days when Lucy and Ricky slept in twin
beds, but because it seemed odd placing it at the heart of a
long song. And whether because of clever packaging at the
hand of the artist herself or divine providence, the
Attitude of disdain for the proprieties of the past has
parlayed itself into much wealth and success for the
“Material Girl” -- NOT “Woman,” heaven forbid. So “girl”
it is, and “material” too, because it's time to acknowledge
reality even while pretending to mock it.

When much of the media holds up “Yuppies” as ideal,
“material” is the right thing to be. Unless today’s parents
teach their children, the wanna-bes, differently, protests
against the Image and Attitude, and even the Costume, of
Madonna are too hypocritical to bear up. When a society
privately embraces the very concepts it publicly deplores,
neither the artist in question nor that society can be taken
seriously. Maybe Madonna senses this; maybe she knows
it as a certainty. When she rails against the
powers-that-be behind Shanghai Surprise, accusing George
Harrison (who had been known, with some friends, to
make what many consider the most valid rock’nroll music
so far) of negative promotion after she and hubby
disdained promotion of any sort on their own parts, and
reporters treat this statement as important enough news
to pass on to viewers of Entertainment Tonight and that
ilk, reality, like sexuality and offensiveness and
everything else that's supposed to make Madonna
controversial, is up for grabs.

Dead Kennedy Defense Fund:
The censorship battle that the Punk group the Dead
Kennedys is going through is well-documented
elsewhere, so we'll assume that those who'd want to
know about it, do. But if you were wondering how to
send money to help in their defense, the address is:
No More Censorship Fund, Box 11458, San
Francisco, CA 94101. Meanwhile, the group has split
up, they say due to conflicting musical goals rather
than this problem.