want to do, if you want to RUIN your voice singing Heavy  
Metal that's YOUR problem! I won't have anything to do with  
teaching you to sing THAT stuff!" It's a great problem, the  
singers realize after a few months...that the exercises they  
do--mind you, they DO strengthen the abdominal muscles,  
because many of them didn't know how to breathe at all--so  

the advantage was that they could hold their breath longer,  
they were stronger, but they still had the problem of:  

wobbliness when they tried to get the wailing that the kids do  
into their singing. Because Rock singing is so passionate.  

Tw: Isn't that one of the differences between white and black  
Gospel singing? The restraint caused by the cultured style  
white singers use?  

Eliz: Exactly, that's one of the best examples of the  
differences in singing--and more and more, white people are  
trying to get the black sound. If they're inhibited about  
opening their mouths and letting their passion show, it's  
rather difficult, and the cultured training does get in the way.  
Today's Rock music is expressing the frustrations and the  
pain that people feel, and there's no room in it to sort of  
soliloquize about it...I think [Rock style] is very healthy, but  
of course if the kids...are pushing their voices against a basic  
inhibition like, “Shut up, don’t make so much noise, stop  
yelling, don’t run through the house yelling,” that's the  
problem. They were alright until they became aware that they  
made a lot of noise--usually it's parental, or they do it to  
themselves, or their peers do it to them, “Oh, shhh! Your  
voice! You're so loud! I can hear you!” You know, they're  
talking in the coffee shop--"Pipe down, you're so loud!” And  
they learn to control it, make it a little lighter, put a little air  
in it. That's the problem. That's when the air comes in, and the  
vocal cords get pushed, and in speaking or in singing, that  
inhibition around natural free sound is what ruins voices and  
gives people tremendous complexes. They break out in phlegm  
and chronic coughing...  

Tw: Let me ask you a question that came up [regarding] Anna  
Russell. She said she became a comic singer because she  
didn't have the natural equipment to do straight operatic  
singing.  

Eliz: Oh, how sad. She probably did have—everybody  
basically does have, if they're properly trained—and she was  
a wonderful performer. I adored her. She had such a powerful  
voice! She was probably so frustrated by the constant  
criticism, the fact that you've got to be perfect--in Rock  
singing, you can have a frog, you can have a little break, and  
it's you, it's your style. I'm always looking for little things  
that students do, and they might not like it, but I say, “Hey,  
that is cute! Keep that! Don't get rid of that! Remember it's not  
altogether good for you, but do it now and again because it's  
your style.” I'm always looking for that little individual  
something because I don't want them to all walk out like peas  
in a pod. And she probably, because she could not make the  
grade of being (cultured voice:) so perfect --although I'm  
sure she did far more good that way, than if she'd been  
another classical singer struggling to be noticed [regarding  
Anna Russell's nose getting broken, Elizabeth says that the  
septum being blocked in some way would make a difference in  
trying to aim sound up in the mouth]...but that wouldn't make  
a difference in Rock singing, where the sound comes from  
straight inside the body, made by the diaphragm and the  
lungs, and comes straight up out of your mouth, very direct.  
Some Rock singers do have broken noses and heavy blockages  
up there, and except for an occasional nasal twang...you  
don't notice it.  

Tw: So when people talk about “natural equipment” for  
singing, what are they talking about?  

Eliz: They think they've been given a God-given gift of a  
voice. I was told by my teacher, that God just hadn't given me  
a BIG voice, just a pretty, light voice. It just wasn't true! All  
those years, 40 years or so, I had a big, raging voice in  
there, but no one ever knew it—they just said, “Oh, dear, do  
the best you can with it, it's a pretty voice, it's just not a  
great voice.” And I was so frustrated! Some of my girlfriends  
had great voices, and they didn't look any different to me, and  
I wanted to know what it was in there. And all the time, it  
was a connection of the abdominal muscles--my mother had  
done such a good job of turning me into a lady--came from a  

humble background, a big Cockney family in England, and  
was determined to be a lady, and any screaming on my  
part was so Cockney that she stopped it straight away  
“Stop that! I will not have you sound like that! You will be  
a lady!"...But she also wanted me to be a singer. And did  
she berate me every time I was nervous, whenever I  

failed. She would tick me off, and I couldn't help it--I was.  

nervous because I was so ill-equipped. If she'd only  
realized that every time she stopped me running through  
the house--or if we'd stayed in England, and I'd grown up  
with my cousins and my aunts, I'd have probably had a  
good voice, because...those of them that are alive say  
(loud voice:) “ere, where yer goin’ for yer holidays?”  
-because of the parental suppression, I was robbed,  
actually, of that big voice. I was always so ladylike. It  
was terribly important to always be a lady, never to cry  
in public or get angry, ever. And I was trying to be a  
singer, so consequently it was always so controlled, and  
so uninteresting. But despite that, I got out. I was pretty,  
I knew how to dress, I got acts written for me. I did  
many club dates in Australia and England...and thought up  
gimmicky things to do. I used to pull things out of my  
bosom, like little paper hearts to give to someone, as  
I sang, “As I give my heart to you.” When I sang “Golden  
Earrings”, I pulled out a big brass curtain ring and put it  
on some man’s ear. I did cute things, to have an act, so  
I did work...musical theatre, light ballads, and some comic  
songs...Australian ballads, which I sang in England, and  
English music hall, which I sang in Australia. And I did  
quite well--but always with this voice. And I had to  
exercise it every day, and always so much breath in it!  
It wouldn't have occurred to me to scream and yell. When  
I was...working as a cruise director, I would impersonate  
the crew. I'd yell, "BON GIORNO!" down the deck, because  
I was being an Italian...it never occurred to me that I was  
using a great big wonderful voice! Only when I met Mr.  
Mazzarella, and he was trying to get me to do that--and  
I was saying, “That's yelling, that's not singing, I won't do  
that!" Well, he made me do it, and as I started to do it,  
I got the sound. I was very insecure about this ugly sound,  
because it was so “EEEEAAAY!"...he wanted me to do  
Opera, “You have a lovely dramatic soprano in there, and  
we're going to get it out.” He left before I was brought  
out, but he'd given me some students to work with, and  
I discovered that most of them wanted to do Rock songs.  
So I did a little research on what successful Rock singers  
did, and I discovered they were all crying like children!  

With students Michael Olivieri (Leather Wolf), Randy O. (Michaelangelo), Betsy (Bitch), David McDonald  
(Citizen Kane), Holly Miller (Syren), and Tommy Gunn (VVSI).  

They were all doing what I hadn't been allowed to do! And  
I loved it, I realized the release that was there...And that  
her students often had problems with holding back.) So  
I devised my little primal screaming exercises, to get  
them to call out. We stamp our feet together, and we say,  
(loud kid voice:) “No! I don’t want to! It's not fair!” Grown  

women doing this, ate something! But they  
always did it with me because they felt that I  
wasn't judging them, never scolded them or put them  
down, “You're stupid, you're not trying hard.”...So they  
started talking about me in L.A.--and the fact that I was  
getting results in 4 to 8 lessons shows that I was on the  
right track...The big thing I teach that's different to the  

classical method, is that they float the voice on a little  
column of air, and what we do, is we hold our breath. You  

can't literally hold your breath, because nothing would  
happen. A sound wave coming up from inside the lungs has  
to come on a little wave of air. Like a child will take a  
breath of air, tighten the tummy, cut off the air, and  
say, “I DON'T WANT TO!” You can't exhale as you do  
it...you have to kind of hold the breath back, (by doing  
which) you can make incredible sounds without tiring the  
vocal cords. But when you push air through...then the air  
pressure dries the cords, they strain, they're trying to  
vibrate—and Mr. Mazzarella's big discovery was that the  
cords just make frequencies, they don't make too much  
sound, just a very small sound. That little frequency  
travels down in the body to be amplified by the abdominal  
muscles, and then transformed by the action of the  
diaphragm...(in technicalese) a diaphragm is a thin  
vibrating disk that converts electric frequencies into  
acoustic sound...and the human diaphragm has already  
been called a diaphragm, which is perfect. It's not just a  
disk that divides the top and bottom half of the body, or  
which pushes the lungs up and down and creates breathing  
action, it does that too, but it also makes sound. So that  
was why it was important we tighten the abdominal  
muscles to create amplifiers...the vocal cords are trap  
doors but they're not also supposed to be valves, holding  
back a big push of air...after a while, the cords get so  
dry, so scarred, so tired, that little blisters form (and  
become polyps).  

Elizabeth can imitate Dennis De Young (Styx) and Ronnie  
James Dio (quite something over the phone), but has no  
desire to sing Rock; “So many people do it better, and I'm  
still a lady, a damn, bloody lady.” Bloody right!