other people have gone through stuff like it.

Bebe: It's distressful...when you're 21 and wanna meet someone you think is a neat Rock'n'Roll star, that's a normal thing, what's wrong with that? If my daughter comes to me when she's 21 and says, “Ma, I really wish I could meet David Bowie,” I'm not gonna think she wants to sleep with the man because of it...it's all unfair. You get hurt. It hurts. Plus, when you have a relationship with somebody that doesn’t work out, that hurts, too (having to go through it in public). But it cracks me up, some of the things I hear. I'm supposed to be rich, collecting all this alimony—which is all total bollocks—I'm not filthy rich, not a jetsetter, don't collect alimony...haven't modeled for 8 years, made that good ol’ green money for a while. You certainly don't make a lot of money in this business unless you have a number one record...I just do what I do. If it works out, great, I'll be very happy. I just intend to never give up! I'm glad I'm young and still have a lot of mileage, glad I started as young as I did...‘Metalbilly” is ours, and one way to make sure people find out about it, is to go to England, 'cause the press over there loves new bands. I love England for that, they're still very fresh about opening the door for new people. In England I've gotten so much press as so many things, so many careers. For them to treat the Gargoyles as just another part of the many dimensions of my life is very cool. I love America, believe me, I'd love to get signed to an American label, but it's been hard for me because the 3 deals I've been offered have not been very good deals. They've been like, “We'll get these guys to write the songs, and do a dance record to get into that market—" Tw: “Get Holly Knight to do you a song—"

Bebe: God bless Holly Knight, I hope she laughs all the way to the bank, but I like my songs better!..I don't sing like a bird, like a mouse, don't have a real girly-girl voice. When I first started making records, everybody tried to push me to sing like that, like a girly-girl. I didn't learn to sing with girly-girl records. I grew up in Virginia, listening to Brenda Lee and Wanda Jackson, and then I got into Rock’n'Roll. When I would practice in front of my mirror with my hairbrush, the records I practiced to were the Stooges, the MC-5, the Stones...I used to get on my friend's vest, tease my hair out and pretend I was Janis Joplin. We used eyeliner pencil to make little pockmarks on our faces so we'd look more like her! I used to get in tons of trouble for stealing the liquor bottles out of the cabinet, we had to have all the props around and Janis was a big drinker—but we didn't have Southern Comfort, only Scotch. We'd put the bottles around us and rock out! My girlfriend Annette—if you're out there, I hope you read this. Annette used to pretend that she was Keith, and I was Mick...Mick is like the perfect Man/Woman, as far as I'm concerned. Mick is like a great guy, as far as not being a chauvinist. I think he genuinely likes the female race. I've been in situations where he's the only guy in a room filled with women, and he gets right in there with y'all...Mick is always the only guy at Jeri’s little salmon and cucumber sandwich tea parties—let me tell ya, some of the funnest times I've ever had. Jeri is the perfect Southern hostess...Mick is a wonderful female companion. I've never met a man who knows more about facials and hypo-allergenic make-up. He cured my zits for me a couple of times when I was 19. He gave me witch hazel! But it never even dawned on me to try to sing like Pat Benatar. I always aspired to sound like a guy.

Tw: Have you heard the Brood?

Bebe: I know the Brood, they live down the street from me. I know all the bands in Portland. Portland is the new Austin, Texas—it's just a matter of time before the record companies come up here and sign everyone in this town...the Brood are going through a lot of changes. They lost their singer and their keyboard player, they're a 3-piece now, and Chris Horne is now singing. So their sound is kinda different. They're cavewomen, though! I'm not a cavewoman. I love cavewomen, I love the Brood, but I sing much raunchier. No, I like the Pandoras, too, their whole trip, but it's a lot more garage-y than the Gargoyles. We're more like the Georgia Satellites, if they were turned up to 50...but I think we have more of an edge, because I was weaned on the Rolling Stones, and the Brood and the Pandoras love all that stuff that's like Greg Shaw's basement, you know? [Greg Shaw, prez of Bomp Records.] I love that stuff to listen to, but it's not what I aspire to for a sound. I wanna do a world tour with Motorhead or the Beastie Boys, that's where I'm at (laughs)...we're at the point where the record companies are starting to come see us without our calling them. Which is good. For 7 years, I've been calling them, saying “Please come to my shows.” And all I'd get was, “Oh! How's Elvis Costello doing?” And I'm, “O-kay! See ya later!” It was hard for me, too, a couple of times when I was close to inking deals. A part of me really wanted those deals, but I couldn't accept them because they were not right. There's no way I could sing Disco—it's just not me...when I was in the B-Sides, I got disenchanted because it was going in too Pop for me. At one point we sounded just like Squeeze!..I would write the lyrics, and my guitar player—who I still really care for and think is very talented—would write everything in these super high keys, like Teri Nunn. I don't like to sing like that. I have my own range, and my own power—in the key of E! And occasionally, in the key of A!..that's why the B-Sides broke up. They wanted to be real melodic Pop...when I formed the Gargoyles... I made sure everybody knew the Alice Cooper catalogue backwards and forwards before I even let them in the door! “Alright, This Is My Body’, backwards, NOW!” Everybody in this band, it's great, we're all on the same wavelength, listen to the same music, like the same things. I'm really happy with this band. I think it's gonna be the last band I have to form...The last few records I put out—my record on Rhino, my Canadian picture disc, my English single were on cool little indies, and finally I put this single out myself—

Tw: So you're your own cool little indie.

Bebe: --but what's so ironic, is that I have no promotion machine, and this record's doing better than any of those other records ever did! We pressed 1000 and immediately had to go into second pressing, we're back-ordered for 7000...I'm so pleased, I'm so happy...we get a lot of female fans. I answer all my fan mail, and I get about 30 letters a week from little girls, I'm not kidding...it's interesting, in the same way you say you wanna do this interview with me 'cause you think I'm kinda misunderstood, I think that's starting to happen a lot more now. People have been coming to the shows, and completely re-evaluating their opinion of me...my spirit certainly hasn't gotten tough, but it's gotten to a point where I just don't care. I care more that the kids like it, that they'll keep coming to the shows, and we'll be able to make an album on a real label. And that they're not gonna want me to be Babushka the Viking Queen—this one label...spent ten grand on me making demos, and I cried all the way through it, "Why don't you just let me do one of my own songs?!” “No, no, we've gotta get you this songwriting team—"...and I went in and I recorded it, and they wanted me to dress up like a Viking...I'm 5'10"...and they wanted to capitalize on the Amazon qualities...they sort of saw me as She-Ra. “Bebe, you're tall enough, and you've got a strong enough voice and persona to carry this off. And all our other artists are 5'2”! This is one of our favorite brainstorms, don't you wanna participate?” I'm like, “Are you kidding? I don't even think I can balance the headdress!” I cried a lot over that. I wanted the deal, but they didn't want to listen to my songs.....as long as there're people like Patti, even though she's a housewife now, but as long as her memory lingers on, and as long as there's a Lydia Lunch, and as long as there're girls willing to fight for the crusade—we're gonna win! These guys can't be the only ones allowed to have fun forever! I love men, but I love women, too—and I also love dogs,

why I do this interview! We a big bark for female females!

shouldn't say that because they're pretty raunchy, actually! They're gonna like me saying that, too; “Girls, you're raunchy!”

Tw: Paula Pandora already said that about them.

Bebe: Yeah, but Paula Pandora, that's a different thing, that whole cave approach. I like

Route Record

: According to the NEW YORK TIMES, Heavy Metal and break-dancing have hit the U.S.S.R. At a special press conference called by the Soviet Foreign Ministry on “the problems of contemporary Soviet Rock”, leading Jazz musician Aleksei Kozlov praised Metal as a way for less affluent Russian youth to blow off steam at the upper crust, saying, “They just like to wave their hands and then calm down. If we forbid this music, they will display their aggressiveness in other forms.” Kozlov also asked that dancing be allowed at Rock concerts. Meanwhile, the Young Communist League is sponsoring discos and break-dancing contests, and Melodiya (the government's record company) is recording bands that a few years ago could only play underground gigs. Two years ago, Michael Jackson was denounced as embodying Western corruption; now, they have aired the “Billy Jean” video on Russian T.V. The TIMES adds, “The Rock music that has won new official sanction is largely devoid of themes of youthful rebellion and the bitter sameness to Western lyrics.” Since the chief ways to get AIDS are through certain types of sexual contact, contaminated blood products, and dirty hypodermic needles, it’s no surprise that AIDS is catching on among drug users who share needles. Some estimates put AIDS infections among New York junkies as high as 60%, and AIDS is now showing up in junkie communities nation-wide. Made of a sort of paper, these are disposable undies for when you're in a situation that just won't wash and would rather toss your undies than park the tour bus at a rest stop at midnight and rinse ‘em under the eyes of intrigued campers. Seven pairs for $2.99 (what about discounts for world tour size orders, guys?), and remember, littering the highway ain't legal. From K W International Trading Co., P.O. Box 21493, San Jose, Ca 95151-1493.

Victory Music, POB 7515, Bonney Lake, WA 98390