will have material by Blacksmith (with lead singer Heidi  
Black); there's a new LP, Carried Away, by Suzy Saxon & the  
Anglos; a new 6-song EP from Dinner With The Browns;  
one from Lacy J. Dalton, Highway Diner; a new Millie  
Jackson; a new Aretha; and look for a X-mas single by  
ex-Runaways Lita Ford and Sandy West, with Quiet  
Riot’s Rudy Sarzo... Reissues now out: Ike & Tina Turner's  
first, It's Gonna Work Out Fine (EMI); Big Mama Thornton's  
Quit Snoopin’ Round My Door (Ace); Sandy Denny's Rendezvous  
(Carthage); and Peggy Scott/ JoJo Benson's Soul Shake  
(Charly)... How To Win Friends And Influence People: 6.A.S.H.,  
or Girls Against Sexual Hype, is a new all-women Thrash  
band from Australia, and one song goes, “Out the way we're gash  
thrash, stick Madonna and Cyndi Lauper right up your fuckin’  
arse, stereotyped women, those chicks are just a farce.” Send  
these girls to a Karen Finley show! (Karen smears herself with  
food--no stereotypes there, nossir!)... And speaking of Karen  
Finley; we're told that when she played S.F. recently, she put  
her own posters up over those of her newly ex-ed husband,  
Harry Kipper, who was playing across the street that same  
weekend... Cartoonist Susan Catherine (a BITCH contributor)  
is in London, promising to send us a series “Overheard At English  
Lunchcounters,” if they have any... And BITCH contributor Neon  
Gene is assisting Kim Fowley with his new all drag queen  
project, the Cosmetics--don't even ask us, write to NEON ANGELS  
and ask them!.. Christine McVie has married a Portuguese synth  
player whose name has crossed our path three times with three  
different spellings, so we're going to wimp out and not even  
guess... The Women's Foundation (a non-profit group that  
funds “living skills” projects for low income women), honored  
six Bay Area women musicians; Holly Near (founder of Redwood  
Records), Cajun/Blues singer Katie Webster, Lichi Fuentes  
(founder of the Latin American New Song group, Grupo Raiz),  
Betsy Wong (founder of the Flowing Stream Ensemble,  
which plays classical Chinese music), Laurette Goldberg  
(founder of the Philharmonia Baroque Orchestra of the  
West), and cabaret singer Weslia Whitfield. Folkie Ronnie  
Gilbert emceed the honors at a benefit concert the honorees  
performed for the foundation.. Separate Checks is doing  
benefits for a Philadelphia Children’s Hospital--hey, SCs, how do  
Californians get your single? We get inquiries... Cyndi Lauper,  
the Pretenders (which ones?), Bob Geldof, and Paul  
Young did a Rock concert on a British aircraft carrier, attended  
by sailors and British military personnel stationed off the Rock  
of Gibraltar. It was taped to be aired as a British TV special. No,  
we don't know if it was a benefit or what... Elizabeth, former  
bassist of Leathur Panteez, is now in Silent Knight.. Lyan  
Ray has joined the ZaZuy Pitts Memorial  
Orchestra.. ex-Go-Go Gina Schock has a new band,  
Schockwave... Bread And Roses, which stages shows for  
shut-ins (ranging from prisoners to those in nursing homes) is  
having serious financial problems. A recent fundraiser featured  
Joan Baez, sister of Mimi Farina, who runs the  
organization... Bette Midler preparing for a TV movie, Winnie:  
My Life in The Institution, where she'll play a slightly retarded  
woman who achieves release from an institution, but is subjected  
to so much cruelty outside that she decides to return. Say, is that  
institution Rock'n'Roll?  

Correction: the new band of Eden, ex-Rude Girl, is called  
Legal Reins, not Legal Reign, as last issue had it  

Distributor F v: Terran Harvest, the  
distributor for Alternative Ears Imported Records, Tapes, and  
Publications, is interested in carrying more female artists (they  
currently carry Sue Ann Harkey and Lauri Paisley). They are  
interested ONLY in the following kinds of music; Electronics (Classical,  
Experimental, or New Age), Jazz Fusion, and traditional or  
improvisational forms of Folk music. Send sample records/tapes to  

Dear BITCH  
Enclosed is a picture of our part in the current “DOLL  
WARS” (your last issue.) At a recent gig of ours, “Jem” of  
Jem and the Holograms was cool enough to drop in for our  
encore. It was a Metal event not to be missed! That doll can  
really headbang--and look! Not a hair out of place!  
Once again, proof that this is the Year of the Doll.  

Yours toyingly, Malibu barbi  

P.S. Our P.O. Box is for sure now, please print this; Malibu  
barbi, P.O. Box 421137, San Francisco, CA 94142. Send $4  
for our second cassette. Live release “Jam With Jem”  
available soon!  

EDITOR: We gotta confess--what really interests us is, whose  
head is that in your drum kit?  

READER EDITORIAL by S. Boston  

Does censorship have a place in American society? No. But that is exactly what the Parent's Music  
Resource Center is trying to accomplish by labeling records. Adverse ratings would make records more  
appealing to many kids. The music itself is not as all-powerful as the PMRC would like the public to  
believe. It is just another means of expression. Labeling records would censor the performer, much like  
banning a book censors the author.  

Rating records would not stop kids from buying them. The R-rating on movies was supposed to keep kids  
from viewing certain movies. Instead of preventing kids from watching them, it has turned R movies into  
somewhat a status symbol. Why would records be any different? It would be a status symbol to have a  
record rated “sexual” or “profane” or “violent.” It is the parent's responsibility, not the PMRC’s to  
know what their children are listening to.  

The PMRC also seems to think that Rock music causes drug abuse, immorality, and violence. People,  
not their music, cause these problems. People will do such things with or without music. Granted, there  
are rare occasions where a person will hear a song about murder and then go out and do it. Those few  
are mentally unstable to begin with. Watching a violent cop show or “slasher” movie could cause such  
people to kill, but those aren't heavily censored.  

The labeling campaign would discriminate against certain artists and musical styles. The PMRC seems  
to be anti-Hard Rock. They complain about W.A.S.P.'s sexuality and Twisted Sister's violent videos. They  
don't criticize Kenny Rogers or Chicago for sexual lyrics. Why? Because that’s what they're listening to  
on their stereos. Country music is just as “bad” as Rock. It promotes alcohol abuse and immorality just  
as the PMRC says Rock is doing, but the PMRC isn't coming down on them. Some things are all in the  
minds of the listeners. “Walking On Sunshine” by Katrina and the Waves is about being so much in love  
that every time she thinks of him she’s “walking on sunshine” because she feels good. “Walking On  
Sunshine,” hmm... Katrina and the Waves are on drugs, right?  

The PMRC is overreacting about Rock music. They should be more concerned about being good parents  
to their own kids instead of trying to control what everyone else listens to.