And I hate the term “spouse”, anything that makes a woman seem like she's a second  
class citizen. Why don't they call Rod Stewart or Mick Jagger “model groupies? Or  
“actress groupies”? Because that's all those guys go out with!  
Tw: Exactly, Rock stars and models—I mean, Bruce Springsteen, Billy Joel, David  
Lee Roth, Ron Wood, George Harrison, Eric Clapton—that's why it seemed so  
remarkable that people...would single you out for this kind of attention.  
~-by Twersky: Bebe:...when I was 17 or 16, when I'd walk into those parties and get photographed,  
“If you're a woman in Rock, you're either a performer or a spouse. If you're a spouse, no believe me, I didn't understand all that—how can you?  
one’s going to give you a break. Sure, you get offered contracts, but not on your terms.”  
--Bebe Buell in SWEET POTATO #36. Bebe: Yeah, I had just come to New York, and I was dating Todd [Rundgren]. Jesus  
I wrote about Rock for 2 years before I found out Bebe Buell wasn't a groupie. It was Christ! (Deep voice:) "Oh, we're gonna take your picture for this and that—” And  
another 2 years before I found out she's a singer with a great raw R & B style. The fault was, like, (High-pitched, perky voice:) “Okay, sure!” I was a kid! And it was tons of  
lies with various journalists (most of whom, Bebe points out, she’s never met) who gave fun! And I certainly couldn't understand the harm in it. And I always had problems with  
her an astonishing amount of undeserved snotty press. As Cheryl Cline points out, women  
some of the older women, cause I was this kid, and I came along and was hanging out  
in the music biz may get tagged as “groupies” in an attempt to “keep them in their place”;  
with all the guys they wished they were hanging out with, and I got a lot of flack from  
as WBA IV points out, there's no need to try to “keep a woman in her place” unless she's  
got some of my peers as well, I had a difficult time making friends.  
what it takes to break out of it. Rock tends to view spouses as handmaidens to the stars,  
Tw: What's this about Patti Smith talking you into posing for PLAYBOY?  
Bebe: (Laughs.) Patti was one of my dearest girlfriends, in the early 70's, when I  
first came to New York. She and Todd were very close...they went out together for a  
while. You know, Patti went out with everybody, she was pretty cosmic. She had  
excellent taste in men—she went out with Sam Shepard before anyone else even  
knew who he was...at the time she was dating Allen Lanier from Blue Oyster Cult.  
I was like 17, and I loved Patti from the second I met her, I was infatuated with her.  
because she thought like I did. We liked the same music, I loved the MC-5 and the  
Stooges and the Rolling Stones, and she would sit around with me and talk about  
Marianne Faithfull and Anita Pallenberg for hours, which were my favorite  
subjects—she and I were real soul buddies on that level. She taught me all about Edie  
Sedgewick, and she said to me, “You're like those kind of girls.”  
Tw: What did she see in you that was like that?  
Bebe: I don't know. Maybe my rebel spirit. We used to put on records and  
sing...before Patti started singing, she was a poet and an actress, she would do a lot  
of little plays off Broadway and such, and I would go see every one of them, I went to  
every one of her poetry readings. She knew I really wanted to be a singer...I was  
Tw: The reason we wanted to put you on the cover, is we decided you'd gotten more  
undeserved snotty bad press than anybody since Yoko Ono...[the comparison] came up  
because a lot of it was on the order of, “How dare a girlfriend try to prove she can make  
music?”  
Bebe: Well, how about if the girlfriend was making music way before she became a  
girlfriend?!  
Tw: I don't think most people know that.  
Bebe: Yeah. It's too bad...I'm a lot less naive now than I was. I'm 30 years old now. When  
I came to New York, I was 16 going on 17, and a lot of the things that happened to me,  
happened during an age when most people are in college, or they're developing or  
whatever. I, unfortunately—or fortunately! I don't know if I should regret it or not—did all  
of my growing and developing in front of everybody and their mother. In the public eye.  
And in a lot of ways, I was very naive to the damage that was being done to me on a lot of  
occasions...you know, when you're 18 years old, and you're out, and somebody takes  
your picture, you don't really realize that that picture could end up somewhere, and  
somebody could assume you're married to or dating the person you're standing next to...I  
think things got out of hand for me, cause I didn’t have a press agent or a manager—and  
I still don't, I never have—I just didn’t have any control over what was written about me.  
I couldn't keep my finger on it like artists can who've got people working for them. I've  
always pretty much been a self-promoted package...  
Tw: Why do you think the press took you up and treated you that way?  
Bebe: I don't know—maybe they thought I was cute! (Laughs.)  
Tw: I think that's part of it, really!  
Bebe: I don’t know! I would like to think that it was maybe because they noticed something  
about me that wasn't normal. Maybe they didn't see me as just a girl that went out with a  
guy. Maybe they felt instinctively that I had something else to offer. For Christ's sake,  
they've been writing about me for enough years, and they don't seem to want to stop!  
I mean, I've even moved to Portland, Maine, I don’t know how much further I can detach  
myself from the situation. But I just look at it this way; I've been living in Portland...since  
1980. I haven't dated somebody “famous” in almost that long. It's kind of funny to me that  
they dredge up so much stuff that, to me, is just really old news. And I'm sure that the  
people who were the other part of the involvements consider it old news, too. (Laughs).  
I'm still very close to a lot of people I dated—or went to dinner with, a lot of times it was  
just dinner...but you know, for as much weird, distorted press as I've gotten, I've gotten a  
lot of favorable reviews, too. When I put my record out on Rhino, in 1981...that record  
didn’t get one bad review. And some pretty tough critics liked it. And when I started  
performing live, with my first band, the B-Sides, the reviews of my shows were always  
pretty favorable. I think if you keep at something long enough, and you don't give up, never  
stop, eventually people understand, I feel at this point, I'm getting to that place. The  
Gargoyles are coming together pretty well...that's why we're going to London on Monday.  
Cause they happen to like me over there, in Europe! (Laughs.)  
Tw: Well, people must have been picking up on something special in you, because when you  
think of people out there who really are super-groupies, and are trying to get that press  
attention, and can't—  
Bebe: Well, I really hate the term “super-groupie”—