Addie is fronting a new band with Lois LaRue,  
ex-Rude Girl, a band called--well, we'll get into that.  
About Lois--see Danise's piece, p.8. About Addie--  

--you want to hear “scary”? Imagine a woman  
guitarist as good as the best, compared favorably to  
Eric Clapton, Jeff Beck, and Duane Allman, but  
unknown to most of the Rock public. That's scary--to  
be as good as Addie is, and not to have gotten wider  
recognition.  

Understand we're talking numbers here, as in  
stadiums of screaming fans, the cover of ROLLING  
STONE, and at least one pointlessly vicious attack by  
NME. For there are places Addie is most definitely  
known. Addie is the only woman ever asked to audition  
for the Rolling Stones. At 18, she was a founding  
member of Fanny, the first all-female band to sign with a  
major label (and the band that inspired Lita Ford to swing  
an axe in the Runaways) but she left before the first  
album was finished. After doing backup singing in L.A.  
(for nobody special--just Ringo Starr, Ella Fitzgerald,  
Frank Zappa, Lowell George, and ELO), she headed for Chicago and  
became Willie Dixon's protégé.  

Now, if you don’t know who Willie Dixon is, I can't tell you.  
Suffice to say he's a Blues MONSTER, whose tunes have been  
covered by the likes of the Stones and Led Zep. Among other  
Blues greats she's jammed with are Albert King, Koko Taylor,  
Fenton Robinson, Buddy Guy, Junior Wells, James Cotton, Sun  
Seals, and Jimmy Johnson. It would be impressive for anybody  
to play for that list; but remembering that she did this as a white  
girl in black bands on the South side of Chicago, it's damned  
impressive. She even survived being nicknamed the “Blonde Blues  
Bombshell” with her dignity intact. It's the fashion for girl  
musicians to simper and “Aw, shucks” their playing, no matter  
how good they are. Addie has no inclination towards such bullshit.  
She knows she's good, and for someone who's been called one of  
the top white Blues guitarists in the world, she's pretty casual  
about it. She is sure better than Ron Wood, who did get the  
Stones gig.  

So this is an interview with Addie and Lois. “I'm probably going  
to ask a lot of boring questions you've both heard before,” I  
warned. “Okay!” Lois said, cheerfully. “Let's see--B.C. Rich, I'm  
older than dirt, Rude Girl, and my influences are...”  

Addie:... Wayne Charvel from Charvel guitars gave me a call...he  
joined B.C. Rich, they merged, and they want to build me a guitar  
to endorse their product...I told him I was working with Lois of  
Rude Girl, ‘cause Lois had had some dealings with B.C. Rich, and  
he was very excited...we're going to L.A. because of the Howard  
the Duck thing I did. The midget, Ed Gale, who played the duck,  
asked me to come. I'll be doing a video out there with him,  
playing acoustic guitar--which should be interesting! What I did  
was work for two weeks on the movie, and my job was to learn  
Joe Walsh's guitar solo verbatim, from the title track—-[sings:]  
Ho-OWard the Duck, quack!—(rolls her eyes)—anyway, it has a  

lot of Chuck Berry, some Peter Townshend sweeps and stuff...I learned the part, and my main role was  
to do the close-up hand work. Which I did not do, because I taught Ed, the midget, how to play the guitar.  
And he did it really well. He had never played guitar...In my scrapbook—I took pictures—it says  
“Howard's guitar double”. And I have the full-size suit! He's got the midget suit, for the finale, right?  
The puppet hands were all the same size. So, really, the prerequisite for getting the gig was, would my  
hands fit? And I said, “Lois, if my hands don't fit, YOU'RE gonna have to do this  
gig!” The puppet hands are four fingers, right?  
Tw: Like Jerry Garcia.  
Addie: Right! No, it was like Cinderella! Like one of the ugly sisters. “It's gonna fit, I'll make it fit, I'm  
gonna marry the prince!”  
Lois: Prince Howard the Duck.  
Tw: How do you get a gig like that?  
Addie: Oh, it was really neat. Chris Mickey, a session guitar player who worked with me on the Nth  
Degree project, which is a video company in San Francisco that I did two years ago--like for a real video  
they spend $60,000, and it was a big deal, and it was never completed. The main guy was a little off, he  
didn't have the money to finish it--anyway, Chris Mickey, who was with the Pointer Sisters and various  
other players—good guitar player--was in Bananas, in Oakland, the store that he works in, and someone  
came in and said, “Does anyone know a good woman guitar player?” They wanted a woman, they thought  
a woman's hands would be smaller. Chris right away said me, so they called me from Bananas and said  
“Are you interested in doing the part”, and I said, “Yeah, it'd be great.” 'Cause--this was really  
weird--psychic--a white feather had flown into my car. A pure white feather. I couldn't believe it, said,  
“This has gotta be symbolic,” put it up on my visor, get home, there's a call about the Howard the Duck  
thing... [Mimes staring at a phone receiver:] “Howard  
the DUCK?! Is this a JOKE?!” ‘Cause I'd just had a call before that. [Perky voice:] “Hi, are you da da tuh