and more recently “David St. Hubbins” in Spinal Tap) plays a member of the BARBUSTERS band as

does Joan Jett’s real life and brand new drummer Paul Harkins. Jason Miller, better known as
Father Damien in The Exorcist, plays Dad Rasnick. Can't remember his name but the little bugger
who plays Joan's kid looks right into the camera for brief seconds during a scene when the whole
family’s at the dinner table in the beginning of the movie. That was classic. And something that
was not advertised, The Fabulous Thunderbirds make a cameo appearance.

People will go see this movie just because Michael J. Fox is in it. People will go see it because
Bruce Springsteen's music is involved. And people will venture to the theaters just to see Joan
Jett's trademark raven hair reduced to a wimpy brown. But I bet mostly what will attract people
to Light Of Day will be to see if the hot shot Jett can act as well as rocks. I think those folks will

be surprised.
= Concert Review: Cyndi Lauper

by Cheryl Cline. Part One =>

Heavy metal, one critic has said, hardly seems respectable enough to write
about. Another said the thought of reading about heavy metal was perhaps
more repellent than the utterly repellent thought of listening to it. Both
writers managed to overcome their qualms, though the latter wrote a piece
calculated to prove his point.

I have my own qualms about writing about heavy metal. It is disreputable,
isn't it? But that's exactly why it intrigues me. The establishment rock press
and most “respectable” rock fans won't touch the stuff with a ten-foot pole and
I keep rushing up close to see why. I can see perfectly good reasons why heavy
metal is considered objectionable, and it’s no help at all that I'm attracted to
heavy metal for the very reasons it’s in the critical doghouse: its loudness, its
sameness, its insistent thud-and-blunder, its machismo, its lumpen-ness. I
crave its excesses: the lights, the flash, the symbolism and smoke, the shoes
and haircuts.

I've tried to explain my attraction by saying I like heavy metal for the same
reasons other people like the film Plan Nine From Outer Space; that I like David
Lee Roth for many of the same reasons I like Vincent Price; and frankly, I often
wonder how people who spend a lot of time with comic books can rib me about
heavy metal. But the fact is, ironic distance -- the frame of mind that allows
one to appreciate old Dragnet reruns as high camp — this crucial distance is
not always there. I can laugh at the pure undiluted pretentiousness of Motley

Crue's flaming stage sets, but I can also understand, “like, heavy metal

man.”

No, I haven't taken leave of my senses. Nor have I, as one friend jokingly
accused me, regressed to the level of a sixteen-year-old boy (“but Rich, I
never was a sixteen-year-old boy”). All my faculties are in place and working
fine, thank you.

But it's great stuff!! Really. Critic John Mendelssohn, go immediately to
hell.

CLICHES
Otherwise intelligent people, in their eagerness to express their distaste

for heavy metal, may unfortunately resort to some of the most appalling
cliches. Six of the most well-worn are listed here. They have been chosen
both for their groundlessness and for their general applicability to any kind of —
music. They should be familiar, since all of them have been used against rock
music of one sort or another, or against rock music as a whole. Because of
this, I haven't used the term “heavy metal” where it would normally occur, but
have instead substituted the phrase that music.

-- That music is a bad influence on today’s youth.

-- Anyone who spends that much time on their clothes can't

be spending enough time on their music.

-- That music is too loud.

-- That music all sounds the same.

-- That music is only popular because of the hype it gets; if it

weren't for the hype, nobody would listen to it.

-- The popularity of that music is proof the world is going to

hell in a handbasket.

And don't forget that timeless all-purpose insult: They have

no sense of humor.

Caught Cyndi Lauper in concert on her True Colors tour (1/14/87) in Tyler, Texas, at the
Oil Palace. Don't laugh, it’s said to be one of the largest brick domes of its kind. A strange
venue, originally designed as a giant boxing arena, it makes any audience look small except
when the whole floor area is covered by, say, a 3-ring circus. It resembles a high school
auditorium/gym, but it's about ten times as big. “Did Buddy Holly play here?” Lauper asked,
peering out into the gloom. No--it wasn't finished during his lifetime. But, hey, that was me
sitting under the big Texas Cash Register sign. Lauper had done research--she knew that Sandy
Duncan was born in Tyler.

Opening act was Concrete Blonde, who did pretty well at holding the interest of a
Lauper-crazed crowd.

Lauper apparently did much the same show she'd done in Dallas two nights earlier, including
telling the same joke (oh, you know, the joke about Roy Rogers trying to order some flambe)
that drove the Dallas Times Herald reviewer crazy. She talks to the audience a lot. I
especially liked her account of how, after the release of ‘She Bop’, “me, my mother, my
whole family lived in shame.” She then said that a bop a day keeps the doctor away and
launched into the song.

My, but that woman has energy. How she can keep going at that level for so long I don't
know—it’s mesmerizing to watch. You get your money's worth. Lauper does long shows and
doesn't hold back. She frequently clasps hands with people in the audience while she sings,
and I believe that really could be something—to grip her hand at the moment when she is
screaming into the microphone (on key, of course)—it seems like there'd have to be some kind
of charge in it. Some people blow it, though. To one person waving their hand and pleading,
Lauper said, refusing, “Last time you almost made my arm go a different way.”

About the audience. The Dallas Times Herald bemoaned a spate of ten-year-old girl fans. The
Savannah Morning News described the Savannah audience as being “mostly girls between nine
and 15 years old.” Well, shoot. Some of the Tyler audience fell into that category and some
of us didn't—a lot more of us. Most were older, a few were younger, quite a few were
male... I just hope this isn't supposed to be a negative thing. People complained about all those
young girls at Beatles concerts, too, and it was meant to discredit the Beatles as performers
in some way. (Gee, seems like their reputation survived it in the long run.) I myself am over
15, but I think that I had good taste and critical judgment at that age. Would Lauper be
validated as an artist by the presence of lots of elderly men in the audience?

Cyndi Lauper's a hard act to follow, but the Oil Palace is
up to the challenge. A few days later they had filled the
Palace with tons of specially formulated mud for a 3-day
‘Mud Bog’ event in which various wheeled and tracked
vehicles displayed their superb traction and got all dirty.

Pretty neat, huh? But it didn’t produce any great pieces
of video journalism the way Lauper did. Local TV
covered the concert, producing the following interview:

(Cyndi Lauper emerges from a door at the Oil Palace,
wearing shades. To her apparent surprise, a TV reporter

is there.) TV: Cyndi, what's the message
behind your music?

“David Lee Roth would make a great game
show host -- but would you

buy a Bob Barker album?”

-- non sequitur from Mark Rhodes

75 cents each issue

ALL GIRL BAND FANZINE

CL: Message? You mean like a
coded message or something you'd
find in a bottle? On the beach?
There aren't any beaches around
here.

TV: What are you trying to say in
your songs?

CL: That depends on the song.

TV: Do you have something you'd
like to say to Texas?

CL: (Removes shades, waves,
grins) Hi! (Turns around, goes
back into Oil Palace.)