; 8 re ene | 6a and Gar 30) o  
Unlike its predecessors, Reform School Girls takes itself lightly and provides an entertaining view of  
life in an all-girl reform school. Inspired by the likes of Chained Heat, Concrete Jungle, Women Behind  
Bars, Born Innocent, and other women-in-prison films, this flick does not cast Linda Blair in the  
traditional victim role. However, it features Wendy O. Williams (looking slightly older than her teenage  
character), Sybil Danning (looking slightly younger than her middle-aged warden role) and Pat Ast as  
the Matron.  

The movie starts with runaway Linda Carol being sent to reform school. She can't go home because  
her stepfather “likes” her. She is assigned to Wendy's dorm. Wendy's opening scene shows her laying on  
a bunk bed while flipping through a HIGH SOCIETY magazine (I guess that's a subtle way of saying her  

character, Charlie, is less than straight). The movie then proceeds to show a lot of shower scenes,  
fights, crude jokes, and every other mandatory element from an exploitation film. Pat Ast was  
exceptionally funny. Her character, Eddy, uses her position to manipulate all the innocent girls. At the  
end of the movie, Wendy takes over and even stands on a speeding bus. The soundtrack went out of its  
way to feature female bands like Girlschool, Girls Night Out, the Screamin’ Sirens, and of course,  
Wendy herself.  

For anyone who enjoys pictures out of the mainstream, we recommend Just  
make sure that you bring your sense of humor with you! If you want to compare it to the real thing,  
there's a new women-behind-bars picture called Vendetta (“...what she does to the other inmates is no  
accident..."), which has the Screamin’ Sirens performing three songs in it. They're a bar band in the  
movie, so they're on screen for about ten minutes.  

She blows up Cadillacs on stage. She rides cars (strapped to their hoods) through walls.  
She skydives bare-assed in PLAYBOY pictorials. She chainsaws guitars. She talks tough and swears like  
it's an art form. She's currently in the most “B"-like "B“ movie in ages to make the drive-in circuit.  
She's outrageous. She’s...uh...she’s...well, gosh. I don’t know.  

I guess I’m faced with a dilemma. How do I review an overtly sexual album by an overtly sexual woman -  
without sounding overtly sexist or overtly sexually obsessed?  
I could try talking in the same manner as Wendy. For instance, “Well, those goddamn, motherf***in’,  
stuffed banana straight people probably won’t understand this album, and there's no reason to  
explain nothin’ to nobody. It ain't none of their  
business anyway.”  

Naw. I don't feel right saying that. No sense  
upsetting readers. (EDITOR'S NOTE: Our readers? Do  
our readers upset that easy?)  

Oh, well. How 'bout the Joe Bob Briggs approach:  
"We got one body, no quart blood, loudness-fu,  
thrashnbash-fu, four-letter-fu, black electrical  
tape-fu, angry-fu, fu-fu. Only a one on the vomit  
meter, Joe Bob says check it out.”  

Naw. That pitch is probably trademarked.  

You know, I have to confess: this album has become  
one of my guilty pleasures. It has no earth-shattering  
artistic quality, no grand and glorious messages that  
we'll remember when the next “big chill” comes  
around; it makes me drive fast when I listen to the cassette on my car  
stereo; it's loud, ear-drum destroying, Heavy Metal, Deep Purple  
influenced crash and burn material; it gives me goose bumps; it makes  
me feel mischievous and a little naughty. It makes me smile.  

No, don't look for any redeeming social values here. It's a thrill a  
second, tilt-a-whirl ride at a two-bit traveling carnival. It’s a front row  
seat at a tractor-pulling contest. It's a turn at the wheel on the “Big  
Spin® program. It's drinking a quart of Thunderbird when you're 18 and  
then trying to live it down for the next 22 years. (What? Oh, never  
mind).  

What I'm trying to say is, I like it. The justification I can give is that  
Ms. Williams’ band is fast and tight, even on the live track. Her raspy  
vocalizing fits the maxi-fuzz, mondo-distorto guitar, and her persona  
leaks out of every track. Granted, this ain't for everybody's taste, but  
Ms. Williams probably has a saying for those, something about stuffed  
bananas and minding their own business or something.  

Ron Bob says check it out. (What?)  

For more fun, Wendy has a fan club that sells information, pictures,  
merchandise, and probably life insurance for anyone planning on seeing a  
live performance. Send a buck ($1.00) to:  

Wendy O. Williams Fan Club  
P.O. Box 837,  

Sex and sexism aren't the same thing, so unless one  
is sexist there shouldn't be any problem “reviewing an overtly sexual  
album by an overtly sexual woman without sounding overtly sexist.”  
“Confusion between sex and sexism irritates me, since it implies the one  
thing doesn't exist without the other, and is the basis of all arguments  
that define sex as an act of oppression against women, or that condemn  
feminism as trying to destroy heterosexual sex.  
Put it this way; sex without sexism means equality, Ron, so as long  
as you're willing to skydive bare-assed for Wendy's delectation, I don't  

Call this  
item “The Mysterious West.” Canada banned a PLAYBOY photo of Wendy,  
saying it promoted violence against women, from Western Canada, and  
removed the photo from issues of PLAYBOY sold there. But, they  
continued to allow it to be sold in Eastern Canada. Huh? It promotes  
violence in the West, but not the East? Consistency, please!  
Free classifieds, no sex  

personals, please—we don't want to  

NEON ANGELS—fanzine covering the ex-  
Runaways: Joan, Lita, Sandy, Cherie, Jackie,  
Wendy, Vicki, Laurie and Micki! Only $6 for 8 issues.  
Write to: Neon Angels, P.O. Box 421773, San  
Francisco, CA, 94101. Checks payable to Gene  

Williams  

ORCHIDS fanzine featuring Laurie Bell, Che  
Zuro, Jan King, Sunble Sinn, and Laurie  
McAllister. Send $1 for sample issue to: Neon  
Angels, Box 421773, San Francisco, CA  

RAP CONNECTION—America’s Official Rap  
Report. Biweekly. One year, domestic: $18.  
Canada/Mexico: $22. 16519 Amargos,  

The Relay—one of the few surviving fanzines  
on THE WHO! Up-to-date information on The  
Who, Pete, Roger, John, and Kenney’s  
activities, interviews, trade section, pen  
friends. Send $2 (NO CHECKS) for latest issue  
to: The Relay, 8 Stella Drive, RD * 5,  

Hockessin, DE 19707.  
TWISTED IMAGE weird-zine is back!! New  
issue features R. Crumb, Jello Biafra, Norman  
Dog, John Waters, and, of course, the Ronald  
Reagan inflatable love doll...To order send $2  
to TWISTED IMAGE, 1630 University Ave.,  
#26, Berkeley, CA 94703.  

STEVIE NICKS fans please write. Stevie fan  
and collector desperately wants U.S. pen-pals.