No Dogs! Well, a few, but we just moved the lay-out  
stuff, and we couldn't find where Sumac’s dogs were  
packed--gloom. They'll be back next ish. Worse, a  
computer failure resulted in the loss of half the letters  
column. Among the casualties: a letter from the editor  
of the mag SOUND CHOICE, saying we were doing  
important work and should keep it up; one from Dirty  
Tina in Palo Alto, saying Punk and Metal women have  
more in common than they think they do; one from  
Name Withheld saying she'd rather be stabbed by Sid  
Vicious than live with her current boyfriend, who she  
said she'd have left by the time we read this, and we  
should run more stuff questioning Punk attitudes about  
women; a form letter from the Womyn's Music show  
on Michigan's WNMC, thanking labels for their support;  
one from Pam Kentz saying why she's subscribing; and  
we think that's it. If your letter ain't here, you now  
know why.  

Letter To Editor:  

Due to unresolved financial conflicts with the Orchids  
producer, Neon Records was forced to cancel its  
upcoming release. Lynn Drum, Tami East and I had a  
blast at the BAWIM fashion show. My favorite model  
was the “flash-dancer.” Hey—Anita, if you ever need a  
gymnast... Maybe you can run a photo of Renata  
sometime? The outfit she wore the night I saw her  
would make Wendy O. Williams look like an Eskimo. But  
I guess if you're on the same stage as Leather--you  
have to do SOMETHING for attention! Leather is the  
most confident front person EVER! Her kicks put David  
Lee to shame. When ARE we going to see a Puss N Boots  
interview? Which created the most controversy...the  
New Monkees or the New Runaways?  

Gotta swirl, Gene, San Francisco, CA  

Editor: Since Gene puts out the ‘zine NEON ANGELS,  
formerly about the Runaways and the Orchids, now  
Femetal, we asked why they just changed to  
SHE-BANG! Gene replied, “Due to static from Kim  
Fowley. We're not still covering Kim Fowley bands. I  
feel that the Runaways and the Orchids did well in spite  
of Kim Fowley, not because of him. Plus the Orchid  
girls don’t want the Orchids stigma on them and are  
trying to make it without that. And the Runaways--I  
ran out of things to write about them, so I don’t write  
about them anymore, though I do write about Joan Jett  
and Lita Ford.”  

Dear BITCH:  

SCENE 1: I'm sitting here debating whether or not to  
do my homework or keep playing my new red fender  
bullet... aw, fuck school. Music comes first and it  
always will.  

SCENE 2: I'm playing with my all-female band at a local  
club. We roll around onstage, scream and throw beer at  
each other and the audience. We play our own music and  
then do an encore of “Pretty Vacant” by the Sex Pistols.  
As we leave the stage, I throw my mic stand onto the  
stage and Patty slams her bass into her amp. Karen  
stands up, kicks her drums over and Roxie lets the  
feedback from her guitar wail until the lights come on  
in the bar.  

SCENE 3: I'm browsing at Shinder’s and come across a  
paper called BITCH. What? Could it be? Women rockers  
cover to cover? Wait, I must be dreaming... I buy it and  

I LUV issue #1 of BITCH  

read it on the bus. I scream at the top of my lungs with  
delight and the person sitting next to me changes seats.  
A few weeks later I find the next issue. I'm in heaven.  
I have to pinch myself. Yes, it's true--a rag about  
women rockers everywhere--no attitudes, no  
prejudices--you write about 'em all!!! Definitely cool.  
I couldn't wait any longer to write a big fan letter. (And  
I've been spreading the word about your magazine—to  
everyone who will listen and even those who don't  
want to but should!!!) You are the greatest!!! Keep it  
up!!  
—Cynthia Lawson (The Clams), Mpls., MN  

Dear BITCH:  

Hi! How was your new year? Thanks for running the  
ad for the keyboardist. We are sending you the  
Tomboys promo shot and bio. If you want to give them  
any publicity besides the musicians wanted ad that  
would be really cool. They have just started recording  
for a 6 song EP entitled Mad Ball. It will be released on  
Hard Rock records, in about 3-5 months... The  
Tomboys know some gossip... but it'll cost  
you... what's that you say, you haven't got any money?  
Well... all they know is that a while back one of the  
Pandoras was caught peeing in some alley in  
Hollywood, and another one of the Pandoras was caught  
showing something that was shaved to a movie  
producer! You figure the rest out!! Anyways we hope  
you enjoy the bio and the pic!  

bye for now, Walter Hess (president, Tomboys fan club),  
Van Nuys, CA  
EDITOR: More on the Tomboys soon, or see ish #13.  

Dear Chix and Trix:  

I will get rich doing a female spectacular act based on  
Girlschool.” Check this out: When I (a male) was in high  
school, I performed at lesbian bars for a few $. This  
consisted of stand-up comedy, including jokes like “Is  
tofu fattening? Have you ever seen a skinny dyke?”  
And women are like postage stamps... just lick 'em and  
stick 'em.” (I guess ya had to have had a few beers!)  
Once a month, this club called The Moonlighter would  
put a board over the pool table, and we would lip-synch  
to records. I did “Cherry Bomb” by the Runaways in a  
corset and blonde wig. But my fave number was  
Girlschool's “Tush”! I wore a magenta crushed velvet  
mini-skirt, lime green fishnet stockings, orange  
pumps, a black t-shirt that said “Fuck Off and Die!”  
purple blush and red press-on nails. The womyn would  
stick one dollar bills between my nerf-ball cleavage. I  
believe I made $8 for that 3 minute song. I suppose I  
could've made more doing Marilyn, Diana, Judy, Bette  

or Liza. But someone had to do the punk queen bit!  

Cheers, the Masked Pineapple, San Francisco, CA  
EDITOR: Now, now, Pineapple, my man, you know that's  
not how Girlschool dresses--they wear t-shirts and  
jeans on stage! Readers may like to know that the  
above letter is real and the story true. Then again,  
they may prefer not to know this...  

RS  

Feminist Media Directory: 525 periodicals,  

112 women's presses, and 13 women's news services  
are listed in the new 1987 index/Directory of Women’s  
Media, put out by the Women's Institute For Freedom Of  
The Press. Also: radio, TV, and cable shows,  
multi-media groups, 66 women's bookstores, 72  
special library collections on women, etc., as well as  
455 media women who wish to network. $12 from  
WIFP, 3306 Ross Place, N.W., Washington D.C.,  
20008.  

MUSICIANS WANTED:  

Femetal bands: engineer/producer Sylvia Massey  
(who has worked with Malibu Barbi, Theresa Trull,  
Impulse-F, the Mechanical Bride, and Linda Tillery) is  
assembling a compilation album of all-female Heavy  
Metal bands. Send photo and tape to her at 1230 Grant  
St., #531, San Francisco, CA 94133, or call (415)  
285-3348.  

Rock bands: the new owner of the Vanity Ballroom  
in Detroit called us to say he's interested in supporting  
women in Rock by booking more bands featuring  
women; recent gigs there have been by the all-female  
band Vertical Pillows, and the singer Camille. Send  
audition tapes to Ron Clark, 14201 E. Jefferson St.,  

A new Polish translation  
of “Winnie The Pooh” changed boy Pooh to girl Pooh,  
“Kubas Puchatek,” as he was formerly known there,  
to “Fredzia Phi-Phi,” and there we have Polish sex  
role stereotypes conveyed by sheer sound. The Poles  
are generally unhappy with this; the traditional Pooh  
is so much that Warsaw has a “Winnie The  

BITCH #15, 87  
Editor: Lori Twersky.  
Dogs: Sumac.  
Contributors: William B. Abbott IV, Susan Catherine,  
Cheryl Cline, Ron Cook, Anita L. Mack Farland, Diane  
Flaherty, Sheri Gillette, Susan Madden, Juliet Mauro,  
S.J. McCarthy, Pearl-Lynn, Danise Rodriguez, Sarah  

Subscriptions are $15 for 12 issues. Make out checks  
to San Jose Face, at Suite 164, 478 W. Hamilton Ave.,  

Campbell, CA 95008.  

Opinions expressed by any BITCH writing in BITCH are  
not necessarily those of the other BITCHes, or of any  
sane person. Contributions looked at with interest (we  
are eclectic), but enclose stamped, self-addressed  

envelope to ensure return.  
Our back issue list is now too long to run! Send  
stamped, self-addressed envelope for list.