—— TARZAN AND SHANE O

"...a few writers are saying it sounds too much

like a Judas Priest album. I mean, what's it
supposed to sound like?”
-- Rob Halford of Judas Priest.

Heavy metal bands are all alike: “Deep Purple who begat David Coverdale
who begat Ronnie James Dio who begat...what we're getting these days is
clones of clones...” (David Lee Roth, Clone). Heavy metal music is all the same:
“part of the expanding but non-evolving repertory...albums forever in print on
major labels.” (Will Straw, Critic)

They call it formula music. Why, a friend of mine asked, try to out-Sabbath
Sabbath? Why? Why try to outsleuth Sherlock Holmes? Why re-write
SHANE? Why re-read SHANNA? Why cheer on Luke Skywalker? Why follow
yet another heroine carrying yet another guttering candle downstairs into yet
another cellar--or down into the bowels of an alien spaceship with a
flashlight..?

Heavy metal isn’t Mozart, it's TARZAN OF THE JUNGLE. Think of heavy
metal not as “Art,” whatever that may be, but as genre fiction--not as
Shakespeare but as Rex Stout--and you have got yourself a better handle on its
appeal.

“Deep Purple put out six albums of the same mung,” Lester Bangs once
wrote. “Good mung, but mung nevertheless.” Nevertheless nothing. The same
could be said of Rex Stout--or of Stephen King. Coming at it from this angle,
the recent collaboration of Stephen King and AC/DC seems more inspired than
otherwise.

I may as well admit here that I'm an unabashed fan of genre fiction of the
most formulaic sort: CORD westerns, Perry Mason mysteries, bodice-rippers,
Harlequins, B-movie singing cowboy films, creature-from-the-black-lagoon
thrillers. And when I say fan, I mean fan. Someone else can write about how
America’s “trash culture” is proof we're going to hell in a handcart; it won't be
me.

Led Zeppelin is the SHANE of heavy metal. Sure, every heavy metal group
that came after Led Zeppelin restates the original, but that's what formula
fiction is all about. The best formula fiction retells the original in such a
compelling way that the reader can feel the story is new, while at the same
time it reinforces the sense of pleasure she felt when reading the story for the
first time.

Likewise heavy metal. Its weaknesses as “art” become its strengths as
formula music, as Shafelike music. Each new song in its “non-evolving
repertoire carries for its fans all the excitement of an old song heard for the
first and hundredth time.

Heavy metal is very much a sledgehammer art. Other kinds of sledgehammer
art include monster trucks, Big Time Wrestling, tractor pulls, demolition
derbies and imaginative swearing.

Sledgehammer art is rarely subtle. It is always excessive. It goes far
beyond the boundaries of middle-class good taste and pushes the boundaries of
working-class good taste. Sledgehammer art is brash, powerful, vigorous,
often playful, and a little too loud. Sometimes a lot too loud. Sledgehammer art
can be contrasted to “Sentimental” art, as represented by romance novels and
Willie Nelson's rendition of “Over the Rainbow.”

Sledgehammer art and Sentimental art should not be taken as opposite poles.
They are this close. Folks who like one tend to like the other.

Synthesis of Sledgehammer art is in its grandiose exaggeration, and it’s Big
for Big's sake, it's More is More overstatement. Or as my mother says, “He's
really gone overboard, hasn't he?” Monster trucks are going overboard; heavy
metal is going overboard.

But of course, one can learn a thing or two by “going the limit.” Bigfoot
certainly says something about “truckness.” Heavy metal, likewise, has a lot

DC Period

wOc Period

--byT

NBC dubbed vocal teacher Elizabeth Sabine, “the Auntie Mame of Heavy Metal,” but she
prefers Auntie Mame of Rock'n'Roll; "Metal isn't actually my specialty, it's just that I'm good
at it. I also teach Blues, Jazz, and Musical Theatre.” But one can’t blame NBC for being so
taken with the image of a 63-year-old ballad singer (and the cantor of her Burbank
synagogue) being the vocal coach for Queensryche, Bitch, Stryper, Syren, Slayer, and Lizzie
Borden, among others. Her family moved from England to Australia, and she has a delightful
overlap of English, Australian, and American vocal mannerisms, as well as a theatricality
gained from over 40 years of club singing and musical theatre. She's a protégé of Robert
Mazzarella, the opera tenor/physicist who came up with a revolutionary theory of voice,
and has adapted his techniques for Heavy Metal singers with some new ideas of her own.

She says, “Most of my students are boys rather than girls, because that's the Rock scene.
People call me up, and they want boys who sing like girls and look like girls, and I say, How
about a girl? And they say, No, we do want a boy. I say, Let me send one along, she's got
a good strong voice. And they say, ‘Oh, if she’s got a strong voice.’ It's really quite unfair,
so we girls have got to show them that we can be as active and as exciting and as stable as
the boys are. Because we are!”

Eliz: Today's vocal lessons are usually diaphragmatic breath support. And this is excellent
if you want to have a very cultured voice, if you want to sing opera and so on. That was my
background, was this very pretty voice. It's so funny that it's been the established way of
singing, the established method. It has been so since the early 1900s. But previous to that,
some of the best singers in the world were very inspirational, like the Italians. Like the
peasants. As children they would yell and scream, as adults they would call out loudly,
without any inhibitions, until they just drifted into singing, which was the same thing. And
then as the Victorian era came in...and everybody was a little more discreet, noise wasn't
okay. Everything was gentle. So the voices went from a—(Elizabeth lets out a “La da di
daaaa!” that uncurls the phone cord)—to a—(switches to round-toned, fruity “La la
la's)—very, what's the word? Educated? Classical?

Tw: Wasn't it called “the golden voice"?

Eliz: The “golden voice” was the early one, in the 1800s. The golden era of voice was a
great, open-throated freedom. It was noisy, and that sort of noise wasn't acceptable in the
drawing rooms. And the sweet, floating voice was discovered. If you put a little air through
the voice, you've got the (sings “Laaa”), you float it. In other words...it was considered
acceptable. The trouble was, the earlier way got forgotten. And this other way, that’s been
taught ever since, has given the young Rock singers great problems, because they know that
the only way they can sing Rock is to kind of yell like babies in a playground, and that puts
them in conflict with the teachers, who taught them never to push on their chords, never to
yell and scream, to always control the airflow, always put it up in the mouth, too, which is

Sp rernngnatrintanosingiagen

Tw: That's been a problem with many of the Heavy Metal bands we’ve reviewed, they've
clearly been to teachers who pressed that cultured way of singing.

Eliz: And that includes just about all of them. I've been doing a lot of research on this
because I recognized I was unique, and my results were so quick—there was no fiddling
around, no (prissy voice:) “We'll strengthen your voice and then YOU can decide what you

SSE SUSS SSS SSS RSS Sse saeco eer s Leases ses receeS sess reessseesese
Elizabeth with (left to right); her assistant, Janice Massey, and students Lisa Sumner
(Strange Sumner), Kandi (Rock Kandi), Julia Free (Free Enterprise), Carol Billingsley

(Kenny Rogers’ daughter), Jennifer Young (Gig Young's daughter), Ivy Ney (Poison Ivy),
and Holly Miller Syren). ’ : ° ext

af