S qemeecamames

one state can be unknown in the next. The U.K. scene
is small enough that anyone who becomes visible to
one segment will be visible to the rest. The U.S. is
big enough that if an artist has several Metal fans
but no BIG Metal following, several Wimyn’s music
fans but no BIG Wimyn’s music following, etc. info
distributors may not even realize that the product—
oops, the artist—has fans in those areas. Which is
the case with Kate The Product. She has knots of
followers in every music genre except maybe
Dixieland and Hardcore.

Some may gape at the concept of her having a
handful of Metal fans. But many Metal Guys, being
kneejerk sexists, are not looking for women who
embody what they perceive as male virtues
(aggression, noise, drunkenness, guitar solos,
smoker's cough). They are looking for Yins to their
Yangs, and Kate Bush is so Yin as to cause more than
one critic to fulminate sulfurously about airy-fairy
artsy-fartsy—(clutches chest, has heart attack,
manages as last act to scrawl, “And Stevie Nicks,
too”). I really think that, given the Synth Pop stuff,
her Folk fans are harder to explain (unless they're
the ones who blur over into New Age).

My point is just that Kate Bush could be much
bigger in the states than she is, and that what's
keeping that from happening is largely the way Kate
The Product is distributed, not consumer resistance.
BITCH readers are ALL interested in women in Rock,
but even we get letters saying “Who is Kate Bush?”
The info isn't distributed over a wide enough ground.
Any approach pegging her as New Age Disco or Synth
Pop Stevie Nicks is an approach seen by few
potential fans.

The following interview was done by Tony Myatt for
the British KB ‘zine, HOMEGROUND, and is serialized
in issues 22–25. We are reprinting only parts of it
here; for the complete interview, write to the ‘zine
at 55 Whippendell Way, Orpington, Kent, BR5 3B2,
United Kingdom, and enclose a SASE or international
reply coupon. It's a must for fans.

TM: Let's talk about the Hounds Of Love first of all.
A wonderful name for an album, but where does it
come from? ...does it come from a book? Or is it
something that you made up?

Kate: No, the Hounds Of Love are an image, really.
Someone who's afraid of being captured by love, and
the imagery is of love taking the form of hounds that
are hunting them, so they run away because they're
afraid of being caught by the hounds and being ripped
to shreds.

TM: Are you afraid of being caught by love?

Kate: Yes, I think so. I think everyone is. When you
are in love with someone you do not want to lose
that, it’s something that affects you in so many
areas. It can be frightening, yes.

TM: It's not a feeling of being trapped, though, Kate,
is it?

Kate: I think it can be for some people. Yes, it
doesn't mean that for me, but I think for some people
any relationship can be a form of being trapped, and
they're afraid of that.

TM: Just on the lighter side, it's a wonderful cover,
the two hounds; where did they come from? How
long did it take to pose that picture? Because it must
have taken quite a long time.

Kate: It's a very popular question. The two dogs are
friends of ours, and John, my brother, who took the
photo, had a lot of trouble keeping them under
control. He had a very strong word with them and
got them to behave, and it was really just a matter
of patience because we'd get the whole scene set up,
and the dogs would come in and they'd be walking
over me and everything would be totally ruined in
five minutes so we'd have to start again.

TM: So they behaved themselves in the end anyway?
Kate: Yes, to the point where they just went to sleep.

TM: This is your first album for quite a while. A lot of
people would say that being that amount of time away
from any kind of business, let alone the Pop business,
can be quite tricky. I mean, why was it necessary, that
break, as far as you are concerned?

Kate: Whenever I do something, it's really going in at
the deep end of a project, and I do find that things take
me longer than I thought, it’s not something I plan, it's
just that the work takes over and in order to make it
better you just have to be patient and spend more time
with it. After the last album at the end of 1982, I'd just
spent an intense period in the studio doing an album, and
I wanted to get a break. I felt that I hadn't really had any
time to take things in because I'd been working so
constantly since 1976—and we'd just moved, as well,
out of London—so I wanted to spend some time at home,
see my friends, take in new stimulus, and try to create
a new energy for a new direction that would be different
from the album I'd just written. Also, I wanted to get
together our own recording studio, which was definitely
something that was being pointed at all the way through the other
albums—that it was the thing to do. And I found that just
during that time that I was taking off to discover things
right, get the studio together, I made some of the most
important decisions—and very beneficial ones—that
I have done, and I think it’s all good, and I understand just
what you mean about that time. In a way you do get
scared that you're spending so long away that you won't
be able to come back, but the priority, and again I really
did feel that this is what I wanted during this time was
the work, and not necessarily being successful or
famous—that what I was working on could be the best it
could be, at that time.

TM: Was the business itself getting on top of you? Did
you feel you were missing out on things?

Kate: I don't think I was missing out on things, but I
wanted to get away from the exposure that
being—consumed—that can start to happen to you if you
don't get away, and I think, too, that when I spend so long on
projects I want to get back to that more and more when I'm
out doing promotion because I know that everything takes me
such a long time to do.

TM: So you built the studio. That was a giant step as well,
I would have thought. Did you actually physically get in there
and help build the place yourself, or was it just—

Kate: No, I was really involved in the design and really the
inspiration behind the whole project was my father and he
was totally encouraging and really did put a lot of it together
himself, and he was in there building it and advising on putting
the studio together and so really the studio is very much a lot
to do with his efforts and enthusiasm.

TM: You're very close to the family—you’re a very
close-knit family?

Kate: Yes.

TM: Are your family supportive so far as your music is
concerned?

Kate: I think they're supportive to me in every area possible.
I think I am most definitely a strongly emotionally based
person and my family are totally integral, I think, to
everything I do. They affect me because I love them.

TM: Do you need that? Is it essential?

Kate: I think it is essential. I think it’s something that has
always been there and that if it wasn’t there it would
probably be devastating for me, yes.

TM: What about when you write your songs, though, do you
try them out on your family? Do they get a chance to hear
them?

Kate: Yes, yes they do. There's a small group that is around
the family, obviously including Del and a few friends, and
they're really the people who hear straight after I've written
it and I suppose the reaction is the initial—you see if it's
going to work or not, by just the way they react.

TM: For example, the songs on the Hounds Of Love album.
How many songs in total would you say you wrote for the
album that perhaps didn't make it in the end—or does it not
work that way?

Kate: No, it does. Initially I write a batch of songs and try to

by Susan Catherine

Counters runs in BITCH and other
‘alternative’ publications in the US,
Canada, France, England, and Finland. A
64-page book of the cartoons is published
twice yearly. Individual copies are $3.00.
Please write to the publisher for info re.
foreign and domestic distribution: Cherry
Stone Press, 4715

A. 98109.