IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Tw: Because Rude Girl was one of those legendary bands in this area, and eventually just go their separate ways. Addie:—and there's your ego—

Sometimes? Tw: on ‘cause you haven't | keep hearing I was a total idiot to miss — Addie: I think it's fair to say that when it happened, you're young—we were all, like, 18 and Addie: Yes.

Lots: (Long silence. Longer silence.) 19—and the Big Time comes in, and you're signed to, like, a label like Warner Brothers Addie: That's right.

Tw: Let's turn this off! (General laughter) Just kidding! I'm just trying to think for a moment, what did happen with the band. Um...(EXTREMELY long silence.) 

Addie: Exactly. Those were Rude Girl, now comes Fanny) and June Millington— 

Tw: Shall we go back to that question later? Lois: I think that was it with Rude Girl, too. 

Lois: Okay! (General laughter.) Addie: They start fighting over the silliest things. Lois: It's a shame, like, even to this day, Fanny still talks about getting together. And Rude Girl still talks about getting together.

Addie: Oh, yeah, I love the South side! Tw: That is not the easiest place to be a white girl in a black club. 

Lois: And people are offering you things— Addie: (laughs:) Oh, yeah?

Addie: It sure isn't. Lois: Unless you're doing it right. 

Addie: Well, I would hang out at the Checkerboard and Teresa's, Theresa's mostly, the basement club—real small, and Buddy (Guy) and Junior (Wells) would jam, and all the Blues folks, Willie Dixon, and Sammy Longhorn was a biggie down there at first, I would get charged $5 for having, like, a V.O. and water—really gouged, ‘cause I was white—and then, Willie would accompany me, he was like my Godfather in Chicago. I was his White Girl, he was putting the money behind me to play the Blues. I met him in Iowa, of all places. He saw me play and he said, “I'd like to produce you.” He brought me to Chicago, produced an album of his songs (NOTE: unreleased, but part is on cassette; see end of article)...

Leis: ...can I say something? I think you went over in Chicago, even being a white person, actually a white girl, because you did the Blues so well. You did it with so much passion and joy— 

Addie: Yeah, I would’ve been ignored if I hadn't been able to play it. 

Leis: That was, like, the intense hurdle? 

Addie: Okay, in a nutshell, I left Fanny, stayed in L.A. and was a studio musician, my bio tells what records I'm on. Guitar-playing was turning into a winky-winky, Disco kind of sound, I said, “That stinks, I'm going to play the Blues, I'm going back to my roots—"—I learned to play Blues at 15 or something—I went to Chicago, was discovered by Willie, and started playing the Blues again. Just to be able to get back to pulling the strings and to play the guitar, instead of having to go “wanka, wanka” on everything. 

Tw: Was that why you left Fanny? 

Addie: No. That's why I left L.A. That's a whole other story that we don't even need to go into. 

Lots: That's as hard as why Rude Girl broke up. 

Addie: Yeah, really, that’s a long story. 

Lois: I think—do you think this is fair to say?—that what happens is people just hang together for a while, and write music together, and they 

Lois: That's great! Because it's not like—when you're in a band, it’s like the greatest orgy you could have, you know? And when situations arise and you come to each other's rescue, you build this camaraderie that really is incomprehensible. So you don't just all of a sudden decide one day, “Well, I think I’ll move, see ya,” and then it goes away. It always stays with you. Like in a marriage, or any kind of relationship.

Addie: It's devastating. It’s like breaking up with a lover. The band—I know the feeling you had with Rude Girl was what we had with Fanny.

Lois: Especially with girls.

Addie: We had little things, we'd dress alike—

Lois: Girls are so intense.

Addie: The big thing about getting lost for three hours alone in a big city? That’s why they invented crying!

Lois: I thought of you less than an hour ago! Passed one of those fog machines in a shop.