5 a 2 2 Ss 2 aS 2 HF  
es rs  

“Fun Fax: “I didn't fit in anywhere else” (Max) is my second  

fave reason anyone's given for joining a band. First is Deborah  

Lyall’s “I was looking at them and I said, I can do that!”  

Falling  

do the Might |  
J b  

by Twersky.  
Drums: Debbie “Killer” Medford. (ex- Nervous Gender, the Conservatives, Strong  

Silent Types, Johanna Went.)  
Bass: Susan Ames. (Ex-Hebephrenics.)  

Sv reg out (  
{= 19, nwt ‘  
ai Adunly (oh it's so bright  
Stepping out into the night light  
The hair on a worker is standing  
on end Z  

a ao  
Going down to the shadows  

ner peel)  

Hiding in bright pink.  

a :  

Going down into the shadows,  

Voum dour down  

cI:  
m talking  

Falling head over heels  

BAe ei Fe  

Hand over hand  

=r 5 |  
LM falling falling in the heel  

CERO over heels, heels over head  
TS ta life or characteristics being dead!  
‘ lady held it up and : = ‘ s)  
you've got a band that stands on its own musically independently of any genre: “I want so much for this band—I want their next record to capture the excitement of their live sound (the crowd went nuts), I want Maxine to keep at it a cist = aera:  
I want them to just plain stay together and not break up, as so many bands do—and as such a high percentage of female bands, in particular, want them to find a level that gets them a big audience, without being “packaged”—like the hilarious video made of them for when they appeared on Swiss TV, where they were unsuccessfully presented as a cute Nena-style Disco act, complete with mirror ball and twinkling star effects. You can just hear the producer reasoning, “Well they're girls, so it HAS to be cute.”  

About lyrics; I'm burnt out on most political lyrics at this point, too, because  

they tend to reduce complex issues and philosophies to the level of advertising jingles; a few catchy phrases, that's all. Which is again a problem in my checking out  

their lyrics; “I don't wanna be a Yuppie girl” is a valid sentiment, but it just doesn’t say enough about the issue for me. However, lyricist Maxine also (in addition to the  

Guitar: Clara Lux. (Ex-Clito, Girls On Fire.)  
Vocals: Maxine Cottrell. (Ex-Clown Alley, Underground Soldier.)  

San Francisco's all-female Typhoon live are the hottest, most exciting band I've seen in a long time, way beyond anything promised by their record. That's how one makes enemies—the band puts out an indie album and needs to sell it, and the reviewer says, “Aw, they're better live.” But it could be two different bands. The album showcases a Typhoon that sounds like a more danceable version of Wilma, Punkish Disco. Live—  

Well, WBA IV and I were having a conversation about Eric Clapton, about how Clapton wanted to be a classic Bluesman and wound up reinventing lead guitar, and WBA IV said, “A lot of innovation is really a failed attempt at conformity.” Typhoon are being PUNKS with all the letters capitalized, with a lot of self-conscious WEIRD films of half-naked women with snakes, live pigs or dangling hot dogs on stage, cryptic eerie lyrics. I'm sorry, I've been looking at Performance Art since I was 12, and it has no shock pizazz for me anymore (I realize this isn't true for most of the audience); no matter what it is, chances are I've seen something like it. In fact, I've been trying to remember how Maxine came out at first, and it's confused in my head with Jeorgia of the Mechanical Bride—it all sort of blends into a general ethos for me, I can't remember who had the hockey mask and who had the doll's head. Yet in spite of all this PUNK, the group's strength—and it's damn strong—lies in a resemblance to late 60's/early 70's Hard Rock. I swear, live, they remind me musically of no one so much as an over-amped version of Sugarloaf (“Green-eyed Lady”), with Clara's guitar taking the place of the organ and Susan's great bass-playing essentially taking lead, Deb’s wild drumming is the most fun of any drummer I've heard in a while, and it's like Ginger Baker's (Cream), or Keith Moon (Who) with less bottom end. She even indulges in showiness similar to theirs; at one point, she knocked a drum head loose on the stand, and she continued playing  

held it. Turn off the period atmosphere, and  

=  

Like teardrops of vont  
The skies have fallen  
Melt skin like acid  
Melt skin like Zerd,  

Like you melt my heart  
I'm falling  

Falling for you  
Head over heels and heels over head  
I'm falling, falling away, repeat  
Head over heels and heels over head  
This is us, this is being clear!  
I'm falling, falling down.  

The Fab Four: Maxine, Susan, Clara, Debbie.  
(A handy BITCH teen-rave poster!)  

bellydancing #  
moves on  

eee ee ete  
I pick roasted crisp eyes  
Immaculate manicured smile  
I'm pl  

poem ele pose  

exploited knows  

Notes knock the sane.  

Maxine rage:  

5 OO  
Fun Fax: Clara, the graphic artist responsible for Typhoon’s  
neato cartoon posters and trademark skull with bow, is Italian  
and sees in passing with her previous band in the Fellini movie.  

Fun Fax: The band (fully clothed) will be pictured in the next  
German edition of PENTHOUSE. No one in the band seems entirely  
sure why, except that the Germans seemed taken with them.  

Fun Fax: Debbie was highly influenced by the Runaways,  
which she considers a Punk band—so with all these Punks and  
Metalists claiming origins in the Runaways, it's about time critics  

realized how influential that band was.  

2estit MELGORO —AkA "KILLER" Sb