IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Rules:
1. Fix obvious OCR errors (like '0' instead of 'O', '1' instead of 'l')
2. Preserve the original line breaks and text blocks.
3. Preserve the original meaning and historical context.
4. Do not add any additional text.
5. Do not delete any text.
6. Process EVERY line - do not skip any content.

Corrected text:

PLL LOSS OEOOEOEOEGOOLEEEGEECOESEOOEOOOOCOOEOEELOOLOCOGOOOOOOOOOLOOGOEOEGGOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOGPE- PODSOLGO SOS EL OEELEOEOEGECEOOOOLOOMOOEOOOO

LM: Well, but the thing is, what I do, like working
hours, I mean at home here writing songs---to me
that’s not work, that's fun. I mean, it’s really work,
but you see, when I was working as a secretary, I
mean that wasn't my favorite thing to do. But when
I'm sitting here writing a song, that's my very
favorite thing to do.

McC: What kind of guitar do you play?

LM: I play a Martin Double 0 18, which my husband
gave me as a present way back there in the 60s as a
Christmas present one time. But my first guitar was
a second-hand one which the fellow who got me
interested, Hermes Nye, took me down to a music
store and bought this old second-hand guitar. He
figured, ‘Get anything, but get started,’

McC: How long did you play that guitar?

LM: I played that for about 3 or 4 years. Then, when
my husband saw that I was really getting into this
seriously, he went and got me one of the best ones he
could find.

McC: Would you say that your roots are pure folk,
then, or is there blues or jazz or rock or whatever?
LM: Well, I think when you're growing up and you
have the radio--this is before television--you hear a
lot of things on the radio, and those things all go into
your subconscious, if you are musically inclined, and
they're in there. And then, I think, they tend to come
out in the music you write. Although mainly...the
forms that I choose for my songs are mostly folk
song forms...Not always, because I have written
some blues--but even that is a folk form, blues. But
you know, there'll be a couple of verses with a
chorus and frequently my choruses are sing-along
choruses, because I always like to involve the
audience. That's the way folk music works. I mean,
it's worked that way for hundreds of years. When a
lot of people experience something, they've all
experienced this same thing, and some person goes
and puts that into music, then that’s a folk song,
because it was not written commercially, it was
written to express something about his mutual
experience. For instance, my song about buying a car
is getting a very good reception, because everybody
had gone through this experience, of buying a car,
when you have yours as a trade-in--this is the stuff
that folk songs are made of. See, it's these shared
experiences. And I know that not every--see, I didn't
realize this, I didn’t realize how special it is to write
a song, I thought everybody could do it. But that's
not so, I'm finding out. And then to write with humor
and satire, that’s even more specialized.

McC: Who do you listen to? Is there anyone you'd
list as an influence?

LM: Oh yes. Influences on my music have been Tom
Lehrer, for his wonderful biting quality of his songs.
He doesn't even write songs anymore. Do you
remember who he was?

McC: Oh, yes.

LM: So I really thought he was a genius in being able
to express in very brilliant songs these comments on
society...I like Tom Paxton, who does the same thing,
but more in the folk idiom. And then there was, of
course, Woody Guthrie, going back further, who did a
lot of social comment in his own way and I liked him
very much. And Malvina Reynolds in the 60s, she
was a woman from Berkeley, California who did
marvelous things, and I met her, and was her friend.
And she encouraged me a lot to keep on doing what
I was doing. So she was a great influence too...

McC: Has your voice changed over the years?

LM: I think it has gotten stronger. But as far
as--you know, I don't have really a beautiful singing
voice. I never did. And one time I went to a music
teacher and I thought, ‘If I'm going to be doing a lot of
singing, I need to learn really how to sing,” formally,

RIDRRRRRRRRRERRERRRRRAERARERRRARRTARTRTRETKTRRRTRRRTRATRAR TARTRATE ARARRAR RRR

you know. Well, after a couple of lessons I could see
that this woman was going to have me coming out
singing like Giselle McKenzie or somebody. And my
friends all said, ‘Lu--you will just be a poor copy of
singers that people hear all the time. Keep your own
voice, go with it! Because you have something
unique, and people will accept that if they like the
songs.’ And you know what, I quit those lessons...I
went with my own voice, such as it is, and I never
worried about it again. I have a loud clear voice, and
when I sing nobody ever worries--I don't sing in
pear-shaped tones.

McC: How many albums have you done?

LM: This is my fourth album. I did one in ‘63 and one
in ‘66 and then we had the long dry spell, and then in
‘83, when I retired from my office job, that very
summer I made another album. And now, ‘86, this
new one is just out...

McC: How can people get your albums?

LM: Well, they can get them from me personally. I
usually have them when I do concerts. I just take 'em
with me, and I do real well that way. I have never
approached a big record company, because they
wouldn't--they don't know me. And they tell
me...these words I quote from Arlo Guthrie—he has
never made much money on the albums he does with
Columbia and other big companies. So he has taken to
funding his own albums and selling them himself when
he goes to concerts.

McC: Are they available through the mail?

LM: They are available through the mail from me
[see end of story] and there’s one little place in
Dallas, one little store called Paperbacks Plus,
who've asked me if they could carry my album, and
I said yes, because I like the people that run the store.
But for me to have them in stores around, I couldn't

* keep up with collecting the money for them and the ~

bookkeeping, I don't want to fool with that... I have a
wonderful mail-order business going...you know, I've
always made my own. This is a trend. I found out
when I went to the Kerrville Folk Festival, which I
entered a competition down there a couple years ago,
and I won a prize, I won first prize. A lot of
recording artists there do fund their own...and they
make the album themselves at some local place, you
know, Dallas or Houston or wherever, and they
supervise the whole thing themselves and then
market it themselves. The way I do. And this is
becoming very popular with recording artists,
because it's too much of a hassle to get into those big
record companies like Columbia and RCA. And also,
those big record companies are--there's a lot of
connection with organized crime...all sorts of bad
stuff. They say, ‘You don't know what trouble is til
you get mixed up with those people.’ Instead of
waiting all your life trying to get on with a big
record company, we're all doing our records and
doing fine. We're selling our records. I mean, we may
not get the wide distribution they have, but we're
doing all right. Also there is a small independent
record distributor in Amarillo, and they have asked
to distribute my records.

McC: What's the name?

LM: It's called Canadian River Music. And they
feature Texas artists. It's a small company but we
know the owners. And they're wonderful honest
people who have integrity and they want to promote
Texas artists and so I did give them permission to
put mine in their catalog...

McC: I've run out of questions. Is there anything
else you think people would be interested in hearing?

LM: Well, I think people would be interested to know
what kind of music I make. Now, satire is mainly
what I do. Although I have done one or two serious
songs. I don't mean serious, I mean quiet songs. But
satire is what I do, cause I see the world that way. I
look at the world, I see the world as an absurd place.
And all my music tends to come out that way, and it
pokes fun--for instance I have a song called ‘Ring
Around the Collar’, that pokes fun at the absurdity of
TV advertising. And satire I think is very funny,
unless you get too bitter and then it’s not funny any
more, but if you don't cross that line it's very very
effective. And I think I know how to do that,
instinctively. So that’s what I do, and if anybody
wanted to describe my music, it would be social
satire.

Lu Mitchell's records are available from her, at
2922 Eric Lane, Dallas TX 75234. Currently
available in cassettes or albums are Chant of the Rat
Race (83) and Alarums and Excursions (86). Either
is $8.00 plus $1.50 postage. Al io)

includes “The Paper Shredder”, “The Real Estate
Lady”, “Central Expressway Lament”, “Lewd and
Loose in Lewisville", "The Kuglesburg Bank", “Dear
Dr. Ruth”, “Onward Jerry Falwell”, “It's Nice to
have a Live One on the Table", and “The Great

* NONGNC SONG NG NOONE NG ONC GOOG OCG ONG ONG NONGNOMONG GNC NOOO MONO OM

)

Dick Clark Productions, Inc. (you know--the guy on
American Bandstand) will be offering 1.6 million shares
of common stock to the stock-buying public, in the
expectation of raising about $14.5 million to increase
its production of TV shows,

AIS PORT issues
430 overseas.

,

~C

If You're Serious About Rock,
Study Geology

BITCH

O It's more than a Rock Mag--
--It's newsprint.

0
3 Q Once a month (unless we just can't
‘deal with it) BITCH brings you the
arfing-1st Rock journalism in the
world today. Unless we decide to
cover Jazz. Or Folk.
This is 4 lousy subscription ad,
e isn't it?

} Name
Address

City

Address checks to San Jose Face,

Suite 164, 478 W Hamilton Ave.,
Campbell, CA 95008.

\OORRCOSOSO OGG G OGG GONG GOOG NG GG OGG OO OG