Dear BITCH, dear world:

My songs will be top the charts, but I'll remain humble. True, I'll accept homage from total strangers, but modestly will have nothing to say except, “Thanks.” To me, success will be sitting down with every rock magazine in the world in my mail box, saying, "Aw, shucks, I'm not that brilliant, but thanks all the same. I won't worry about if everybody will still love me next month. Or even when I'm old and grey. I don't want the fame, the riches, the glory. I want revenge. I want to see Madonna gasping purple-faced as she tries to keep up with me on the charts. Then I want to shove her off the charts with my own two hands. By that time she'll be so tired she won't even notice the fall! There just isn’t room for all of us, and I don't like them, so I will make short work of Cyndi Bopper, Witless Houston, and the Pointless Sisters. I may pick Chrissie Hynde off the floor again, if she survives the fall, but it's curtains for Patti Labelle! Pat Benatar can take care of the Wilson sisters for me, then down she goes!

Then all I have to do is guard against assault from beyond the grave by Janis Joplin. Not pushin’ hard enough, Randi, Berkeley, CA

EDITOR: So what you're trying to say, Randi, is that sisterhood is beautiful?

BITCH

I feel strongly that something needs to be said.

Dear Editor: That ADDIE issue was the best one yet. I was one of the few to see FEVER when the line-up was kind of my tunnel. So thanks Eden, Leather, Lois, drummer Sandy, bassist Joann, guitarist Lois, and guitarist/vocalist Addie. It's always fun to see Rude Girl will never be forgotten. As for that HEROINE promo photo that was scolded for not showing guitars...) I LOVED IT! Lois has never looked better and Addie reminds one of a sexy Vicki Blue. Yes, Heroines manage to look feminine and aggressive at the same time!

DEATHS:

Jane Dornacker, 40, when her traffic helicopter crashed in New York during a live broadcast. A comedian and California/New York radio personality, Jane was known to Rock fans through her performing in Leila and the Snakes, and the Tubes. Consider San Francisco in shock.

Sippie Wallace, on her 88th birthday. Known as the Texas Nightingale, this Blues shouter (backed by musicians like Louis Armstrong and Sidney Bechet) was one of the queens of the 20's/30's Blues circuit, after which she turned to Gospel. She began singing Blues again in ‘65, and then Bonnie Raitt convinced her to perform regularly again in the ‘70's. Sippie had been ill since a concert last March, when she had a heart attack.

Judy Hayden/June Wesner, 61, following a car accident.

Between 1948 and 1957, June (using the Judy Hayden stage name) was part of a Country music duo with then-husband Merle Travis, and they appeared together in the early TV shows Town Hall Party and Dinner Bell Round Up, as well as Merle Travis And Company, in which she was the "Company." She left performing when they divorced, though she'd been a solo radio singer earlier.

Donations in her name can be made to the Arthritis Foundation, 450 San Antonio Road, Palo Alto, CA 94306.

Joan Jett & the Blackhearts Good Music (CBS/Blackheart Records.)

Just when you thought it was safe to go back into your local record shop, Joan Jett and the Blackhearts release their fourth album. Not surprisingly, this record is packed with songs that sound as though each one was performed by a totally different band. Over the years I have noticed that uniqueness in the Blackhearts; being able to make albums that aren't monotonous production-wise. Joan's wide variety of musical tastes aid that factor I think. She seems to like to gather up all her influences and put 'em in a blender, then pour the result all over us. Joanie’s first two records, Bad Reputation (a solo project before she assembled the BHs, and that is also known as Joan Jett [good title]) and the now legendary I Love Rock-n-Roll, reflected some early sixties British Glam Rock styled songs while the last two packages, Album and Glorious Results Of A Misspent Youth, revealed Joan's passion for the soulful Blues sound. That brings us to Joanie’s latest work, called Good Music. This album sounds like a cross between T.Rex and Run-D.M.C. There's an impressive list of guest musicians on the back cover, which is a first for the Blackhearts. The sixties queen of hits, Darlene Love, is helping out on background vocals, as are the Beach Boys. A rapper named Scorpio and some of his rhyming buddies appear on the album as well. The Uptown Horns are back. This group of guys played on a few tracks from the previous album, - Don't know who the percussionist is, but sounds real good when wearing a bikini but...

“Black Leather” (not the song of the same name Joan performed with her old band in ’78) shows her talent for dancin’ with Scorpio. I remember hearing some time before this album was completed that this dude wrote a song (“Black Leather") for and about Joan. She liked it, so it’s included here. For hardcore fans, it may take some getting used to.

That letter from Cassy was very amusing, suggesting Rude Girl once a month. They were the fight at the Che and Shandy were twins. They do both have orangish hair.

--by DANISE

The answer I got was that the rest of the album does not sound this way. He nodded understandingly and tipped out the door. This other guy I know pointed out that there aren't many female Rappers, and for Joan to attempt being a part of that, in his opinion, is great. We should all know by now that Joanie is no stranger to stirring up controversy (unwittingly for the most part) nor is it curious to her to go against the norm. Uh-huh.

Joan's singing on this album is probably the best to date. Not quite as wild as she sounds live, but there's still lots of the growling that has made Joan popular (or UNpopular) with Rock fans. But on other tracks the little woman proves she is able to appeal to those who prefer a more relaxed singer.

A lot of this album is Top 40 material. I hear a lot of potential singles. That is another first for the Blackhearts. With all respect, there's usually only one or two songs on each BH record that radio would even consider touching. Without selling out or wimping out, Joan & Co. have figured out a way to keep both the Jettheads and the radio listeners happy and satisfied.

Actually, all the Leathur Panteez girls resemble the Orchids. Blond drummer Michelle is a dead ringer for blond drummer Laurie Bell. Guitarist Punky has a streak in her black hair exactly like guitarist Sunby. Bassist Peggi has brown hair like Orchids bass player Lori McAllister. And Jan & Jayne both have ash-blonde hairdos. I've been able to get over not seeing the Orchids in concert (the major tragedy of my life) by seeing Leathur Panteez 20 times. Actually, I’m beginning to think one of your readers is right... I should have my head examined! OK, Carol Kao, READ MY BEADS, girl. Am I the only one to admit having Bebe Buell’s record?

Later Daze, Gene T., San Francisco, CA P.S. Kim Fowley is GOD. FANNY are Goddesses.

EDITOR: Gene, we're pleased that you're not embittered by our stealing Danise from your fanzine (NEON ANGELS). Some of us are pretty dubious about this “blondrummer” coinage— is Kenny Rogers a “grist”? Thanks for sending reprints on Lori Burton!

Dear Editrices: Hadda stick in my 2 cents (22 cents) on Addie/Lois pic. Chix w/guitars beats chix w/no guitars. Tess, you're so hot guys die just gaping at you. Sure, 2 cute chix but nobody gets away with that without looking like her face/body is her act. GUITARS get you looked on as MUSICIANS, not GUR-ULS.

Ms. D.O., Portland, Oregon