by S.J. McCarthy  
|, Tina. By Tina Turner with Kurt Loder. William Morrow & Co., 1986. $16.95  

This is the inspirational story of someone who swore, when just a high school girl,  
"Someday, if it’s the last thing I do, I'm gonna have long hair and some big hips and  
legs.”  

{Tina intersperses quotes with narrative. The quotes are mostly from Tina Turner,  
but others come from an interesting variety of people (even a few from Ike Turner).  
The narrative is by Kurt Loder, a senior editor at ROLLING STONE. Loder has mastered  
that ROLLING STONE writing style, all right. He tells us that at age four, the girl who  
would one day be Tina Turner (then Anna Mae Bullock) had “an already exotic facial  
geography of elegant broad bones, richly sculpted lips, honey-toned skin, smooth as a  
breezeless sea, and eyes like tiny brown beacons.” Tiny brown beacons? Picture it if  
you can--I've been trying.  

He describes singles as “lysergically tinged.” Tina doesn't sing, she gives “an  
incandescent reading” of a song. Incandescent may have been a good adjective once, but  
I've heard it too often.  

Best of all, there's this great thought (setting the scene for those who can't imagine  
life in 1961): “First came the pony...then the fly, the slop, the Bristol stomp, the  
mashed potatoes, the hully gully. The nation, now led by John F. Kennedy, the youngest  
president in its history, was going dance mad.” Now, doesn't that sound...doesn't it give  
the impression...Jack, we hardly knew ye.  

{In a couple of places there are happy faces in the text. Don't ask me why. If I knew  
I would tell you, because I'm sure it would be interesting.  

However, it all hangs together in a coherent account of Tina's life, and the many  
quotes are nice. It's readable and has great pictures.  

In fact, it’s so full of interesting things that I must resist the temptation to just tell  
all the good parts. From the beginning of Tina's career (still a high schooler, she finally  
managed to get a hold on the mike that Ike Turner and the Kings of Rhythm occasionally  
let audience members sing into. She let loose. ‘And boy, Ike--that blew him away. He  
went, “Giiirrrlll!...he ran down off that stage...He said, “I! didn't know you could really  
sing. What else do you know?”) through the day she finally left Ike and his Revue (One  
day in 1976, for some reason, a perfectly routine incident--Ike hit Tina for saying ‘ick’  
when he offered her some melting chocolate while she was wearing her white Yves  
Saint Laurent suit--Tina decided it was over. She split with 36 cents, sunglasses, an  
overnight bag, and a bloodstained Yves Saint Laurent suit.), to the present ("I have not  
given up on men.”), this book is full of good stories and sidelights on human nature.  

A central theme, of course, is the by now widely publicized fact that Ike constantly  
abused Tina. Just in case anyone doesn't want to believe her (and there are always  
people who don’t want to believe that kind of stuff) Loder has quotes from emergency  
room nurses who remark that she came in all the time and former Revue staffers who  
agree that, yes, they did see Ike put the lighted cigarette up Tina's nose, yes, they  
remember the time he fractured her ribs. Ike Junior adds that he personally got fed up  
with dad when he “beat me in the head with a forty-five--a cocked forty-five--for no  
reason.” Ah, come on, there must be lots of good reasons to pistol-whip your kids--Ike  
Junior must be overlooking something.  

A central mystery is why Tina stayed with Ike and why, for a long time, she loved  
him anyway. Tina discusses these questions a little. The first time Tina told Ike she  
wanted to break off their personal involvement, he beat her up and raped her. Tina was  
pregnant by him. ‘So I said to myself, “I'll stay right here, and I'll just try to make  
things better.” I wasn't as smart then as I am now. But who ever is?’ she says. She  
also says that at first she just liked him as a friend, she was just out of high school and  
he was helping her realize her career dreams. Then that turned into what she thought  
was love. That she started losing that love following the beatings and his infidelity. And  
finally, after her suicide attempt and his unpleasant behavior about it, she started to  
hate him. But why did it take so long? That kind of situation is so hard to understand for  
people not involved that it's no criticism of the book that it isn't made crystal-clear.  

What's a music bio without a frank discussion of drugs? Tina herself hasn't got much  
to tell. She tried marijuana once and had fun, but didn't like the lack of control and  
never used it again (she had little enough control over her life already). Sometimes Ike  
would make her take Benzedrine during long recording sessions. She doesn't drink and  
she doesn’t smoke.  

However, Ike had a bad cocaine habit--the bio is saved! He could afford to indulge his  
habit and he did, to the extent, a former staffer criticizes, that there was enough coke  
around that it sifted down inside the studio control board and messed up the sound. He'd  
already showed this staffer how cocaine had destroyed his nasal septum. But an  
impresario can go further without a nasal septum than without a control board in his  
studio, I guess.  

This book isn't really about Tina's singing, though that’s certainly touched on. Part of  
the reason for this, apparently, is that Tina had little artistic control while she was  
with Ike, and doesn't like a lot of the work she did then. Ike wanted her to scream and  
shout on the songs, “...selling them, you know?” Tina also didn't like her simulated  
orgasm stage routine on “I've Been Loving You Too Long.” When the Revue first started  
doing it, musician Jimmy Thomas sang it, with a similar routine. Tina made the mistake  
of mimicking Jimmy one day, after he left the act, and Ike liked it, built it up, and  
insisted it be performed that way. “Embarrassing. But the people loved it.” They did, and  
since it appeared in Gimme Shelter (the Stones film), Tina didn’t get to forget it for a  
long time.  

“It wasn’t even my career--it was Ike's career.” His songs, about his life, and she  
describes herself as having just been his tool. “...I know some people say those old  
records are classic now, but I hated them. And onstage, the music was so loud, so  
noisy, and the keys were all too high.” When Tina got out on her own, she wanted to do  
things differently. Her manager, Roger Davies, says he and Tina wanted real songs for  
her, not just dance riffs, to highlight her voice and make it clear she was a singer, not  
just a screamer. The two recordings described in detail were ones she made without  
Ike--River Deep, Mountain High, with Phil Spector, and Private Dancer.  

Tina did have a lot of influence over the stage show--things like the choreography of  
the Ikettes routines. And she was in part responsible for their drift towards  
Rock'n'Roll.  

There are some nice mentions of other musicians Tina ran into over the years. In  
1966 they performed with the Rolling Stones for the first time. Tina had been so busy  
mending and ironing costumes that she hadn't met the Stones yet. Seeing Mick Jagger  
offstage watching her perform with the Ikettes, Tina asked the question that so many  
people have asked, “God, who's that boy with the big lips?”  

Her account of being in the Ken Russell film Tommy is interesting. He was unsure  
about her, complaining that he'd thought she was taller. “I mean, what was I supposed  
to do--grow?" She finally won him over by imitating Vincent Price, complete with  
bulging eyes and quivering head.  

And there's a nice bit, too, on Bonnie Bramlett’s brief stint as an Ikette, the only  
white one they ever had. Even covered with instant suntan and wearing a wig, she  
wasn't fooling people. There was trouble in Kentucky, and she had to drop out. It broke  
her heart, she says, for she “wanted to be an Ikette in the worst way.” A lot of women  
seem to have dreamed of being an Ikette, and I've met a lot of guys whose secret  
longing was to be a Pip. Surely there is some way for society to harness all this hidden  
energy?  

This is a book with a message. “If you are unhappy with anything--your mother,  
your father, your husband, your wife, your job, your car--whatever is bringing you  
down, get rid of it,” Tina says. I like this message. I feel that Tina may have met my  
car. And I'm impressed. Not that many people can look back on their mistakes (and  
correct decisions) and actually feel that they’ve learned something they can articulate.  
That's nice.  

Loder goes into such genealogical detail on the maternal side of Tina's family  
(although he’s vaguer about the paternal relatives) that one can readily determine that  
Tina is as much Indian as she is black--Navajo and Cherokee. (How much white ancestry  
there may be isn't clear.) Our society identifies such people as black, however. That's  
not the whole story. Let's reclaim Tina Turner as a Navajo success story and a  
Cherokee success story as well as a black success story and a female success story!  
Let's recapture our secret identities as Ikettes and Pips! Let's occupy the Capitol and  
dance in the fountains! Let's boogie!