simpler political stuff) does some texturally complex poetry  
somewhat like the Ruggedy Annes used to have, things that reach  
out further and really test her ability to project emotion in  
concert. Check out “Falling”, this page, or “Tragedy Storm” (“I  
want to wash your blackboard clean") on the album--not easy  
stuff to deliver. The most political thing about this band is that  
they exist the way they exist--that they put themselves together  
by themselves and play the way they play. As McLuhan said,  
“The medium IS the message.” I mean, look at the picture in the  
center--like, who would get the impression they wanted to be  
Yuppie girls, anyway? The message that they don't want to be  
that, is already implicit in their actions, it's not necessary to rub  
it in. The emotions that can come out of the power is another,  
different--and to me more interesting--message.  

Like when Deb was talking about their European tour; “We put it  
all together ourselves, without any male help, without opening for  
a male band like Frightwig did. As a band we try to make a year  

You know, they don't have those North Beach beatnik  

coffeehouses anymore.” She was also tired of being viewed as  
a typical girl Punk”--she notes that other Punk scenes,  
San Francisco's scene is, that some of them are still  
freaked” at girl Punks even having the styles, let alone the  
aggressiveness. “The first time, people started to heckle, but  
halfway through, I went, Hey, I’m the one onstage, you’re  
gonna listen!”  

“Get off the stage!” Debbie laughs. “And it was great, cause we  
were making history!”  

“Whose girlfriend are you?’ ‘I'm the singer.” ‘Oh, yeah,  
sure!” Maxine adds.  

in the South, aren't as ready to deal with strong women as San  

“really Newbern Ave., Medford, MA 02155.  

$1/copy.  
Your basic regional Punk fanzine  

(Massachusetts). Interviews with the  
likes of Bebe Buell, reviews of the likes  
of Anti-Scrunti Faction, Urge Overkill,  
and the Dogmatics. BANG! is also in the  
record business; Under the auspices of  
77 RECORDS, they've released a  
compilation featuring the likes of Bebe  
Buell, the Odds, Das Furlines, and the  

“In L.A., at the Hong Kong Cafe, they shouted, Hey broads,  
“Even in San Francisco, it happens, someone comes to the  

Well, you won't make that mistake when you catch them live,  

will you? If there's room, you'll even be able to dance--the  

plan. We said, we're going to Europe. And we got numbers and  
addresses and mailed everything out and did it--we got a 2%  
response, which was enough, and we did it.” Franci  
“We did it and we stayed friends and didn’t break up,” Susan  
laughs.  

Max nods, “We had a total of two bad fights.”  

“A lot of women get to where they are by having boyfriends  
——we left our boyfriends home,” Debbie says.  

“Even though my boyfriend called me up and said, "I can't live  
without you,” Susan says.  

“And wept. But we did it alone. And it was women in control all  
the way,” Debbie finishes.  

Yeah, and that control is obvious from the first moments of  
hearing the band--so it's more interesting to me when they move  
on to, okay, now that we're in control of our actions, now that it's  
our choice, NOW what?  

It's harder for Maxine to write the emotional songs. She dislikes  
the whole idea of normal romantic love songs; “I can't just go and  
sing about how happy love is.” “Tragedy Storm” grew out of a  
real, painful incident--"...which made it easier to write because  
that's what I was feeling. I have to get in really bad condition to  

a bad state, though that doesn't always work—in the last two  
months, horrible shit was happening and I was frustrated because  
I couldn't write--it was like, slit your wrists, come on! You have  
to really work at it, but you can do it--though then it can be a  
dark, sarcastic thing, because it's not from the heart.”  
Maxine is the latest to join the band. The others advertised for  
a vocalist. She vaguely knew Clara, knew they wanted a lyricist,  
too, went to the audition, “--and I was kind of shy--  
“No, you weren't shy!” Debbie protests. “You were more  
aggressive than anyone else there, really coming out with  
stuff--that's why we picked you.”  
“I was intimidated,” Max continues, “They didn’t intimidate me,  
I was intimidated by being there.”  

Her audition was to improvise words to what they were  
playing. I note that happened to Paula of Vertical Pillows, too,  
and suggest that that's an exceptionally difficult type of audition.  
“But we have to sit there and make up parts,” Susan says.  
“We're writing our own parts, we're not performing the words,  
so we shouldn't write them.”  
I demur with this as an overall philosophy, asking, “What would  
the Who have been if Roger Daltrey had written the words?”  
“Well, for the audition,” Debbie explains, "if someone puts  
themselves out to be able to sing and be in front, then they ought  
to be able to do it, to handle it. We make the music and the singer  
makes the words, so it's complete if the singer writes her  
parts--it's better if the vocalist has complete control of what her  
part is going to be, so she feels what she's saying.”  
“We didn't just want a front person vocalist,” Clara says. We  
wanted somebody ready to put herself on the line.”  
“There were people, they had beautiful voices, but they didn't  
fit in,” Debbie continues. "They weren't ready to put themselves  
on the line.”  
“And I expected it,” Max says. "It's one of the reasons I tried  
out. I make a chain of impressions, and I pick the parts of it that  
go with the music.”  
“What's another reason you tried out?” I ask.  
“I didn’t fit in anywhere else. Cause being a poet doesn't go  

anywhere, and it's not as much fun as doing poetry to the music.  

the Japanese female duo, Frank Chickens, in Switzerland, and  
on stage the Chickens claimed to use sanitary napkins to  
manipulate their sound  

(Nyad’s Originals) and asked her to single out some  

SNACK BARS  

“It's not a three-piece suit, it’s a two-piece  
suit, very nearly a three-piece suit!”  

Book Review:  

by Maryanne Burgess. Carikean Publishing, P.O. Box  
11771, Chicago, IL 60611-0771.  

This book is GREAT! If you're designing your own  
clothes, your own stage costumes, anybody's clothes,  
you MUST have this book--it’s wonderful, an exhaustive  
compendium of where to mail order sewing specialties,  
from unusual patterns through places that print fabrics to  
order. We showed it to designer Anita L. Mack Farland  

hat-making; Banasch’s Notions, ranging from 15 kinds of  
shoulder pads through the smallest and largest size snaps  
available; the Brisk-Set Rhinestone Stapler;  
Dressmakers Service Ltd., which fabric-covers buttons  
and buckles to order; and Upfront Fashions, which sells  
maternity lingerie patterns. Also included; resources for  
making original patterns, where to find patterns for  
fashions for every period from medieval through  
Ragtime, where to find patterns for unusual sizes and  
info on fitting mastectomy patients, where to get zippers  
made to order, wholesale cloths by the bolt (from silks  
through water repellants and vinyls), lingerie kits,  
lacemaking equipment, hand-made bobbin laces, industrial  
sewing machines and birch looms, hat blocks, ribbon  
rosebuds, dress forms, leather dyes, windsock patterns,  
and feathers by the square foot. This is an excellent  
book, can't recommend it too highly,  
zine review:  

END TIMES is a ‘zine showing the prevalence of  
beatniks in our modern society. Go, man, go! Lotsa  
reviews (records, concerts) of the Punk-New Wave  
college radio sort, but I tell you it adds up to Beat  
Generation all the way, and not just because of the Allen  
Ginsberg interview in issue 9. It's the forceful  
conglomeration of certain artsy-tistic dialectics, from  
Performance Artist interviews to the correspondent in  
South Africa who seems to be LIVING a William Burroughs  
novel (“I am a homosexual coke-drinking black Nazi with  
a bit of an ego,” he writes, convincing this reviewer that  
he's a girl in Tucson, AZ with a rich fantasy life). Some  
dada, some neo-dada, some neo-neo-dada, but much more  
coherent than any hardcore ‘zine--nice spare “read me”  
graphics, 99 cents from END TIMES, 1085 14th St., Suite  
1234, Boulder, CO 80302.  

“Vivienne, Viv! Let’s go down to the pub  
and have Susie tell us again about the  
American’s circumcisions!”  

“T really want the London College, but  
I might better to cash my chips and say,  
first choice, Bath.” — It could be that you  
want to find  
the sugar daddy and shove off to