Addie: Jealousy, there was a lot of jealousy.  
Especially 'cause I was getting paid—they were like  
making $20 a man, and I'd come in—Kingston Mines  
is where I really got the start there, in Chicago. And  
Doc, the owner, he'd be paying me a good buck to  
come in and just sit in, and maybe I'd do six numbers  
in a whole night, with whatever band was there, and  
they'd back me up.  

Lois: And there'd be lines around the corner to see  
the white girl.  

Addie: Yeah, I had a good reputation and a good  
following there, and it just built up.  

Tw: As a white girl or as a Blues player?  

Addie: As a Blues player! The white girl thing—that  
was not an issue except for the blacks that were  
jealous...  

Lois: (On their playing, after I note Danise’s use of  
superlatives to describe it:)...It's the intensity, it's  
like going on until the last drop is wrung from it—it's  
like that with Heavy Metal, it's like that with the  
Blues. It's not like that with a lot of forms, but with  
those particular forms—if you're a person who goes  
for that form, you're also a person who goes for the  
jugular, for the bull's eye, until it’s like centered and  
focused like a laser. And when you put those two  
together on the same stage, you really have to look  
for superlatives to describe it, 'cause it’s really like  
using that last bit of oomph to get there, to describe  
the situation. Something like “The Thrill Is Gone” or  
“Loan Me A Dime”—it’s so quiet in the room  
you could hear a pin drop, and it's so slow, it's  
like half your heart beating. And then some of the  
Metal stuff, is SO INTENSE...that's how people get  
about Blues, about Heavy Metal, that die-hard  
quality; “I will go to the ends of the Sahara to hear  
Blues!”  

Tw:...in California it’s really common for a band  
member to only learn the songs that their own band  
plays. I mean there are great musicians here, but  
also lots of “professionals” who can actually only  
play the like 6 songs their band does. Are there as  
many people ABLE to just jump in and jam with you?  
Addie: Well, I'm starting to find out—I’ve had  
people in my band recently, who do not know the  
basics of music. Who do not know what a I-IV-V  
progression is—  

Lois: But to jam, you don't have to have a I-IV-V  
progression. You can have just a simple tune. And  
then take that anywhere.  

Addie: No, but see, they can't. Because they don't  
have the background. They don't have the  
fundamental basic good Blues or Rock background.  
I find that to be a real  

Lois: Some people have a Classical background, and  
they never touch the Blues, and they just, like, jam.  

Addie: But they can't do what I do on stage. They  
can't play with my band, 'cause they don't have the  
basics. I really find this to be true. If they don't have  
the fundamental knowledge of the basics—I’m  
thinking of one bass player in particular who did  
not—  

Lois: Oh, yeah, well, him, you gotta learn—  
Addie: It's like pulling teeth, to get somebody to get  
what's going on...okay, when I first came back from  
Chicago, I didn’t have a band. And there were a lot of  
jobs where musicians would just recommend  
musicians to me. I'd call up and say, “I've got a gig,  
so-and-so said you're a good player.” I'd never seen  
their faces before, never played with them. “Meet  
me at the club at 7:30 for sound check, and we'll set  
up.” “Okay.” So I'd have a list of songs as long as  
your arm, all Blues or very similar to Blues, “Okay,  
this is in the key of A, we'll take it from the 5, it's  
a shuffle. Here we go, 1-2—" if they don't know  
what I'm talking about, forget it! I've played a lot of  
shows that were real exciting shows, everybody  
was real tuned in, “What's gonna happen next?” And  
I'd go, “Just follow my hands, follow me, and we'll  
just go...improvise.” And if they can't (follow  
me)—(shrugs)...there are some novices that sit in,  
but they usually have something going for them. And  
if not—like I say, “A big hand as they leave the  
stage,” it's a polite way so nobody's embarrassed.  
Because you never know if you're gonna get the next  
Jimi Hendrix...I'd played in black bands when I was in  
L.A. I'd be the only white girl in a 10 piece Rhythm &  
Blues, 'cause I was so into Funk and black music. My  
main thing I always say, is I'm a black girl trapped  
inside a white girl's body. That's my slogan...(On  
mostly white audiences in the Midwest with mostly  
black musicians:) I could see them looking at me,  
making their little opinions. “She must be—  
all the guys in the band, what is she, white  
trash with all those black guys?” BEFORE we started  
to play. And I'd get up on stage, and hear out of the  
corner of my ear, “She must be good, she has an  
all-black band behind her—she MUST be able to  
play.” And we'd play, really start smokin'—and  
they'd go, “It doesn't matter.” Mostly white college  
kids, hardly any blacks, in the Midwest...I did the  
Blues for a minute, that's how I feel about it, but I've  
got this reputation for playing the Blues...I like it but  
I can't stick with the changes because it bores me, to  
a certain extent. I grew up in a Jazz environment,  
my parents were Jazz musicians...I was almost born  
at a Stan Kenton concert. I get bored if there's not  
like changes and colors in the chords. I like  
movement. I can play one note as the music moves  
around me. I can just keep one note happening, if I  
want.  

Tw: (To Lois:) You have a rep for using deep,  
semi-mystical imagery.  

Lois: As much as possible...  

Addie: Yes, those are very good adjectives.  

Lois: The imagination. That's what I like about Heavy  
Metal. There's no limit to what you can write about. I  
think when you get into other forms of Rock music,  
like New Wave, you tend to write love songs. I don’t  
remember writing a love song. Just about anything  
else!  

Addie: But in any form, you can write about  
whatever you want. The lyric is whatever you want  
to do. It doesn't have to be Heavy Metal.  

Lois: But certain forms lend themselves—like, the  
Blues lends itself to a down and out kind of thing, a negative thing?  
Addie: As Willie Dixon says, “The Blues is the facts of life.” But  
the Blues make you happy—  

Lois: The facts of life. I try to stay away from the facts! I try to  
go for the clouds!  

Addie: I think her material is unique, from the Heavy Metal I've  
listened to. A lot of her material that we don't do, I think is the  
best Heavy Metal I've ever heard. I wouldn't even call it Heavy  
Metal, although it is that form. She's really a gifted writer. I hear  
a lot of Thrash, a lot of headbanger material, and I go, “This is  
cool, I love the guitar playing, but you know, these songs  
slink.”...we have written material together, which is interesting,  
coming from the two spaces we are coming from.  

Lois:...this band was born out of necessity. We didn't, like, get  
these people together to jam, rehearse in a basement, and pursue  
a record deal. We did this completely ass-backwards. "We got a  
gig! Who do you know?"  

Addie: That's the way I do things!...  

Lois:...we rehearsed with this particular line-up one night before  
our first gig, for about an hour, popped a few brewskis, “Fuck  
it.”...that's what's really beautiful about this experience, we get a  
fresh canvas every time we perform. That's what's neat about the  
Blues. “I think I'll paint it all black now! And now—bright colors!”  
So it often ends up being quite different from the last show.  
Addie: I wouldn't call it Blues. This band, with you and I playing,  
we like to Rock! The heavier, the better. We get down into it. They  
didn't call me a Blues player in Chicago. They called me the girl  
who plays Rock’n’Roll who sits in with the Blues groups. I played  
Rock in a Blues situation, that's what branded my Blues  
different...what's really neat, is we're so relaxed about it, that  
things are just happening, and we can go, “My God, how far do we  
really want to take this?”...  

Lois:...people think it's so hard to make it, and it's really not. If  
you just start doing it, if you just GET OFF YOUR ASS and DO it—  
Addie: Do what your heart says.  

Lois:—it comes to you. The gigs have been coming to us.  

Tw: (To Addie:) I hear you're exceptionally picky about the  
product you'll release.  
Addie: Exceptionally.  

Lois: (Long sigh:) You would NOT believe it! (Laughs)...  

Addie: (After expressing dissatisfaction with everything she’s  
recorded thus far:)...I like my tunes, I like my music, it never  
comes out the way I want it to sound on disc. I just don't ever  
hear it the way I want to hear it.  

Lois: I don't either, I've never heard anything I'd want to release,  
and I'm finding out, “Oh, that was RELEASED? Oh. Interesting.  
Great.” Things with Rude Girl, things before that. I don't think that  
an artist is ever satisfied—it could always be better.  

Tw: It's just that I've heard that you (Addie) in particular could be  
famous if you weren't so picky.  

Lois: That's probably true. (To Addie) You're just a dip-shit, I  
have so much product, you wouldn't  

LASSIE TELLS ALL!  

VAM OT AMMAN! LAAROT A TRANSVESTITE! I DO NOT  
WAVE ALPS! I AM HOT! I AM WRITING TO PONES!  

TRE QUINTS VO HET BELONG “TO ACULT! I Never  
DATED BENSI! I AM NOT WARD TO WORK WITH!  
I JUST WANT HIGH-QUALITY PRODUCTIONS WITH