The Language Lab

Last month: France and Aqua started catering Arfur Smiff's party to celebrate his solo album. Time: 1972. Place: Monterey, California.

Midnight. She'll blame me for getting her into this mess, (France thought.) and I'm guilty, guilty, guilty.

Arfur was okay, out to lunch, but okay. His pals (entourage? tribe? crew?) took advantage of that. Things had gotten increasingly hairy—every few minutes, random people would offer them random drugs or come through the kitchen with random bizarre requests ("Who did the album art? This is an emergency!” “I need 5 lbs. of ice—IMMEDIATELY!" “Take the car keys and go get some fluoride toothpaste—NOW!") to which France made various replies (“Search me,” “Search the freezer,” “Fuck off,”) since Aqua seemed to feel it was France's job to do any actual talking with the inhabitants (and why did any of them think SHE knew anything? They must be new here, themselves), random voices lifted in random fights from random rooms, random passes from also-ran dummies. They'd barely finished making the chili when some orangutan in a cowboy shirt came in and said, “Why don't you fine pretty ladies take a break and smoke some dope with me and my friend?” To which France replied, “Fuck off!" As they began the little cakes, random male voices outside the kitchen door cried, “Any chicks in there? Come out and play!” To which France replied, “Fuck off!” When they were mid-crudités, it was Arfur's driver, saying, “Mama, you make me crazy. What IS your sweet name?” to Aqua. To which France replied, “Fuck off,” since Aqua seemed unable to get the hang of such clever repartee. Couldn't a person cook in peace? If this was what it was like today, the actual party was going to be purest bummer.

But Aqua wasn't complaining at all. She was barely saying anything. France was relieved. If Aqua had asked—you moron, why do you have anything to do with these jerks? And if you must have to do with them, why drag me into it?—France would have had no reply but a long, guilty cringe.

Quitting for the night, France and Aqua moved their sleeping bags into a remote corner of the garden naturally defended by bushes. Aqua hadn't even thought the suggestion was weird, and though France was relieved at not having to explain, it weirded her out that Aqua was being SO polite about everything—even the driver. France might not have said much about being pestered and ogled that way (every time they turned around, he seemed to be winking at Aqua), but she'd have at least said, “Fuck off.”

That driver! When they'd bought the supplies, they turned out to only need 70% of the money Arfur's manager had given them. He'd suggested that they quietly split the

“No,” France replied. Driver: Hey, the asshole tried to rip you off. Aqua: “To live outside the law, you must be honest.” That's Bob Dylan. Driver: “Don't be a sucker." That's from me. France: “I have the receipts, and the manager's getting them.” France Kingof. If we're going to stop being a world of rip-off artists, somebody somewhere has to make the first move, and it might as well be us. He's getting an exact cost accounting.

Not that he'd seemed to notice—just stuffed the receipts in his pocket and looked at her funny...

They settled into their sleeping bags.

HUGE fight sounds from the house. Breaking glass. France: I'm sorry, Aqua. I didn't think it would be this stupid. Aqua: No, it's okay, I'm learning a lot. It's really a learning thing for me. I feel completely safe with you in control, that’s an experience. Your ability to handle these guys and their trips is impressive. I'm glad I'm here to see it in action.

Was that a joke? France: Um, I don't actually feel like I'm in control of anything too impressively.

Demurring, Aqua said, “I've always been TERRIFIED of being around guys like this—“ detailing her horror with good reasons—fear of rape, molestation, violence, assorted humiliations. “It's instructive to watch you deal with this and know it’s even possible to do that without compromising who you are.”

I guess, (thought France,) I always figured my abnormal paranoia and hostility would hang me up, incurable, prevent my being anywhere. Instead, I found an environment where the paranoia and hostility are completely justified.

Breaking twigs. Lit up by more than the moonlight, Arfur collapsed at the foot of their sleeping bags. Both women sat up. Arfur: Stupid bint. Says it's Rattlesnake’s idea, fur coat in the freezer. "It's sexy, sets fur,” that’s what she said. Sick, am I right? Not like you sweet girls. Effin’, bleedin’ France: Arfur, you're bleeding. Arfur: Bleedin’ what? France: Bleeding blood. From your head. Arfur: Oo, yeh, right. It me with a bottle, din't she? ‘er with ‘er sick, wet, freezin’ fur. Airtight if I sleep ‘ere? I ‘ate them all, the...

He subsided into incomprehensible English cursing, mostly sounding like “rowrbazzle.” France: Arfur? Arfur, are you sure that cut’s okay?

He was already snoring. France: I guess he’s out for the night.

Aqua: Is it safe to leave him there?

France: Well—for us or him?

Aqua: Yes.

France: Well, I guess he could make a pass—unless he’s dangerously passed out. Guess I better check his pulse. Only I don’t guess he'd be any problem, we'd say no and he'd go back to sleep.

She got out of her bag and took his pulse, which he slept through.

Aqua: Couldn't he possibly be persistent?

France: Maybe slow to get the point persistent, but not dangerous persistent. His pulse seems okay.

Aqua: I'd be afraid to get so close to a guy that drunk.

France: A guy this drunk is no danger, unless you fall over him. I hope it's just drunk. Lots of pills going around. I'm getting something to treat that cut, want to come?

“Oh, yes!” Aqua said quickly, scrambling out of her bag to join her. As they entered the house, they passed the driver, who grabbed Aqua's arm. France kicked him in the shin.

“Hey!” He protested, without letting go of his prize.

France: Get off it, give us some space, already! Got a first aid kit?

“No harm done,” the driver told Aqua, releasing her. She rubbed her arm and stood behind France. “Who's hurt?”

France: You'll be, with rabies, if you don't cut it out. I'm getting real foaming at the mouth bitchy, and then I'm gonna bite a few people, no jive. I don’t need a whole kit, just a disinfectant, sponge, bandage. Oh, yeah, and a blanket.

Driver: It's not Arfur, is it? Man, I love that dude.

France: He's fine. He doesn't want to see anybody. He sent us to get the stuff.

That was better than the driver deciding to carry Arfur in. She'd be less worried watching Arfur herself than letting the clowns in the house do it.

The driver nodded, went and got them the stuff. Handing it over, he told Aqua, “Hey, babes, I'm sorry I keep pissing you off, it’s just, I really like you. You’re special.” Aqua: I don't like the way you show it. Please leave me alone.

Driver: You're a sweet chick. Not like your bigmouth friend.

France rolled her eyes. The women went back into the cool, breezy garden, the ocean close enough that the waves masked any sound from the shaking leaves, the grass damp under their bare feet. Aqua covered Arfur with the blanket while France lifted one of his eyelids, checking his condition. Grunting, he made a feeble bat at her hand and subsided into torpor. His eye was silver and black in the moonlight, like his face, but she could see the pupil contract, see he could move the eye.

If he can move, he’s okay. Aqua nervously held his head while France cleaned and bandaged the wound, then

“So if he vomits in his sleep, he won't choke on it,” France explained. Aqua’s eyes widened. Then they got into their sleeping bags again.

Beautiful, silver, damp, breezy night. A shame Arfur alarmed Aqua. But Aqua was probably too normal ever to have felt as completely useless and unwanted as France often felt. It felt good, amazingly good, to have anybody think enough of her to turn to her for help, as Arfur had.

Good thing I was so busy. I hardly had time to think of Gil at all. If he really does have

Next month: Gil comes to the party.

‘ow, THANKS. Just Tew on Te FIRST