THE BRIDE WORE... LEATHUR PANTEEZ!

The Lita f Pant ee Dani  
I receive letters just about every other day from people who ask, no, not my  
thoughts on the price of cheese in London but instead people wanna know, what  
has LEATHUR PANTEEZ been up to lately? When will the band visit your  
town? Well, if I were living outside California I wouldn't start asking the boss  
for the day off just yet. In October the band came off 11 months of solid  
gigging, so it ain't like the girls have been dilly-dallying since BITCH last  
wrote about ‘em. Leathur Panteez spent the remaining months of 1986 writing  
new material, preparing to support the LITA FORD BAND on January 9th.

The sold-out Stone turned away over 100 people at the door. The  
crammed-in crowd was antsy with excitement. Lita hadn't played San  
Francisco for over two years. That her long-awaited album was still not out  
(being not even recorded yet) didn't seem to matter. Current radio play  
obviously had nothing to do with selling tickets for tonight's concert. I guess  
that made Lita feel pretty good; bands are hardly ever able to tour without the  
support of new vinyl. (Supposed to be ready last summer, the record at last  
asking was tentatively titled The Bride Wore Black.) The Panteez fans too  
were out in force. Credit the band’s busy schedule last year for the growth in  
fans. The interesting footnote here is that even when L/P first came out on the  
scene people did not go to the shows just to see “the new all-girl band.”  
Leathur Panteez gained their fans through sweaty work and word of mouth. Which  
goes to prove people were into the MUSIC, not just “the concept.” Things have  
definitely changed since '76. Back at the Stone: SF's Queen of the North Beach  
strip (and I use the term loosely), Carol Doda, was present, rockin’ out with  
the rest of us. For those with enquiring minds—yes, she's still very, uh,  
healthy lookin’, too. Per the band’s request, one of the videos shown on the  
huge screen right before L/P went on was by Sid Vicious with a cameo by  
Nancy. Just to correlate with something Twersky said last issue, when Nancy  
got a close-up in the vid, people, mostly girls, cheered and whistled. Go Nance.

As I said, L/P has been working on new stuff. One song with promise as a  
(GASP!) radio hit is “A Million Miles Away.” As in other Punky-penned tunes,  
there's a fun guitar riff that just doesn't leave yer head. Bassist Peggi now  
applies some nice back-up singing while lead guitarist Punky gets away with  
growling out the words. Her tune “Too Many Deeker Nites," about getting  
inebriated, or “deeked” if you will, is a good example of Punky’s rough and  
tumble sound. In the new “Young Boys,” Jayne stops in the middle and says  
"Hey, wait a minute! I thought you said you were 18!" On older favorites the  
babies of the band, Peggi and drummer Michelle, have added their styles  
~giving the tunes new life. Tonight Jayne was at her best on the Aerosmith  
oldie “Write Me A Letter,” microphone in hand, her other hand tangled up in  
her hair, eyes shut tight. When her singing ceased her features snapped back  
to normal as if she never moved a facial muscle.

As an encore L/P thought it'd be a good idea to do their version of—what  
else?—the RUNAWAYS’ “Wasted.” And they were not alone in their beliefs...

“I thought it was GREAT!” Lita expressed afterward to members of L/P.  
Apparently she was in her dressing room the whole show. Just a stone's  
throw from the stage her progeny (Punky) was playing. “I've never heard a  
band do a Runaways song before!” Her bassist Gordon chimed in: "Yeah, she  
wanted to run out there but she didn't have any pants on..."

All in all, Lita’s hardcore following, as well as mainstream rockers, liked  
Leathur Panteez. The Panteez guitarists knew from prior years' experience  
down front that it’s all but easy to be the opening band for Lita Ford, so they  
were ready for anything. Other members, however, weren't wary. “They  
were a tough crowd,” Jayne exhaled wearily. “Probably the hardest we've  
had to play for.” But instead of receiving the classic rock’n’roll treatment for  
opening bands (chunks of ice and/or wads of A.B.C. gum winged at them),  
Leathur Panteez was flashed by tits (what'd she just say?!) and band members  
were almost grabbed off the stage. So, yeah, I'd say they were liked.

Lita changes her band line-up as often as she changes her guitar strings.  
[PSYCH! Thought I'd say something else huh?!] By my count Lita has had  
approximately 4 bassists, 3 drummers, and 2 second guitarists. All within a  
three-year time span. And NOW she’s added a keyboardist to her list of  
Musicians To Ace Sooner or Later. [Ha, ha. Just a lil joke, Lita.] She lets her  
rhythm guitarist do some leads, but not much. The drummer is pretty  
awesome but I really miss Randy Castillo, the band’s wildman last tour. Ozzy  
Osbourne (that wanker) swiped him from Lita. But the lead guitarist managed to  
keep her bassist of two years—Gordon Copley. He's super sweet, really cute  
and a kick-ass player. What a rare combination eh?

The new songs sound real good. Some titles: “Under The Gun,” “Kiss Me  
Deadly”—which is killer I must say—"Little Darling.” Nikki Sixx wrote a song  
with Lita for the album, and Holly Night was credited for another. The  
keyboard player may have been wearing a cool hat for the soundcheck but he  
did an extremely long intro to “Dressed To Kill,” a song from the last record,  
and one of the few from Lita’s catalog that a video was made for. The dude's  
solo probably wouldn't have been so bad if it wasn’t SO FUCKING LOUD, and  
out of tune on top of that. Lita did a lotta songs from her 1984's Dancin’ On The Edge, but I don't  
remember hearing even the title track from her 1983 debut Out For Blood. More than a few folks  
were disappointed with Lita Ford this time around, for reasons never entirely clear. She kept  
saying stuff like ‘C'mon San Francisco! Are you OUT there! San Fran audiences are not snotty or  
boring by nature. Maybe she wasn’t showing enough skin for some. Maybe others didn't like her  
rowdy looking cowboy boots. Maybe Lita just stayed away too long. But, ya know, her live singing  
has improved 100%. [Though a resident rock star commented, “Could it have gotten any worse?”  
OUCH.] In her old band Lita was considered ‘the metal one’. While Joan Jett scraped out the chunky  
rhythms Lita wailed out inspirations of her own. She carried that tradition, or perhaps that ‘tag’,  
right into her first album without her girlfriends. But on her next record and today Lita leans  
more toward just hard rock, with her Keith Richards tirades scribbling across yer face now and  
again. She can still make those strings squeal like a broad gettin’...well...METAL still drips  
heavily from her guitar. I put it that way. But maybe Lita is looking for a change these days.  
Sometimes it’s fun rolling with the punches. That may be the cause for using a Holly Night tune.  
Commercial success would be a nice change for someone who's been working their butt off for the  
better part of ten years without making the slightest dent in the industry.

At the last minute I was refused (by Lita’s ever lovely manager) a side-stage position to  
photograph the band. Yeah, I was pissed. So instead I chatted with loomers outside who couldn't  
get in. I roamed around the club and occasionally jumped atop a chair to catch the action onstage.  
Lita still plays in the faces of the front row. That was always a fun part of being up front at one of  
her shows. She leans right into ya and gives you her naughty-girl grin. Lita doesn't make any  
quick or uncertain moves onstage. Modestly she creeps to each side checking out the front row.  
And despite her “bitchy” rep, she’s got a smile for everyone. I remember at one show some years  
back it was decided she wouldn't be doing her ballad “Just A Feeling.” When the crowd learned this  
~ everyone shouted for the song the whole night. Lita protested by reasoning that she did not bring  
the right guitar for it on this tour. The white double neck was the one. Eventually, overwhelmed,  
she agreed to do the tune. I remember Lita’s sincerity in not believing the crowd's enthusiasm  
over the tune, the look of being flattered she tried to hide. Those were her metal queen days. She  
couldn't overtly reveal she had the emotions of a civilized person. Lita Ford is one of the original  
chicks who (probably unwittingly) bragged about having "No Pride“—even before RUDE GIRL wrote  
the song. But when a female is charged with having ‘no pride’, i.e. doing whatever the fuck she  
wants and not being scared of consequences, the chick is considered a bitch. I’m not getting  
political on ya, just trying to get it across that Lita, as much as even she'd like to believe it, is  
not a bitch. Although it does take less time to say just one word—“bitch,” than to say two—“no  
pride.” So, please yourselves.

Later Lita’s manager, I think her name's Dena, found me licking my wounds. She surprised the  
hell outta me by allowing me to go ahead and take pictures of Lita after all. Before my middle  
finger could go up in her face and foul words come spitting out of my mouth my rational other  
pointed me in the other direction. I guess she didn't have to give me permission. In fact she didn't  
have to invite me to the post-gig assembly backstage either, but she did. Bless her  
business-minded little heart. The party consisted of people like BAWIM chairwoman Ms. Sheila  
Renee, NIGHT RANGER's guitarist Brad Gillis and a host of other celebs just too big to name! (Yeah,  
right?) Scribes from newspapers including the SF Chronicle were on hand waiting for the woman  
of the hour to bat her long eyelashes at them. Of course, the ex-Runaway did not oblige the boys.  
Lita just sat around munching on the veggies and dip made available to us and talked attentively  
with those she knew. Careful not to be noticeably obnoxious, the guitarist gave her best smile to  
her temporary friends. If they only knew. Yep. Lita’s still the same cool kid.  

Up fap