“Duh?” “Yeah.” "Do you know you just won--" “Oh, yeah. Forget it.” Then I get this call, [perky voice:] “$8@N @ guitar, let alone played one... So he had to do this in a 50-pound.

“HI, are you Addie?” [Grimly:] “Ye-es, okay, who is this? Did I win something?” — paca se soniye oes an Pig: Epa itt

is: When phone rings, you never know who it’s gonna be! ” {
eg It ies 1 dent beng up on this guy. Duck? What?"...he said that Chris had recommended me oe —_— a head-set; Okay, do your Chuck Berry, now do your to do the part, was I interested? Okay. “Can you really play?” “Yeah--! can ry ve aene fe se ic nctngs Rodi Fav elisah ae and I did be

number.” Thomas with Science”, he was involved in writing; choreographer, raise the dance steps. Because what I wanted him to do with the guitar had to.

Tw: Did any of the actresses playing musicians in that film (NOTE: It features an ‘all-girl band)—are gid to the dance moves, too, so we worked real close together.

f Uh iclans? “ae pe Flier ieee dues Vas learned four songs. Not really... Thomas taught them how to play... the black nen a hs the band's name? Is it Addie & the Heroines, is it.

; 1» $3 imi told me that she was really a professional singer. : an

tls: But really, they were more models and dancers and actresses, not musicians... Addie: (Doubtfully:) It's Addie & the Heroines right now.

Lois: Well, it's Addie/Heroines. With a slash.

Tess —_ REAL female musician in the film, was in a duck suit? Tw: Hal | te time when I say the name, people go, “Heroin?” Like the.

Tw: What you have to do to get gigs. cane psi prin the S.

Addie: Yeah, I said, “Here I am at the epitome of my career, resigned to doing Chuck Berry licks with cam; 3 why we added; duck hands on, I can't even believe it!" But I didn't have to wear the head and the feet! Lois: (laughs) It used to be Heroine, but then we added the S on it, like.

Lois: There was some Eddie Van Halen two-hand tapping going on. - ay. GET IT? Its. people!” People are quite illiterate. Without the E.

Addie: Yeah, I showed him some finger-tapping, the Chuck Berry Duck Walk, the Peter Townshend sweeps, Jimi Hendrix play-with-his-nose, well, duck-bill— ain w: They probably figured it was a Heavy Metal spelling...

Tw: He hadn't seen any of those? YY Lt Lois:...if People would just stop and think—and remember sixth grade.

Addie: He didn't know anything, Lori, he'd never even } tl A English—they'd understand [dumb voice:] “Oh, it's a woman hero!"

Tw: What happened to the original line-up of Heroines?...

Addie: ...we were called The Fever, first. Actually—

Lois: It started as a joke.

Addie: It was a Joke. Dance Fever. (Cracks up.) We were a trio!

To do like a Top 40, make a lot of money in two weeks, overseas—

je: I changed my name! To Adrienne! Did you change 7.

Lels: No. We changed instruments. ‘i cauiteeaed.

Addie: I played bass!

Lois: It was a trio, we had a drummer, she played bass (nods at Addie), I played guitar, and she sang. We did Van Halen, Billy Idol--regular straight-ahead Rock...

3 Addie:...I had been in the studio for like a year and a half, playing all the instruments myself—and Lois’ Rude Girl had just broken up, and.

> 74, Re: she wasn't sure what she wanted to do—and we had met at the shot like the ©! sera SUB: 2 4 ee, pS Starship shooting of——"Lay It On The Line"? (Lois nods) We're both smeared, It has MOre nesses j ee in that video. So we became really good friends and decided, well, yeah, we might as well play some music as a joke, what the heck?

And then we decided, well, let's get a little more serious. We became The Fever, then we got two other girls, “Let's see what an all-girl band has to offer for us.” ‘Cause it's been 1970, since Fanny, for me, being in an all-girl band. And I just feel that the musicianship wasn't exactly what we were desirous of at the time, you know, I think it was real good, I just think it was that we were more accelerated, we wanted to get more into it, heavier, like REALLY rugged Rock’nRoll.

Tw: You're both lead guitar players. Are you both playing lead in this band? How does that work?

Addie: (Long raucous laughter).

Lois: Now we turn out like, Iron Maiden double leads. We (making elaborate illustrative gestures) have this line, and a harmony, and it goes along, or Addie will take an intro and I'll take a solo, or we'll both jam at the end, or we'll toss a coin up in the air, “Okay, where is this gonna go?” Because we rehearse so little, perform so often--this is our calendar, now (shows schedule; half the month is gigs)...that we try to make every show interesting for us. So we try to keep each other on our toes—

Addie: Really!

Lois:--and try not to step on each other's toes. So when Addie is going for it, I back off—

Addie:—and vice versa.

Lois:--and when she hears me going for it, if she gets real inspired, she'll get on the wagon and we'll go together, or she'll stay back...and I'll take it.

Addie: There's a lot of groups that have two lead guitar players. I love double guitar rhythms, double solos.

Tw: But there aren't a lot of female bands that do that.

Addie: That's true.

Lois: I can't think of one!

Addie:...we are the only women in the group, we do front the band, and I think it's a real kick that we are both real strong...

Lois:.. Everybody's real strong, too—

Addie:--oh, yeah, the band’s real good!

Lois: Everybody's always commenting, “Addie, your bass player’s really good, wow, what a drummer!” Actually people think our drummer looks like that guy in Loverboy...

Tw:...why did Rude Girl break up?

Lois: (with excessive sweetness:) I never thought you'd ask.

Addie: (thumbs through press kit:) I think there's a page in here explaining it!