PHOTO STEV

WHAT TO

Congrats/Correction for VERTICAL PILLOWS: Silly us--in our story on YP-4 last month, we told you that Paula Boufford won “Best Female Vocalist” in New Music in Detroit's METRO TIMES annual music awards; we didn't tell you that she also placed as Best Guitarist in New Music, with Monic Reynolds Best Drummer, ditto. Not “female guitarist and drummer”--just best. Way to go, kids! We also neglected to show you new bassist Terry--that's her, right.

Joan Baez was in Iceland during the recent Reagan/Gorbachev summit, to perform concerts at the invitation of a coalition of Icelandic peace groups. We were unable to find out how many people that was: the population for the entire country (a quarter million) is half the size of the Woodstock audience (a half million)... You explain these bare facts, Sheila E. was introducing her encore at a recent concert, when Prince walked onto the stage. Immediately, Lionel Ritchie appeared at the other end of the stage, and asked, "What's he doing here?” After the show, Lionel and Ms. E. left by one door, Prince by another... Also going out by two different doors; Prince and the Revolution, which has disbanded. Wendy and Lisa reported to be considering projects together... And Hanoi Rocks has reformed, so the Cherry Bombz are bust and singer Anita is looking for a new gig... Rock Goddess is planning their first U.S. tour... Jackie Collins, author of “Hollywood Husbands”, wants Madonna to play the rock star, Heaven, in a screen version. Meanwhile, Penthouse has found another batch of nude photos taken in '79, when Madonna was a “professional figure model”, and plans to run them early next year... Artist Sue Coe's new book of radical leftist graphics, X, is out from Raw Books and Graphics... ALBUMS: Precious Metal has a 4-song EP coming; Keta Bill of Big Bang Beat is releasing her first solo LP; Frightwig's Faster, Frightwig, Kill, Kill! is out on Caroline Records; Hellion is completing their debut and (sayeth their record co. promo, from New Renaissance Records) “appear to have solved the differences of opinion among band members"--a full European tour is planned to coincide with the release; Girischool’s Nightmare At Maple Cross is out on GWR Records, WITHOUT Jackie Bodimead (ex-She, stepped in last album), who quit; the upcoming MCE Studios Metal compilation album, Metaluna,