Interview With Kate Bush by Tony Myatt & HOMEGROUND

first-- the Product the Marketing

If marketing questions bore you, skip down to the Tony Myatt interview with Kate
Bush that we've excerpted from HOMEGROUND. But if you have a moment to
consider consumer issues, I'd like to voice a few gripes (try and stop me).

The Marketing Myth goes like this; we can target the tastes and habits of potential
consumers, and aim products directly at the consumer bull's eye--anything that can
be sold on a big scale can be so aimed. This premise rests on a basic fallacy in
reading statistics; the assumption that “average” is synonymous with “typical.”
That is, whatever registers on the graph as “average” is assumed to represent
what is “typical” in whatever group of consumers is being graphed. What's wrong
with that assumption? Look at it this way; according to the graphs, the average
American family has 2.4 children, yet there is no American family that actually has
2.4 children--a typical American family will have 2 or 3 children. Okay?

Dividing the public into marketing segments works as long as the aimed product is
equally attractive to markets contiguous to the one aimed at. That is, a product
designed for a family with 2.4 children will fail unless it’s also useful to families
with 2 or 3 children.

You can have the best product in the world, but without a distribution system
that makes it available to consumers, no one will buy it. The distribution systems
for information, as well as products (yeah, yeah, info can be a product, I know),
are largely determined by the perceived markets for it. That is, if someone has a
new Heavy Metal act, they'll tell the Metal mags, not the Punk mags. Which would
be fine if people had no individuality and really belonged to such categories. If one

PRT:
DEB! BES

th--by Twersks

neither Punk nor Metal but listened to by

has a crossover artist like Metallica,
people who fall into both marketing segments. One can spread info to both. With an
artist as individual as Kate Bush, the marketer's perception is often, “She doesn't
fall into any of our categories, so she can’t be marketed. And since she can't be
marketed, she can't be sold.” Kate The Product is perceived as problematical
because she fails outside the marketing segments, not because she doesn't sell
records. Considering what she’s up against as far as breaking into distribution
channels in this country, she sells surprisingly well. After all, no radio station
specializes in music like hers because few people do things like it; she turns up
mostly on college radio stations, and with the last couple discs, in dance clubs,
though no one would call her a college radio artist (as Fetchin’ Bones has been
called) or a dance clubber. She's a self-contained genre. Any self-contained genre
that gets big enough becomes mainstream by default and is marketed to THE WORLD
AT LARGE (consider how the Bangles’ “Walk Like An Egyptian” or Berlin's “Riding On
The Metro” went from college-radio-play-only to mainstream as the groups became
more popular). Without that kind of marketing, it’s difficult to see how Kate Bush
could reach enough distribution channels to become known to the people who'd like
her stuff if they knew about it.

Unlike the British audience, which voluntarily breaks itself down into marketing
segments under various guises of art fascism, but does so in a country small enough
that anyone who makes even a small splash can become generally known, the
American audience is spread over an area so huge that the most well-known band in