Watch for the Pandoras in a cameo appearance in the Ramones’ latest video, “Something To  
Believe In." The girls have their own video, too, for the song "Stop Pretending.” After the band's  
show at the Stone in San Francisco, August 16th, three of the L.A. swingers resumed party  
positions across the street at the Fab Mab (above). Though the bands playing that night were  
thrash-or-be-thrashed Metal bands, the Pandoras were just about the rowdiest ones there! For  
more on the Stone show, see the center spread.  

Remember we told you that Patti Labelle would duet with Cyndi Lauper for CT's  
latest album? Scratch that (no, not literally!). Patti had her voice erased off the tape after she  

and CT couldn't reach an agreement on what royalties PL  
would get...vocalist Ann-Marie left England's The  
Skeletal Family in August, and now her replacement,  
Katrina, has been left with only guitarist Stan after the  
other band members split also...Malibu Barbi has  
new lead singer named Steve...Sherrone is no longer  
the lead singer of Savajazz, but in a new band called  
Pure Sex...Tracey Lamb (ex-Rock Goddess,  
ex-SHE) has a new band called The Perfect  
Mothers...Singer Claudia Morley has left the band  
Propaganda... The Eurythmics will play their first  
live shows in the U.K. in 3 years in late Nov./early  
Dec...Deniece Williams headlined at England's annual  
Christian youth festival at Castle Ashby...NEON ANGELS  
asked Leathur Panteez where they got their name, and  
actually got a straight answer! Lead singer Jayne  
Reaction said it was thought up by “... my brother who's  
a real estate executive. I asked him to think of the most  
obnoxious thing he could."...The Bay Area Women’s  
Philharmonic just got a $45,000 grant from the  
James Irvine Foundation... The Raunchettes are moving  
to California to record on Bomp. Stiv Bators will  
produce...The grand opening of the new Chicago club, the  
Plastic Factory, was a $25 per ticket show with Koko  
Taylor, John Cale, and free Dom Perignon...Hazel  
"Breaking Glass” O’Connor (currently starring in Brit  
TV's Fighting Back series) is looking for a backer for a  
film of her life story, which she wants to call (huh?)  
The Beirut Project...ROLLING STONE’s September 11th  
“Where Are They Now” issue includes looks at Jackie  
DeShannon, Suzi Quatro, the Dixie Cups, and the  
Crystals...Debuts coming: Cynthia Manley and her  
band; John Hammond's new discovery, Karen Kraft  
from Texas; River Starr, NY. R * & “er, — on  

vey Doce  
PREGNA