Sue Fink: Technology Doesn't Have To Be Scary

You have to know a bit about Womyn's Music to
understand what Techno Popper Sue Fink has done.

BITCH staffers have heard me complain of this scene,
“It's like talking to Hobbits!” Womyn's Music is rooted
firmly in the late 60’s/early 70's, and in Folkie
tradition. Many involved are Global Village drop-outs;
they don’t tend to watch TV or to get info from
prominent subcultures besides their own. Rock mags
are usually ignored as politically incorrect. They
seem to be unaware of female performers outside the New
Age axis, except for those mentioned in daily
newspapers. Meaning many Womyn's Music types have
no idea what goes on in Rock/Pop today--I recently
talked to a concert promoter on that scene who'd heard
of neither Bangles nor Go-Go's. I mention this because
many Womyn's Music types tell me--and sincerely
believe—that Sue is the first female synth wiz. This
just ain't so. Sue started in '84, when the most
successful female synth wiz, Suzanne Ciani, was
already well-established (she scores movies, ads,
TV)--and there were so many female synth players out
there then that I doubt the Eve, so to speak, can be
pegged. But Sue was apparently first to introduce
Techno Pop to Womyn's Music--and that took guts.

Folkies can be passionately anti-technology. Some go
to the extreme of opposing electricity of any kind. Not
all Womyn's Music people feel this way (if they did,
they'd neither make nor buy records), but many do feel
synths are phony instruments, lacking some true
voice that’s in less complex musical tools. Further,
this type of hardcore feminist—contrary to stereotype
--is often MORE feminine than the average woman, so
any math anxieties and nervousness about machines
found in mainstream female culture tend to be raised
to the Nth power. In this milieu, Sue Fink is a crusader,
going into such venues and insisting, “You don't have to
be afraid of technology"—a message that has left these
audiences thrilled, dismayed, excited, and aghast,
earning her the “certified outrageous” tag that’s her
trademark. Punks and Metalheads may be confused by
this certification, unless they remember that Womyn's
Music audiences are comparatively shy (more fall-out
from being more feminine than the mainstream).

She does most of the playing on her albums (on
Ladyslipper; see classifieds), with bass by Diane
Lindsay and guitar by Jaqueline Standard.

Tw: How did you come to be a synth artist, when
initially you were afraid of synthesizers?

Sue: I think I was actually afraid of everything—it
was much broader than just synthesizers. I used to
have a terrible fear of performance in general...I did
everything behind the scenes I could do, conducting,
teaching, studio work, anything except get in front of
the public, but deep down, there was a monster that
wanted to come out. I tried everything. I did therapy
for two years, and then the therapist said, “I'm

sorry I couldn't help you.” And I said, “Can I have my
money back?”

She faded voice lessons for hypnosis.
Sue:...(the hypnotist) taught me self-hypnosis, and I
got over my fear of performance in general...and I
knew the first step was to get a synthesizer. I didn't
know much about them. I'd taken a little class on the
ARP 2600, one of your basic battle-axes with all the
wires, that looked like a glorified telephone answering
service of the forties. I took the class, but really, it
meant very little to me. When I started to do this, I
was pretty scared. I went into a music store, and the
man talked technical-ese. I don't know why they make
things sound so much more complicated than they are.
Tw:...If they'd just talk English instead of tech talk, it
would be so easy—I know a 3-year-old who can
program the ADSR function on her Casio, she doesn't
know the term, but she can do it. If they'd just call it
“sound-maker” instead of “ADSR function”...

Sue: Right, a “sound-starter”, a “sound-holder”, and a
“sound-getter-off-er”...but they make it really a drag
to learn. Even the words have a real kind of bite about
them. Attack! Delay! Sustain! Release! The whole
language is so funny...the “female” and “male” endings
of chords...the first time (in a music store), I sort of
got ignored. So I listened while he talked to other
people, invariably men...

She had almost no exposure to other female synth
players. Doing it seemed “very wild and exciting” in
part because it seemed like something a woman wasn't
expected to do.

Sue:...but I was afraid of all kinds of things—that I'd
get it home and wouldn't know what to do with it—plus
I didn’t have the money. They were very expensive—I
mean, you can get a good synthesizer for under $2000
now. But if you had a half-decent synthesizer in 1984,
you're talking about $4000...I didn't have that kind of
money, and you couldn't just get a synthesizer, you
had to have an amp, you had to have this, you had to
have that...and how could you get a synthesizer and not
have a drum machine? I didn't know how to work

anything, and they just sort of ignored me. Then I got

this brilliant idea. I went back to the same store and I
said, “I've got this money, and I would spend it today if
I knew what to buy.” And I don’t know why that worked
(laughs) but they changed their tune—suddenly he was
a salesman with knowledge! Breathing the words down
my throat!...I made it very clear I wasn’t going home
with one of these synthesizers until I at least had some
vague idea of what buttons to push...Even when they
would try to explain things—you know some people are
natural teacher types, and some aren't? Most of these
salespeople are NOT—step by step learning process is
not their gig. But I just kept asking questions, and
finally I took a set-up and went home with the whole
thing...I had my heart set on this OB-8, I knew that was
it...it had these lush string sounds I loved. [Twee
voice:] And it looked real pretty. It looked real cute. It
was one of the few synths then where you could split
the keyboards and get different sounds...it, like,
sparkled in the storm...and the salesman talked me into
a DMX drum machine, which I'm still not quite sure was
the choice for me, but I ended up at home with those
two items and my little amp, and I still didn't know
what to do, but I just pressed buttons until things
started happening! I would take whatever the program
setting was, in the synthesizer, and I would try to
figure out how they did it, just turn knobs until I saw
what they had to do to get the sound. I really taught
myself...and I got a pretty good working knowledge of
analog synthesizers, but there were no terms attached
to them. I just knew that if I added this, something
would happen, right?...a very non-verbal experience,
much more touchy-feely.
Tw: Do you find that people who have the tech talk
down, get boggled if you don't use the tech talk?
Sue: Oh, absolutely. Ever work with a lyricist who
doesn't know music? Sure, it's that same kind of
frustration...go, “I turn this thingamajig, and I get
this great sound,” and they're going, “Well, the looping
rate on the sampler—” (she went out to buy a
sampler)...he immediately had this computer going.
{Suave voice:] “Watch what I'm doing.” And he’s doing
something with the wave form on a Mac computer.
Putting it on, taking it off. “Now, listen how it’s
different.” And of course, I don't know what he’s doing.
Later on, I found out...but not because he explained it to
me—he could have just said it! Instead he’s doing this
whole trip with taking notches out of a wave form on a
screen—which is, like, totally freaking me out! What
happened was, he left me in the room alone for an hour
with these instruments, while he made a phone call,
and I figured it out myself—but if he had tried to
explain it to me, it would have been all over!...I know
how I've got (MIDI) hooked up and I still feel like I'm a
baby dealing with it—I guess what I just want to say to
people is that we can't let ourselves be put off by this
technology, we're either gonna learn to use it, or it's
just gonna walk away and leave us behind. I run into
drummers who are mad at me, all the time, when I use
a drum machine—but drummers are the ones who'd
make the best programmers of these things, if they'd
learn to get into it instead of fighting it!

She did some piano before getting into synths, but
thinks of herself mostly as a writer.
Sue:...no one is going to hire me to be the great Jazz
keyboard artist of 1987. The synth for me was like an
orchestration tool, I looked at it that way from the
very beginning...it was like somebody gave me
Pandora's box.
Tw: And what came out of it?
Sue: All the good and all the bad! And I had a lot of bad,
oh! My first year, I happened to get a lemon, and it
was breaking down like, every day, and I had to fight
with them and take it in to be fixed—'til they finally
replaced everything in it but the outer shell...the
arpeggio would not stop working, or it wouldn't work
at all, a note would just not play—it went on and on...
Tw: I wonder how many people who go through that
think it's something wrong with them for programming.