KATE WOLF

1942 - 1986

by Susan Madden

K If di | f | ia.  
“I never heard a voice come so easy and so free.”

Our community feels a great loss at the passing of Kate Wolf. So  
many loved her, whether they knew her personally or heard her songs on  
the radio. A gracious woman with an air of strength and kindness, she  
made everyone feel comfortable with her warm voice and gentle manner.  
At folk festivals, one could approach Kate knowing there would be a  
welcome smile and an encouraging word or a genuinely humble and  
appreciative “thank you.” Her caring nature was expressed in lovingly  
crafted songs that spoke of everything from estranged relationships in  
need of repair to old houses once full of life, now empty and forlorn. She  
saw an old woman's mailbox as the seed for musings on a life that might  
have been; there were songs of a father unknown, tales of spiritual  
quests and resiliency. The songs that Kate Wolf wrote had the simplicity  
of a home-cooked meal shared with friends. They were country simple  
in the best sense. She wrote with clarity from a deeply personal  
perspective direct from her heart. A Kate Wolf song becomes a part of  
you, an expression of your own experience that somehow you never had  
the words for. When Kate wrote of colors, as in "Cornflower Blue” or  
“Green Eyes,” you could see those hues in a more vibrant way than ever  

al bd Jose FACE  
Getta 1S4Y  
478 W. HAMILTON AVE.  

CAMPBELL, CA 95008  

before. Her reverence for the land came from an understanding of the native peoples and their  
inherent respect for nature. Kate Wolf valued family and tradition, seemingly passé these days, and  
she had a way of including everyone in her family. Over the ten years and six albums that Kate  
recorded, there was always a feeling of warmth and camaraderie amongst the accompanying  
musicians. The harmony vocals were a premium blend; the instrumentation was nothing short of  
perfect. It seems obvious that Kate Wolf brought out the best in anyone who had the good fortune to  
cross paths with her. In the spring of 1986 when her leukemia was first diagnosed, Kate made it  
very clear that she would conquer this foe and throughout her illness she maintained a positive and  
healthful attitude. We all looked forward to a return to good health and a victory tour. Many kinds  
of support came to her and the healing time was nurtured by countless friends and fans. She seemed  
to be doing well after a bone marrow transplant, but several months in the hospital took their toll.  
On December 10th, that slender thread Kate Wolf wrote so eloquently of finally gave way. Her  
spirit will always be with anyone who has listened to her songs and surely there is essence here of a  
true guiding spirit, a keeper of the flame. That she will not be here to make more songs is sad, but  
there is solace in the body of work left us.

“If I could I'd tell you now/ There are no roads that do not bend/ The  
days like flower bloom and fade/ And they do not come again...We’ve  
only got these times we're living in...”

Kate Wolf's albums are available on Kaleidoscope Records. Her children are planning a songbook and  
there will be an album in '87 of some of her earlier material. Contributions may be sent to Owl  
Productions, P.O. Box 198, Forest Knolls, CA 94933. Once the hospital bills not covered by  
insurance are taken care of, donations in Kate Wolf's name will be distributed to appropriate causes,  

including Cross Cultural programs, public radio and leukemia research.  
Repri fr Vi i iew  

GOSSIP: Elizabeth (ex-Leathur Panteez bassist) joined the otherwise male Silent Knight...Diahann  
Carroll married Vic Damone...Yoko Ono was among 900 celebrities (including Graham Greene and  
Gregory Peck) the Soviet Union invited to a weekend forum on peace and nuclear arms...Kristen Lems  
(founder of the National Women’s Music Festival) has her first album in 2 years out on Flying Fish,  
Born A Woman...Wendy O. Williams has re-formed the Plasmatics for a new album, Maggots: The  
Record...a second Pop record is due from ex-Gospel singer Tramaine Hawkins...Holly Miller replaced  
Brenda Barboni in Syren... Ellen Seeling and Jean Fineberg (ex-Isis) are in a new funk septet, Deuce,  
on Redwood Records. Also on the record; Womyn's Music vets Teresa Trull, Carol MacDonald, and  
Laura Theodore...The Art Sluts are defunct, but their $5 tape is still available from ex-member Ann  
Wood, who co-edits the zine JAVA; P.O. Box 7461, Columbia, MO 65201...The new Jaded Lady  
line-up: Terry O'Leary (vocals), Cathy Amanti (bass), Mary Jo La Rouche (drums), Sylvia Cei  
(guitar), and Lisa Clawson (guitar)...Of Thrash Queen's original line-up, only Diane Frost is left (look  
for an interview next ish)...Aretha Franklin is the first woman in the Rock And Roll Hall Of Fame.