“Cleveland is third in the country in rapes and  
fifth in murders. The D.A. was afraid of the real  
criminals so he took a cheap shot at me. Because I'm  
a woman. I look different. I have a Mohawk. And I'm  
upset at the status quo.”  

----Wendy O. Williams of the Plasmatics, CREEM,  
September, 1981.  

“I also want to be Darth Vader's wife in Star Wars  
II. I was born to play that part. George Lucas doesn't  
even have that part. George—you need me.”  

----Grace Slick of the Starship, CREEM, April,  
1981.  

“We never made love in a bag. People probably  
imagined that we were making love. It was just,  
all of us are in a bag, you know. The point was the  
outline of the bag, you know, the movement of the  
bag, how much we see of a person, you know. But,  
inside, there might be a lot going on. Or maybe  
nothing's going on.”  

----Yoko Ono, Playboy, January, 1981.  

“And the thing is, that now is a really good time in  
England, and it's getting more like it here in  
America, where girls don't have to be stereotyped  
anymore. I think before you had to be a real  
monster, a real aggressive, absolutely unbearable  
creature that got to where she was by tooth and  
claw. And everybody lived in fear of you. Either that  
or you had to be a real sweet, cute little thing that  
wore short dresses or revealing bosoms, and looked  
like some little doll. See, I think now people can be  
themselves. And why not?”  

----Lene Lovich, Trouser Press, October, 1979.  

(Of England): “The guys are real sexist and the  
women seemed real content to be treated as objects,  
consider girls as anything over there. You could tell  
when you talked to a guy that they weren't really  
going to take anything you said seriously.”  

----Jane Wiedlin of the Go-Go's, The Record,  
May, 1982.  

“I was Mick Jagger when I was 14 years old.”  
----Cindy Bullens, Trouser Press, May, 1980.  

“I'm just playing in a rock 'n' roll band... What I do  
does not substantiate (this) attention. I'm not  
important enough, I've got nothing to say.”  

----Chrissie Hynde of the Pretenders, The  
Record, May, 1984.  

“I can't really blame Warner Brothers, because  
they'd been real indulgent with me, where it would  
have been easy to market me into a Barbie doll.”  

----Carlene Carter, Trouser Press, January,  
1981.  

“Girls Just Want To Have Fun’ doesn't mean ‘Girls  
Just Want To Fuck’—excuse me—or ‘Girls Just Want  
To Have Sex’. When people try to use my music that  
way, and make it all tits and ass, it infuriates me  
because that is not what I'm all about.”  

----Cyndi Lauper, The Record, May, 1984.  

“They're raking me over the coals for wearing  
fishbowls on my tits but I'm trying to be a real  
person. I'm trying to find a tasty limit where a  
woman is still a woman.”  

----Dale Bozzio of Missing Persons, Trouser  
Press, March, 1983.  

“I was uncomfortable with the image of standing  
there, hitting my butt with a tambourine, in the  
traditional way I've always seen women's roles. (So  
she learned saxophone) Sax is total emotion. I'm not  
a great technician on the horn, but I do put a lot of  
passion into it.”  

----Rindy Ross of Quarterflash, The Record,  
March, 1982.  

“This is one of the first times women are breaking  
into music through music itself instead of through  
using their sexuality. If Pat Benatar wants to prance  
in skin-tight leotards around the stage, that’s fine,  
but I just want to get out there and sing.”  

----Pauline Black of the Selector, Trouser Press,  
August, 1980.  

SIMONES  

STERLING EARRINGS  
BARBED-WIRE JEWELRY  
EARRINGS—CHAIN SAWS, SKULLS,  
BAYONETS, SNAKES, HANG NOOSE,  
PENTAGRAMS, TRIANGLES,  
BATTLE AXES, SPIDERS,  
SCORPIONS, MALTESE,  
SKELETONS, GUITARS,  
AND MORE.  
CATALOG $1.00  
SIMONES  
BOX 3701B  

EARRINGS!  
that LIGHT!  

Sensational new Lobe Lights earrings:  

@ Brilliant fashion colors. @ Completely safe  
Lithium Batteries. @ Durable - Glow lasts up to  
100 hrs. @ Extremely lightweight. @ 14Kt gold filled  
ear posts. @ Moneyback guarantee.  

MIX Specify your earring color  
C Black, C White, C Red, C Blue, C Gray  

MATCH Select Lights  
C Red, C Green, C Yellow, C Orange  

@ @ BOATERS SPECIAL @ @  

One ear Red light, one ear Green light.  
Specify: C White or C Black Earrings Only.  
Order today! $15.95 per pair. Batteries included.  
FREE SHIPPING. Send check or money order.  
Extra batteries $4.95 per pr., ppd.  
Send to Lobe Lights Industries  
PO Box 1008, Dept BE, Boston, MA 02134  

For more information  

Featuring the hit single "Heavy Metal Nights.”  

THE RUNAWAYS New Album “Young and Fast”  

Denise Catherine Missy  

Produced & Directed by Kim Fowley