Women’s  
legislation:  
smoke, but  
no fire  

By Louis Varga  

The 1983-84 session of the Arizona  
Legislature spun its wheels on issues of  
concern to women.  

A Senate bill requiring equal pay for equal  
work stirred up more controversy than  
expected, but was signed into law by Gov.  
Bruce Babbitt April 18.  

On its surface, the bill appeared  
straightforward and a long time in coming, but  
it was attacked by a lobbyist for the National  
Organization for Women and two labor unions  
as being “so full of exceptions, it would be  
impossible to use,” said Judith Guenther of  
NOW.  

“It's so vague there are no real protections.”  

George, a lobbyist for the Arizona Education  
Association. She said women are paid less than men  
because their work is undervalued by employers.  

Michael Shea, a lobbyist for the Arizona Public  
Employees Association, agreed with the AEA. “A  
secretary holds as many responsibilities in the  
functioning of an office as a truck driver in getting  
apples to a marketplace,” he said.  

An Arizona Daily Star editorial contended that the  
bill “is not well crafted and leaves too many  
loopholes.”  

A second seemingly innocuous bill also caused  
unexpected debate before being approved. The law  
will purge from Arizona statutes the term  
“workmen's compensation” and substitute  
“worker's compensation.”  

The bill was sponsored by all five women senators  
and had experienced very little difficulty until it hit  
the Senate floor. There, the nine male senators, who  
eventually voted against the measure, protested  
that it would be unnecessary and costly.  

Led by Hal Runyan, R-Litchfield Park, chairman  
of the Senate Appropriations Committee, the nine  
senators contended that the State Compensation  
Fund would have to make numerous costly changes  
to conform to the switch. Runyan cited the costs of  
changing letterheads, cards, car decals and  
building signs as part of the fiscal burden,  
estimating the cost to be $30,000 to $40,000.  

“The fact that our statutes say the use of the word  
‘man’ is the same as the use of the word ‘woman’ or  
‘female’ or whatever . . . doesn’t seem to matter at  
all when somebody wants to de-neuter or neuter or  
de-masculinize or do whatever it is they do to  
statutes,” he said.  

Jacque Steiner, R-Phoenix, responded to this  
criticism by saying, “It's really a very simple bill, and  
it’s not all that costly. It's just a little gesture to  
43 percent of the workforce and 52 percent of the  
population.” She noted that Arizona is merely  
following the lead of at least 32 other states.  

The final vote was 19-9. For the record, the nine  
dissenters were Sens. Peter Corpstein, Bill Davis,  
Bill Hardt, Jeff Hill, Carl Kunasek, Jack Taylor, Tony  
West, Stan Turley and Runyan. Sens. Greg Lunn  
and Wayne Stump were not present for the vote.  

This legislative session also produced two bills  
dealing with the expectedly volatile abortion issue.  
One bill, SB-2309, although passing the House  
Judiciary Committee, chaired by Rep. Jim Skeely,  
R-Scottsdale, and the full House, went down to  
defeat in the Senate Health Committee by a 5-4 vote.  
The measure proposed to require formal burial or  
cremation of fetal tissues rather than the current  
practice of incineration.  

Linda Herzog, Tucson organizer for Right to  
Choose, said the purpose of the bill was unclear  
except to “give ‘human life status’ to fetal tissue.”  
Right to Choose considers any legislation designed  
to infringe upon a woman's right to make her own  
moral decisions, unacceptable.  

In rebuttal, Marilyn Geidraitis, vice president of  
Arizona Right to Life, said such a bill would provide  
for human disposal of a human being that has the  
same intrinsic worth as every other human life,  
regardless of its stage. “Our society provides clear  
standards for the disposal of dead animals. Can we  
settle for less for human beings?”  

Both organizations expect this measure to be  
reintroduced in the next session.  

An abortion regulation bill did become law this  
session. SB-2206, sponsored by Skeely, requires  
physicians to explain in writing the necessity of any  
proposed abortion before operating.  

The measure also compels doctors to report the  
techniques used in the operation, and it mandates  
the presence of another doctor to try and save the  
life of a surviving fetus, specifically in the third  
trimester of pregnancy.  

The bill, endorsed by the Arizona Medical  
Convention, cleared the House 36-19 and the  
Senate 25-3. Babbitt signed the measure April 20.  

Arguments raised against the measure were that it  
is unnecessary, since third-trimester abortions are  
rare and seldom elective, and that it is an  
infringement upon the medical profession.  

Herzog of Tucson Right to Choose said, “Our  
organization is against any legislation which  
restricts the right of all women, regardless of  
financial status, to have safe and legal abortions.”  
She added that “part of what is involved in each  
choice to have an abortion are personal realities that  
legislators do not consider in passing anti-abortion  
legislation.”  

On the other side of the controversy, Geidraitis of  
Arizona Right to Life said the bill was intended “to  
provide protection to an unborn human being. The  
legislation is necessary because the right to have an  
abortion seems so boundless that should the fetus  
survive — and it has happened in Arizona — the  
medical profession cannot in reality offer assistance  
to save the child.”  

Despite the usual rhetoric from both sides, the  
real issue, as in the Roe vs. Wade decision by the  
U.S. Supreme Court, remains the viability of the  
fetus and the concern that as medical science  
progresses, fetuses at an earlier age will be able to  
survive.  

(See related stories pages 2, 3.)  

The only women’s newspaper in Arizona  

May 1984  
Volume 8, Number 5  

302 E. University Blvd.  
Tucson, Arizona  
85705  

Rep. Cindy Resnick, D-Tucson, in front of the Arizona Capitol.