Pr AADAC T

WP Wr CVCTUUwEY

Comparable pay: Tucson

Many critics of comparable pay for comparable
work argue that it would be impossible to assign
relative values to jobs traditionally held by women
and men. How, they ask, could any so-called expert
determine which of two workers should be more
valued? Should it be the woman who works in a
small space, typing on a video display terminal with
constant pressure to work quickly? Or should it be
the man who works on a refuse truck, out in the
elements, lifting cans and heaving their contents
into bins? How could anyone ascertain which job
carries more value, which job takes more effort,
which worker should be paid more money when the
positions have nothing at all in common?

What these critics fail to realize is that we have
already assigned those jobs relative values. Work
traditionally done by women earns less than work
traditionally done by men. The value system, in all of
its inequity and obsolescence, is in place. The issue
lies not in assigning relative value to jobs, but in
reassigning those values, paying more attention to
equity between men and women.

Since about 1950 the number of women in the
work force has increased by 173 percent — from
about 17 million to about 46 million. Statistics say
that 9 out of 10 women will work outside of the home
during their lifetime, most of them because of
economic need or out of a desire to be a productive;
contributing member of society. Yet we do not pay
women a wage comparable to that of their male
counterparts in the labor force.

One does not have to look far to see this
employment discrimination. About 80 percent of all
women in the work force are in dead-end jobs in
plants or factories, in sales jobs, in secretarial work
and in services, according to Shannon Davis,
executive director of the Tucson Women's
Commission.

And the systematic discrimination against women
in employment and economic compensation
is no stranger to Tucson. A study by

the commission showed that more than 80 percent

of the job classifications in city government are "sex

Christine Craft

Congratulations to former anchorwoman
Christine Craft!

Her outspokenness and determination have
brought attention to the other side of television.
Behind the glamour of the cameras is real life, and
unfortunately that reality is widespread
discrimination.

KMBC-TV in Kansas City, Mo., is just one of many
stations in the country where a woman, in particular,
cannot grow old gracefully in front of the camera.
Instead, she is subject to the whims of television
executives who for the most part are men.

It could have happened here in Tucson. As a
matter of fact a Tucson television station had a

si ePTreaec

Readers respond
to Clarion appeal

Editors:
I sympathize with the Clarion and its financial
plight. You produce too fine and timely a newspaper
to cease publication.
Alberta Johnson
Tucson

segregated”; that is, at least 70 percent of the
workers in those jobs are of one sex. Furthermore,
according to the commission, 75 percent of the
female city employees in administration,
professional and technical services earn less than
$20,000 a year, whereas 65 percent of the male
employees in the same categories earn more than
$20,000.

“It's not that the work isn't valuable; it's that
women are doing it,” said Davis. "Women are simply
not valued in society.”

The cheap value of “women’s work” was familiar
to most of us early in life, early enough that we
simply accepted it, not knowing any better. A
woman at a City Council meeting last fall pointed
out that many of us can remember when we were
children and an hour of baby-sitting earned us 50
cents. At the same time, an hour of lawn-mowing
earned $2.50. Baby-sitting has never been a
traditional male job.

Another fallacy espoused by many of the critics of
comparable worth is that the job market is based on
supply and demand and that there is no great
demand for workers in fields traditionally
dominated by women. The truth is that there has
been a nursing shortage for years but one seldom
sees the pay for nurses being upgraded
significantly.

Tucson's elected officials should follow the lead
of many others in the nation and take steps to bring
equity to employment and economic compensation
for women. Custom and convenience are
unacceptable reasons for perpetuating
discrimination.

Also unacceptable is the excuse that determining
the values of various jobs is too difficult. Such
studies have been successfully completed, Davis
said. The city government of San Jose assigned
points to its jobs for such factors as know-how,
problem-solving skills, accountability, working
conditions and so on. San Jose officials have
already begun to integrate an equity program based
on comparable worth into their pay scale.

should lead

Finally, it is also unacceptable to maintain that
correcting inequities in pay between men and
women would bankrupt most municipalities. If
officials are fiscally irresponsible, then of course
such a plan would be sabotaged. But the state of
Minnesota, Davis said, is phasing in a pay equity
program over a number of years. The Minnesota
Legislature has appropriated $15.9 million to begin
to rectify the inequities, she said.

The city of Tucson should be a leader in the state.
Making a commitment to a comparable worth study
and a pay equity plan would set a precedent for
ending job discrimination against all women in the
state.

[In memoriam

Judy Tyree

Tucson's women are in mourning.

Last month, we suffered the loss of a woman who
exemplified — in the purest sense — the ideals of the
feminist movement.

At the age of 47, Judy Tyree lost her battle against
cancer and left behind the work that others only
dream of accomplishing in so short a time. As a
single parent, executive, community leader and
representative for Sen. Dennis DeConcini, she
demonstrated unselfishness, unyielding energy
and, above all, devotion to others.

It is not enough to say that Tyree was special. She
was exceptional.

In receiving the Woman of the Year award in
January, she said: “I like to think I am accepting for
the many single parents who run households,
manage careers and still find time to give hours to
charities, politics and other civic organizations.”

All single parents and working women shared that
award with her then. Tyree symbolized the working
woman. And now we share with her loved ones a
deep sense of loss.

exposes real-life TV

discrimination and equal-pay suit brought against it
two years ago by a female anchor/reporter.

Jane Maass, then employed by KOLD-TV, filed
the suit with the U.S. Attorney General's Office and
fought against local executives and executives from
the parent company in Detroit. Unfortunately the
fight was considered a draw and the charges were
dropped.

The dust settled, and apparently the local
executives thought Maass was one of a kind. When
Craft's case hit the press, local TV executives should
have realized that no matter what city they are in,
they are vulnerable to lawsuits if they practice
discrimination of any kind. Even after the lawsuit

Editor: Your product and commitment are
impressive.

R.H. Ring

The Arizona Daily Star

Editors: Keep the financial need known. The

Clarion must not go down.

Laura Cardinal,
Women in Science and Engineering

Editors:
Enclosed is my check for $10 to the Clarion
newspaper. I hope that my contribution will be one

Maass pursued, things haven't changed.

Just recently after seven years as a KOLD-TV
anchor/reporter Martha Vazquez was fired. The
reason given was that she had reached her peak.
The question arises; has Dan Rather or Tom Brokaw
reached his peak? (Vazquez has since gone to work
for KVOA-TV news.)

One would hope, even assume, that the television
industry which tries to report the news fairly and
avoid bias, would set its employment standards
equally high and maintain quality. If so, Craft, in
addition to calling attention to important issues, has
won a long overdue battle for women in television.

of many that you receive and that you will be
fortunate to continue publishing Arizona's
women's newspaper.

Ed Pastor

Supervisor, Dist. 5

Maricopa County Board of Supervisors
Phoenix

The Clarion welcomes letters to the editor.
They must be typewritten, double-spaced and
signed, including a telephone number for
verification. The Clarion reserves the right to
edit for space and clarity.

tA 5) os | (T
BS Wee e es Ke

Health a ee. A
“Quilters” “Si... >.iee.. 5
Phoenix news ............ 6

Legal Counsel: Minnette Burges Board of Directors: Margrit
Cromwell, Malice Ruelas Keller,
Editorial Board: Elaine Ayala, Betsy J.C. Martin, Eileen Ramirez
Bolding, Norma Coile, Carmen

Duarte, Margo Hernandez, Jane ; ie

Kay, Malice Ruelas Keller, Sharon Circulation: 15,000

published monthly by The CLARION, Inc. as an
educational forum concerning the status of women

in society. The aa Inc. bei ao sole
Telephone: 628-1518 Tobias and Jacqui Tully. a pieces for the editorial policies of the

April 1984