Giant quilt to star at ATC

By Marguerite Bantlin

“I’ve always belonged to some quiltin’ club or church bee. When I was raising my kids the club was always my time to get off and get some relief. I ain't happy doin’ nothin.’ But if I can take my relaxation with a needle and have some fun talkin’, then I think it's all right.”  
(From “The Quilters: Women and Domestic Art” by Patricia Cooper and Norman Bradley Buford, Doubleday & Co. Inc. 1977)

Seems women again have taken up their needles to “have some fun talkin’,” while creating beautiful and practical quilts.

Rebekah Smith, chairman of The Piecemakers of Tucson, a chapter of the Arizona Quilters Guild, says quilting is more easily accepted now as an art form than strictly as a utilitarian, domestic art as in pioneer days.

“Quilting is not only an art; it's a craft. Creating the pattern is the art; quilting is the craft,” she says.

“Smith, who founded Piecemakers about a year ago, also designed the 17-foot-square medallion quilt for the Arizona Theatre Company production of “Quilters” to be presented at the Tucson Community Center Little Theatre April 7 to 29.

The play was adapted in part from the Cooper/Buford book, which is a transcription of women’s conversations about quilt-making in the old days. Molly Newman and Barbara Damashek are the playwrights.

The Piecemakers are putting 3,000 hours of cutting, piecing and quilting into the “legacy” quilt — all handmade — which will be displayed at the finale of the play.

“The stitching will really show when the theater lights hit it,” Smith said. They used polyester batting that is extra fluffy to make the stitching stand out in relief.

Susan Griggens, marketing director for Arizona Theatre Company said it is the first time she knows of a local group making a set quilt. Usually they are made by costume shops, she says.

“Sometimes the stage quilts are just painted.”

Although quilt-making is and always

See “Legacy” page 7

hand painted baskets — french straw hats — velvetine rabbits — ducks —

velvetine rabbits — french straw hats

hand painted baskets —

by  
Molly Newman and  
Barbara Damashek

April 7-29  
Tucson Community Center  
Theatre

The Professional Resident Theatre of Arizona

Call for Reservations

622-2823

SPRINGTIME

IS HOPPING ALL OVER  
OUR STORE!

WE ARE NOW  
TAKING NAMES

EASTER BUNNY  
DELIVERIES

326-0  
18 BROADWAY VILLAGE @  
BROADWAY AT COUNTRY CLUB

FOR

188

SUGGESTIONS F.41390] 9a ~ saey mIIs YUL; —$2048eq Poured pure

323-2977

Dr. Bella Eibensteiner  
Chiropractic Physician

Our health, equal emphasis in creating must address our physical, emotional, and spiritual needs. I am interested in providing a more holistic, preventative and caring approach to health.

Services include: spinal adjustments, nutritional evaluations, stress management, relaxation procedures, exercise dynamics, prevention of athletic injuries.

323-2977, 2204 E. Fork Lowell Rd. Tucson, AZ 85719

GADARIGHT.  
HAIR STUDIO

The choice of Tucson’s most fashionable

April 1984

Providing