x, eto) ~ AAG?

WH WP CVUTUUmEY

The law: women’s road to power

Powerlessness. This historic condition of
women forms the foundation of their
oppression, both individually and as a class.

One of the means for ending this oppression
is the law. Although itself filled with elements
that allow unequal treatment of men and
women, the law does provide women with an
avenue to power and a path to freedom.

The legal framework offers four processes
by which the law can be used to empower
women: becoming aware of existing rights,
enforcing these rights, using the legislative
process to protect these rights and create
others, and challenging unconstitutional laws
through litigation.

The first process is acquiring awareness of
existing rights. Women as individuals have
rights under the existing law. Many of these
rights, such as most of the fundamental
constitutional rights, are common to men and
women alike. Other fundamental rights, such
as the right to have an abortion, are uniquely
women’s. Women must be diligent in
becoming aware of and insisting on their rights
under the law. In this process, women must
also become aware of the rights they do not

Clarion poll:

“In view of what rape victims undergo during trials,
would you bring charges against the rapist? Why?”
the Clarion asked women. We asked men the same
question, adding, “Would you want your wife, sister,
daughter to press charges?”

Fred Dardis, Pima County Public Defender

“Absolutely affirmative. The old story that the
rape victim is made to feel bad and belittled is just
old-fashioned thinking. Of course the defense case
is prejudicial to the victim. But in the majority of
cases, cross-examination brings out the true story,
the real facts. It is an out-of-date fiction that the
victim is crucified by innuendo and embarrassing
remarks, etc. A capable prosecutor protects the
victim from such trash. Yes, I would want my wife to
press charges.”

Joan Caldwell, Tucson housewife

“Definitely — vehemently if I were the victim, YES
I would press charges. Now, if we were talking about
a teenage relative then the circumstances of the
case might modify that vehemence. As for a small
child, I would do anything in my power to help put
the criminal away — with strong punishment plus
treatment. This is an area that must be developed
and constantly improved.”

Lyman Elicker, retired insurance man from Ohio
now living in Tucson -

“Those people in that pool table-bar rape case
definitely should have gone to trial. But in my
opinion that trial was distinctly a disgrace to our
legal system. The defendants were tried not on the
charges but on their nationality. And that trial
should not have been publicized.” 
Ruth Davis, educator

“I’ll just say that 99 chances out of 100 I would
definitely press charges.”

Heals. ccs
_ Author's spiritual quest 5
~~ Feminist radio .......6

Calendar............. 7

May 1984

ele

the legal system

have. It is through this process that women
discover, often with rage, the need and
potential for change.

The second process is enforcing existing
rights. Awareness of rights leads to the
assertion of those rights, and this assertion is
often met with resistance or challenge. An
abstract “right” under the law, such as the right
to equal employment opportunities, becomes
a personal issue when it is challenged or
denied. Thus, enforcement of rights is
necessary. It can range from simply exercising
a right to courtroom litigation. Women must be
prepared to enforce their rights through
whatever means necessary.

The third process is working in the
legislative arena, both for new and important
rights and to maintain presently existing rights
under state and federal statutes. Each year the
Arizona Legislature and the U.S. Senate and
House of Representatives consider legislation
that proposes to alter the rights of women
under the law. Constant pressure must be
applied for new legislation, such as the Equal
Rights Amendment, that improves women’s
chances for equality. It is also crucial to

R. H. Ring, columnist and criminal-affairs writer
“I say ‘Go ahead and testify.’ The community
understands that the defense asks discrediting
questions of the victim on purpose. I believe that the
majority of the community know it is necessary for
me to bring out all of the facts, and is
or: I ae) 2 es atte O

brea Ory @ tru s the
ultimate goal, and hopefully this will come out in a
fair trial. Rapists need to be identified and dealt with
— punished or treated. Testimony is the only way
this can come about.”

Suzy Thomas, Tucson artist

“Yes, I certainly would press charges — no other
way to go. Also young women needing to be out late
at night (because of job, career requirements)
should not have to worry about being attacked. This
crime has gotten out of hand! Something must be
done, and pressing charges against a rapist is very
important.”

Rose Cabat, Tucson potter

“Yes, I'd be more than anxious to press charges. I
would feel similar to the horrible way I felt the time a
lot of my treasured things were stolen from our
house several years ago. I couldn't press charges
then because the robbery occurred when we were
all away and we had no idea of who it could have
been. I actually felt raped in a way, it was
unforgettably horrible. I realize some young women
would be shy and embarrassed about going into a
public courtroom and becoming associated with
such a terrible crime. But there must be ways the
trial could be conducted to aid her, and the rapist
must be punished.”

Tom Volgy, Tucson vice mayor

“Yes. I think rape is the most heinous of all crimes,
and until every potential rapist understands that he
and all rapists will be subjected to the strongest
possible punishment, the statistics will continue to

Editor: Marguerite Bantlin
Advertising

Director: Betty McKasson
Photo Editor: Tim Fuller

Legal Counsel: Minnette Burges

oppose measures that push women back.

Finally, the fourth process is challenging
existing unconstitutional laws through
litigation. Certain aspects of the law can be
challenged only through review by the courts.
Some legislators pass laws that are patently
unconstitutional; these laws must be identified
and, through courtroom litigation, brought
before judges who will declare them unlawful.
Fifteen years ago a pregnant woman in Texas
known only as Jane Roe told her plight to two
lawyers, Linda Coffee and Sarah Weddington.
Jane Roe had been raped and was pregnant as
a result. Together, those women fearlessly
fought the laws that had denied Jane Roe the
right to choose abortion. The battle ended with
the landmark 1973 Supreme Court decision
that struck down the anti-abortion statutes and
declared the fundamental right of a woman to
choose abortion.

The opportunity is clear and the challenge is
crucial. The legal framework provides an
important avenue to power, and only through
empowerment can women control the
decisions, opportunities and experiences of
which their lives are composed.

would you charge rape?

be outrageously high. Courts must be sensitive to
the feelings and courage of the victims who testify.
Some believe the rapist can be rehabilitated, others
say just to put them away for good. Rape is not a
sexual act, it is a power act. I think the key to
eliminating rape is EARLY teaching of children to
what a

problems such as bad family history, serious abuse
as a child, etc. For too long society has looked aside,
only now are we beginning to give this terrible crime
the attention it deserves and must have.

Jan Spray compiled the poll. She is a retired
copywriter.

Letter from the Editor

Economic reasons force me to leave the
Clarion’s employ, but I shall continue to assist
my favorite women’s publication as a
volunteer.”

I give up my part-time position as editor of
the Clarion for a full-time job at the University
of Arizona in agricultural communications.

What I take with me is increased knowledge
of the strength, beauty and talent of Tucson's
women. I had only an inkling of that before
October 1983. The women who serve on the
Clarion’s two boards, its volunteer staff,
advertisers, subscribers, readers, community
supporters all exemplify that womanpower.
Also eye-opening for me has been the number
of supportive men, those who understand the
basis of the women’s rights movement, willing
to help in furthering the cause.

I thank you all.

(T ADIN L
WN V

Board of Directors: Margrit
Cromwell, Malice Ruelas Keller,
J.C. Martin, Eileen Ramirez

destructive act it is. Many factors figure in a
- UBTOBTRG INFOS" &-EyInNtd eet —

Production
Supervisor: Patricia Jimenez

inquiries: CLARION, 302 E.
University Blvd., Tucson, AZ 85705
Telephone: 628-1518

Editorial Board: Elaine Ayala, Betsy
Bolding, Norma Coile, Carmen
Duarte, Margo Hernandez, Jane
Kay, Malice Ruelas Keller, Sharon
Kha, Susan M. Knight, J.C. Martin,
Jane Maass Pavone, Patricia
Rapson, Jill Schensul, Sheila
Tobias and Jacqi Tully.

Circulation: 15,000

Published monthly by The CLARION, Inc. as an
educational forum concerning the status of women
in society. The CLARION, Inc. assumes sole
responsibility for the editorial policies of the
Clarion.