& RITUAL DRAMA ABOUT NUCLEAR

VOLUME 8 NUMBER 1 FALL '82

2000 SOUTH 5TH STREET, MINNEAPOLIS, MN 55454

Non-Profit
Organization

Minneapolis, MN
Permit No. 1888

(612) 375-9487

ASHES, ASHES, WE ALL FALL DOWN

We decided to create, produce, and tour ASHES,

ASHES, WE ALL FALL DOWN because not to do so
meant passive social suicide.

Russia owns enough nuclear bombs to “overkill” every
American 20 times. America owns enough nuclear
bombs to “overkill” every Russian 40 times. In the next
10 years, America plans to build 17,000 more strategic
weapons and 29 more Trident submarines. Each Trident
carries enough nuclear weapons to destroy every major
city in the Northern Hemisphere. If both countries
engage in an “all out nuclear war”—which will last less
than an hour—life on earth will be over. Mass death
threatens all life as we know it. We are living in a State
of Emergency anticipating, Dr. Helen Caldicott warns,

“the last epidemic. And the medical dictum states: if
you have an incurable disease, the only recourse is
prevention.”

ASHES, ASHES, WE ALL FALL DOWN is about the
prevention of the destruction of the world.

AT THE FOOT OF THE MOUNTAIN:

ASHES ASHES,

A Aken Sot ee a | we ini re

E ALL FALL DOWN

CREATED 8

MADNESS AND THE DENIAL OF DEATH 8 MARTHA BOE

a

Because facts and statistics about nuclear holocaust are
so emotionally unbearable, newspapers, books, and
lectures have limited power. Theater seems a more
appropriate tool to break the barrier of psychic numb-
ing we all construct in the face of certain death. “We
behave like rats in a cage,” Caldicott observes. “When
you put rats in a cage and introduce a life-threatening
situation, they do something totally irrelevant to that
which threatens them. That's called “Displacement
Activity.” This is the most serious issue ever to face the
human race. And can we even contemplate it?”

We must.

POSTER BY LESLIE BOWMAN

As a physician, Caldicott notes that, “in epidemio-
logical and medical terms, describing the effects of
a nuclear war is like describing the medical effects of
a gas oven full of burning Jews.” Aren’t the moral
issues also the same? Was it psychic numbing that
allowed the German public to remain silent about
the concentration camps?

ASHES, ASHES, WE ALL FALL DOWN speaks out
against the imminence of a nuclear holocaust, reminding
the community of the unacceptability of mass murder.
As a professional theater piece, ASHES, ASHES, WE
ALL FALL DOWN explores our psychic numbness, our
dreads and fears, our personal “defense systems,” our
collective denial of death. It also examines the differ-
ence between a personal death and genocide.

When patients are told they have cancer, physicians have
noticed a common progression of emotional responses:
1) shock and denial, 2) profound depression, 3) anger,
4) acceptance. Unlike the cancer patient, we do not have
to accept the “inevitability” of certain death by nuclear
war. Profound anger can be used constructively, but we
must move through our own shock and despair first.
“Only if you start to swim that river of emotion,”
Caldicott warns, “will you be motivated to save your
life, and save the only life in our universe. We mightn’t
win, but it’s worth trying. What else can you say to

Our goal in ASHES, ASHES, WE ALL FALL DOWN is
to “swim that river of emotion” with the audience—
through the shock, through the denial, through the
depression, into the anger—and climb out, together,
onto the bank of constructive action.

“Ashes, ashes, we all fall down” is part of the refrain
from a Mother Goose nursery rhyme. Known today as
“Ring Around the Rosy,” the 1962 edition of The
Annotated Mother Goose traces this rhyme to Medieval
days of the Great Plague. In the original, “ring-a-ring-a-
roses” referred to the rosy rash that appeared on the
skin as an early sign of the dread disease; “pockets full
of posies” were the herbs and spices carried to sweeten
the air fetid with decaying corpses; “ashes - ashes” was
originally “A-tishoo! A-tishoo!”, a replication of the
sneezing which was common just before death; “we all
fall down” is exactly what happened to the stricken. The
reverberations of this childhood song moved us as we
learned more and more about the symptoms of radiation
sickness.

Since we began thinking about this project in the Fall of
1981, we have worked closely with many Twin Cities
peace organizations including: Clergy and Laity
Concerned, Friends for a Non-Violent World, Minnesota
Council of American-Soviet Friendship, Minnesota
Council of Churches, Minnesota Freeze Campaign,
National Assembly of Women Religious, National
Organization for Women, Northern Sun Alliance,
People’s Party for Survival, Physicians for Social Respon-
sibility, War Resisters’ League, Women Against Military
Madness, Women's International League for Peace and
Freedom, and many church-based groups of all denom-
inations working for nuclear disarmament. Many audience
members have since become actively involved in one or
more of the above organizations, and the personally-
delivered comments, the reviews, and the letters of
appreciation we have received mean ASHES, ASHES,
WE ALL FALL DOWN works: emotionally, politically,

Over 3500 people attended the play during our eight-
week Minneapolis run, May 20 through July 11 and, so
far, over 2,000 have seen the show on tour. New volun-
teers are not only joining other organizations working
for peace, but many women have become volunteer
workers here At the Foot of the Mountain, a contribu-
tion of time which is as valuable to us as the money
others have given. Whatever your contribution has
been—whether supplying “leads” for booking the tours
of ASHES, ASHES, WE ALL FALL DOWN, volunteering
your time, telling your friends about the play and
the work done for peace, or donating money—Thank
You! You make a difference, and contribute to the
paradigm shift and transformation that is now in
process. —

ly, theatrically.

INSIDE THE PRODUCTION SEASON 7
“DIFFERENCES” 2 4 THE TOURING SEASON 7
WHY YOU SHOULD SEND US SOME MONEY 8 CLASSES 15
THE JUNKIE FILM 2 BROADCLOTH 5 & 6
NEW PLAYS 2 TICKET PRICES 8
SUMMER WORKSHOP 4 MISSION STATEMENT 8
RITUALS 3 FINANCIAL STATEMENT 8

“At the Foot of the Mountain is a theater with guts and
commitment—and enough talent to make its audiences
feel the force of both... ASHES, ASHES, WE ALL
FALL DOWN, while political in intent, also is imagina-
tively staged and filled with moments of love and
beauty.”

(Peter Vaughan, Minneapolis Star and Tribune)

“The play’s greatest strength lies not in its ability to
depress its viewers, but in its power to inspire fear
and hope.”

(David Hawley, St. Paul Pioneer Press)

“And there are funny moments. ...”
(David Hawley, St. Paul Pioneer Press)

TOURING ASHES

WE’VE BEEN IN THE MIDWEST
THIS FALL

As you read this, the acting company is somewhere be-
tween Winnipeg (Canada) and Chicago, (Illinois)
performing ASHES, ASHES, WE ALL FALL DOWN.
Our fall tour of the Midwest will end on October 29. At
the time this newsletter went to print, some of the
touring dates were not definite, but the schedule inclu-
ded: Eau Claire, River Falls, La Crosse, Green Bay,
Milwaukee, and Madison, Wisconsin; Grand Forks,
North Dakota; Winnipeg, Canada; Blaine, Lake City,
Winona, Marshall, Minneapolis, Moorhead, Northfield,
Grand Rapids, and Duluth, Minnesota; Chicago, Illinois.

SPONSORED BY A VARIETY OF
FRIENDLY ORGANIZATIONS

We've had many different types of sponsors, but they all
share a common purpose: to achieve a living, loving, and
peaceful future by educating people about the nuclear
issue and empowering people to take action. We have
been sponsored by Freeze Campaign Committees in
several states, the Social Justice Committees in churches
of several faiths, college and university Theater Depart-
ments, Women’s Studies Departments, Student Activities
Boards, MPIRG, a national alternative newspaper, the
Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom,
Clergy and Laity Concerned, a rural community co-op,

Designed by Nett Hart.