RITUALS AT THE FOOT OF THE MOUNTAIN

Theater has its roots in sacred rites in many cultures, and one of our goals is to discover the life of those roots in our own work for our own community in our own time. Discovering and creating rituals which are meaningful to contemporary women is one of our continuing goals. This past year we created and performed five rituals to celebrate/honor specific events.

Our “Ritual to Honor Battered Women” was commissioned by members of the congregation of a church in White Bear Lake to honor a White Bear Lake woman who had been murdered in an abusive relationship. The ritual—which involved all present and which placed this one woman’s death in the social and historical context of violence against women—functioned as a memorial service on the anniversary of the woman’s death. We performed the ritual again in October, 1981, on the National Day of Unity at the request of the Minnesota Coalition for Battered Women. The women who attended in October, the majority of whom were victims in battering relationships, were able to bond with one another, sharing their common experiences, shattering the isolation that envelops battered women.

Commissioned us to create a ritual and sensitive issues surrounding women’s choices and abortion. Working collaboratively with artists from Women’s Art Registry of Minnesota (W.A.R.M.) who designed and built its environment, the ritual formed pictures—both literally and figuratively—of women “cornered” by lack of choice. Preceded by a popular song which signified the socialization/commercialization of her oppression as a woman, each woman told her story. Then each woman emerged from her corner, carrying with her a symbol of her oppression which she burned in an urn. Performers then mixed rose petals with the ashes, cast a circle on the floor, and invited those present to enter the circle and tell their own stories, their own truths.

In the Fall of 1981, the Abortion Rights Council commissioned us to create a ritual.

On June 30, 1982, the Equal Rights Amendment failed in Congress. The women at W.A.R.M. and At the Foot of the Mountain wished to mark this day, honoring the women who worked so hard for the amendment’s passage, acknowledging the political significance of its defeat and reaffirming the ongoing struggle, commitment, and power of women. We marched solemnly in funeral garb through downtown Minneapolis, playing a dirge and otherwise silently gliding through the rush-hour crowds. An eight-foot Death figure in a three-piece suit preceded us, bragging to the pedestrians about the successful squelching of those shameless, hussy-type feminists. When we reached the county government center, we formed a circle of mourning and read two poems of bonding and celebration, one by Judy Grahn and one by Meridel Le Sueur. Then we threw off our shrouds, tossing them onto the corporate death specter, who crumpled under their weight. Dressed now in bright colors, we turned the dirge into dancing music, and boogied back to the W.A.R.M. gallery.

In July, we were asked to create a ritual for a rally on reproductive rights. We stood on the steps of the State Capitol in St. Paul, the great Mississippi River Puppet from Heart of the Beast hovering behind us. With strips of cloth, we created images of bondage (the binding of feet, hands, eyes) which slowly transformed into images of healing, washing, and then into ribbons of bonding. We read Meridel Le Sueur’s “Doan Ket”—

How can we touch each other my sisters?  
over the criminal space.  

We appear armed as mothers, grandmothers,  
sisters, warriors...  
We come with thunder, lightning on our skin.  

As we sang, we shared bread with the people assembled on the steps for the march and rally.

Roaring womb singing...  
Chorus of millions  
singing.

On August 21, 1982, we gathered in Powderhorn Park with 300 other women to “Take Back Our Lives.” At the end of a rally which included Legislator Karen Clark, Playwright Ida Mae Holland, and culminated with Anna Stanley’s passionate appeal for a renewed look at our differences and the necessity of overcoming them, we created a bonding ritual. Calling upon the ancient tradition of women healers who were burnt for being witches, we asked everyone present to form a circle in the ball field. Then, under the new moon, we all joined hands in a spiral dance, raising the enormous woman power of that evening in a celebration of our lives.

ERA Funeral Dirge

We call these events rituals: simple symbolic acts and to commemorate, honor, and affirm who we are and where we stand. We at the Foot of the Mountain create rituals for special events by using images, music, and words from our own experiences and the age-old, timeless experiences of those who have gone before us. We are available to create new rituals for special events or to perform those rituals we have already created. Call us, or write. As with all our services, we base our fees on our sponsor's ability to pay.

TOUR (con't) A ares  
a chapter of the American Medical Students Association, Physicians for Social Responsibility, N.O.W., and many others. Some of these sponsors have used the play as a fund-raiser for their own activities, as well as a tool to accomplish the common goal. ASHES, ASHES, WE ALL FALL DOWN touches emotions, transforms thinking, and inspires action.

WE’RE GOING EAST IN APRIL, 1983

You can assist us and make a difference. Our sponsors are organizations created by individual people just like you. We will be touring the eastern United States with ASHES, ASHES, WE ALL FALL DOWN between April 4 and May 8, 1983. We might also bring along our new plays which premiere later this season (Read about LOW LIFE ON A HIGH PLANE and HAUNTED BY THE HOLY GHOST elsewhere in this newsletter). We have made contact with potential sponsors (people like you) in: Melrose, Medford, Northampton, Worcester, and South Hadley, Massachusetts; Charlestown, West Virginia; Lexington, Kentucky; Washington, D.C.; Cincinnati, Columbus, and Oberlin, Ohio; Syracuse, Albany, Ithaca, and New York, New York; Philadelphia and Swarthmore, Pennsylvania; Burlington and Middlebury, Vermont; Halifax, Nova Scotia; Montreal and Toronto, Ontario; Athens, Georgia; Arlington, Virginia; and Red Bank and Princeton, New Jersey.

WE’D LIKE TO GO TO EUROPE IN THE FALL OF 1983

Our collective feet are itching to travel across Europe. According to reliable sources, our work would be highly valued there and delivering the message that ASHES, ASHES, WE ALL FALL DOWN conveys is a high priority. With the encouragement of several teachers from The Netherlands, Belgium, West Germany, and Denmark, as well as the urging of an Arts Manager from France (all of whom saw ASHES, ASHES, WE ALL FALL DOWN this summer), we have begun to make plans to tour Europe in October and November, 1983.

If you have any advice, suggestions, or contacts in Europe, please call or write Terri. Meditation, prayers, and contributions on our behalf are also welcome.

YOU CAN BRING US TO YOUR COMMUNITY

If you would like us to perform in your community, call Terri Ziegler (our Outreach Coordinator) at (612) 375-9487, Monday through Friday, between 8:30 A.M. and 5:00 P.M., Central Time. Call your community groups, your churches, your schools, and your universities and let them know you want to see us there. Volunteer your time to put up posters and sell advance tickets. Assure them that the performance is needed and will be well attended. Then attend it and bring your loved ones. All booking “leads” and assistance are appreciated; all signed contracts are celebrated! Word-of-mouth is still our best P.R. Share your experience of us and our work with others.

WORKSHOPS AND RESIDENCIES

Whenever we tour, we are available for one performance or more, workshops and lectures, and for residencies (combinations of performances, workshops, and lectures for two days or longer). If you're interested in workshops (which include “Despair and Empowerment,” “Women’s Sexuality and Spirituality,” “Addiction and Spirituality,” and a workshop on Mothers and Daughters), drop Terri a note and she will send you more information about all of the above.

TOURING FEES

Like our ticket prices and other performance fees, touring fees are on a sliding scale, based on a combination of our needs and the sponsor’s ability to pay.

PLANNING

AT THE FOOT OF THE MOUNTAIN

With the aid of a McKnight Excellence in the Arts Award and a grant from the Minneapolis A.R.T. Exchange, At the Foot of the Mountain has created a 3-year organizational, program, and budget plan with the aid of consultants Arlene Goldbard and Don Adams,

Co-Directors of NAPNOC (Neighborhood Arts Programs National Organizing Committee). In addition to publishing a monthly newsletter called “Cultural Democracy,” Don and Arlene spend a lot of time traveling the country organizing. Their political and aesthetic commitment to do advocacy work for professional community-based artists, their respect for differences, and their vision of the essential relationship between cultural and economic democracy make them compatible colleagues for us. Among other projects, they’re helping us develop a new support network called Friends At the Foot of the Mountain. You’ll hear more from us soon.

BREAD FROM JAM —

On Sunday, August 22, At the Foot of the Mountain participated in the first “Minnesota Jam to Preserve the Arts.” Characterized as an “art-a-thon,” it was a money-raiser for the Metropolitan Regional Arts Council’s production grants pot. This pot re-grants money to many small arts organizations, including At the Foot of the Mountain. $11,500 was raised from ticket sales to 4,000 people who came to witness an incredible kaleidoscope of 29 arts organizations performing for eight hours in the same room (the Minneapolis Convention Center). These organizations earned additional money by soliciting pledges for every hour of stamina. At the Foot of the Mountain performed the whole eight hours and, thanks to the loving support (a.k.a. hard work) of our board, company, and friends, earned $1,000 in donations. We gratefully appreciate all those who pledged money and solicited pledges for us.

BRECHT CONCERT

AVAILABLE TO TOUR

Martha Boesing and Paul Boesing presented “An Evening of Bertolt Brecht Songs and Poems” (music by Weill, Eisler, and Dessau) at the Walker Art Center on September 24, and At the Foot of the Mountain on October 1, 2, and 3. Because Bertolt Brecht’s songs express his passionate commitment to people’s freedom from oppression and his (often ironic) protest against war and the military establishment, they are evocative and deeply relevant today. Brecht, too, believed that art can change and heal the world. If you are interested in sponsoring this fine concert in your community, call Terri.