“DIFFERENCES” SERIES TO BECOME

MARTHA BOESING’S
AN ANNUAL EVENT |

“WEB”

In the 1970s, during the height of the Second Wave of
Feminism, the model for sisterhood was “we're all the
same.” As more and more women joined Consciousness
Raising groups, we began to realize that women share
many of the same visions and disappointments, feelings
and emotions, childhood experiences and role indoctrin-
ation. As we began to name the truth about our experi-
ence out loud, that experience took on a collective
significance: all women are oppressed.

As the decade is shifting from the 70s to the 80s, so
too is that model shifting. Women of color are speaking
up and saying the oppression of white women is not the
same as their oppression. Lesbians speak of a vision of a
non-sexist society which is not the same as hetero-
sexuals’ vision. Working class women are saying “grow-
ing up female” for them was not the same as growing up
female in a middle or upper class environment. Again,
women are naming the truth of their experience but this
time, instead of becoming unified, women seem to be
fragmented and isolated with no common forum from
which to speak or hear about our differences.

To provide that forum, we produced a 6-week series
which invited artists, humanists, and audience members
to examine 6 issues which have been divisive within the
women’s movement. We saw the project as a bridge
between At the Foot of the Mountain’s continuing
creation of formal ritual dramas and a less formal par-
ticipatory use of theater which directly involves the
community in the task of seeing itself as a community.

DIFFERENCES: IF WE CAN ALL

SURVIVE OUR STRUGGLES WITH

etc.—from the points of view of the women who work
them. Do you know how unusual it is to see working
class women—working—on stage? Visibility is the first
step toward recognition; we can’t change things if we
can’t see them.

AGE: The film “AT 99,” about spry 99-year-old Louise
Tandy Murch, brought many elder women into the
theater whom we’d never met before. We listened to our
elders. We know them better.

DIFFERENCES: A CELEBRATION
OF WOMEN’S RESISTANCE
AND SURVIVAL

Response to the first DIFFERENCES series was so
positive, we had to think about a second. As we did,
we kept coming back to the transformative power of
art. How have women of varying races, ages, classes, and
sexual perspectives used art as a means of resistance and
survival?

DIFFERENCES: A CELEBRATION OF WOMEN’S
RESISTANCE AND SURVIVAL will happen on four
Monday evenings in March, 1983. Still in the planning
stages, we hope to focus on a different art form each
Monday: visual art, publishing, film, and video. Artists
(two or three each week) will share their work and talk
about its creation in terms of personal resistance and
survival and in terms of their own specific cultural
heritage.

We’ll send you more information this Winter.

EACH OTHER, JUST THINK HOW EIGHT WEEK—

STRONG WE’LL BE

This first series took place on 6 consecutive Monday
evenings in March, 1982: the issues addressed were
RACE, URBAN/RURAL GIRLHOODS, SEXUAL PRE-
FERENCE, CHOICE, CLASS, and AGING. Each even-
ing began with an artistic presentation, followed by an
artist/humanist response, followed by audience dis-
cussion.

of Kim Hines’ play JUST REMEMBER MY NAME, a one-
act about five women’s struggles with racism in a univer-
sity Women’s Studies class; two of the women were
Black, one was Jewish, two were Caucasian. The volatile
end of the play demonstrated how deep the roots of our
racism are and how deep are the roots of our mutual
alienations. After the play, life imitated art as a full
house of 140 women gradually let their antagonisms
erupt over the course of a 2-hour discussion. It took
several weeks for tempers to cool and differences to sur-
face sanely. The evening was risky. The evening was
invaluable. The source of our wounds is the source of
our power.

URBAN/RURAL GIRLHOODS: Four professional
authors read from their autobiographical writings.
Patricia Hample (36 years old, white, from St. Paul),
Endesha Ida Mae Holland (38, Black, from rural Miss-
issippi), Sandra King (34, American Indian, from the
Red Lake Indian Reservation), and Brenda Ueland
(90, white, from Minneapolis) read from stories, essays,
poems, and journals, emphasizing the imaginative re-
construction of childhood as it differs for women who
grew up in cities, towns, and countryside. The writers
were their own panel, focusing discussion on writing as
a way of exploring and understanding the past as well
as differences.

SEXUAL PREFERENCE: Jackie Zita, who teaches
Women’s Studies at the University of Minnesota, pub-
lished an article called “Female Bonding and Sexual
Politics.” Written as an encounter between a radical
lesbian feminist and a heterosexual feminist, this dia-
logue—which exposes the fears, defenses, and arguments
that often polarize lesbians and heterosexual women—
was given an interpreted reading by company members
Chris Cinque and Randa Downs. Panelists included
lesbian, heterosexual, and bi-sexual women of varying
age, race, and class backgrounds.

CHOICE: After we performed The Ritual to Honor
Women and Choice, women from the Minnesota
Abortion Rights Council, from the Chicano community,
Indian community, and women’s community discussed
the threat of no legal abortion and the threat of forced
sterilization as two sides of the same coin: both take
away women's rights to make choices about their own
reproductive lives.

CLASS: The Women’s Theater Project, directed by
Carolyn Levy, performed PINK COLLAR GHETTO,
a one-act play which looks at “pink collar” jobs—

clerks, waitresses, secretaries, factory workers,

RACE: DIFFERENCES opened with a full production

SUMMER WORKSHOP

A living/learning experience in the creation and
production of feminist experimental theater.

For the first time, we are offering an intensive eight-
week summer workshop to share our skills in producing
between art and social reflection. Interested women will
have the unique opportunity to participate in our
process of creating theater which combines a feminist
consciousness with a deep respect for theater art. All
participants’ work—as performers, technicians, and
managers—will focus on a new adaptation of ANTIGONE,
written and directed by Martha Boesing. Martha’s
adaptation of ANTIGONE, the archetype of those women
who commit Civil Disobedience to honor their own
truth when it runs counter to the laws of men, will
also tell the stories of less well-known women who are
even now in prison for their beliefs. Actors in the work-
shop will perform with the theater’s acting ensemble,
technicians will build and run the show, managers will
fund and publicize the production: Intense learning by
intense doing. The culmination of this work will be a
public performance run of ANTIGONE, for the last 3
of the Summer Workshop.

DATES July 2-August 28, 1983

WHO This workshop is for women performers,
technicians, and managers. We will be
accepting up to 20 performers and 5 tech-
nicians and/or managers. Academic credit
may be available (fee not included in
tuition) through Continuing Education in
the Arts and/or Women’s Studies at the
University of Minnesota. More informa-
tion is available.

PLACE Located in Minneapolis, our home is in
the heart of one of the nation’s most cele-
brated arts communities—The Twin
Cities. We have an office and performance
space at the Cedar-Riverside People’s
Center in Minneapolis’ alternative com-
munity, the West Bank. The performance
space is an experimental “black box”
theater with a seating capacity of 150.

You will share, with one other woman, a
double-occupancy college dorm room
near the theater.

$2,100 (Includes room, food, and theater
tickets)

FINANCIAL Limited financial aid will be available on
AID basis of need. Ask for more informa-

AUDITIONS. We plan to arrange auditions or interviews
for all applicants. We'll try to schedule
your audition within a reasonable travel
distance from your home.

HOUSING

TUITION

FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE ENCLOSED
BROCHURE.

TRINITY SQUARE REPERTORY THEATER, one of
the country’s leading residential professional theater
companies, will premiere Martha Boesing’s newest play,
THE WEB, from October 5 through November 14 in
Providence, R.I. Martha’s script—one of about 500 un-
solicited manuscripts sent to Trinity each year—was
“discovered” by Trinity’s composer, Richard Cumming
and given to artistic director, Adrian Hall, who liked it
so much he decided to open his nineteenth season with
it.

The play is about Abigail Sater, a mother in her forties,
coming to grips with the sexual complicities of her
family, the betrayals and hypocrisies, and her own crisis
as a burgeoning playwright. “THE WEB is in good
hands,” says Martha, who spent the first days of rehear-
sal in Rhode Island with the cast. “Adrian Hall is tough
and imaginative. He is sympathetic to both the sorrow
and the humor in Abigail’s life.” Martha has had her
plays produced at many small professional theaters and
universities in the U.S. and England; this is her first pro-
duction at an equity house of international reputation.

Programs, activities, and services since January, 1982,
have been made possible, in part, by contributions from
the following 24 corporations, foundations, and public
funding agencies:
Bremer Foundation
Butler Family Foundation
Dayton Hudson Foundation
Deluxe Check Printers Foundation
GRANTORS 3M Company
General Mills Foundation
Investors Diversified Services
Inter Regional Financial Group
John G. Kinnard Company, Inc.
McKnight Foundation
Metropolitan Regional Arts Council
Minneapolis A.R.T. Exchange
Minneapolis Foundation
Minnesota Humanities Commission
National Endowment for the Arts
NCR Foundation
Northwest Area Foundation
Northwestern Bell
Northwestern National Bank
Pillsbury Company Foundation
Piper, Jaffrey, and Hopwood
St. Paul Companies
*Orsen, Campbell, Rolando, and Lehne

Volunteers

Kay Bolstad
Barrie Borich
Rachel Breen

Mary Burns Denise Konicek
Carol A. Carraher Denise Kozak
Anne Clark Kathy Laughlin
Liz Conn Brenda Manaugh
Jan Cooper Mary Mandeville
Randa Downs Mary Kay and John Murray
Judith Eisner Joan Pinkney
Cheryl Ekstrum Anahid Sarkissian
Vicki George Mary Sexe
Camille Giancola Deb Sikora
Barbara Gittes Carol Skalko
Charlene Greenwald Willie Snyder

Dianne M. Gutoski Sue Stephens

Jackie Hicks Cat Stewart
Endesha Ida Mae Holland Lisa J. Weber
Deb Holtz

[- IMMEDIATE JOB OPENING - |

AT THE FOOT OF THE MOUNTAIN

Because Meredith cannot finish work on her Ph.D. while
working full-time, she will be leaving the theater as of
December 1; we need to replace her with an equally
responsible, skilled, and passionate woman. The primary
responsibilities of the INFORMATION/PUBLIC RELA-
TIONS COORDINATOR include publicizing all theater
activities, developing PR ideas which keep the theater
visible to the public throughout the year (locally, nation-
ally, and internationally), responding to requests for
general information about the theater, and editing
regular newsletters. Secondary responsibilities have in-
cluded coordinating theater space use by company
members and renters, coordinating special program
events, maintaining and expanding the theater’s library
and performing daily banking tasks (deposits,
withdrawals, petty cash, bills, balancing accounts).

This full-time job requires a commitment of 40-60 hours
a week for a regular $150/week salary plus modest fringe
benefits, not the least of which is working creatively
within a professional women’s theater for the betterment
of the world in which we all live.

To apply, send us a resume of experience, an appropriate
sample of your writing (this is crucial), a statement
saying why you want to work At the Foot of the
Mountain and why you’d be good at this particular job,
plus 2 letters of recommendation mailed directly to us.

Application deadline is November 1, 1982; we'll
interview applicants between November 1st and 15th;
the job begins November 29. Act now.