A SAMPLER OF NEW WORK BY WOMEN PERFORMERS

Last season, At the Foot of the Mountain premiered  
BROADCLOTH: A THEATER SAMPLER OF NEW  
WORK BY WOMEN PLAYWRIGHTS. This staged-  
reading series of 6 new scripts was so well received,  
we decided we could produce BROADCLOTH annually  
if we loosened its weave to include other art forms.  
This season's BROADCLOTH: A SAMPLER OF NEW  
WORK BY WOMEN PERFORMERS will feature  
eight weekend performances: four 2-night sets in Nov-  
ember, 1982, and four 2-night sets in February/March,  
1983. Woven with the energy and talent of 13 women of  
varied cultural backgrounds, BROADCLOTH includes  
new performance work by a playwright, an improviser/  
storyteller, poets, a belly dancer, a prose writer, musi-  
cians, a modern dancer, and a puppeteer. The women  
At the Foot of the Mountain are proud to give these  
artists an opportunity to showcase their work, bringing  
new audiences to them—and new horizons to you.

All performances are on Friday and Saturday evenings  
at 8:00. Tickets for each evening will be $4-$10, Sliding  
Scale. Series tickets are available at considerable savings.  
For reservations or more information, call us at 375-  
9487. This may be the only mailed notice you get for  
the November BROADCLOTH performances, so mark  
them on your calendar now.

NOVEMBER PERFORMANCES

Artist: Endesha Ida Mae Holland  
Medium: Playwriting  
Dates: Friday and Saturday, November 5 & 6, 1982

The Performer:

Endesha Ida Mae Holland was born in pre-Civil Rights  
rural Mississippi. Her mother was a midwife and a  
prostitute. Before she became involved in the Civil  
Rights Movement, Endesha herself was a prostitute and  
a thief. As a result of her active participation in the  
Civil Rights Movement and her arduous efforts to get  
blacks to register to vote, arsonists set fire to her house  
killing her aged mother. Now Endesha writes plays which  
draw upon her rich rural past. Her scripts, SECOND  
DOCTOR LADY and THE RECONSTRUCTION OF  
DOSSIE, REE HEMPHILL, won second place in the  
1981 “National Lorraine Hansberry Award” for best  
original play about the Black experience in America.

M/SS IDA B. WELLS, opens the November BROADCLOTH  
series.

The Event:

Ida B. Wells was an educator, publisher, author, anti-  
lynching activist, wife and elocutionist. M/SS IDA  
B. WELLS, set in Chicago in 1928, focuses on her  

life and works between 1884 and 1915. We meet Wells  
through her own retrospection, through the perceptions  
of her daughter Alfeda, and through the responses of  
an audience observer. We witness Wells’ interaction with  
contemporaries such as Susan B. Anthony, Jane Addams,  
and Mary Church Terrell. Seen here in its first full  
production, M/SS IDA B. WELLS was originally seen as  
a staged-reading at the Playwrights Center where Denise  
Ellis and Kim Hines played the role of Ida B. Wells.

Susan Delattre  
Medium: Improvisation/Dance  

Friday and Saturday, November 12 & 13, 1982

The Performer:

Susan Delattre began performing for relatives in the  
living room as a youngster, lip-synching and dancing to  
songs from the hit musicals of the late ’40s. (Her favor-  
ites were Oklahoma and South Pacific.) She began her  
study of modern dance at Barnard College in New York  
City, where Jose Limon’s company members taught  
classes. Returning to Minneapolis (where she was born)  
in 1973, Susan taught dance at the University of Min-  
nesota and choreographed for both student and local  
dance groups. In 1978, she joined the women At the  
Foot of the Mountain, where she performed in CLUE  
IN THE OLD BIRD BATH, THE LIFE, CALAMITY  
JANE, and RAPED and taught for three years. Cur-  
rently, Susan uses the improvisational Action Theater  
form of Ruth Zaporah as her performance mode. She  
has been offering classes in Action Theater At the Foot  
of the Mountain over the past year and will share this  
performance mode with BROADCLOTH audiences.

The Event:

In the course of the evening's performance, Susan will  
present herself in the roles of dancer, actor, and story-  
teller, showing those aspects of her work in their more  
separate forms. She will also present pieces which use  
elements of Ruth Zaporah’s Action Theater, an improvi-  
sational form in which movement and vocal elements  

merge, dancer and speaker roles are reunited in  
the performance moment. Susan has recently begun to  

use stories and memories from her childhood as a basis  
for improvisation and is interested in recreating child-  
hood scenes through improvisational storytelling.

Phebe Hanson, Jill Breckenridge,  
Patricia Hampel  
Medium: Poetry  

Friday and Saturday, November 19 & 20

The Performers:

PHEBE HANSON began to write when she was 11 in  
a little five-year diary given to her for her birthday.  
Since then, she has filled 73 journals and diaries (of  
all sizes and colors). Nine years ago, she began to call  
herself a poet and has done hundreds of readings all  
over the state as well as in New York City and Los  
Angeles. She also has taught classes in Poetry and  
Journal-Keeping for The Loft, Continuing Education  
for Women, Metro University, and the Summer Arts  
Study Program at Quadna. This year, she is teaching  
writing at Sanford Junior High School and Freshman  
Composition at Minneapolis College of Art and Design.

JILL BRECKENRIDGE, a recipient of State Arts Board  
and Bush Foundation fellowships, received an MFA  
in Creative Writing from Goddard College in Vermont.  
Formerly director of The Loft, she currently teaches for  
the Compass Writers-in-the-Schools Program. Her poems  
have appeared in 25 Minnesota Poets, Dakotah Terri-  
tory, and Milkweed Chronicle.

PATRICIA HAMPL was born in St. Paul and has lived  
there most of her life. Her first book, published in  
1978, was Woman Before an Aquarium (poems). In  
1981, she published A Romantic Education, a memoir  
which was awarded the Houghton Mifflin Literary  
Fellowship. In 1983, Houghton Mifflin will also publish  
Resort and Other Poems, her second collection. Her  
most recent project was to write the libretto for In a  
Winter Garden, a large choral work composed by Libby  
Larsen. The premiere performance of this work will  
be December 5, 1982, at Minneapolis’ Plymouth Congre-  
gational Church which commissioned the work. Cur-  
rently, Trish is working on a novel, Beautiful Dreamers,  
and is teaching (Memoir and Fiction Writing) at the  
University of Minnesota.

Your age provides you with an identity almost as strong  
as your gender. Or more so? When something happens  
in a person’s life can be more startling, for example,  
than what happens. Imagine a story that begins, “Susan  
Anders, a beautiful woman, made love for the first time  
last night... Where else—in the back seat of a car.” Now  
imagine this revision: “Susan Anders, a beautiful woman  
of 64, made love for the first time last night... etc.”  
Are you a bit more intrigued to know this Susan Anders  
in the second version?

And of course your age fixes your life in time, in the  
particular. Did you actually see (or stand in) the bread  
lines of the 1930s? Do you remember VE Day? The  
day President Kennedy was shot? Were you 20 or 70  
when John Lennon was killed? Our ages are intensely  
personal and particular and yet they attach us to history  
as perhaps no other single personal fact does.

These three writers, Phebe (age 54), Jill (age 44), and  
Patricia (age 36), want to take advantage of their range  
of ages to present a reading of their own imaginative and  
memoiristic works that consider or demonstrate the  
experience of their ages, and also investigate the dreams,  
fears, and notions they have about their own histories  
and futures.

The basis of the evening’s program is a fascination with  
the personal life lived in time, in history. But beyond  
this, all three writers share a healthy, (one hopes)  
disregard for the idea that all the important life issues  
are settled by the choices made in one’s earlier years.  
As Florida Scott-Maxwell said (in The Measure of My  
Days), “Age puzzles me. I thought it was a quiet time.  
My seventies were interesting, and fairly serene, but  
my eighties are passionate. I grow more intense as I  
age...” Join these three writers for an evening of  
readings, conversation, and exchange across three  
decades.

Artist: Cassandra  
Medium: Belly Dancing  

Dates: Friday and Saturday, November 26 & 27

The Performer:

Cassandra has captivated audiences across the nation  
for the past seven years with her dramatic and joyful  
performances of Oriental dance. In this visual feast,  
she conveys her exciting love of the dance with authen-  
tic interpretations based on years of study with the  
major dance figures in the United States. Every perfor-  
mance is a marvelous revelry in which her refined  

skill and the soft beauty of her body give life to a  
range of emotions: Cassandra’s professional experience  
began in San Francisco where she has performed at the  
Casbah Cabaret, the Greek Taverna, and Powell Station.  
Since 1977, she has been the featured dancer at “George  
Is In Fridley.” In addition, she has toured the United  
States and Canada and has been the subject of articles  

in publications which include the Minneapolis Star  
and Tribune and Habibi.

The Event:

Cassandra, accompanied by several area dancers trained  
in classical Middle Eastern dance styles, will present  
a unique dance and lecture evening exploring the many  
joyous traditional women’s dances of Egypt and the  

Near East. The role of Middle Eastern Folkloric dance in  
Islamic women’s culture will be discussed, and specific  
women’s dances performed. The classical Oriental  
Dance will be presented creatively in both Egyptian and  
American styles. Both the Oriental and folkloric wo-  
men’s dances are earthy, expressive celebrations of  
women’s natural joy and pride in their own bodies.

PERFORMANCES

Artist: Sandra King  
Medium: Poetry/Prose/Playwriting  

Dates: Friday and Saturday, February 11 & 12  
Artists: Cindy Lane, Lisbeth Lipari, Melissa Stoudt,  
Laurie Witzkowski  

Medium: Music  

Dates: Friday and Saturday, February 18 & 19  
Artist: Marilyn Habermas-Scher  

Medium: Choreography  

Dates: Friday and Saturday, February 25 & 26  
Artist: Sandy Spieler  

Medium: Puppets and Masks  

Dates: Friday and Saturday, March 4 & 5  
SINGLE TICKET PRICES:

Single tickets for each evening are $4 to $10, priced on  
a sliding scale which is based on your gross annual  
income.

SERIES TICKET PRICES:

NOVEMBER BROADCLOTH:

All four performances for a sliding scale ticket fee of  
$13 to $32. (Purchased singly, tickets would cost $16 to  
$40; purchased as a series, you save a total of $3 to $10.  
That’s a 20% discount.)

FEBRUARY/MARCH BROADCLOTH:  
(Same as above.)

MORE SAVINGS FOR A DOUBLE-  
SERIES-PURCHASE:

All eight performances for a sliding scale ticket fee of  
$21 to $52. (Purchased singly, tickets for all eight per-  
formances would cost $32 to $80; purchased as a  
double-series, you save a total of $11 to $28. That’s a  
35% discount.)