THREE NEW PLAYS PREMIERE

1982/83 marks our ninth production season as a theater
committed to developing the talents of women theater
artists. We are proud to announce that we are premiering
three new scripts this year, all written by company mem-
bers: two are by new writers within the Performance
Company, Chris Cinque and Jan Magrane; the third is
by Artistic Director Martha Boesing.

LOW LIFE ON A HIGH PLANE

In late December, we premiere LOW LIFE ON A HIGH
PLANE by Chris Cinque. It’s a mystery, a romance, a
ghost story, a comedy, a tale of lust, a lesbian fable.
It’s the story of Harriet Rage, a collapsed musician once
a big-time jazz performer now bitterly reclusive after the
mysterious disappearance and possible death of Grace,
a high-class woman in red shoes and Harriet’s lover of
many years. “Life on High” excavates the ruins of
Lesbian History with Clair Blair, a bright-eyed journalist,
acting as head archeologist. Star struck by Harriet’s
music and wild life, she arrives one day to interview
the once great Queen of Jazz. Her questions goad Harriet
into rising off the rubble heap of her past and into a new
life of action. But, who are the ghosts who refuse to
leave? The German Grandmother with her pointing
finger? The silent muse with her blazing eyes? The
figures on TV that only Harriet can see? The answers lie
in the bedrock of our own hearts.

LOW LIFE ON A HIGH PLANE, a play for lovers past,
present, and to come, opens Thursday, December 30,
1982, and runs for 5 weeks through January 30, 1983.
Come celebrate the changing of the years at the Foot
of the Mountain and begin the New Year with LOW
LIFE ON A HIGH PLANE.

HAUNTED BY THE HOLY GHOST

In March, we premiere Jan Magrane’s HAUNTED BY
THE HOLY GHOST, a look at the teachings of the
Catholic Church and the effects of that dogma on the
lives of the one-out-of-four women who grew up
Catholic in the United States in the 40’s, 50’s, and early
60's. In this era, Masses were still in Latin, nuns wore the

“Death rather than Sin.” And practically everything was
a sin. The play explores the quest for grace and sinless
perfection, the world of fervent devotion and self-denial,
the fleeting ecstasy of those moments after confession
when a girl’s soul was clean and pure, the daily inspec-
tion for the appearance of stigmata on the body (a sure
sign you were to become a saint), and the maintenance
of Catholic modesty so as not to become an occasion of
sin for some unsuspecting high school boy.

The central journey of the play is women’s search for a
place in this Father/Son religion in which God is always
“He.” HAUNTED BY THE HOLY GHOST examines
what is offered women by the Church: a total lack of
women in central roles of worship, the shamefulness of
Eve's curiosity as the source of the world’s misery, the
denial of the rights and pleasures of our reproductive
organs. This, in contrast to the rich variety of spiritual
role models presented by the nuns, by the heroines in
Lives of the Saints, by the cult of the Virgin Mary (who
is all we have left in Christianity of the worship of the
Great Goddess); in contrast to the emphasis on tradition-
ally “feminine” aspects of religious experience such as
mysticism.

An ex-Catholic herself, Jan spent the summer of 1982
interviewing Catholic and ex-Catholic women, including
ex-nuns (also Protestant and Jewish women), exploring
topics as humorous as childhood schemes to find a loop-
hole through which to get to heaven, as painful as the
decision to leave the life-long practice of the Church,
and as joyful as the connection between sexual and
spiritual ecstasy. The title of the play comes from a
feeling (expressed by many of the Catholic women
Jan met) of being haunted by the values they absorbed
in Catholic girlhoods, of being haunted by a sense that
“once you've been a Catholic, you can’t be anything
else.” Jan left the Church, but is not surprised that she
entered the theater, bringing with her a love of ritual
and mystery and an appreciation of the power of
communal gatherings. Using the imagery of the Catholic
experience (the Sacraments, the Catechism, the music,
the incense), Jan hopes to reach out to all women who
have grown up in predominantly male religious institu-
tions and are now struggling to protect and expand their
own spiritual understanding.

Because of previous touring commitments, HAUNTED
BY THE HOLY GHOST will open (in March) to an
unusual production schedule of two separate 3-week
runs. In the first 3-week period, the play will premiere
on St. Patrick's Day (Thursday, March 17, 1983) and
close on Easter Sunday (April 3). On April 4, the entire
company will leave town for a 5-week East Coast tour of
ASHES, ASHES, WE ALL FALL DOWN (LOW LIFE
ON A HIGH PLANE and HAUNTED BY THE HOLY
GHOST may also be on tour). Returning to the Twin
Cities in May, HAUNTED BY THE HOLY GHOST will
re-open for a second 3-week run from May 12 through
Memorial Day Weekend (Sunday, May 30). Some worry
that this “split run” will confuse you. Prove them
wrong. Come in March, during Lent. Then tell your
friends and bring them with you in May.

ANTIGONE

In August, we premiere Martha Boesing’s new adaptation
of ANTIGONE, Sophocles’ play about Oedipus’ daugh-
ter who breaks man’s law to honor a higher law; like all
who commit Civil Disobedience in the name of con-
science, she is incarcerated. Martha’s ANTIGONE will
present the stories of many women who have broken
men’s laws when they believed those laws were unjust
and needed to be changed: famous women like Elizabeth
Gurley Flynn, Emma Goldman, and Dorothy Day, as
well as less-known women like those who chained them-
selves to the White House gates to obtain the vote, used
non-violence in Mississippi in the Sixties, fought the
Powerlines in the Seventies, and are pouring blood on
the steps of the Pentagon today. Like Antigone, these
women must act in accordance with their own truth,
whatever the personal cost; like Antigone, they know
that whenever laws are corrupted by power, the only
way to change them is to break them—as did the slaves,
the suffragists, the civil rights workers, the draft
resisters, the peace-makers. The alternative to Civil
Disobedience is the denial of one’s own right to
freedom, equality, and survival on this planet; the alter-
native is the denial of the survival of the planet itself.
(This understanding grew directly out of Martha’s work
as a playwright and director of ASHES, ASHES, WE
ALL FALL DOWN.)

Production of ANTIGONE is scheduled for August,
1983, as the culmination of an intensive 8-week July/
August Summer Workshop for women performers, tech-
nicians, and managers from all over the country (see the
enclosed brochure for more information; send in your
application soon). Preview performances are scheduled
for the Women’s Network at the 1983 American Theater
Association Convention in Minneapolis.

A communal renewal, a glimpse into the kind of
serenity recovering addicts speak of.

3) To collaborate with other artists, particularly film
and video artists.

4) To expose film and television audiences to quality
and experimental dramatic experiences.

5) To create a theater/film/video network which will be
of future benefit to At the Foot of the Mountain and
to other theaters.

6) To explore alternative funding sources and new
sources of income through the distribution (sales and
rental) of the film and video tape.

We are working in collaboration with Twin Cities Film-
maker and Videographer Kathleen Laughlin to make
THE JUNKIE FILM a cinematic piece in its own right
(not a document of the theater experience). We want it
to touch movie audiences the way the play moved
people at the live theater event. Kathleen is Co-Director/
Editor of the film, Martha Boesing is Co-Director/Script
Writer, and Phyllis Jane Rose is the Executive Producer.

We will be filming in Minneapolis with the original com-
pany for three weeks this Fall (November 15 through
December 5); we’ll be editing over the summer of 1983.
By September, THE JUNKIE FILM will be ready for
distribution on 16mm film and video tape (color, of
course).

The total film budget is $132,000. We’ve raised $48,750
already, and we’re in the process of raising the remaining
$83,250 before November 15. Many, many people are
helping us find money. If you’d like to be part of THE
JUNKIE FILM—because you've seen the play and want
to help the film come to life, because you know the
importance of preventing addiction and supporting those
who are recovering, because you like us and want to see
us immortalized on celluloid—SEND MONEY! Any
amount will help. We're trying to avoid loans and invest-
ments so that income the film generates can go right
back into the theater to support future productions and
activities.

If you’d like information on distribution costs, drop us a
note. We’ll keep your name on file and let you know as
soon as we know.