MAKE A PRETTY JACOB

BY

Jacob and his mother took an early morn-
ing stroll through an uninhabited part of
the island that was the family's summer re-
treat. His four-year-old curiosity prompted
a steady flow of questions about the new won-
ders entering his world. He skipped light-
ly, smiling, pointing, asking, listening.
Twice he asked apprehensively, "We don't
have to go back yet, do we?" His mother's
face tensed. She answered, "No, not yet."

He stopped suddenly, let go of his moth-
er's hand, and stooped by a clump of wild
flowers. The sun shining on his face high-
lighted the baby down that made his skin
like creamy satin and his auburn curls lus-
trous and soft. His eyes sparkled and an
"O-o-o-h" rounded his dusky lips. He was
about to put a dimpled forefinger on a
large monarch butterfly when his mother gen-
tly cautioned him, “No, Jacob, don't touch
him. He has powder on his wings. If you
brush the powder off, he won't be able to
fly and he'll die. We don't want that, do
we?"

He whispered, "Oh, no. He's pretty."

Satiated, the monarch fluttered its wings
and disappeared. Jacob giggled. "Where's
he going, mother?"

All the way back to the cabin, Linda Ev-
erett answered Jacob's questions. But
when the cabin came into view, he became
silent. He pulled back to inspect some
weeds. He searched for something to say a-
bout the nondescript mass before him. At
length Linda took his hand in hers. "Come
on, Jacob. Aren't you hungry?"

Jacob didn't answer. He scratched at
his ear and submitted meekly to the end of
his glorious morning.

Bill Everett stood in the doorway stretch-
ing and yawning. "Hi, Tiger," he boomed to
Jacob, "about time you're getting back. I
thought you'd taken off on me." He tousled
Jacob's hair.

Jacob wore a tight smile. He scooted in-
side, scooped up his pull-toy duck, and
settled himself on a step stool in the
corner of the kitchen to inspect the mech-
anism that made the duck quack.

Linda started bacon frying and began
whipping eggs in a bowl. Bill flopped into
a chair. He thrummed his fingers on the
porcelain table top and stared out the win-
dow. He seemed to address himself to the
trees outside. “Thought we were all here to-
gether." Linda didn't answer. "A guy could
starve to death," he added.

Linda sighed and muttered, "Which of those
do you want me to defend first?"

Jacob stirred on his stool and worked the
duck's mouth up and down--rack-rack-rack!

"Stop that, Jacob!" The sharpness in his
mother's voice startled him. He hung his
head and poked absently at the duck's gar-
ish orange bill.

Bill threw a sharp look at Linda. "Do
you have to pick on the kid? Don't bitch
at him just because you're in a rotten mood!"

CHARLOTTE MASTERMAN

Linda's jaws tightened. Through clenched
teeth she asked, "Is it all right for Jacob
and I to enjoy the early morning together?
Or," she bowed slightly in Bill's direction,
"should we sit in silent awe waiting for
his highness to arise? As for breakfast,"
she sent the eggs spluttering into hot
grease, "I assume you're not entirely ig-
norant about cooking. If you do have troubl-
e, there's a cookbook on the counter top."

Bill snarled, "That'll be the day!" He
grabbed yesterday's paper and snapped it
open, reading furiously.

Jacob looked furtively at both his par-
ents, then hunched over his toy. He hummed
softly to it.

They ate breakfast in silence. Jacob
spread his eggs over his plate so that it
would look as if he'd eaten most of them.

He slipped a piece of bacon into his jeans
pocket to be disposed of later. Quietly,
he slipped out the kitchen door to retreat
to his sandbox. He scooped a big mound of
wet sand together and patted it into a dome.
He tried to square it off, but his hands
would not obey his directions. Frustrated,
he hammered the sand into a soggy, shape-
less mass. The cool morning breeze carried
harsh voices from the cabin to the sand-
box. Jacob drooped his eyelids and ran a
listless finger through the sand.

Bill emerged from the cabin in swimming
trunks and yelled, "Hey, Tiger, how about a
swim?"

Jacob's eyes brightened. “Mommy too?"

"Nope. Just us men. Get your suit on and
I'll race you."

Jacob wrinkled his nose and tugged at one
ear. He opened his mouth to speak. But
when he saw a familiar look on his father's
face that signaled both a little warning
about saying no and the vague, helpless
feeling about answering the question of Why
not?, he changed his mind and went to put
on his trunks.

Bill perched Jacob on his shoulders and
ran to the beach and into the water. Jacob
locked his arms tightly around Bill's neck
and let out gleeful shrieks as the cool
water drenched them both. Bill pulled Jacob
through the water by his hands, Jacob pro-
pelling his feet wildly and sputtering like
a motor. "Brrrrrmmmm--I'm a boat, Daddy,
I'm a boat!" he laughed.

Bill supported Jacob's tummy with his
large hand while Jacob's arms and legs
beat at the water. When Bill let go, Jacob
began to sink. Bill pulled him up quickly
and tickled him so he wouldn't cry. Bill's
laugh echoed off the lake mixed with Jac-
ob's light, tinkling giggle. He threw Jac-
ob high over his head and held out his arms
to catch him. Jacob caught his breath. His
mouth turned downward, a terrified ha ha
ha erupting as he descended and bounced into
Bill's arms. He clutched at Bill--"No,
Daddy, don't do that!"

continued on page 5