THE DISPOSSESSED. URSULA K. LE GUIN.

(Harper & Row, 1974). 341 pp. (Also
available at Mpls. Public Library.)

At last! A feminist science fiction writer who
can overcome the pulp mentality to achieve a literary
work. Ursula K. Le Guin's latest novel, sub-titled "An
Ambiguous Utopia," explores the problems and issues
of creative self-expression within various political
systems.

Set in the solar system of Tau Ceti, the story
revolves around the struggles of an idealistic scien-
tist who wants to share his discovery with all known
worlds. His homeworld is “the ambiguous utopia," a
socialistic anarchy-gone-sour, spoiled by humanity's
imperfections: envy—"...his reputation was built on
expropriations from other minds;" and the will to
dominance—"people can no longer discriminate between
administering things and governing people.” Fear of
change has led to repression—"We've let cooperation
become obedience.”

With no outlet for his creativity, the hero em-
barks on a journey to the mother planet, whose poli-
tics are suspiciously similar to Earth's. He hopes
to find a freer milieu for his ideas in a capitalis-
tic society.

The novel is structured as a 2-in-1 book. It
switches back and forth between the two planets chap-
ter by chapter, one set of chapters recounting the
hero's experiences in capitalistic society, and the
other explaining the circumstances which led to his
decision to leave the homeworld. No issue is left
untouched: poverty, sexuality, exploitation of the
masses, women's status, ecology, religion, morality,
education—chapter by chapter, system to system, com-
parisons and contrasts are explicitly delineated.

Though her style is reminiscent of Ayn Rand,
whose characters transparently spout the author's
beliefs, Le Guin keeps her philosophic discourses
short and to-the-point. Indeed, at times her ideas
almost slip by in matter-of-fact descriptions and one
or two line dialogs: "Takver gave birth afoot, squat-
ting." "Dead anarchists make martyrs, you know, and
keep living for centuries. But absent ones can be
forgotten.”

The Dispossessed insists on the right of the in-
dividual to be an individual. Though Le Guin uses a
hero rather than a heroine, she emphasizes that peo-
ple are individuals, regardless of sex. Sex roles are
obsolete, she tells us, and creativity is stifled by
governments. Even the mildest forms of administration
lead to corruption. Feminists, as well as sci-fi en-
thusiasts and the politically-minded, should read this
book.

--Diane Hayalian

con’t from pg. 6 LOVING HER

she also adds to the old myths and subtracts
from her main point - the validity of love
overcoming the hatred, fear and poverty too
common in our world.

Whatever faults the novel may have, it
presents a basically positive outlook on the
life relationships that can be built between
loving individuals. In the words of another
reviewer, "I, as a black lesbian, found it
very refreshing and I can identify with most
parts of it." It would be of interest to
"lots of women, especially third-world women
with questions about their feelings."

XK XKXKK XK

.». and then some!

"ANTONIA: A PORTRAIT OF THE
WOMAN,” DIRECTED by JILL GODMILOW
AND JUDY COLLINS

By Helen Rosenfeld

"Antonia" is a film about women and work. It is
about the notion of work that has nothing to do with
equal employment statistics, but rather with the dis-
ciplined, creative outlet through which women attempt
to give significance to their lives in the world.

Antonia Brico is a musician whose instrument is
the orchestra. She is a symphony conductor and, as
such, her attempt to pursue satisfying work on the
grand scale illuminates the less obvious efforts of
other women to give meaning to their lives. The in-
tensity of her passion and the triumph and anguish
of her barely tasted success match the size of her
undertaking and say large the feelings of accomplish-
ment and frustration which attend all our undertakings.

The film is a skillful composition of newsreel and
press clippings, interviews, and footage of her at
work, conducting the Brico Symphony Orchestra in Den-
ver. The clippings establish her credentials as an
exceptional artist, making us at once indignant and
ashamed that we have not even heard of this woman who
conducted the Berlin Symphony at 28 and formed an all-
woman orchestra in New York in the '30s. The conduct-
ing sequences are frequently, even insistently, inter-
spersed within the interview, forming a unified im-
pression of the woman and her art. We can more fully
witness her joy at work, having moments before felt
her pain at only being allowed the experience five or
six times a year, when her almost paralyzing need is
to conduct that often every month. We bristle at the
knowledge that a man of her ability would be using
his talents to their limit, while she gives piano
lessons and conducts bee-hived housewives and student
musicians a few times a year.

Yet there is no condescension toward the house-
wives or the students. Indeed one of the most affec-
tive elements of the film is the introduction of one
of Brico's piano students, a young girl apparently
making her debut performance with the symphony. By
way of some impressive editing we see the girl one
moment practicing at Brico's home, the next moment at
her performance. This juxtaposition communicates a
sense of the hard work and discipline which lie behind

Brico's own achievement and that of all women who
would overcome the mediocrity to which we are assigned
and so often resigned. Not only do we see the girl's
dedication, however, but we also see her simultaneously
appealing and frightening vulnerability as she
stands in the wings, ready to go on stage. And we
fear that she will be defeated by her girlishness as
much as by the fact that she is a girl.

In what is mostly an excellent film there are only
a few flaws. One is an animated segment showing the
filmmaker's fantasy of a kettle drum competition be-
tween a woman and a man. It is at best extraneous,
and at worst discordant in an exploration of achieve-
ment which otherwise refuses to deal in the terms of
competition.

The other, more important problem is the relation
of Judy Collins to the movie. Certainly credit is
due her for the production and direction of a fine
document. However, I was somewhat offended by her
intrusive presence as a “personality” (rather than
simply as the filmmaker) both in the publicity and
within the film itself. With the exception of some
exciting photographs of Albert Schweitzer, the only
three individuals in the film to whom our attention
is drawn are Brico, the young pianist, and Collins.
While the relationship between Brico and the girl is
an obvious and appropriate one, Collins' presence does
not seem justified. Rather, it seems a gratuitous
sponsorship of Brico, when the film and the woman her-
self speak well enough.