Minnesota  
Feminists  

are continuing needs.  

"Each of these areas, groups, sends a  
representative chosen however they decide to  
represent them on the steering committee.  
Each of these women has a say and a vote in  
determining all policies. The steering comm-  
ittee also serves as a clearing house of  
inter-organization information. There will  
be knowledge passed so the abortion task  
force knows what other groups are doing and  

the reverse. This knowledge can then be  
taken back to the smaller groups and dis-  
persed.  

Stat”  

“Then taken from the MS article is a pos-  
ition of “Star.” This position is for con-  
tact with the media since the media usually  
picks one vocal woman and makes her the spo-  
keswoman for the whole organization, whether  
or not she knows about the subject matter.  

So we created the position of Star. These  
three women have a responsibility to act as  
spokeswomen for the group. They meet with  
the press and other groups. These three wom-  
en have the group to be responsible to. The  
women are chosen by lottery and their names  
are submitted by the women themselves. There  
is an ego-gratification with this job but a  
lot of responsibility since they have to  
attend all steering committee meetings and  

be knowledgeable about all aspects of Minn-  
esota Feminists.”  

"The core of the organization is the large  
group. It will form from all of the aware-  
ness groups, task forces, ongoing groups and  
all action. The large group will meet once  
every two weeks. The meetings will also  
be a clearing house for information and the  
meetings will be more than business since  
programs are to be planned by either the task  
forces, ongoing groups or whoever would like.  

“We want to be both a university group  
for students and also an area for other  
women in the community. To be able to make  
women knowledgeable about other groups in  
the city.  

“With the Minnesota Feminists, we will  
have a chance to take time with women, to  
share with women, to invest time and energy  
for and with women," Jackie concluded.  

PEOPLE’S  
COMPANY  

1534 EAST LAKE  

NATURAL FOODS  
BREAD  

GRANOLA  

Battles Won  

"In a victory for what the Arlington (VA)  
Education Association terms ‘women's and men  
men's liberation.' AEA has negotiated one of  
the first contract provisions in the country  
to grant parental leave to male teachers."  

--MN Education News  

"Carrie Goetze, 12....will drive in the All  
American Soap Box Derby at Akron, Ohio. She  
is the first girl to win the Minnesota state  
championship, sponsored by the Greater Mpls.  
Chamber of Commerce and the Mpls. Jaycees.  
There will be six other girls among the 250  
champions competing." --Mpls. Star  

"Norm MacDonald walked to the center court  
at Minikahda Club Saturday afternoon and pre-  
sented a basket of flowers and a kiss to his  
opponent of the day, Jeanne Arth.  

"But his psychological ploy didn't prevent  
Miss (sic) Arth from winning what was billed  
as the 'Northwest Tennis Battle of the Cen-  
tury,’ otherwise called Man vs. Woman. A  
Wimbledon doubles champion with Darlene Hard  
in 1959, ...Arth calmly and smoothly wore  
down MacDonald 8-5 in their pro set."  

~-Mpls. Tribune  

"Another first is for Mary Bacon, one of the  
small but increasing number of female jockeys.  
She was fined $50 by stewards at New York's  
Aqueduct racetrack "for using foul and abus-  
ive language to admissions personnel." It  
seems Ms. Bacon tried to enter the paddock  
without showing her credentials, and the guard  
not recognizing her in mufti, wouldn't let her  
in.” --Family Circle  

Battles Lost  

"End the heartbreak and embarrassment of  
terrible coffee forever...And get back to the  
business of living happily ever after.  

Farberware" --Mpls. Tribune  
"Hi--I'm Barbara. I work for the Sales  
Dept. at Hull. Have you heard about our new  
Dynameltor injection molding machine? I've  
seen my boss, Ken Haywood, demonstrate it to  
customers, and they are really impressed!....  
Here comes Ken with another quote to type!  

I'll write you later if I may."  

"The Revolutionary Screw...Bring us your  
mold and find out firsthand what the revol-  
utionary screw can do for you!"  

(direct mail ad)  

& Hi Voltage Group  
A HIT SHOW FROM  
FOUNTAINBLEU, Miami  
THE LIVING ROOM, N.Y  
MR. KELLY’S, Chicago  

McGuires  
14 Mi. So, 694 at Lexington  
SHOWTIMES: Mon.-Fri. 8-10  

‘eaten’!  

p.m.  
Sat. 7:30-10:00-11:30  
488-6781