itorials

BY NANCY WHISKEY

Oppression is oppression is oppression

Once upon a time, women were told, among
other things:

1) You are stupid, not to be trusted with
anything more complex or important than the
nurturing and socializing of future adults.

2) You are unhappy because you are selfish,
not giving yourself completely to the needs
of your master/husband and children.

3) You are depressed because you are neur-
otic, not well adjusted -- go to a psychia-
trist!

4) You are a woman and must act as women
are supposed to act if you hope for anything
from life.

The conclusion is obvious -- women could
not talk of their problems to each other. To
do so would be to admit being selfish, neur-
otic and much more that wasn't quite compli-
mentary. (It's the old "divide and conquer"
game.)

Then one day, doubt began to creep into the
minds of women. They began to talk to one
another about their unhappiness. They broke
that unwritten law -- loyalty to their man --
and began to speak of little things about him
which they disliked. Some even managed to
share dissatisfaction with sex! -- although
of course they felt terribly guilty about
exposing their private life so completely.
They shared broken dreams of being doctors,
auto mechanics, airline pilots.

And the guilt of sharing disappeared when
they discovered others felt the same, and a
terrible anger replaced it -- this was not
a private problem but a political issue, to
be solved by group political action. At our

Caucus (continued from page 14)

restrict our coverage to the speeches given that
morning, we were beyond conversion. Paula
Page of the National Student Association gave
a terrific speech. Congresswoman Bella Abzug
wasn't bad and everyone else was. Lunch was
not included in the $10 conference fee.

An additional $16 got you lunch in a Hilton
tea room within belching distance of the
celebrities... We ate the turkey special around
the corner at a cafeteria with other bemused
conference participants who were wishing
they'd stayed in their hometowns and gone
fishing.

Sometime after that weekend I got a letter
on California Senator Mervyn Dymally's station-
ery from one Mari Goldman saying, "...it was a
pleasure to meet you at the recent National
Women's Political Caucus in Washington, albeit
briefly." Then there was some ladylike jive
about the Caucus, ending in "...all the parties
will listen to us next year and we shall elect
many more women to political office". She
signs this Mari. My Aunt Doris would say
she had beautiful handwriting. Underneath her
signature is her full name in capital letters
and underneath that her title--Executive
Assistant. Last on the page are the initials
Imc, her secretary maybe or Dymally's or maybe
a Kelly Girl brought in to type letters to all
300 of those other women Goldman didn't meet.

Another letter almost as wonderful as
Mari Goldman's arrived at the job office soliciting
support of Linda Jenness' campaign
for President of the United States as the
candidate of the Socialist Workers Party.

Her argument for herself was pretty dull.

The SWP was neither Republican nor Democratic
and therefore not responsible for all the

evils in America as were those others. She
ended with a terrific pitch for unity. As

the Dems are not at all democratic one doubted
if the SWP was so socialist or worker. Even
Richard Nixon was going to "bring us together".
In American politics consensus has always
meant somebody got sold out.

I wish I'd get on somebody's mailing list
who wants to make the nation safe for social
deviants.

At the present stage, we have the Minnesota Women's
Political Caucus, a group designed for women
to deal collectively with their oppression.
And we have speakers like Betty Friedan, who
applaud the coming out of women into the
political arena.

And yet we are far from free, for we have
been told other things:

1) You are a woman, and you will find sex-
ual fulfillment only with men.

2) You are depressed because you are neur-
otic, not well adjusted -- go to a psychia-
trist!

3) You are a woman and must act as women
are supposed to act if you hope for anything
from life.

Same conclusion -- women could not talk to
each other. In fact, they could not even
talk to themselves -- they could not admit
how much they loved the women they loved, or
how much they didn't love the men they loved.
(A friend of mine told me recently that she
could never be a lesbian because she really
likes men, and five minutes later, on a dif-
ferent subject, confided that she had never
enjoyed sex, that she just wasn't sensual!)

Then one day, doubt. Talk. Guilt. Shar-
ing. The height of disloyalty, to prefer
women to men sexually, as well as emotional-
ly?

And the guilt of sharing, and the guilt of
being different, disappeared when they dis-
covered others felt the same -- this was not
a private problem but a political issue, to
be solved by group political action.

Betty Friedan should applaud, not shout
down, the coming out of gay women into the
political arena. When confronted by gay
women, she should welcome the chance to ex-
pose their oppression. Does she hold a
stage to speak to the concerns of the people,
or does she hold it for her own ego gratifi-
cation?

Betty Friedan refused to speak to the con-
cerns of gay women. Therefore, I can only
conclude that she does not represent freedom
from oppression for women, but represents
only herself, her own ego. She is my oppres-
sor. To support her is to support her ego,
not the liberation of women. To support my
oppressor is to be my oppressor.

Re: The Disruption
(continued from page 13)

men? Feminists? Or the MWPC?

No. What it did do was give the news
media an excuse to dump on the feminist move-
ment, an invitation they were delighted to
accept. Also, a lot of women present were
antagonized by the disruption. One offered
a kind of resolution to censure the disrup-
ters later saying that her right to hear the
speaker had been abridged. And it had.

Incidentally, whatever Ms. Friedan's per-
sonal attitude, the NOW National Conference
in Los Angeles held in September 1971 passed
a very long and complete series of resolu-
tions speaking to every aspect of the gay
women's concerns. See the NOW Acts, Fall
issue.

Betty Friedan was in town for a weekend.
The Caucus and its members are here to stay.
Can't we as women (all of us) get together
and explore our problems in effective and

productive ways? BY SUE FROM