NEWS (CON’T FROM 6)

Whatever the views and abilities of the new appoint-
ees, EEOC is currently facing a key test; how to
respond to recession-caused layoffs which could wipe
out the gains made by women and minorities in the
labor force. The crux of the issue is interpretation
of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act, which upholds
"bona fide seniority systems" which are not “the re-
sult of intention to discriminate." Opinion is split,
however, on whether this provision covers seniority
systems whose effect is to lock in past discrimination
(With Seniority, if you are the last hired--as with
women and minorities--you are also the first fired.)

(See Women Installers, page 7.)
COURT SLAPS SEX ROLES

The U.S. Supreme Court ruled April 15 that states may
not set different ages of majority for men and women.
The majority opinion, written by Justice Blackmun,
rejected the arguments of Utah courts that the law
was reasonably designed to prepare the sexes for their
expected roles--longer dependency for males who need
to train themselves as family providers, shorter de-
pendency for girls who “tend to mature faster" and
marry earlier. Contending that the arguments lacked
a rational basis, the Court said, "No longer is the
female destined solely for the home and the rearing of
family, and only the male for the marketplace and the
world of ideas... if a specified age of majority
is required for the boy in order to assure him paren-
tal support while he attains his education and train-
ing, so, too, it is for the girl... if the female
is not to be supported so long as the male she can
hardly be expected to attend school as long as he
does, and bringing her education to an end earlier
coincides with the role-typing society has long
imposed." (Three cheers for Blackmun!)

HEW MARCHES --BACKWARD!

Local schools working to eliminate sex discrimination
can expect to get only half as much federal help as
schools working on race discrimination, according to
amended regulations proposed by the Department of
Health, Education, and Welfare (HEW) Office of Educa-
tion for implementation of Title IV of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964.

Jean Tully, president of the Legal Defense and Educa-
tion Fund of NOW, urged equal expenditure and atten-
tion for efforts to eliminate sex discrimination.

“I am shocked to discover," she said, "that HEW takes
the view that discrimination on the basis of sex is
only half as invidious as other forms of discrimina-
tion. So far as we are concerned, all forms of dis-
crimination are equally detrimental to those people
involved and should be so viewed by the federal
government.”

(In the April 15 issue of Spokeswoman, regarding HEW
and Title IX enforcement in public schools, their
new guidelines actually encourage inaction on the
part of the schools. "The regulations provide no
guidelines on the composition or operation of griev-
ance machinery and set no time limits on the process,
and HEW will not act on any complaints until such
internal grievance procedures are completed. In
other words, the schools and colleges which are en-
trenched in sexism and deal it out daily to their
students may take their sweet time in eliminating
sexism, if they do it at all.” Women are encouraged
to write President Ford and their congressional rep-
resentatives to protest the final draft of Title IX.
If it passes intact, our younger sisters will face
the same thing all of us faced in public education.)

«>»

game preserve —
marriage is an attempt to
pickle ourselves

— alta

quickies

A woman in her regular clothes was told by a land-
lord, "We don't accept welfare mothers." When she
got dressed up and went back to the same place, he
said, "We don't want any hookers.” So testified
Emily Goodman during the hearings on sex discrimina-
tion in housing. Many women do not know whom to
contact if they are victims of discrimination in
housing. Contact the Human Rights Commission.

(Good luck.)

Majority Report, May, 1975.

The (Supreme Court) recently upheld a decision by the
Fourth Circuit that Prince William County Hospital in
Manassas, Virginia violated the Equal Pay Act by
maintaining different wage scales for male orderlies
and female nurses' aides. The County argued that the
work was not identical; the justices held that if the
courts "defer to overly nice distinctions in job con-
tent, employers may evade the Act at will.” The hos-
pital must eliminate the dual wage scale and pay more
than $23,000 in back salary to nurses’ aides. (Same
thing happened at Hennepin County General!)
Spokeswoman, May 15, 1975

Senators Edward Kennedy and Richard Schweiker have
introduced a measure banning the use of DES in animal
feeding and halting its use as a morning after pill,
for one year pending the accumulation of additional
safety and effectiveness data. According to a UPI
report, HEW Secretary Casper Weinberger (no friend to
women, if you are familiar with his decisions!) has
indicated that the Ford Administration would not op-
pose outlawing DES in cattle feed, but said that the
proposed one-year moratorium on the morning after pill
is "quite another story.” Spokeswoman, May 15, 1975

The Metropolitan Opera will have its first woman
conductor next season. Highly-acclaimed Sarah Cald-
well, founder and director of the Opera Company of
Boston, will conduct eleven performances of "La Travi-
ata" at the Met in 1976. (Now let's hear it for
Antonia Brico!) Spokeswoman, May 15, 1975

The Minnesota House defeated legislation Thursday
which would have brought homosexuals under coverage
of the State Human Rights Act. The legislation was
modeled after ordinances in effect in Minneapolis and
St. Paul which bar discrimination against gays in
employment and housing.

Rep. John Tomlinson, DFL-St. Paul, said the move was
"an insult to gay teachers to say they are unfit to
teach school."

"I know of a teacher who was arrested for fooling
around with the boys at the beach," said Rep. Norman
Prahl, DFL-Grand Rapids. Rep. John Clawson, DFL-
Center City, replied, "I know of some male teachers
who were dismissed for fooling around with the girls.”

Minneapolis Tribune, Fri., May 9, 1975

PE SUININEFSPOrtS

Blueberry popsicle skies are abounding. It is time
for our woman bodies to join together to frolic in
the fields and greet the sun! The Woman's School will
be offering classes in SOFTBALL, VOLLEYBALL, TENNIS, 
AND BASKETBALL. Skills will be offered as we enjoy.
Cost of classes is $7; SWIMMING is $11 due to pool
rental fees. $1 will go toward reliable childcare.

Come and play and register at the Picnic Potluck at
1:00 p.m., June 15, Powderhorn Picnic Area. Bring a
treat and share a rainbow. (The Woman's School, a
project of the Twin Cities Women's Union, is located
at 2953 Bloomington Avenue S.)

PPPFEPVSCPSSSSSSG