12  
Southern Woman Faces Death  

Penalty For Fighting Back  

My Dear Friend,  

Twenty-year-old Joanne Little may be put to death because she defended  
herself against the jail guard who tried to rape her.  

The Southern Poverty Law Center is marshaling its resources to aid her  
defense against the charge of first degree murder, which carries a mandatory death  
sentence in North Carolina. That state has already sent 69 people to death row—the  
highest total in the nation—and they are rushing to make Joanne number 70.  

Her trial begins in a matter of weeks and Joanne desperately needs help  
now—both yours and mine. I think you will agree her story is one of the most  
shocking and outrageous examples of injustice against women on record.  

Early in the morning on August 27, 1974, Joanne was sleeping in a cell at the  
Beaufort County, North Carolina, jail. She had been there three months awaiting  
action on her appeal of a breaking and entering conviction.  

Joanne, who is black, was the only person in the cell block, and she was guarded  
solely by white male jailers. Clarence Alligood, a 62-year-old farmer and former  
truck driver, was in charge that night.  

Women who have stayed in that jail have said Alligood and others made  
advances to them. Witnesses will also testify he kept an ice pick in his desk drawer.  

With his ice pick in hand, Alligood approached and entered Joanne’s cell, where  
he began his sexual attack. Joanne is a quiet, even a shy person, but centuries of  
repression and abuse against black women must have welled up inside her that  
night. Although she stands only 5’3” tall, she fought him off with all her strength.  

During the struggle, Joanne stabbed Alligood numerous times with his ice pick.  
In a blur of fear and confusion, she then fled from the jail.  

This was just the beginning of Joanne's ordeal.  

Her flight from Alligood's wrath soon turned into what she feared was a run for  
her life when she learned that Alligood, found nude from the waist down, had died  
in her cell.  

Fortunately a stranger agreed to hide her in his tiny, two-room shack. Several  
times the police searched the shack with their shotguns at the ready. They never  
found Joanne, who hid beneath an old-fashioned feather mattress. One policeman  
nearly suffocated her when he sat on the bed for half an hour and questioned the  
stranger about Joanne’s whereabouts.  

Joanne was afraid the police would kill her, and after this harrowing series of  
narrow escapes she decided to give herself up. Through a friend, she contacted  
Durham attorney Jerry Paul, whose elaborate precautions helped ensure her safe  
surrender a week later to the State Bureau of Investigation.  

She turned herself in just in time.  

Efforts were underway to have her legally declared an outlaw. North Carolina is  
the only state in the Union which still has such a procedure. It amounts to an instant  
sentence of death without benefit of trial because ANYONE may shoot an outlaw  
on sight.  

Can Joanne Little Get A Fair Trial?  

I am totally convinced that Joanne Little is telling the truth about what  
happened that night. All the facts bear out her story, yet she has incredibly been  
indicted for first degree murder. Several things have already worked against her  
and may continue to do so—  

1. Local North Carolina newspapers at first failed to inform their readers that  
the jailer was found naked from the waist down and that there was clear evidence of  
sexual activity. Editorials appeared honoring the jailer for “dying in the line of  
duty,” thus further prejudicing their readers against Joanne.  

2. The state medical examiner was prepared to support Joanne’s story from his  
observation of the evidence, but he was not allowed to testify before the grand jury  
which indicted her.  

3. Joanne is to be tried in Beaufort County. The jury will be selected from people  
living in neighboring counties—a statutory requirement which is being challenged  
as unconstitutional. Pitifully few black people of either sex are called to serve on  
juries in these counties. This could badly hurt Joanne, who lives in a region where  
many white people hold the worst sort of prejudices against black women.  

4. Joanne is indigent and funds have been requested to hire a criminologist to  
investigate her case, but the state refuses to provide her with the money. A  
criminologist will cost thousands of dollars, and the testimony of such an expert is  
crucial to the outcome of her trial.  

5. Vital evidence, such as the jailer's clothing, has been scattered among various  
law enforcement agencies, making it extremely difficult for defense attorneys to  
locate and have this material examined. Requests that the evidence be kept safely  
in one place have been denied.  

Human Life And Human Rights At Stake  

Our first goal is to save Joanne's life. In the process her trial will bring to light a  
number of extremely important issues.  

The very right of a woman to defend herself against sexual attack is at stake,  
prison conditions for women is another key point. Evidence is growing that sexual  
abuse of women inmates is a national disgrace.  

In many local jails, male guards and even male trustees have exclusive control  
over the women held as prisoners. Special treatment or extra privileges have been  
offered in return for sex. Brute force, as in Joanne's case, is another method.  

The discriminatory use of the death penalty against poor people and  
blacks...selection processes which fail to produce juries of true peers...the right of a  
poor person to an adequate defense...all these issues will be brought together at  
Joanne Little's trial.  

Your Help Is Needed Now  

I have committed the Center to seeing that Joanne receives the best defense  
possible. She has two of the finest attorneys in the South, Jerry Paul and Karen  
Galloway, who are working without fee. But the Center’s commitment will mean  
nothing and Joanne's chances for a “not guilty” verdict will be seriously diminished  
without your support.  

The Center is dedicated to achieving justice for the poor, and we never take a  
fee from those we help. Only the contributions of people such as yourself have made  
it possible for us to achieve landmark victories in the areas of equal employment  
opportunity, education, health care and many other areas vital to the well-being of  
America’s poor.  

THE NEW YORK TIMES, SUNDAY, DECEMBER 1, 1974  

Killing of Carolina Jailer, Charged to Woman,  
Raises Question of Abuse of Inmates  

By WAYNE KING  
Special to The New York Times  

RALEIGH, N.C.—The icepick  
slaying of Clarence Alligood,  
the 62-year-old night jailer at  
the Beaufort County jail, might  
have appeared a simple case of  
murder and escape by a woman  
inmate except for what one law  
enforcement official termed  
“the peculiarities in the way he  
was dressed.”  

Mr. Alligood had been stabbed  
11 times with an icepick he  
kept in a desk drawer; the fatal  
wound was in his heart. Missing  
from her cell, where the  
jailer was found dead last  
August, was 20-year-old Joanne  
Little, a black woman who had  
been held in the jail for three  
months pending an appeal of  
her conviction on a charge of  
breaking and entering and bur-  
glary.  
Subsequent disclosures in a  
medical examiner’s report, how-  
ever, and Miss Little’s giving  
herself up and pleading self-  
defense, have turned the case  
into something far more com-  
plex, raising allegations about  
what goes on in small-town jails  
and stirring demands for a  
Federal inquiry.  

Dr. Harry M. Carpenter, the  
Beaufort County medical exam-  
iner, said in his autopsy report  
that the jailer had been found  
slumped over near the foot of  
the cell cot, his feet on the  
floor.  

Shoes Found in Hall  

“His shoes,” the report con-  
tinued, “were in the corridor,  
his socks on his feet. He was  
otherwise naked from the waist  
down.”  

In one hand, Dr. Carpenter  
reported, the jailer held his  
trousers and the other he  
clutched the icepick. Beneath  
the body was a woman's ker-  
chief.  

Finally, the medical examiner  
reported clear evidence of re-  
cent sexual activity by the  
jailer. A nightgown was on the cell  
floor and a nightjacket was  
banging on the cell door.  

The body was found in the  
early morning hours Aug. 27.  
On Sept. 4, Miss Little, sought  
around the country, gave her-  
self up to the director of the  
State Bureau of Investigation.  

Despite the overtones of the  
case, Miss Little on Sept. 11  
was indicted for first-degree  
murder by a grand jury in  
Beaufort County. Conviction on  
the charge carries a mandatory  
death penalty in North Caro-  
lina, which now has more than  
60 persons on death row, the  
highest number in the nation.  

Karen Galloway, an attorney  
for Miss Little, said that her  
client would state only that the  
slaying was self-defense.  

The case, like that of Inez  
Garcia, the California woman  
who has contended her slaying  
of a man who allegedly helped  
rape her was justified, has be-  
come a cause célèbre among  
women's and civil rights  
groups but has attracted only  
slight national attention.  

At the moment, the murder  
trial of Miss Little is continued  
indefinitely pending higher  
court action on an appeal of  
the judge’s ruling denying Miss  
Little a change of the trial lo-  
cation to outside the Beaufort  
County area.  

Also under appeal is the de-  
nial of a defense request for  
$20,000 to pay an investigator  
to look into the allegations that  
other inmates had been sub-  
jected to sexual abuse in jails  
and to hire a criminologist to  
reconstruct the stabbing inci-  
dent itself.  

Miss Little remains in the  
correctional facility here under  
bond of $100,000.  

As I stated earlier, just the cost of hiring a criminologist for Joanne’s defense  
will run into thousands of dollars. Our involvement in other important cases is  
placing a strain on our funds. In fact, Center attorneys first learned of Joanne’s  
plight when they recently went before the North Carolina Supreme Court to appeal  
the death sentences imposed on three young black men.  

I realize giving isn't easy for many people these days, but I cannot allow myself  
to be ashamed to ask for your help.  

This nation and its system of justice will be far poorer if Joanne Little is  
convicted and sentenced to death. I ask you to join me now and stand beside Joanne  
in her hour of trial and need.  

Please send your contribution today. I'll keep you informed of our progress.  
Joanne’s trial is only a few weeks away. If you plan to give, then please answer my  
letter now before it is too late.  

Most sincerely,  

Julian Bond  

Please send contributions to Julian Bond, THE SOUTHERN POVERTY LAW  
CENTER, 119 South McDonough, Montgomery, Alabama 36101. Because we are a  
nonprofit organization, your donation is tax deductible. Please make your check  
payable to The Southern Poverty Law Center.  

If for any reason you receive more than one copy of this letter, please pass it along  
to a friend.