sex discrimination, Continued from page

Having started on an unhappy note, I found  
that my job was a source of pain from the  
first day.  

I should note factors that made this most  
recent job different from others I have  
held:  

--I had begun to take a serious  
interest in feminism: Know-  
ledge of exploitation brings  
pain.  

--I was working for a private corp-  
oration. Previously I had either  
worked for a newspaper (a pri-  
vate corporation masquerading  
as citizens' advocate) or a  
university where certain degrees  
of nonconformity are tolerated,  
even applauded.  

--I was now working in an atmosphere  
of such stifling conformity that  
nothing I'd ever read, heard of or  
had nightmares about prepared me  
for the reality of it.  

Wonderland  

For seven months, I performed my duties.  
There was a mad, Hieronymous Bosch quality  
to my days. Males high and low in the corp-  
oration were feuding for reasons I could  
not fathom. (I am neither naive nor unin-  
telligent but to this day I cannot divine  
the motivation for the excess of savage com-  
petition and hateful behavior displayed by  
these men.) I, mindful of my debts and sec-  
retly ashamed of my cowardice in not quit-  
ting the job, struggled--swimming in the  
murky waters of departmental rivalry and  
I was tagged "efficient”  
- That is, I was competent and,  
to my shame, willing to tolerate brutal rudeness  
and stupidity that made my teeth ache.  

Unfortunately, too, I could take little sol-  
ace in the work I produced. I had not ex-  
pected the job to be absorbing, but I had  
hoped to be allowed to perform as a compe-  
tent writer/editor. This was not to be.  

The program became a "political football”  
(as do all projects in such a structure)  
and after many "reviews" and constipated con-  
ferences, I would have left the shards of my  
work--a program that said little and deeply  
embarrassed me.  

“Pig and Pepper”  

After seven months, however, I was transfer-  
red to the communications department. My  
transfer was by fiat of a high executive who  
had decided she liked me. I was happy to  
comply, as the education department was un-  
dergoing a "shakeup" that resulted in an at-  
mosphere just this side of the Gaza Strip. I  
also had a choice between two male supervi-  
sors--whether I stayed or transferred--men  
who I knew were no friends of women.  

I cast the die and chose the one I felt would  
be less obnoxious.  

The communications department was a male  
bastion. I was never welcomed in any way.  
And as time passed, I was very glad for  
that. It made my course uncomplicated. In-  
itially, of course, my silent isolation was  
difficult. I had always been in an atmos-  
phere where at least 50% of my peers liked  
me. Men who work in academia or "quasi-  
creative" occupations seemed better able to  
disguise their prejudices. Or, perhaps I  
had started to view males with a cold eye  
and they reciprocated.  

The move seemed providential, despite the  
cool reception. My new supervisor left me  
entirely alone to work as I saw fit. I  

was pleased and chose to regard this free-  
dom as a permanent state. (Alas, innocence).  

continued on page  

Rules of the Game  

If you feel you have just cause to file a  
sex or race discrimination charge against  
your employer with the Minnesota State Hum-  
an Rights Department (or your state's count-  
erpart):  

1. CONTACT AN ATTORNEY AT ONCE  
She can give you valuable  
information and advice about  
filing the charge. She can also  
accompany you to the Department.  

Tell NO ONE connected with your  
employer that you contemplate  
filing a charge. You argue  
from a position of strength if  
you are an employee in good  
standing when the charge is  
served.  

Make a careful judgment as to  
whether your employer discrim-  
inates both on the bases of  
race and sex. If this is the  
case, talk with your attorney  
about joining race and sex dis-  
crimination in your charge. One  
of the saddest aspects of minor-  
ity struggles for justice is the  
white male's cunning attempts  
to set us at each other's throats.  

Resist the impulse to confide in  
male co-workers at any time.  
There are many sensitive men, but  
my experience tells me they are  
not yet ready to be involved  
in women's liberation.  

It is now Minnesota law that the  
State Department of Human Rights  
must conclude its investigation  
of your charge within 90 days of  
your filing. (The 90-day limit  
does not include "conciliation"  
and/or appeal time, however.)  

POSS