AIR VIBES

NEW STERILIZATION STUDY CALLED  
A CRIME AGAINST HUMANITY  

A team of doctors in Denver and Guatemala  
City have developed a new method of sterili-  
zation through experiments on women which  
will be listed as "a crime against humanity"  
at the Bertrand Russell Tribunal, according  
to a story by Gloria Jacobs in the September  
5 issue of Majority Report.  

The report aimed to show that “introduction  
of an inflammatory agent into the fallopian  
tubes" could provide an "ideal form of  
sterilization". The agent is paraformalde-  
hyde, a harsh chemical commonly used in em-  
balming fluid. Small amounts are formed  
naturally in the body, where they are conver-  
ted to carbon monoxide and expelled through  
the lungs. As carbon monoxide plays a key  
role in respiration, changing blood levels  
may be expected to affect respiratory  
function.  

After testing six monkeys, one of whom died  
of chronic tuberculosis, women were used as  
guinea pigs. Twelve women who were injected  
with paraformaldehyde (5mm in each fallopian  
tube) then had their uterus and tubes sur-  
gically removed and examined. Of the twelve,  
one woman suffered a "moderate bronchial  
spasm" after her veins were injected acci-  
dentally rather than her fallopian tubes.  
But "no deaths were reported."  

The paraformaldehyde proposal, which was  
challenged before the Bucharest Population  
Conference by a group of New York feminists,  
raises some disturbing questions. Testing  
poor, third-world women opens the procedure  
to the charge of racism; certainly, the  
insensitive brutality of the method opens  
it to the charge of sexism. The published  
data on monkeys seems slight to support  
human testing. Population control is a  
serious issue, but one which will collide  
with the right of women to control their  
bodies if funds and research continue to  
concentrate on cheap, fast, effective ways  
to erase women's reproductive function.  

(*Note from GF--vasectomy is still the  
safest, cheapest, easiest way to sterility!)  

Sitters and Minimum Wage: The Wage and Hour  
Division of the U.S. Dept. of Labor has  
issued proposed regulations for employment  
of domestic workers, who are now covered by  
minimum wage. Federal minimum wage protec-  
tion was extended to household workers under  
the new Fair Labor Standards Act passed in  
April, 1974. Under the act, domestics who  
work more than eight hours per week or fifty  
hours per quarter (for one or more employers)  
must be paid at least $1.90/hour now; $2.00/  
hour beginning January, 1975; $2.20/hour be-  
ginning January, 1976 and $2.30 beginning  
January 1977.  

Babysitters who work on other than a casual  
basis are not exempt from the minimum wage.  
Employees who babysit on a regular and recur-  
ring basis for more than twenty hours per  
week are covered by the act, as are sitters  
who spend more than 20% of their time doing  
household work while babysitting (even if  
they work fewer than twenty hours per week).  
Babysitters who take care of children in  
their own homes, however, rather than in the  
employer's home, are not covered by minimum  
wage requirements.  

CREDIT, HOUSING, EDUCATION.  

Equality for women in housing now has the  
force of federal law. Title VIII now covers  
discrimination based on sex as well as race,  
in almost all areas of marketing housing--  

Women are urged to file charges of discrim-  
ination with HUD and to take advantage of  
their toll free 24-hour "hot-line" to  
record complaints. No. is 800-424-8590.  

Women who are discriminated against in credit  
transactions now have the force of federal  
law behind them in their fight. An amend-  
ment to the Depository Institutions Amend-  
ment Act forbids discrimination on the basis  
of sex or marital status in the granting of  
all kinds of consumer credit--both commercial  
and personal. Provisions of the amendment  
“become effective one year after signature  
by President Ford (expected shortly). Fed-  
eral Reserve Board guidelines will be re-  
leased about mid-February. Women are urged  
to comment on them and pass the word to  
other women that credit discrimination is  
now illegal.  

The Women's Educational Equity Act, signed  
into law in September, authorizes the Dept.  
of Health, Education, and Welfare (HEW) to  
make grants for the development of non-  
sexist curricula and tests, new methods for  
training educational personnel, non-discrim-  
inatory techniques for career and vocational  
counseling and guidance and women's studies  
centers and programs. The $30 million  
annual budget is considered excessive by  
Mr. Ford, and it may take some pressure on  
congressional representatives to make sure  
this budget is allocated. Refer to ESFA  
Title IV.  

SENATE VOTES SWEEPING BAN ON ABORTION FUNDS--  

The U.S. Senate took a giant step backward  
September 17 and approved a total ban on the  
use of any funds allotted to the U.S. De-  
partment of Labor and Health, Education and  
Welfare (HEW) "to pay for or encourage"  
abortion--except in the rare cases where the  
operation is necessary to save the life of  
the mother. If the anti-abortion amendment  
remains in the final version of the bill, it  
will affect dozens of federal programs, in-  
cluding Medicaid. Prohibiting the use of  
Medicaid funds for abortion effectively  
denies the abortion rights of poor women.  

(*Note from GF--time to get back to your pen  
and ink again and write your representatives.  
Refer to the Bartlett Amendment. Sigh--it  
seems we spend most of our free time writing  
our male legislators pleading for them to  
legislate and regulate our lives in our  
favor!)  

SUCCESSFUL LAW SUITS--  

American Tobacco: The American Tobacco Co.  
Has been found guilty of sex and race dis-  
crimination and ordered by the U.S. District  
Court to freeze hiring and promotion of  
white male supervisors and allow blacks and  
women to displace white male employees with  
less seniority in higher job classifications.  

News from The Spokeswoman (Oct., Nov.,  
published at 54 South Shore Drive, Chicago,  
60615, $9.00 per year.)