10

Chippie

By K/T

“Hey, baby, break it up:  
I said break it UP!"

Pushing aside people gathered around the two women, B.D. grabbed Katie's arms, restraining her from lashing out again at Linda.

"Break it up," she repeated, quieter this time, holding Katie a few moments longer while Linda and her friends left the bar. Assured that the fight was over, for now anyway, B.D. gently patted the crying Katie on the shoulder and left her with another woman.

And Katie's cries of "But I LOVED that woman: I LOVED HER!" were nonchalantly accepted by the Saturday night crowd as a common reaction to another broken affair. It happened every week. Women might be different. But there were always broken affairs, jealous lovers, and an occasional fight.

And B.D., or "Big Daddy," knew how to handle just about anything that might happen. She'd been bartending at the Seafish Lounge for the past twelve years and commanded the respect of everyone who frequented it.

"Hey babe! How ya' doing tonight?" she yelled to a group of women who had just noisily entered. All loudly greeted B.D. as they searched for other familiar faces in the dimly-lit room.

One of them slowly made her way through the women standing and sitting around the bar to finally reach a seat in the corner that seemed to be waiting for her.

She was about thirty years old and carried herself with a quiet assurance.

Pausing briefly from mixing drinks, B.D. looked up, then leaned over the counter to kiss her lightly on the lips with a "Hi, babe."

Both talked to each other a few seconds before B.D. continued to make drinks for the ever-increasing number of women coming in.

Earlier that night somebody had asked her if she was in love. She replied with a very negative shake of her head, and noncommittedly added: "She's growing on me, though." B.D.'s most recent affair with Pat had been going on for just two weeks.

Now Pat observed B.D. as she performed behind the bar. "She's beautiful people," said those who knew B.D., and Pat's eyes reflected that thought as she watched her.

B.D. was at her best tonight... Saturday nights, the busiest nights, always seemed to bring out whatever it was that made her friends comment: "B.D., you're cool." She never forgot a name of anyone who came in, never forgot what they drank, and never forgot to greet anyone with a grin, or a "Hi, babe, how ya' doing?"

Saturday nights were B.D.'s most interesting and wild nights. They were the nights she drank the most, danced the most, smoked the most, and laughed the most. She was laughing now, as she sang along with a song blaring from the jukebox.

Head thrown back, hands cupped under her large, firm breasts, B.D. was singing: "Babe, I do the BEST THAT I CAN!" in a laughing, infectious voice that captured the attention of everyone in the bar. As the song ended, B.D. laughingly accepted the loud, good-natured applause given her by the women who shared and acknowledged the meanings of B.D.'s gestures.

At 2:00 A.M., ten minutes from now, B.D. got off work, and she began to turn the bar over to Sue, who worked the morning shift. Actually, the name “Big Daddy" was a name given B.D. as a joke. She was only 4'10" tall.

But with B.D.'s short haircut, and tough, firm stockiness, the name fit.

Having given last directions to Sue, B.D. handed Pat her purse, took her own billfold, briskly combed her hair, and walked from her place behind the bar to sit and relax beside Pat before walking to Sally's, another bar only a block away.

B.D. liked certain things at Sally's that the Seafish didn't provide: the pool table, the bowling machine, her favorite song "Amber Light." Most of B.D.'s friends spent Saturday nights walking from Sally's to the Seafish, from the Seafish to Sally's.

"Ready to go?" B.D. asked Pat, as she put out her cigarette, and glanced questioningly at her. Pat nodded. B.D. led the way to the door, yelled her good night to everyone and Pat followed her out.

"Amber Light" was playing as they walked into Sally's. B.D. took Pat's hand, led her to an open place on the floor, and started dancing. One hand encircled Pat's shoulder, the other held Pat's hand closely to her breast. The slow strains of "Amber Light" enveloped B.D. and Pat and seemed to soften and warm Sally's sinister, dark, and smoke-filled atmosphere.

Bells from both the pinball and bowling machines, pool balls cracking sharply against one another, a marijuana scent filtering from the women's bathroom, ice clanking against the sides of glasses, murmurs, cries, laughs from liquor-perfumed breath—all were sounds and smells that filled and pervaded the room every Saturday night.

As "Amber Light" ended, B.D. and Pat walked to the counter, ordered drinks, and began their “weekend drinking." "Rock 'n Swing" vibrated through the air now—a fast, hard tune—keeping them awake, moving, drinking, until later, much later in the morning, when they would finally leave the bars and go home to recover from their Saturday night drunken activeness.

(continued on page 11)