WOMEN & MEN

(DO WE NEED
EACH OTHER?)

How is it that men and women so seldom need each
other in the same or at least complementary ways?

In a discussion of our friendship, a male friend
said that he couldn't think of any needs he had vis a'
vis me and, in fact, didn't feel he needed much of any-
thing. That statement not only floored me but led me to
tie together a lot of threads on the theme of "How do I
need you? Let me count the ways."

Some sort of equality of need seems to me to be a
good thing in a relationship between adults. My most
satisfying and secure friendships or love relationships
have been those in which I felt sure that we each
needed the other in mutually acceptable ways. It can be
dissatisfying and eventually degrading for one person to
be the perpetual "needer" and another the perpetual
“giver” in a relationship.

The statement, "I don’t need much of anything" out-
lines a conventional ravine between men and women. We
are raised so differently that when we want to love each
other as adults we don’t even speak the same language.

One painful discovery by women that need divides the
sexes is reflected in Alix Kates Shulman's MEMOIRS OF AN
EX-PROM QUEEN, "Baybury boys are taught it is weak to
need a woman, as girls are taught it is their strength to
demand." (p. 293) Once the man is won, the woman's
“strength” is gone; the man, never dependent on her for
sustenance anyway, continues being "strong."

Phyllis Chesler's book, WOMEN AND MADNESS, discusses
this same arena of need but pinpoints the conflict between
a woman's search for one man and man's search for women.

It is not that women ‘need' men more
than men 'need' women; on the contrary,
men need women very much, but as rel-
atively interchangeable servants.

Women are conditioned to 'need' one
man as ‘irreplaceable.' (p. 291)
From this difference rises the feminine question,
"Wouldn't anyone else do as well? What difference does it make to you?"

THE “NEEDY” ROLE

Several recent incidents have added to my insights on
needs. A friend described to me her frustration in a
deteriorating relationship with a man. "The only way I
can get him to spend enough time with me to discuss our
relationship is to create a crisis; i.e., to say that I'm
going to end the relationship.”

My friend described her feeling that it is always her
job to ask that a problem or confused issue be talked about.

This system of her playing the "needy" role in simple
terms of "I need to talk with you about this,” or "I need
to get this settled," communicates to her the impression
that her anger or hurt are so insignificant that they're
only worth dealing with if she creates a scene over them.
Thus, the "needer" is continually reinforced in feeling
that she is overly needy, over-reacting, and weak: unable
to withstand the tensions the man seems to find so livable.

I might also testify that in several years of
relating to men as brothers, friends, lovers, husbands,
housemates, I have rarely been addressed by a male in
terms of "I need to talk with you," let alone "I
need (anything)!" Needless to say, many, many women HAVE
expressed a simple need to see or talk to me. I do
realize that need is too complex an issue to boil down to
simple conversation, but isn't it in the ordinary life
situations that men and women conflict?

I remember a college friend saying that every few
months she'd bring up to her lover questions about "the
state of the relationship," simply so that she'd know
where they stood. Why the woman? I think Florida Scott
Maxwell, author of WOMEN AND SOMETIMES MEN, would answer
that it is a social expectation in M/F relations
that women will be the heart, the guardian of the relationship.
This is the role of emotional nurturance which
women fall into so easily.

THE COMPASSION TRAP

In what other ways besides women feeling lousy about
themselves, does this M/F need inequity show itself?
First, I think it shows itself in the "compassion trap"
which Chesler describes in WOMEN AND MADNESS. If we
have all our lives observed that men don't really need us,
of course we'll jump at the chance to assume needs for
men, expend compassion as the women Chesler inter-
viewed did, even to the male therapists who used them
sexually and economically. The “needy man" is instantly
attractive because he is suddenly more human, more like-
than unlike us, for once!

Need inequity perhaps explains why American literary
heroines have the reputation for loving men who are
blinded, crippled, or in some way mentally or physically
handicapped. Hester Prynne's love for poor Dimmesdale
is a prototype of the "compassion trap" relationship.
This theme in literature says to me not that women want to
castrate men but that women can be satisfied with relation-
ships in which the male clearly needs the female. Chesler
makes a very interesting statement about this:

Women are so trained to ‘need' a man
that even male ‘losers' can find some
woman to take care of them, certainly
far more easily than female 'winners’
can find men or women to care for
them. (p. 291)
The further dimension Chesler suggests here is that the
female 'winner' is such a social anomaly that she finds
it very difficult to find an adequate partner. What if
she needed him as little as he needed her?

SEDUCTION GAMES

Seduction games are built on male knowledge of the
female need to be needed. The familiar line, "Help me--
I'm afraid of women," or even "My wife doesn't understand
me," thrive on the need issue. These two lines also
give the woman in question the opportunity to "rise above”
those "other women” who "frightened" him or "failed to
understand” him. It's called divide and conquer.

AND THE FUTURE...

My point is not that women should develop
super-strong personalities without needs, nor that
we should dictate terms of humanness by which some
males or some females are excluded from personhood
because they are emotionally self-sufficient.

What I am suggesting is a new ethic regarding
need--a very cautious approach on the part of women
in need relationships. I think we should make
greater efforts to find out exactly in what ways
people need each other and be sure that we aren't
discouraging men from human growth by doing the emo-
tional shitwork of our relationships. In practical
terms, I should have challenged my friend's asser-
tion that he needed nothing!

I also think women can profit from learning
one of the ways in which we come to think less of
ourselves within a relationship. The knowledge
alone does not give us ultimate power but does pro-
vide us with a tool for change.

We can't plant needs in other people, nor make
the weak strong by grafting. But we can hope that
if we understand ourselves better we will be better
able to tell others who we are--and what we need.