Minnesota Women’s Political Caucus  
Annual Convention  

Feb. 1 at Hamline Univ. Student Center  
members $3 non-members $4  

Keynote Address by Joan Growe, 9 am  
Workshops: Gay Rights, Abortion, Child Care Legislation, Election '76; Hennepin and Ramsey County Caucuses - annual meetings and elections. Bring a bag lunch, fruit and refreshments for sale. A $2.50 wine and cheese and “munchies” fundraiser follows the convention, from 5:30 to 7:30 pm.  

For further info call: 331-5285  

%  

v  

Twin Cities Women’s Union  

Below is the list of courses for our Winter/Spring session. Please contact the Union at 729-6200 if you would like to receive the School brochure or the Union newsletter, Still Ain’t Satisfied. We'll help you make special arrangements for childcare or payment if lack of babysitters or dollars are problems for you. To find out more about the School, meet the women who will be convening classes and register, please join us on Sunday, Feb. 23, 4 pm at Chrysalis, 2104 Stevens Ave. S., Minneapolis.  

Women’s School Classes  

AFDC in Minneapolis  

Alternative Birth Styles  

Art | Figure Drawing |  

Chinese Brush Painting  

Elementary Electronics  

Susan B. Anthony Birthday Celebration  

Feminist Issues for High School Women  

Feminist Publications sponsored by NOW  

Fix-it Class  

Graphics Workshop Feb. 15, 1975 - 7:30 pm 96 Clarence Ave. SE, Minneapolis  
Group Dynamics and Leadership Skills  
Book Sale: Entertainment: Refreshments - Sisterhood  
Karate [includes a special class for children which will meet at same time]  

Lesbian Health Issues  

Music Collective  

Emma Willard Birthday Party  

Photography (class for women who already have basic skills)  

Puppet Workshop Luther Hall - 1813 University Ave. SE  

Quilting Sunday, Feb. 28 (Emma Willard’s birth date) 2 - 5:30 pm  
Spanish With a Political Emphasis  
Socialist-Feminism  

Video  

Vocal Music Class  

Women and Employment Problems  
Women and the Law  

Women in Minnesota History  
Women in Revolutionary Movements  
Women Poets  

Women’s Theatre Workshops  

Yoga for Women  

*Grand opening of Sex and Family Role Resource Library  
*Film Room: Continuous showings include “Dick and Jane as Victims”  
*Grand Auction of trophies and relics of the Struggle!  

Birthday cake and refreshments