SOCIALIST—FEMINIST CONFERENCE

Dayton, Ohio--All around the country women are organ-
izing to change their lives: women are beginning
childcare centers, fighting for abortion, organizing
unions, creating a new culture. At a national con-
ference on socialist/feminism, July 4-6, hundreds of
women will come together to discuss this work.

The conference planners, representatives of about
ten socialist/feminist organizations throughout the
country, expect from 300-600 women to participate.
The goal of this Socialist/Feminist Conference will
be not only to share local experiences and organizing
practice but also to discuss how women integrate
socialism and feminism to challenge institutions and
effect radical social change.

"The weekend is designed to be a working conference,"
report the conference planners. "Women will have the
opportunity to discuss theory and strategy as it
applies to their organizing work.”

There are four major components of the conference:

1) Theoretical presentations in meetings of the whole.

2) Strategic workshops on workplace organizing,
community organizing, and building the socialist/
feminist movement.

3) Skill-sharing workshops on specific interest and
issue areas, and

4) Women's culture activities to share fun and
joyousness.

In the context of expanding numbers of women's unions
and organizing practice, there has emerged a sharpened
awareness of the need to develop a political
framework which synthesizes our needs as women with
the critique of capitalism and imperialism we make as
feminists and as revolutionaries. The conference is
seen as a means of further developing these politics
and strengthening the organizing work that is their
ongoing practice.

The planning committee welcomes women organizers,
activists and interested feminists who want to dis-
cuss their work and concerns within the context of
the following principles of unity:

ANAZ(O
BOOKSTORE

doll? HENNEPIN

We recognize the necessity of the autonomous
women's movement throughout the revolutionary
process.

We agree that all oppression--whether based on
race, class, sex, or sexual preference--is inter-
related and that fights for liberation from op-
pression must be simultaneous and cooperative.

3. We agree that socialist/feminism is a strategy
for revolution.

The conference will be held at Antioch College, in
Yellow Springs, Ohio. Conference planners encourage
early registration; facilities are limited.

Suggested Reading List:

Women, Resistance and Revolution, Vintage Books, by
Shiela Rowbotham.

Women's Consciousness, Man's World, Penguin Books, by
Shiela Rowbotham.

Socialist Feminism Strategy Paper, available from
Chicago Liberation Union.

Dialogue Between Barbara Deming and Arthur Kinoy on
Party Building, available from M.P.P. 156 5th Ave.,
Room 812, New York 10010.

Socialist Revolution, the Eli Zaretsky series, Volume
13-14, and Volume 15.

Origin of the Family, Private Property, and the State,
Engels.

Radical America, Volume 7, No. 4 and 5.

The Power of Women, and the Subversion of the Communi-
ty, Maria Rosa Della Costa.

The Longest Revolution, by Juliet Mitchell, New
England Free Press.

For more information on registration, transportation,
contact the Twin Cities Women's Union, 729-6200 or
write to Socialist/Feminist Conference, 1309 North
Main Street, Dayton, Ohio 45406.

Register Early!

Women’s Skills Bank

Recent studies reveal that comparatively few women
serve on appointive boards and commissions in
Minnesota. Recognizing the need to rectify the im-
balance in early 1973, the Women's Advisory Committee
of the Department of Human Rights invited all inter-
ested women's groups to organize a Women's Skills
Bank.

As a result, more than 25 groups representing a wide
variety of civic, political, educational, ethnic and
social service organizations have joined together
under the auspices of the Women's Advisory Committee
to search out and recommend women to state, county
and city officials for appointment to boards and
commissions whenever openings occur.

The purpose of a skills bank is to secure appointments
of qualified women in appropriate numbers to appoin-
tive governmental and quasi-governmental positions.

The Skills Bank actively seeks capable women who are
interested in serving on boards and commissions and
urges them to seek endorsement of the Skills Bank by
contacting the Women's Advisory Committee, Women's Division,
Minnesota Department of Human Rights, 200 Capitol
Square Building, St. Paul 55101 (tel. 296-5669).