Rising Moon, from

women in Minneapolis? (One of the women has since
moved to Chicago.)

Rising Moon was supposed to be an all women's
community but who knew if our community was matching
someone else's dreams. For months, there had been
no direct communication between the dreamer and the
doers so we did what we felt best.

Just being a community was an accomplishment.
Rural folk in general don't much appreciate 160
acres of lesbians in their midst. They said so the
previous Halloween with two bullet holes and a
skinned squirrel in the mailbox. They said so to
our neighbor when they warned him to keep his two
young daughters away from us. (Fortunately, he
didn't think much of their advice for that family
was a good friend to Rising Moon.)

Summers are just short intermissions between
winters and the first frost on September 1 warned us
of all that needed to be done. Hay for the horses.
A dog's life claimed by the mower. The whole field
hand-raked.

Tore down the neighbor's shed and got a deal
on used lumber at a local auction. With this and
several mistakes I built a room onto our shed. It
was a project done entirely by guesswork but it
held out the rain and snow and 80-mile-an-hour
wind gusts. Sunsets and sunrises beamed through
large windows on the three outside walls and small
windows in the loft. At night, when the stove had
been glowing for a few hours, it was the most com-
fortable place in the world to be. A hand-made
womb.

Since the end of October, alone at Rising
Moon. The other five had moved to a nearby farm
for the winter. The owner of the farm used it
only as a vacation spot in the summer. Everyone
was going to have more space this winter.

Wake up. Reach out from under my insulation of
eight blankets and switch on the transistor radio.
Want to know the time and temperature so I can be
prepared before I throw off the blankets completely.
It's maybe 8 am and the fire died out about midnight.
Never enough wood to stoke up the stove for all
night. Hurry. Sit up. Another shirt, sweater and
jacket over the clothes I've worn to bed. Boots.

Climb down the ladder and move around. My
feet will loosen up if I walk so I go into the
woods and hand-saw some wood, drag it up to the shed
and split it. Then do more work on the shed.

Almost every day I discover a new draft in either
room to patch up. Or make Christmas wreaths to
sell in the city. Or go visit the others a mile
away. There's always something I need to borrow.

Bena a i
AN deen

drawing by Lynette Wells

Sunsets that have shifted to the southwest are
magnificent across the river. Steel blue-gray and
deep pink. The snow glistens like a dream. Some-
times the beauty of the land is overwhelming. Tears.

January 15 and the radio says it's the worst
blizzard in 35 years. A Chicago radio station
calls it a "frozen hurricane.” All I can do is sit
it out for three straight days.

I don't want to go outside but the snow is
burying my woodpile. Get the snowshoes on (lent
by a neighbor) and search for my wood like a dog;
down on all fours digging with my hands, then carry
the wood piece by piece to right in front of the
door. By the time I've rescued all I can find,
about half the pile, I can't see anymore. My eyes
have frozen shut. The next day I do the digging
routine all over again.

The still falling snow is like dust and, even
with snowshoes, I sink way down with every step.
The water pump seems so far away. I'm in a white
vacuum. Can't see even the closest landmarks.

This is a time to break tradition so I keep
a fire going at night. Thirty below and wind gusts
even lower. The second night as I stoke the fire
by the light of just a flashlight, the stove-pipe
pops off at the joint and thick, black smoke pene-
trates the room. I breathe fresh air through a crack
in the wall.

When the blizzard had subsided, I left my home;
snowshoed over to the other women's house. As I
trudged, national guard planes flew overhead in
search of stranded survivors.

Stayed at their house about a month then went to
the city to work a bit and travel a bit before re-
turning with the spring. But return I never would.

In October 1974, the woman who had given the
money to buy Rising Moon filed suit to transfer the
land title to her name. Rising Moon residents were
only informed indirectly of the action. (We decided
to continue with our work plans, hoping she would
change her mind.) Her supposed motivation was that
the land wasn't being worked in the way she had in-
tended. Specifically, her two-year prior rule of no
men had been broken. We had allowed a handful of
neighbor men to deliver messages, offer help or buy
grains from the co-op (now located in the barn). Two
fathers paid visits. The gay brother of one visiting
lesbian stayed one night at a deserted corner of the
property.

Using her city standards, the woman apparently
thought it was possible for an impoverished group of
people to exist in the country without any contact
with or help from their neighbors. It is not. For
months there was no operative car at Rising Moon
and never a telephone, chainsaw or hay mower.

Being a radical separatist in a rural area
brings rumor tellers to the scene for "a little fun.”
Even in the city, separatists have to deal with men
for the basics of public utilities, housing, food,
institutional education, etc. A separatist can
only be so by living in a hole or by having class
privilege enough to buy her way out of situations of
fate and mistake.

In April 1975, one week before the trial date,
the land was signed over. She had "won," or so it
felt to the losers, the women who had called Rising
Moon their home.

And now? "Rising Moon is still for any woman
who wants to live without men,” says its owner.

Except for one woman who recently moved to
Chicago, the other Rising Moon residents are still
living in the Aitkin area, caretaking two neighbors'
houses. They all have outside jobs.

Rising Moon isn't a reality for any of us any-
more.