Suffer the Children

BY MARY HASTINGS

"Bending the twig" can be a distressing
prospect if parents want their daughters and
sons to grow up free of stifling sex
role stereotypes. But some Twin Cities in-
stitutions do offer activities for children
that can strengthen them and free them from
sex role bigotry. Following are results of
an admittedly selective survey of Twin Cit-
ies agencies; the activities listed tend to
appeal to very young children and most are
recreational. Charges, if any, are indica-
ted (Welfare subsidy is also indicated).

DANCE CHOREOGRAM: 725-4th St. S.E.,
Mpls. (Dinkytown area), 331-8563. Starting
September 19 Choreogram will offer dance
classes for boys and girls ages 6 - 12.
2:30 p.m. Tuesdays, 9:30 a.m. Saturdays.
$25 for series of 12 lessons, reduced rates
for families enrolling more than one child.
(Call to discuss possible special arrange-
ments in cases of financial need.)

CHILD CARE RESOURCE CENTER: 406 E. 48th
St., Mpls., 823-5261. The center is basic-
ally a resource center and library for
parents and day care workers, concentrating
on pre-school children. Its services are
available to anyone in the metropolitan
area. The center offers literature, files
on day care regulations, help with funding,
help with curricula. The center has a model
play area for people to investigate and
conducts workshops for parents and day-care
workers in such areas as infant stimulation
and nutrition.

August workshops will treat learning and
behavior problems of children. Register
as soon as possible; a $2 fee is charged.

Every Thursday in August the center will
hold “kids' activity days" from 1 to 3 p.m.
Parents can bring their children if they
call at least 24 hours in advance. The
days will include: plant day, mobile making
day, paint day, clay day and water play
day. There is no charge for these activi-
ties.

YWCA: 1130 Nicollet Ave., Mpls., 332-0501.
Following is the Y's statement on non-
sexist education and a listing of activi-
ties for pre-schoolers:

"The philosophy of non-sexist, non-racist
education for pre-schoolers is now in op-
eration in many YWCA programs.

"All YWCA instructors I spoke with indica-
ted that non-sexist education was attitud-
inal. Most children between the ages of
3 and 6 have yet to determine sex roles and
will therefore try and do anything their
friends do. Likewise, if instructors en-
courage both boys and girls to do every-
thing children do not develop a "must not”
attitude about their various activities, at
least, not in the school situation.

"Some examples of non-sexist educational
tools include play activities, books and
discussion. The YWCA Nursery School has
an open environment which includes trucks,
dolls, a play house with dress-up clothes,
and a miniature kitchen where kids learn to
cook. The teachers encourage the kids to be-
come involved in all aspects of the facilit-
y. It is not unusual to see little girls play-
ing with trucks in the sand or boys play-
ing with dolls.

"Books are very important educational
tools to young children. All YWCA pre-
school educators select special non-sexist
reading material. "William's Doll" was a
favorite with the children last spring.

The attitude being that it is just as im-
portant that boys learn to be good fathers
through play acting with dolls as it is for
girls to learn about motherhood.

continued on page 2