FLYING:

Flying, by Kate Millett, (Alfred A. Knopf,  
546 pages, hardcover, $8.95).

Reviewed by Susan W. Plaster

I applaud Kate Millett's just-released  
autobiographical work, Flying. During the  
days I was reading it, Flying took up most  
of my time and mindspace: I sat down to try  
to write in my own journal and all my sen-  
tences came out like Millett's. Flying is a  
powerful analysis of a person, a way of  
living, and a movement.

Flying is largely about Millett's life  
during the past few years, but much is told  
of her previous life including her St. Paul  
Catholic childhood. The format is that of  
undated journal entries. The chronological  
scrambling bothered me at first but really is  
appropriate because it is roughly comparable  
to the way most of us mentally inhabit  
several time zones at once. The book chron-  
icles a period of great growth in Millett's  
life, a return from a mental precipice on  
which she found herself a few years ago.

Flying becomes a book-within-a-book as  
Millett tells of the agonies undergone while  
writing it and of friends' reactions to parts  
she shared with them. How many authors are  
courageous to share with their readers their  
insecurities about their work? The book  
involved me deeply in its progress. Millett  
asks, "Can I finish this book? What if my  
friends are offended? Should I tell every-  
thing?" Midway through the book I was  
trapped, feeling myself more participant than  
reader.

Millett's writing about her family is  

particularly striking. Her use of verbatim  
accounts of conversations is especially  
effective in her talks with her mother.  
"What do you mean, bisexual," Mrs. Millett's  
voice asks over the phone, and as Kate jumps  
into the unknown and tries to explain, she is  
breaking that granite barrier of parent-child  
dishonesty about sexuality.

WORTH READING!

The word "radical" and how it might apply  

to Kate Millett. A dead horse by now, the  
word used to be defined as “one who analyzes  
and attempts to change the roots of a prob-  
lem." Radical has to do with roots and  
causes, not just symptoms. The word roots  
relates to Kate Millett's radicalism in that  
Flying tells much about her roots as a person.  
Instead of trying to totally deny parts of  
her past or separate herself from family  
members who are critical of her, Millett  
writes about her past and those people with  
an attitude of acceptance. She delineates  
in Flying the roots of her sexual and polit-  
ical beliefs. She doesn't omit embarrassing  
or unhip things she may have done: in a  
radical sense, she is honest about herself  
and her roots.

A crucial political confrontation de-  
scribed in the book is Millett's speech at  
Columbia when she is challenged by Teresa  
Juarez to say she is "lesbian," not  
"bisexual." Millett says:

The line goes, inflexible  
as a fascist edict, that  

bisexuality is a copout.

Yes, I said yes, I am a  

Lesbian.  
Reading these pages over I was shattered  
to realize that Millett succumbed to the  
pressure of a political line and ended up  
making a statement which didn't reflect her  
life truthfully. Flying portrays beauti-  
fully Millett's love alliances with women  
and with her husband Fumio. Bisexuality  
may not be politically "cool" but after  
reading Flying I don't think "lesbian" tells  
the whole truth about Kate Millett.

A major theme in Flying is the pressure  
Millett felt after skyrocketing to fame with  
the publication of her dissertation, Sexual  
Politics. She discusses the anxieties of  
being recognized by strangers, of being  
expected to speak for all feminists, of  
having the media titillated by her sex life.  
Millett is constantly getting into predica-  
ments because the women's movement's anti-  
leadership stance conflicts with the media's  
hunger for names and faces, and also because  
there are obvious times when a person wants  
and deserves credit for her work. Her  
decision to list herself as director of the  

film Three Lives is discussed in the light  
of that conflict.

Flying introduced me to the people of  
Kate Millett's life--her lovers, family,  
friends, and her critics. Millett's talks  
with Jill Johnston, a memorable tea with  
Doris Lessing, her remarks about Yoko Ono,  
provided me with insights into famous women  
through another famous woman's eyes. Con-  
versely, Millett's record of her stay in  
London with Paul and Nell was the sort of  
ordinary humdrum scrambled-eggs-for-dinner  
picture I enjoy getting of such a person.

continued on page 12