con't from pg..8

only ways it has changed form is that it has
given women the right to say "yes" but taken
away their right to say "no". It is, for the
most part, still centered around male plea-
sure and dominance, even in such "enlighten-
ed" books as Joy of Sex. She says of past
days, “A woman might say 'no' when you hoped
for a ‘yes' but at least you could be sure
she would wait till she was asked."

The sexual revolution also pushes the fact
that everyone must be sexually active or
something is wrong with her or him. If a
woman refuses a man it is taken personally
and not just because she may not want to have
sex. Janeway writes that if we are to have

a sexual revolution we must understand our
needs as people and evaluate our emotional
responses to other people.

Many times women do not realize their human
potential. This happens to them more fre-
quently than to men. Janeway says that one
reason this is so is because women so many
times forget to please themselves. They live
through their relationships with other people
and work at pleasing them. It has gone so
far that most women don't even know what re-
ally turns them on or pleases them anymore.
Women must get back to learning what pleases
them and makes them happy. They must be sel-
fish, take themselves seriously. Learn to
look upon themselves as creative and worth-
while people with potential for accomplishing
tasks. They must find out what their inter-
ests are and how best to fulfill them.

The last topic discussed and perhaps the most
crucial one, is that of power. When it comes
right down to it, as the author herself
states, "The world belongs to the powerful
and though, almost universally the powerful
are male, we can't reverse that statement."
She maintains that the majority of sex roles
have nothing to do with power, that some men
also lack power, children and the elderly also
lack power. "The weak are the second sex"
she writes. Sexual exploitation of any kind
is no more than an example of a relationship
of the powerful over the weak. She recom-
mends that women study power and its work-
ings.

Ln a renee ne ne en ee ene nn a er

€ 5) ae Fe y performing an original play
‘ B

; Sy ; i
424 LADY

2 . Be ® < IN The
“ecw CORNER

2l04% STEVENS S/MINNEAPOLIS

8:00 FRIDAYS & SATURDAYS
Jan. 24, 25, 31, Feb. 1, 7, 8, 14, 15, 21, 22, 28

March 1
2:00 SUNDAYS # 2.00
Feb. 9, 16
first two performances benefits for the Twin Cities Q
Union

‘Constitution?

MANDATORY MOTHERHOOD

Mandatory Motherhood: The True Meaning of
“Right to Life™. By Garrett Hardin, Calif.
Beacon Press. Hardback $4.95, Paper $1.95.

If you have time to read only one book sup-
porting women's right to abortion this is
probably the one. Garrett Hardin, biologist,
and long time student and writer on abortion
manifests keen insight into reproductive
concerns of women.

Mandatory Motherhood, published in November,
is not only succinct, but up to date, an
important feature in a field which is
changing rapidly.

Hardin has the ability to probe behind the
obvious clichés. He unmasks the semantic
tricks used by the fetus guardians: the
Human Life Amendment should be called the
Mandatory Motherhood Amendment.

He also discusses the “sexual envy" which is
the root cause in determining why some people
are against easily available legal abortions.

The advantages accruing to a society where
abortions are safe, legal, and secured with-
out delay are examined and documented.

Philosophically and biologically Hardin dis-
poses of the old argument about “when life
begins" by pointing out that life is a con-
tinuum. A life may end, but there was only
one beginning--probably millions of years
ago.

The logic in not granting full citizenship to
all fertilized ova is cleverly, even humor-
ously portrayed in a series of mock trials.

A Mandatory Motherhood Amendment to the U. S.
Not at all impossible, he
explains! A dedicated, energetic minority
has set 1976 to convince members of Congress
that all life should be protected from the
moment of conception. Their zeal and our
laziness could result in all abortions being
defined as murder.

The ramifications of a Mandatory Motherhood
Amendment are horrendous and endless. Giving
legal status of personhood to a fetus would
throw census and tax laws into chaos; i.e.,
the "fetus-person" could be a dependent for
tax purposes, burial requirements would apply
to it, the IUD would be outlawed, causing a
miscarriage by an accident would be man-
slaughter... the possibilities go on ad
infinitum.

The appendixes should be of value to those
who debate the issue. They contain lists of
organizations supporting abortion, sociologi-
cal research on children whose mothers
sought and were denied abortions, polls on
abortion, and a reading list.

To sum up: A superb little book written by
one who has broad knowledge of abortion, is
adept at semantics and logic, and is as sym-
pathetic to women's concerns as any man
could be.

by Betty Benjamin
UUWF Abortion Rights Advocate

Review appeared in UUWF Speakout