wf THE WOMAN

AS AN ARTIST

BY

QUIMETTA ARDANUY

I went on an extraordinary journey this summer.  
It began with a five hour flight across country  
from Washington D.C. to Los Angeles. Rubyfruit  
Jungle was on my lap the whole way, from the time I  
opened its cover waiting for the plane to take off,  
to the time I closed it just inside the California  
border.

It felt like the start of a new era, although  
I was aware the era had begun months before. The  
era had to do with a new consciousness, and I was  
going to the Feminist Studio Workshop's summer  
art program to develop it. It was in January hearing  
Judy Chicago speak at St. Catherine's that I could  
first begin to connect for myself my art and my  
feminism. The era began there.

I arrived at the Woman's Building in euphoria;  
more precisely in Susan King's "feminist" car, an  
ancient vehicle. I continued in that cloud for a  
while feeling a new and wonderful community forming  
with the women who had come to the program, and with  
the facilitators.

The program, and our CR topics began with the  
very personal; self-image, and went finally to work,  
money and authority in the last week. This exemplified  
the travel from the inner self to the outer world,  
and paralleled one of the goals of the workshop:  
to make the personal experience public through our  
work.

One discovery I made was that feminist art  
education feels a lot different in the flesh than  
when it is described in the abstract. Life and art  
are no longer separable in this process which is  
at once an ideal, wonderful, and frightening exper-  
ience. This process of living and working has a  
momentum that carries each woman through at a dif-  
ferent rate of speed.

I noticed a cycle happening in my life that per-  
petuated itself. I would first find myself in a  
state of confusion brought about by something that  
came up in CR, or in another aspect of my life. The  
theme would finally surface. I would talk about it,  
write in my journal and at last realize that this is  
what I should make art from. That realization always  
would come as something of a surprise and revelation  
although I never understood how I didn't know it  
all along. My art would come out of this, out of  
my life, and it in turn, would influence my life.

The journey there ended with a presentation,  
and a celebration, and a marathon drive across  
country to Minneapolis, this time reading Emma Gold-  
man. I've learned that I can't return to a non-  
feminist kind of education; the level of communication  
honesty, and respect is too high in a feminist context  
to lower my standards. This year I am going to the  
College of Art part time, working with women there,  
and also going to the feminist art program at St.  
Catherine's College. I begin a new journey, my  
consciousness and confidence having been much  
sharpened.

new study group...

The Anarchist-Feminist study group will meet on October  
11 at 10:00 a.m. Women interested may come to this  
first discussion. We agreed to read the ABC's of  
Anarchism by Alexander Berkman. If you wish to join,  
come to this first meeting. (Other groups may be  
started later.) For address, call 377-4892.

anarchist conference...

An area Anarchist Conference will be held October 24-26.  
The first meeting will begin at 7:00 p.m. Friday the 24th  
with a showing of Sacco and Vanzetti. Guests will be  
Esther and Sam Dolgoff; Saturday numerous workshops will  
be conducted. On Sunday the Anarchist Theatre from  
Duluth will perform. The Conference will be held at the  
Waite Community Center, 13th Avenue at 26th St. South,  
Minneapolis.

HELP WANTED:

WRITERS

Charter Press has recently started a  
campaign to actively seek out feminist-oriented  
writing for commercial publication. They are  
particularly interested in writers who have  
not yet achieved professional status.

According to Marilynn J. Taylor any material  
of short book length will be considered. Poetry  
generally is not needed, unless of very high  
quality, and accompanied by illustrations. She  
urges writers to bear in mind that this is for  
commercial publication to a wide audience.

And the advantages of “commercial publication"?  
Royalties are paid twice-yearly at the rate of  
10% of the retail book price, based on the number  
of books sold.

If you have a manuscript or part of a manu-  
script ready for review, contact

Charter Press

Box 7287

Powderhorn Station  
Minneapolis, Minnesota 55407

Taylor says, "We try to report on submitted  
material within two weeks.”