ST. PAUL NOW. HOLDING CONFERENCE

Minnesota's first statewide conference of the National Organization of Women (NOW) will be held Nov. 3-4 at Macalester College in St. Paul. Purpose of the conference is to elect a state coordinator and in general bring people together to work out methods of fighting sexism.

The conference, which is open to the public, has several registration procedures available, depending on how much time and money you want to invest. Regular registration, $16, includes both days, with two lunches and dinner plus entertainment. There's also a one-day form for Sat., Sun. or special events; and another for those who can't afford to pay at all. Plans for the conference include the following: workshops that cover numerous topics—rape, women in poverty, the corporate wife; feminist arts and crafts that will be on display throughout the weekend—many for sale; a special program of music, dance and drama expressing the feminist viewpoint; and a special conference for girls 3-12 yrs. of age with workshops, speakers, and training sessions.

Saturday workshops and sessions begin with registration at 9 a.m. Sunday business meetings begin at 9:30 a.m. Consumer activist Alpha Smaby and DFL feminist Arvonne Fraser will appear at the Convention.

Anyone interested in reserving space to display arts and crafts should send the following information to St. Paul NOW Box 80065 Como Ave. Station St. Paul, Min. by Oct. 25—Include name, address, phone and no. of feet for display. Other questions can also be sent to the same address.

Contact Martha Schlader, 5719 Scenic Circle, Minnetonka 55343 for further information regarding convention pre-registration.

RESOURCES

YOUTH WORKER: Delinquency prevention staff worker to work on North Side Service Coordination, Resource Development, Systems Modification, and directly with North Side youth. $9,000/year.

Northside Youth Service Bureau 1404 W. Broadway Ave., Minneapolis.

PHYSICIAN

ITHACA, N.Y. — We are putting together a primary health care clinic and referral service in downtown Ithaca. We will charge on a sliding fee scale—no pressure. We want to stress preventive medicine. So far, we have more than 30 active members (some of them with nursing and other medical skills). Our biggest needs now are for money and a full-time doctor. If you are a doctor and if you want to work with a clinic that has its roots in the community it will serve, write to: Terry Barker, 415 Elm St, Ithaca, N.Y. 14850. Ithaca is a small city in a beautiful region of upstate New York. There are many community-based projects here.

The next meeting of the Women Historians of the Midwest will be 7:30 p.m., November 7, at the home of Delores Johnson, 4534 Fremont Ave. S.

WOMEN'S FILM CO-OP, 200 Main St., Northampton, MA 01060, (413) 586-2011, distributes feminist films throughout the country and publishes a catalogue listing their own films as well as others with information on where to obtain them. Please send a donation for the catalogue.

WELFARE COUNSELING—From his experiences with organizing and managing a welfare advocacy bureau in San Diego, Ray Schwartz hopes to help others improve their projects or start new ones. A how-to-do-it manual, the Welfare Advocate Handbook, shows the way to build and operate advocacy centers. The second edition is free but he asks that you send an 8¢ stamp for postage. CONTACT: Ray Schwartz, 1507 Tarbox, San Diego, CA 92114.

WOMEN'S RIGHTS LAW REPORTER, 180 University Ave., Newark, N.J. 07102; covers developments in law which particularly affect women, such as education, employment, abortion, family law, health care, taxes, etc. The Reporter appears four times a year. Single issues are available for three dollars, a six-issue subscription costs $15 for individuals, $28 for institutions.

MINNEAPOLIS: New Vocations Project, 2314 Elliot Ave. So. 55404; (612) 335-2424; is a resource center for persons trying to create non-alienating work situations. Most of their energy is directed towards efforts that foster community self-direction in Southside Minneapolis, but they are prepared to consider helping groups in other areas. Resources include experience in organizing community-oriented businesses, in vocational counseling and in publishing. NVP will begin a new bi-monthly magazine in