Part 2

The Gold Flower Story

GOLD FLOWER readers often ask how our newspaper got its name. The
paper is named after a Chinese woman whose story is told by Jack Belden in
the book “China Shakes the World” (available from Monthly Review Press,
116 West 14th Street, New York 10011). Selections from that book were
reprinted in a pamphlet entitled “Gold Flower’s Story.” Since this Chinese
woman's tale is so relevant to the women’s movement, and parallels it in its
implications, GOLD FLOWER is reprinting the pamphlet as a series for our
readers.

In Part I of the series, Gold Flower, a 15-year-old Chinese peasant, defied

a strict village code by secretly meeting a young man (named Lipao) with
whom she had fallen in love. Lipao taught her how to write; she made him a
beautiful jacket. Then Gold Flower’s parents betrothed her to a stranger in a
nearby village. Two nights before the wedding, Gold Flower and Lipao
walked through the meadow. He longed to make love to her, but social cus-
tom made her refuse. She kissed him passionately, then “ran sobbing across
the fields.”

Gold Flower woke the next day feeling ill. And far off, unreal, seemed
last night’s romance. The day had turned cold. Toward evening a wind
blew in from the north and it began to rain. As darkness descended over
the village, Gold Flower’s family went out to attend a party given by the
neighbors in honor of the coming wedding. Gold Flower stood at the gate
and followed them with her eyes until they were swallowed up in the
mist which was rising grayly from the ground. In a moment she heard
the sound of shouting coming from the party and the clanging of beaten
musical instruments and the piping of a flute.

She went back indoors and began pacing from corner to corner in her
room, now and then casting hopeful glances toward the door. She was
longing for her lover to come and claim her once more and this time she
would not deny him. Why had she refused him? It was just cowardice
on her part. Perhaps he hates me, she thought with a sudden rush of
fear. Why had she failed him? Now he would not come.

Shame at her certain ruin—for she believed her lover could not respect
her if she gave her maidenhood to another man—drove her to a desperate
step. She resolved to go to Lipao at once, to seek him out in his home and
give herself to him.

Bending beneath the rain, she made her way to Lipao’s home.
Abandoning all caution, she passed through the courtyard and reached
Lipao’s room. The door was unlocked and she went in without knocking.
The room was in darkness; she called her lover’s name, but there was no
answer. She went up to the bed and ran her hands over it; there was no
one there. She ran through every room in the house. It was deserted.
The walls around her seemed to be contracting, the ceiling was crushing
her, and she ran out, splashing heedlessly in the puddles made by the
rain. Swaying drunkenly, she reached home.

Leaning against the devil screen in front of the courtyard, she tried to
catch her breath. Over the wall came the sigh of a flute and the clanging
of gongs. Her wedding music! She put her hands to her ears, then raised
her face to the sky. The sky was heavy and dark; down from it came
a voluminous splashing of rain. Lost in a stupor and having little con-
sciousness of what she was doing, she wandered about the courtyard.

She was then fifteen. It was her wedding eve. A happy time! But
she no longer wanted to live. Quickly, she went to the kitchen and
picked up a rope. Groping in the dark, she made her way to her own room,
found a bench and dragged it over near the door. Climbing on the bench,
she threw one end of the rope over a beam above the door, tied a slip
knot in the rope, stuck her head in the noose, kicked the bench away
and hanged herself.

A few moments later, her parents, returning from the party, found
her and cut her down. Neighbors, summoned by her parents, poured
into the house and after two hours’ hard work, brought Gold Flower
back to life. When she woke, Gold Flower saw her mother weeping with
her head on the bed.

Drying her tears, the mother stood up and said solemnly: “You
must wait for fate.”

At these words, which Chinese parents have used for countless genera-
tions to badger their daughters into unwanted marriages, an icy chill
crept around Gold Flower’s heart. So she had not done with this life, she
thought, with all this treachery, with this black society, this slavery. She
hated it all. When her mother repeated the phrase, Gold Flower felt her
gorge rising like a bitter poison in her throat.

“Do you remember the day you were young?” she said. “Was it suit-
able for you to marry someone fifteen years older than you?” Suddenly
she raised herself like a galvanized corpse. “You want to kill me!”

Her mother backed away in astonishment. Feeling she had to struggle,
Gold Flower summoned all her strength and, rising from the bed, pushed
her mouth into her mother’s face.

“I won’t obey your commands,” she shouted. “You old fool! You
stupid woman! You donkey!”

The neighbors, scandalized at this attack, tried to calm Gold Flower,
but she would not be still. She soon began spitting like a cat. Her lips
became drawn in a snarl. Her limbs were convulsed, her whole body
taut as a violin string. She began to scream loudly. She cursed her mother,
railed at her, implored her to kill her, and thrust away with stiffened
arms anyone who dared approach her.

But finally she exhausted herself. Weeping and choked by sobs that
shook her whole body, she collapsed on the bed. She lay at full length,
her eyelids closed, her hands open and motionless. Two streams of tears
flowed out of her half-closed eyes and fell on the straw matting under
her head. Once in a while her lips moved in a whisper: “No ... no.” And
she savagely gritted her teeth.

The neighbors closed in on Gold Flower and began to offer her words
of unwanted comfort and unwanted advice. Gold Flower felt suffocated
by the ring of faces above her. But they would not go away. Hour after
hour, the neighbors pounded at her. She felt as if a great weight were
pressing her down. Not able to marry the man she loved, not able even
to kill herself so that she could remain loyal to her lover, completely
done in and drained of all strength, she at last fell into a deep stupor.

When Gold Flower awoke, it was her wedding day. The sedan chair
was already at the gate. Ruthlessly, she was put aboard.

It was past noon when the sedan chair set her down in the courtyard of her
new home, and Gold Flower stepped out and saw her husband for the first
time. He was grinning at her appreciatively. But Gold Flower looked at his
features with an air of shocked loathing, realizing that her friends had warned
her only too well. He appeared twenty years older than she. With the image of
Lipao still fresh in her mind, her husband appeared doubly ugly. He had a
chalk face, with a mole on one cheek from which hung a long, black hair. His
teeth were crooked and of uneven length like tombstones in a graveyard. His
nose was flat, his mouth full, his lips loose. A perfect ogre, thought Gold Flower.

With lagging steps, as if she were entering a prison, Gold Flower followed
her husband into the house. Her mind was occupied by only one thought:
When can I ever escape from here and return to Lipao?

Her husband left her alone with his in-laws and curious neighbors. They
engaged in fatuous jokes at her expense, pawed her, felt her arm muscles,
turned her this way and that, examining her as they might examine a metal
pot on the fairgrounds to see if it were worth buying and bringing into the
home. Under their handling, Gold Flower froze stiff, feeling that she was no
longer a human being, but some kind of a curious, half-dead object.

Night came. She was alone with her husband. She had been wondering
about this moment, trying to imagine what would happen, what she would
do. When he sat down beside her, she tried to smile at him. When he slid
his hand along her arm, she pressed away from him. He took off most of
his clothes and asked her to do the same. She would not. “Why?” he said.
“Is not marriage for this?” She felt choked. She crept to a corner of the
kang and dissolved in tears. He pulled her out, complimenting her on her
good looks, on her youth. Bitterly, she raised her eyes to his face. “You
are old and ugly,” she said, then bent her head and sobbed. “It won’t
do you any good to cry,” he said. She tried to get off the kang; he pulled
her back, slapped her face. Without knowing what she was doing, Gold
Flower began to scream. He almost tore her head off with a blow of his fist.
Blood ran down Gold Flower’s face. He struck her again and again until she
was quiet. She lay back exhausted and in a quick fit of passion he raped her.

With a smile of satisfaction, her husband fell asleep. But Gold Flower hardly
slept at all. She was thinking, tossing and turning. Her body ached all over,
but it was her spirit that had been bruised most of all. She felt that she had
betrayed her lover. Some fatal defect in her character had prevented her from
giving herself to Lipao until now it was too late. The notion that her husband
had taken what belonged to her lover filled her childish soul with a sort of