horror. She muttered to herself: “It’s awful, what’s been done to me—awful!”  
If it had only been Lipao! How happy that would have made her! Now she  
could never have him. That was awful! To stay here—more awful still!  

‘Emotion, when you are young and give real vent to it, is sharp, clear, terrifying.  

When she was eighteen, the North China famine struck her village. Though her  
husband and other members of the family still ate millet, Gold Flower had only  
husks and leaves which she picked from the trees to eat. With conditions growing  

worse, her husband decided to go to Tientsin and become a merchant. Dutifully,  

Gold Flower saw the gate. No sentimentalist, perhaps she had hesitated.  

And Gold Flower fell asleep, seeing before her the endless stretch of the years. She  

said fond farewell, her spouse a series of test-minute of dewy  

turned,  
on the ninth day after her marriage, Gold Flower, as was the local custom,  
turned to her parents’ home. All her vindictiveness poured out on her mother’s head.  

“You cheated me,” she angrily accused her mother. “Do you remember your  
own marriage? My father was older than you. You, yourself, told me how sad you  
were. Have you forgotten your own story that you should so carelessly give me—  
your only jewel—away to a man like that?”  

Her mother tried to teach her patience by quoting the old classics.  

“The wood has been turned into a boat. Everything is fixed. You must remember  
the old saying: ‘It is not only you who hates society, but me too.’”  

The next day, while her parents were out, Lipao appeared in her doorway. Almost  
mechanically, she asked him to enter and sit down. He saw she was unhappy. “You  
would not believe me when I asked you to give me your love,” he said. A bitter  
retort sprang to Gold Flower’s lips. But only for a moment. He sat there, unaltered,  
just as he had sat there for many nights. The thought that he was about to go out  
of her life forever hurt her. She wanted to beg her lover’s pardon, but she did not  
know what to say. She was ashamed to look at him; she did not dare make love to  
him; she thought she had been ruined and no longer deserved such a virtuous young  
man.  

“If I had been brave enough,” she admitted, “I would have given myself to you.  
But now it’s too late. I regret my disloyalty.”  

She watched Lipao rise, say goodbye, and go. She called after him: “Work hard,  
do something for society, forget me.” She looked mournfully at his disappearing  
back, but she did not cry. Already, she was beyond such sentimentality.  

Gold Flower tried to build a new life with her husband’s family. But there was  
nothing but hate on which to build. Besides herself and her husband, they had in  
the house her father and mother-in-law and a younger sister-in-law. The mother-in-  
law, showing the effects of a hard life, was little more than a living corpse, so Gold  
Flower did not suffer much from that quarter as did most Chinese brides. But her  
husband made up for this lack, treating her worse than a dozen mothers-in-law.  
She had to wait on him, day and night. When he went to sleep she had to take off  
his shoes and clothing; in the morning, she had to put them on again. She had to  
light his cigarettes, pour his water, hand him the cup with both hands and with a  
subservient smile on her face. He struck her daily as a matter of course and beat  
her unmercifully if she did not obey his commands on the instant.  

One night, just before going to bed, Gold Flower brought her husband a bowl  
of millet broth, some of which slopped over the edge and ran down on his thumb.  
Immediately, he flew into a rage, picked up a brush from a corner, beat her to the  
floor and then smashed her about the head.  

She did not dare to scream, but tears came to her eyes. Kneeling on the ground  
she pleaded with him to forgive her carelessness. She tried to smile in order to soften  
his heart, but he beat her until he was exhausted. After two hours, he let her crawl  
back in bed.  

Her father-in-law was little better. Gold Flower’s mother sent a message that she  
was sick and wanted to see her daughter. The father-in-law would not let her go.  

“Why have we married you?” he asked. “You are here to work for us and you  
belong to us and not your mother.”  

Gold Flower pleaded so hard that her father-in-law finally gave her permission to  
go. When she returned after two days, he ordered her to kneel down in the court-  
yard and beg his forgiveness for being late. She remained kneeling from noon till  
evening.  

That night as she was taking off her husband’s clothes, he asked her: “Tell me  
the truth. Do you really want to go your own way?”  

Gold Flower, fearing further punishment, put on her best face and answered  
softly:  

“I am a girl. I have never been married before. I do not intend to marry again.  
I shall serve you all my life. When I die, I shall be buried in your tomb.”  

She put a mask over her face and smiled at her husband. But in her mind she was  
thinking she was treated like a donkey or an ox, not as a woman. In order to keep  
her husband quiet, however, she put on her meekest air. She even quoted old pro-  
verbs at him.  

“Flowers have seeds,” she said; “grass has roots, man has heirs. Someday, when  
the harvest is poor and we have to beg, I shall go to the villages and beg for you first.  
I am a woman and must depend on you. So I must take care of you. If you are cap-  
tured by bandits, I shall sell all my belongings and even my body to redeem you.”  

With such words, through three hard years, Gold Flower tried to turn aside her  
husband’s wrath and make her tormented life bearable.  

But turning on her savagely, he warned: “If you disobey me, I will beat you to death.”  

Gold Flower’s heart sank at these harsh words, but she summoned a smile to her  
face. “Do not worry,” she said. “I want only you.”  

During this period of her life, a profound change had taken place in Gold Flower.  
Years so spent always take their toll, nor is there anything more tragic than hope-  
lessness, with its wiping out of the future. Gold Flower, though only eighteen, was  
already tired of her existence. She hated society, she hated her husband, she hated  
life itself. She contemplated suicide again, but was restrained by the thought of the  
sorrow she would bring her mother. When her mother died, she determined she  
would kill herself.  

From her married life, Gold Flower had come to know the truth of the old saying:  
“Heaven is Man: Earth is Woman.” Then, too, she had heard new widows wailing  
over their husbands’ bodies: “Oh, my Heaven! My Heaven!” and her receptive mind  
had grasped the fact that it was not just her husband but all men who were destined  
by birth to be the rulers over women.  

Gold Flower could not help but accept these laws of society and outwardly she  
knuckled under to her husband like a slave—meek, obedient, fearful. But in the  
innermost recesses of her heart, her thoughts were revolving in a different fashion.  
There, deep down inside her, she was engrossed in one thing only: to pay back,  
insult by insult, blow by blow, everything she had suffered at her husband’s hands.  
Even as she was saying goodbye to her husband at the gate, she was thinking: I will  
take my vengeance on you someday. Just wait. The day will come.  

And as there was a Gold Flower, more or less, beaten and bruised, saddened and  
soured, in every farm in North China, she became a portent. The Communist party  
saw her and schemed to serve her and themselves through her. She was that spirit  
that forgets nothing and forgives nothing. There she stood at her gate, slow-burning  
revenge incarnate, waiting a better time, waiting an opportunity.  

In August 1945, a small unit of the 8th Route Army entered Gold Flower’s  
village. They stayed only a few hours and then, having announced they were going  
to fight the Japanese, passed on. A week later, a county cadre entered the village  
and called a meeting. Having announced that he represented the government of the  
8th Route Army, he declared: “The people and the 8th Route Army belong to the  
same family.” Gold Flower who heard these words said to herself: “That is impos-  
sible; you are not even from our village and so how can you be from our family?”  

Some time later, the cadre called all the women of the village together and asked  
them to organize a Women’s Association. He declared that every woman had the  
right to equality with man and he begged all those women who had suffered most  
to come and meet secretly with him. The words of the cadre excited Gold Flower  
and gave her much food for thought, but she did not dare go to the secret meeting  
and besides she did not believe anything would come of it.  

“Someone says the 8th Route Army has come to release us,” she remarked to her  
sister-in-law, “but just look: the Japanese have been driven away, yet we two girls  
in this village still suffer. I think it’s just a rumor that the 8th Route helps women.”  

A few days later when the county cadre went away, without anything extraor-  
dinary having happened, Gold Flower felt her suspicions had been fully confirmed.  
A Women’s Association had been formed, but nothing else had happened. “So that's  
all the 8th Route Army can do,” she said to herself. “The poor things.”  

She was surprised when one of her friends, a girl named Dark Jade, who had  
been elected a cadre of the local Women’s Association came secretly to see her.  
Since the girls were old friends, they dared speak freely to each other.  

“We must release ourselves from the domination of men,” Dark Jade told Gold  
Flower. “But we cannot do it individually, we must all stand together and release  
ourselves as a unit.”  

Gold Flower was skeptical. “That’s all right for you,” she said. “You are a cadre  
now and are protected by the government. But what about me? Who will protect  
me?”  

“Listen,” said Dark Jade, “tell me the truth about your situation.”  

Gold Flower was silent.  

“Open your eyes, Gold Flower,” said her friend. “This is our day. This means  
the end of our suffering. The beginning of our hope.”  

These words, because they were uttered by one of her own friends, kindled a  
spark in Gold Flower. “Oh, that would be wonderful, if true,” she said. “Then  
the 8th Route Army would really be of our family.”  

Some days later, Dark Jade returned with a girl named Taowa. Gold Flower  
questioned them with infinite caution, trying to find out what their strange plans  
were.