8  
[its  

INTERVIEW WITH DIANE WAKOSKI  

by Coco Weber  

When I found out that Diane Wakoski was in town I  
decided to interview her and was surprised when she  
said "yes." I was also surprised to find when I met  
her that she is of about the same height as me (5'3")  
and not the 5'7" I had always imagined. We went up-  
stairs and while she served me wine, I plugged in the  
tape recorder, and away we went for about an hour.  

I had prepared a page of questions, but I didn't need  
them. Wakoski had been to see Judy Chicago at St.  
Catherine's the night before and started to talk  
about that immediately. Chicago and Wakoski differ  
in that Wakoski, unlike Chicago, feels art and pol-  
itics are not very compatible. Political dogma is  
limiting as an artistic statement. Wakoski sees her-  
self as being humanistic rather than political. Art  
transcends politics. Men are as capable of apprec-  
iating art as women. She does not believe that there  
are inherent biological forms that women are more  
capable of understanding. To say that women must use  
vaginal forms in their art is being as restrictive  
as women accuse men of being.  

Wakoski maintains that whether a person is male or  
female has nothing to do with discrimination in art.  
That any young, struggling artist is going to have a  
hard time. The fact that women don't have equal pay,  
equal opportunities, and have the burden, in some  
cases, of child care does not affect their creativ-  
ity. Women have not experienced any harsher criticism  
of their work than young men. Art is dominated more  
by New York and Paris styles than by men.  

Wakoski thinks that what Judy Chicago was basically  
saying was, "when society at large is oppressing you  
because their values are such that they are completely  
contradictory to the individual human being, then you  
must fight against that society.” Wakoski continued  
that that, in a sense, is what art is. Art says that  
the needs of human beings have been disregarded. The  
artist goes further than politics, however, and says  
that no matter what politics you have, none of you  
understand me.  

Wakoski thinks that there are more important areas  
where women have been discriminated against than art.  
Artists should not make such a big deal about it.  
That “one of the only worlds in which sexual equity  
occurs is the arts.”  

Art is subtle, beautiful  

I mentioned the fact that I had seen a movie about  
the life of Antonio Brico, the first woman conductor.  
She had virtually been kept from conducting because  
no one would play under her. Wakoski said that wom-  
en are sometimes their own worst enemies. They don't  
want to do those things. Also, she stated that if  
they wanted, women could be taken as seriously as men  
just as fast. She did, however, add that this is  
more true in the field of literature than in other  
fields. Literature has always been an easy field  
for women. "I wouldn't have published all the books  
that I did or earn my living as a poet if there had  
been that much discrimination in the poetry world.”  

She does not consider herself a feminist poet—ra-  
ther, a feminist person. A feminist person is one  
who believes that women should be as equal as men.  
She is not a political poet. Her poetry is about,  
as she put it, “beauty and justice." You can be a  
feminist and not necessarily write feminist poetry.  
"When you let politics invade your art, you get this  
shrill voice, it sounds like someone ranting...it  
doesn't do the subtle, beautiful things that art is  
supposed to do."  

She does, however, think that in some aspects, fem-  
inist art is necessary. It expresses things that men  
could never personally experience, only vicariously.  
It is important that feminist art be for both men and  
women.  

At this point I asked her a few questions. The first  
one dealt with her poem, “Magellanic Clouds," which  
is one of my favorite poems. There is a line in it:  
"the price is to walk alone up the stairs with your  
candle, every night." I wanted to know if this was  
the way she thought of herself as a woman and an ar-  
tist. Her answer was: “Whenever you do something that  
is important you are essentially alone...our education  
does not prepare us for this...once you recognize it,  
it is not so terrible...it is only because society  
has told us this is not so.”  

Wakoski went on to add that many times she used women  
as a metaphor for artist and also, women as, histor-  
ically, a metaphor for a human being. "All the vul-  
nerabilities that have been culturally foisted on us  
are really the human vulnerabilities that men have  
tried to cover up by the power culture they have cre-  
ated and we have no privilege to." She believes that  
women are reinforcing the people who have been crying  
out all through history. They are expressing what is  
now most historically important to express. Men have  
been sheltered away from this, but women have a pipe-  
line to these feelings.  

Art relieves pain & ugliness of world  

I then asked her about her greed poems, of which there  
are nine published. She began them, she explained,  
because basically she is a formal writer, and she has  
"a lot of rules as to what you can and can't do in  
poetry, and at a certain point I decided that some of  
the things I really wanted to do in poetry were what  
my rules forbade. So I decided, being formal, that  
I would invent a structure where the rule was you  
could do anything that was forbidden in other places.  
Do all the things you don't approve of.” She thinks  
that greed is the most devastating force in the world.  
Greed is the refusal to make choices, to have your  
cake and eat it, too.  

Wakoski has written up to part twelve. Eleven is fin-  
ished and is to be published next fall. Part ten,  
the section on Love, sex and romance, is still unfin-  
ished. She is having a hard time with it. Hopefully,  
it will come out next year. Part twelve is on glut-  
tony.  

The last question I asked, before my time was up,  
was about her use of Beethoven in her poems. She an-  
swered that “Beethoven is a metaphor; for the fact that  
pain and ugliness may be the norm for the human con-  
dition, but even out of such pain and ugliness...could  
come beautiful music...out of pain and ugliness can-  
not be created a comfortable and beautiful life, but  
what can be created is great art."  

She went further to add that this is where the pol-  
itician and artist differed again. The politician  
would say: I must do something to change this condi-  
tion. The artist, however, would say: If I can change  
it, fine, but while I am in pain and misery, I have  
art to relieve me.  

Diane Wakoski will be in town until February 1st.  

She is involved in a poetry workshop sponsored by five  
colleges in St. Paul—St. Catherine, Hamline, St. Thom-  
as, Augsburg, and Macalester. They have a program  
for their interim session involving a visiting writer,  
alternating between poetry and fiction. She has a  
total of fifteen students in her class, three from  
each college. She is also giving various poetry  
readings around the area.