REVIEWS by JACKIE GOHDES

MUSIC, LIVE & RECORDED

WEST BANK TRACKERS

Most rhythm and blues or soul music fans
probably are already aware of the West Bank
Trackers. For those of you who haven't yet
heard these four women vocalists and their
backup band, go listen and do your ears a
favor. This local group handles a broad

range of tunes from R and B dancin' music to

country western to current hits and back to
1950's pops, as well as originals by Judy
Beach, one of the vocalists.

Each singer has her own unique sound and
style. Carol's low, throaty mellowness is
just right for "Hello Stranger" and "Shaky
Flat Blues." Judy does a fine job on
"Goodbye, Farewell, So Long." Her huskier
voice lends the appropriate sultriness to
"Temptation Took Control of Me." Ann's

lighter soprano is straightforward and very

listenable. Bebe has a strong middle range
and really has fun with the country tunes.
In spite of their variety of individual
sounds, they achieve an amazing blend as a
group.

The Trackers are a polished group. They'll
sing you a good time. For booking infor-
mation (concert or club) contact Tombstone
Promotions, 822-2288 or 338-3656.

> SS SST

My resistance is very low when it comes to buying
women's records and that illness will surely be
contagious if you listen to Willie (Willola) Tyson's
new album, Full Count. She has formed her own Lima
Bean record company so hopefully we can expect many
more recordings from her.

Tyson's uniqueness immediately grabs your ear as she
lilts through a song with that wiry voice. Her
somewhat wide vibrato produces a pleasant effect
and her diction is clear throughout.

Willie's flexibility shows itself as she switches
from a strong beat and mellow lower register on
“Paranoia" to a dreamy song of lost love with a
subtle beat like "I Was Your Ship" and then on to
the country blues ballad "I Don't Miss No One."

She jokes with you in country western humor as she
tells of the trials in trying to be "Beautiful"
when even her fairy godmother doesn't have much con-
fidence in her ability to walk in glass slippers.
The rush of words and rhythm of her pleadings for
annihilation by various grim means in "Die Smilin’
Blues" is in contrast to her drawling elbow-in-the-
ribs advice to be ‘careful of how you treat Lady
Love' on "Asian Horses." Not one song is uninterest-
ing lyrically or musically but the catchy tune and
encompassing sentiments of "The Ballad of Merciful
Mary" is my favorite. Mary's futile seeking of
justice from the Supreme Court does not sap any
energy from this swingy showpiece for Willie's
12-string guitar.

She also handles the piano and synthesizer in add-
ition to having written all music and lyrics and
arrangements. Not too many tons of talent there!
Don't be surprised if your favorite feminist book
and record store (like Amazon) keeps selling out
this album. Hearing Willie Tyson is like eating
popcorn - you get started and you want more and
more!

READING

Whipped through a couple books lately.
One that could use a whipping is The Lady
Jock by Lynn Haney. The author once worked
for Christian Dior. It shows. In spite
of researching their working conditions and
getting to know the leaders of the pack of
roughly sixty women jockeys, Ms. Haney all
too frequently helps these jockeys put them-
selves down by constant cute referrals to
the "girls" or "lady jockeys." Just another
case of women adopting the "women-aren't-to-
be-taken-seriously" jargon (and thus the
attitudes) of their male "hosses" or in
this case, the trainers and owners of thor-
oughbred horses.

As Haney puts it, "the women jockeys
retain their independence to remarkable de-
grees and they continue their struggle for
mounts and equal pay and equal opportunit-
ies, but most of them don't want to have
anything to do with the women's lib move-
ment. For one thing, they don't understand
many of the philosophical issues that give
the movement its impetus; for another, they
already have much more freedom than most of
the women they know."

These women earn a living in a demanding
and dangerous way. They have fought for
their chance to ride but they have also
taken the leg-up provided by the brave wo-
men who earlier on risked personal insult
and attack in initial attempts to change
human attitudes to the point where the idea
of women jockeys would dare to be thinkable.
Can they now deny that they've benefited by
the efforts of their sisters? Are they so
caught up in their own successes that they
will refuse to help those who remain boxed
into "inferior" or "different" (read: dis-
criminated against) categories?

No, not all of her subjects take that nar-
row view. And to Haney's credit she does point
out the personal strengths of these athletes
and the rigors of their job in readable fash-
ion. The human interest slant of this series
of biographical stories is aided by a small
section of photos. Unless you're an addict
of the Sport of Kings (Queens?), it's pretty
fluffy stuff.

Ann Allen Shockley's novel Loving Her,
similarly hits and misses in describing a way
of life so rarely, if ever, portrayed. Anoth-
er predictable romance between somewhat shallow
characters? Yes. But not really, for
Shockley draws Renay, a poor black mother,
into the life and love of Terry, an older
white woman who is apparently quite a success-
ful writer.

It could have been a believable story. It
comes closest to ringing true in the descrip-
tions of their tenderest moments together.
Then she allows the characters to expand be-
yond their rather circumscribed limits, in a
caring relationship of sincerity and warmth.
This is most beautifully done at times and
yet Shockley occasionally lapses into triteness
even here.

The author has so much to say that as she
adds each token stereotype to represent
"butch," "fairy," alcoholic and racist,

con’t page 7