4 7  
TWO MORE WOMEN PUNISHED  
FOR FIGHTING RAPE  

The case of a Black woman prisoner who killed a white prison guard who she says attempted to rape her has attracted wide attention in North Carolina.  

Clarence Alligood, a guard at the Beaufort County jail in Washington, N.C., was found dead in a cell Aug. 27, killed with an ice pick he usually kept in his desk drawer.  

According to Joanne Little, the only woman in the prison where all the guards are white males, Alligood entered her cell at about 3 a.m. and threatened her with an ice pick. As he was undressing, Little grabbed the pick, struck him with it several times and fled. Five days later she turned herself in to state authorities in Raleigh.  

The Black community and the feminist movement here have supported her defense, saying that Little's case raises important questions about racism in the courts and prisons, about the treatment of women prisoners and about the right of women to defend themselves against rape. Over 150 supporters turned out at her hearing on the murder charge which was held in Raleigh Oct. 1. During the hearing, Little was kept tightly shackled in the courtroom so she could not even rise to greet her supporters as they entered.  

The state's treatment of Little has been harsh. She has been placed in solitary confinement in the Raleigh women’s prison. She is not allowed to speak to the prisoner in the next cell, and the only visitors permitted are her mother and lawyer.  

Despite the growing support she is receiving, defense lawyers see a difficult road ahead. The first problem will be to ensure a fair trial. A move to transfer the proceedings from eastern to central North Carolina was denied, but her lawyers will appeal. Little also wants to appeal her original conviction for breaking and entering, but there are technicalities that will make this difficult. Expenses are also an obstacle. Although her lawyers are representing her without a fee, they estimate a cost of $20,000 for the trial and more if an appeal is necessary.  

Supporters have organized a Joanne Little Defense Fund, Inc. Tax-exempt donations may be sent there, care of P.O. Box 1003, Durham, N.C. Letters to Little, which she says are a major factor in boosting her morale, may be sent to her at 1034 Bragg St., Raleigh, N.C., 27610.  

20;  

from Nov. 1974 Guardian  

SARAH BAD HEART BULL  

Because of people's support and effort, Sarah Bad Heart Bull was released on parole November 15, 1974. She had been in prison in Yankton since June 21st, 1974. "Committees to Free Sarah" sprang up all over the country, of inciting to riot.  

Deborah Kantaeng, from Long Beach, Calif., is being charged with first degree murder in the shotgun killing of one of her alleged rapists.  

As she was leaving work, Deborah was forced into a car and then raped by two men at knifepoint. Before they would let her go she had to give them her address and phone number, and promise that she would not report the rape to the authorities.  

The next day the men called her and then came over to her house. She met them with a .410 gauge shotgun. In the presence of her father and brothers, she fired one shot, killing one of the men. The other one fled, later turning himself in to the police.  

After holding Ms. Kantaeng incommunicado for several days, the police finally released her on $10,900 bail.  

The Los Angeles Commission on Assaults Against Women announced its support of Ms. Kantaeng and is forming a defense fund for her. (The Commission runs a Rape Crisis Hotline in Los Angeles for women who have been raped.)  

Support can be sent to:  
Deborah Kantaeng Defense Fund  
c/o The Rape Crisis Hotline  
P.O. Box 145  
Venice, California 677-8116  

from Nov. 1974 issue of Sister  

INEZ GARCIA  

Inez Garcia Appeals Conviction  

Inez Garcia was sentenced October 21st, 1974, to five years to life in prison. She was convicted October 5th of killing Miguel Jimenez, who helped another man rape her.  

Inez admits to the shooting, saying, "Anyone who has been raped has the right to kill back."  

Nearly 200 supporters rallied at the sentencing in Monterey, California, shouting "Free Inez," and backing her in her claim that she killed in self-defense.  

Inez Garcia and Charles Garry, her counsel, appealed the conviction in San Francisco on October 26, 1974, and want a re-examination of court attitudes toward rape.  

Garry, in an interview with the New York Times, said that the South Dakota judge would not allow him to explore thoroughly the sociological and psychological questions of rape as it affects women.  

The charges were initiated largely by women in the American Indian Movement. People demonstrated, signed petitions, educated others, and rallied for her release.  

Three days of demonstrations were held in protest of the murder of Sarah's son, Wesley Bad Heart Bull. Wesley was shot by a white man, who later went free.  

Sarah is now appealing her conviction.  

He said that the appeal will assert that the court should expand its understanding of rape to accept the concept that rape so traumatizes women that a violent reaction constitutes a legally justifiable response.