ete snes

BY KATE LIGARE

I am not

complete and

For various reasons, however, I never had
the opportunity to be really physical around
men during the first twenty years of my life.
I watched them win their letters - first
with admiration, then disgust, then bemuse-
ment. I worked at a camp where the boys
took longer and more arduous canoe trips,
but I was always content with our placid
pace, pleased enough to be out in the wild
on my own.

My contact and awareness began innocently
enough. My college roommates and I decided
we wanted to run on the indoor track at the
male-inhabited stadium before breakfast.
Then we wanted to play squash in the after-
noons. And then we entered a beginner's
squash tournament and beat some fellow male
classmates. Such athletic competition and

Sweaty glory against men is one thing in
square white courts with controlled light
and heat - perhaps to a tradi-
tional physical education department -
but inconsequential in a more fundamental
sense.

As I began to camp and backpack alongside
men during my wilderness summers, a whole

new dimension of my existence as a physical
woman came into focus. In a life where phy-
sical strength and stamina became as essen-
tial to everyday survival as good judgment
and a quick mind, most female sexual stereo-
types came cascading down.

Concern over appearance became absurd;
striving for a clean body and a head of hair
were challenging enough when lakes still
supported ice floes. Clothing became asex-
ual. Everyone packed identical weights.
People cooked for their friends. Those who
had talent provided fish for supper. Mas-
culine/feminine roles seemed only another
artificiality of civilization that I was glad
to leave behind, totally and forever, I
thought at the time.

I felt free to be dirty, to sweat, to
strain to my physical limits and then enjoy
the day-end exhaustion. It felt good to be
primitive. I never had the sensation of
being particularly organic or close to Mother
Earth, but in retrospect, I guess our life
did exist in such dimensions.

Even that life, however, was somewhat
transitory and escapist. When I began this
summer, however, to work as a professional
instructor alongside men, my confidence fal-
tered for the first time. No longer was I
merely enjoying the wilderness, but along
with three men I assumed responsibility
for the safety and well-being of 26 students
for five weeks of instruction and backpack-
ing in the rugged Wind River mountains of
Wyoming. We had all received similar train-
ing as instructors, yet it was obvious from
the start that I was unequal. I soon came
to agree, but that acceptance of self was
difficult to achieve, even among men who
obviously could not be terribly chauvinistic
themselves if they allowed a woman in the
midst of such a “rugged, he-man" life.

I could read a map, catch fish, and do
nearly everything as well as the other three
instructors--except be as strong. I chose

Trick Knees And Other
Subterfuges

“Becky and Tric'

not to chew tobacco, but then so did they,
except for the times we met up with horse-
packers and fresh supplies. They could (and
did) cook as well as I. And I could (and
did) teach rappelling off cliffs as safely
as they. But when it came to hiking fast or
carrying heavy loads or jumping streams, I
found it hard to compete.

It was frustrating to be treated as femi-
nine, which in that case undeniably meant
weak; and yet it was just as unsatisfying to
attempt to be equal in a situation where I
could not even pretend to be.

When a girl collapsed of heat exhaustion,
Dave carried her pack on top of his, while
I coaxed her along, walking slowly and sev-
eral hours behind. When a boy got sick, I
was the one to fix tea and honey and sit up
half the night by the fire forcing energy
into his system. When another student seem-
ed to have appendicitis, it was men who con-
trolled and executed the evacuation proce-
dures, while women stayed behind and quite

literally kept the home fires burning. These —
(continued on page 3)

a Se he teth