continued from page 10

their bearded faces while they made all the  
important decisions, and we went along like  
sheep—and not one of them worked to speak of,  
only short part-time jobs, and every one of the  
women had work except for two who were pregnant  
and one girl who was sick a lot. Course, they  
were conducting the revolution," I say, and we  
all laugh at the picture of a bunch of guys  
sitting around jawing a revolution. "But the  
women ended up fighting among themselves, like  
we couldn't stick together because we seemed to  
be pitted against each other. Cuz it's always  
been that way? I don't know. I suppose we  
were scared because we thought we were depen-  
dent on them." I pause a minute so I can get  

i , so they'll un-  

"That really got me, how we fought  

with each other and how really the men were de-  
pendent on us and we never saw that. But that  
wasn't the worst."  

They're waiting now. Prickles run across my  
scalp. I fight to loosen my throat so I can  
talk. "Well... I got pregnant. And the  

guy I was living with... in the commune, you  
know, there were all couples... he has a fit,  
yells at me asking how I could let that hap-  
pen, and I say I didn't use artificial insem-  
ination, but he doesn't think that's funny,  
just stands there screaming at me. I say I  
want us to get out and live alone. He won't  
hear of it and when I push him about this he  
lets it out that he doesn't want to live with  
me anymore, not anywhere. I ask him shouldn't  
he be responsible for his own child? Then he  
lays it on me..." I see his flushed,  
twisted face, ugly now, not beautiful like it  
was when I first knew him, and the burning in  
my stomach shoots up between my ribs. "He tells  
me it isn't his kid, and I don't know what to  
say I'm so shocked, I can't believe my ears. I  
ask him how he can even think that, and he says  
with all the men in the place how does he know,  
and I say with all the women in the place does  
that mean he's been playing around? And he  
won't answer, just sits there, starts his pout-  
ing."  

I can't control my shivers now, nor my voice’  
erratic up and down swings, "I find out later  
he did get it on with several of the women—  
after all the love and honesty shit he spouted!  
I stuck with him 'cause I didn't know what else to  
do. I figured he'd have to want his kid once  
he was over the shock. But finding out about  
him and the others, that was too much. I con-  
front him with it and you won't believe what  
he says—he says ‘It's a free world, isn't it?'  
And that's the excuse he used to get out of  
claiming our baby, said he was free to accept  
or reject it, and besides, he still wasn't  
sure it was his. He says all these things and  
I can't believe anything's real, that I'm hear-  
ing all this, and I feel like I'm going nuts,  
everything I put my faith in believed in  
... all disappearing like the world is a mir-  
age and nothing solid... "My heart is  
drumming wildly in my ears. I'm sure they're  
going to pop. I don't see anyone in front of  
me, everything blurred, wavering, like in one  
of those horror house mirrors. I feel cold  
drops slip down the valley of my breasts. My  
ears ring and I hear someone screaming, "You  
lousy son of a bitch how can you reject your own  
baby? You! You say you cherish life and here  
you are trying to save a sick society and you  
can forget you made a life and what about  
that life?"  

Everyone is gaping at me and I clam up and  
breathe hard to stop the beating in my ears.  
That crazy Gracie says, "He says I need help,"  
and I think I'm going to scream. But I wait  

holding my breath 'cause they're sitting there  
gawking at me, not unkindly, just the way  
people do when they're embarrassed.  

I try to calm my voice but it tilts up, "Well  

when I have my baby they say I have to  
give it up."  

Someone gasps, "Why?"  

"Because I killed him." There, it's out now,  
the poison, and I can say it with a steel edge  
because now I'm empty inside and don't feel  
anything. "I stuck a knife in his gut. I did-  
n't think about it, just did it. And I'm not  
sure I wouldn't do it again, except I want my  
baby." I try to tell them after I get out of  
here I'll go to prison, but the words won't  
come. Instead I see him again—astonished,  
grasping spurting blood, rasping, "Bitch!  
Bitch!" These were his last words.  

The lights blink, warning us it's time to  
break. We avoid each other's eyes. Doris takes  
Gracie's arm, leading her like you would a  
small child and they head for the hallway that  
leads to gray dormitories and iron cots.  

I stay, because Sheila's trembling.  
I put my arms around her.  
She lays her head on my  
chest, whimpering.  

I say, "I know, I know.  
It'll be all right." But I know it won't be  
all right. They've told her she'll never get  
out of here if she doesn't adjust. She's terr-  
ified of that, and I know she won't sleep and  
I'll sit up with her tonight.  

Gracie's short soliloquy carried through the  
hallway—"He says I need help." Doris soothes  
her, "Sure, Gracie, I know. They say that's  
why we're here."  

Copyright 1974  

Blackwell cont’d, continued from page 7  

Another aspect of the group is to gather in-  
formation regarding needed services and a-  
vailable training women can receive now and  
in the future and what is available outside  
Minneapolis. Here is included doctors doing  
research into new gynecological and O.B.  
techniques.  

The two main groups of the task force are the  
advocacy and referral groups. The advocacy  
group is, at the present time, trying to  

find out which clinics in the area are favor-  
able to their cause and will allow them to  
accompany women while they are receiving  
treatment. They are concentrating mainly on  
menstrual extractions, vacuum aspirator  
abortions and D and C-type abortions, as far  
as accompanying women goes, until they have  
more expertise. There has already been a  
meeting with a counselor at the University  
of Minnesota Hospital's North Clinic, where  
abortions are performed. The response to  
advocacy there was favorable.  

Though still in the process of becoming, the  
task force wishes to gain skills for itself  
in women's health care and learn how to  
share these skills and knowledge with other  
women. For more information, or to volunteer  
information, call the Elizabeth Blackwell  
Women's Health Center, 335-7669.  

It is also planned to match women in rap  
groups and on a one-to-one basis regarding  
similar experiences with health care. These  
groups would be a support-type facility.  

i ©