what’s 9  
happening  

Excerpts from The Spokeswoman, July 15, 1974*  

JUNGLE ROT EXPOSED!  

New AT&T Agreement Gives $30-million to  
Women and Minorities. 25,000 managerial  
employees (most of them women) will share  

an estimated $30-million in back pay and fu-  
ture salary adjustments under a new agree-  
ment between AT&T, the Equal Employment  
Opportunity Commission (EEOC) and the U.S.  
Department of Labor and Justice. The agree-  
ment, which was entered as a consent decree  
in U.S. District Court May 30, is the second  
multi-million dollar settlement of discrimi-  
nation charges against the nation's largest  
private employer in a little more than a  
year. The earlier decree, which covered  
non-management employees, was entered in  
January, 1973.  

KKK  

The 10-year-old Federal Equal Pay Act was  
upheld in its first test before the U.S.  
Supreme Court. In a 5-3 decision, the high  
Court ruled that Corning Glass Works viola-  
ted the Act by paying male inspectors on the  
night shift more than women doing the same  
work in the daytime . . . The decision is  
expected to cost the Corning Glass Works at  
least $600,000 in back pay for women workers  
at three plants.  

KKK  

Rutgers Will Pay For Discrimination. 210  
women and minority faculty members at Rut-  
gers University will share $375,000 in back  
pay and salary adjustments in the largest  
‘compensatory settlement ever made by any  
university in the nation. The salary in-  
creases will put 186 women and 24 minority  
men on a par with their white male colleag-  
ues--in some cases retroactively to 1969.  

KKK  

Employment Briefs. The Iowa-Illinois Gas  

and Electric Company faces a charge by the  
U.S. Department of Labor that the utility is  
in violation of the Federal Equal Pay Act  
for paying women less than men doing sub-  
stantially the same work . . . Eastex, Inc.  
will give 137 women and minority employees  
$257,000 in back pay under a consent decree  
obtained by the Labor Department in resolu-  
tion of a suit charging Eastex with discri-  
mination in hiring, transfers and promotions.  
An additional $67,200 will also be paid in  
bonuses to 56 women transferring to other  
jobs . . . According to a recent report by  
the Washington, D.C. Commission on the  
Status of Women, the number of women in top  
D.C. government jobs decreased sharply between  
1968 and 1972 and even more markedly in some  
very high grades since then. The report  
showed that women holding positions in the  
GS 16-18 range fell from 14% of the work-  
force in 1968 to 8.3% in 1972. Current sta-  
tistics show no women holding GS 17 or 18  
jobs in the city government ... The New  
York State Division of Human Rights has  
found "probable cause" in its investigation  

of a complaint filed by the Suffolk chapter  
of the National Organization for Women  

(NOW) charging sex discrimination in em-  
ployment by the Suffolk County Police De-  
partment. The complaint was filed on behalf  
of all women applicants and officers.  

(NOTE: A booklet entitled "Equal Pay" is  
available free from the U.S. Department of  
Labor, Wage and Hours Division, Washington,  
D.C. 20210. Ask for WH Publication 1320  
Rev. July, 1973. The booklet includes in-  
formation about the Equal Pay Act, its en-  
forcement, the economic role of women, and  
court cases. Also, WHOM TO CONTACT IF YOU  
HAVE A COMPLAINT that you think fits into  
one of the categories such as those above.  
Don't be discouraged--you would contact the  
Wage and Hours Division of the Dept. of La-  
bor, not the Human Rights Commission!)  

MORE JUNGLE ROT.  

If you're concerned about our younguns and  
their continuing daily bath in educational  

sexism, read the following--and WRITE.  

HEW Finally Issues Title IX Regulations. The  
Department of Health, Education and Welfare  
has finally published proposed regulations  
for interpretation and enforcement of Title  
IX of the Education Act Amendments of 1972.  
The regulations are designed to particularize  
the general anti-sex discrimination stipula-  
tion of Title IX which says that "No person  
in the United States shall, on the basis of  
sex, be excluded from participation in, be  
denied the benefits of, or be subjected to  
discrimination under any education program  
or activity receiving Federal financial as-  
sistance."  

Generally, the regulations call for equal  
access and participation by both sexes in  
course offerings, extracurricular activi-  
ties and provision and use of facilities.  

In athletics, which has been a hotly de-  
bated area of the regulations, the proposed  
guidelines fall far short of requiring equal  
expenditure for teams and instruction for  
both men and women. The regulations state  
that "equal aggregate expenditures are not  
required." Requirements for equal travel  
and per-diem allowances which appeared in  
earlier versions of the regulations have  
been dropped and the status of athletic  
scholarship requirements remains unclear.  

Ann Scott, legislative vice president of  

the National Organization for Women (NOW)  
commented that HEW's approach "will encour-  
age segregation of athletic teams." Dis-  
couraging integration of teams, Ms. Scott  
continued, "is tantamount to passing pro-  
tective legislation--girls will go on think-  
ing they're inferior to boys and schools  
will continue to treat them that way."  

HEW has also excluded sexism and sex-stereo-  
typing in textbooks and curriculum from  
their regulations on the grounds that their  
inclusion "would raise grave constitutional  
questions under the First Amendment."  

Public hearings on the regulations will be  
held in twelve cities during the next six  
weeks; in addition, written comments can be  
submitted to the Secretary of Health, Educa-  
tion and Welfare until October 15, after  
which final guidelines will be issued. The  
Spokeswoman urges women to write to Secre-  
tary Weinberger and comment. Complete  
copies of the regulations can be obtained  
from the Office of Civil Rights, Dept. of  
Health, Education and Welfare, Washington,  

BL. continued on page 10