EMPLOYEES:

“PLEASE  
TAKE  
ONE  

and READ  

HAPPY NEW YEAR'S HOLDEN EMPLOYEES  

We want to wish you a happy New Year—  
and also want to express our feelings about a pamphlet  
which was passed out a few months ago to several of  
the workers at Holdens. The pamphlet is "Pam Says—  
The Feminine Female".  

What is femininity to you? Did the male  
employees get anything on how to be the "masculine  
male?" It's laid out really clearly what roles we  
are supposed to play...besides being a female  
office worker, we have to appeal to his emotions,  
his needs, his feelings. But what about OURS!  

Is it ever taken into consideration when we have  
headaches?  

When you enter the office, leave pettiness behind. Take with  
you your womanly tact, sympathy, and understanding.  

Make it your concern to help oil the wheels of the office operations,  

to keep it in smooth running order. Women in America have won  
emancipation—but have we lost the old  
gentleness and patience? Remember how King Lear spoke of his  
beloved daughter Cordelia after her death—“Her voice was ever  
soft, gentle, and low—an excellent thing in woman.” It’s a nice way  
to be remembered.  

It’s a treasure... I hate  
to see her go:  

You enjoy your work. The pay is good. The girls are easy to get along  
with. The office is pleasant. Your only gripe is your boss’s manner.  

Brusque, abrupt, rarely a kind word or touch of humor—you wonder  
sometimes if he knows you're alive, let alone appreciates you. It's hard  
on a girl. What would you do?  

1. Quit. Plenty of bosses do appreciate their staff.  
Why not seek a little limelight?  

2. Have a little talk with him. Use your womanly  
wiles to reform this blunt character.  

3. Nothing.  
(For Pam's Comment on your choice, see next page.)  

He’s changed. I used to be so  

PAM'S COMMENT:  

of your present job.  

Women who try to reform them  
may not prove to be the ogre  
he seems.  

If you are allowed out of  
all decent company,  
petty grievances  
are at the  
finale. Readers  
work just be-  
some extra in-  
come, you are badly mistaken. Most  
women work because they have to.  

Pam says, "Do nothing."  
Sara says, “You may be an Uncle Tom. An  
Uncle Tom (forget the confusion in gender  
for a minute) is a girl who acts out a  
man's preconceived idea of her subservient  
role. Black people use the term to mark  
the "good Negro" who behaves according to  
a white racist stereotype. The black Tom  
pretends to be, or sometimes even believes  
that he is, dumb, oversexed, and a talented  
singer, dancer, and pole-vaulter,  
because that's the way the whites would  
have it.  

Now, the feminists have appropriated the  
Tom label to describe a girl who "yes  
massah's" her man. Like the "good Negro,"  
she may do this consciously or unconsciously.  
Maybe she really believes that she's  
adorably helpless. Or, possibly, she has  
glimpsed the hypocrisy of the game that's  
being played but has decided it's the only  
one in town.  

As the feminists explain, a lady Tom ac-  
cepts privilege in place of responsibility.  
Her ability to do excellent or meticulous  
work is discredited, and her thoughts, dis-  
counted as "female illogic." At the same  
time, she enjoys the flattery and "pro-  
tection" of her man. It's a psychological  
truism that we grow into the roles other  
people design for us...and so the Tom (fe-  
male version) becomes progressively more  
inept at so-called masculine activities,  
like thinking and working, and turns into  

WHAT WOULD YOU DO?  

Now he’s almost human. 1. You might find an appreciative boss  

—but lose some of the advantages.  
2. No, no, no! Men don’t appreciate  
3. Certainly. Stick it out and stay your  
pleasant self. Give him time—he  

the incarnation of His Pampered Darling.  
The man's worship of woman as sex object  
"makes up" for her having been cheated and  
undermined in every other department.  
Ironically, the Tom girl is herself the  
System's most ardent defender. She stomps  
her little foot in rage whenever another  
woman suggests the female Tom may be uncer-  

privileged, insisting that she finds her  
femininity "wonderfully, divinely fulfilling,"  
and that any woman who doesn't feel  
the same way is hostile and castrating...a  

Lesbian or worse!  

A Tom is a victim, to be sure, but she is  
a collaborator. She is actively complicit  
with the man who casts her in a  
subservient role...probably because she is  
a little weak, and more than a little an-  
xious for male approval. She pays heavy  
dues for her self-betrayal.  

In conclusion, it's an illusion to believe  
that our bosses will change just because  
we are nice. The way that Pam frowns on  
the most is the one that we find to be the  
most effective—the first half of “2,” “have  
a little talk with the boss." This is the  
best way to deal with the situation. Let  
our bosses know that we are human. When  
they realize that they don't have to be  
Supermale images, then they will also know  
that they don't need any longer to  
surround themselves with the false images  
of femininity which they have used for so  
many years. They will discover that they  
are human, too—and not "almost human,"  
as Pam says.  

--Sara Bullit and friends