Women Behind Bars... fr. pg.12

HOW EFFECTIVE IS THE  
PRESENT PRISON SYSTEM ?

Marilyn: I don't believe in confining people in the  
environment of correctional facilities as they are  
today because they create criminals. It doesn't  
destroy anybody's tendency to want to go out and break  

the law—in fact, it makes you angry enough to want to  

go out and tear up the world. I feel that if we cannot  

deal, in our community, with our social illnesses  

such as crime, there's something drastically wrong  

with the system.

For further information on support and service groups,  

legal aid and education, prison programs, halfway  
houses, and books and resources, write to the address  

listed at the beginning of this article.

No Lady

The Amazon Bookstore, in operation since 1970 at various locations in  
Minneapolis, is now situated at 2607 Hennepin Ave. South. One of the few  
women's bookstores in the Midwest, Amazon serves the local area as well as mail ordering to  
Minnesota, Iowa, Canada and as far away as Mexico.  
It is a non-profit, collectively run store. The women who work there  
participate in all aspects of managing a business; book ordering,  
promotional activities, conferences, book reviewing, store tending and developing advertising. The staff of  
ten to fifteen people is volunteer, each person working four to eight hours a week.  
You will find more than interesting books to buy at the store. There are  
works by women artists, a lending library and arts and crafts of local women for  
sale. Also, frequent events are sponsored by Amazon such as readings,  
musical performances, photography displays and book reviews. With  
the bookstore becoming a cultural gathering place for women to share  
experiences, enthusiasms and talents, eventually these events will be sponsored by  
the community. To keep in contact with community activities Amazon serves as an  
information center for the Women’s Network and other local organizations.  
There is a community bulletin board of current women's events.  
Amazon’s goal is to become a non-capitalistic, self-sufficient women’s business with  
paid staff coordinators.  
They carry literature on herstory, sociology, psychology, poetry and  
children’s books which other area bookstores do not carry. In making them more  
accessible to women and men, it fulfills a role of supporting small feminist  
businesses that are also struggling to maintain themselves. Amazon supplies the tools  
by which we can redefine ourselves as women, analyze our condition and finally develop a  
strategy for changing our position in society.  
Open Monday through Friday and 12-6 Saturday. Stop by:  
Women artists are encouraged to bring their work to sell on consignment. Suggestions and questions are welcomed.

Prison didn't improve me none,

There was ten of us girls in the county jail—  
five white, five black awaiting trial for selling drugs.  
The white girls, they all on probation.  

Us black girls, we all go to Dwight. Me, three months.  
And I ask myself sitting on them concrete benches in  

county,  

How come? How come me and my sisters going to jail  
And the white girls going back to college?  
Their mothers come in here and weep—they get probation.  

My mama come in here  

weeping too  
But I going to Dwight  
And I think about that  

nose spread all over her face she  

But I don't come up with no answers.  

Ain't got no money for a lawyer.  
Hell, I couldn't even make bail.  

Met the defender five  
And I done what he said.  
Didn't seem like no trial to me, not  

I didn’t understand none of it.  

Six months to a year they give me.  

They ride us out there in a bus.  

See me playing the game—going to charm class and the body  
dynamics, (to learn my Feminine Role)  

And I take keypunching,  

and I do real well,  

My boyfriend, he come to see me twice, and then he stop  

coming.  

And when I have the baby, I give it up,  

Weren't nothing else for me to do.  

They give me twenty-five dollars when I get outta there  
And I wearing my winter clothes in July, and everyone knows  

where I coming from.  

Six months I try to find a job, make it straight.  
But every door I push against closed tight.  

This here piece of paper  

says I’m a first-class key puncher.  

But the man who give the job, he say I flunk that test.  
Sheeit man, I didn't flunk that test,  

You think I'm a criminal.  

I done my time, but you ain't re-classified me.  

I always be a criminal to you.  
One of the counselors say I “mentally ill,”  
I need treatment. Two hours a week they give me group  

therapy.  

The other hundred and fifteen, they lock me up—like an  
animal.  

And I ain’t got no neurosis noways.  

Sheeit, it’s this place make you ill...  

Other night, I took sick with the cramps;  

There weren't no doctor ‘til morning,  

He poke me in the sore spot and say, “Girl—  

You just wanna go to the hospital.  

Tea and toast!”  

Get you some tea and  

My girlfriend—she die of diabetes, before they do anything  

for her.  
She come outta here in  
a box. Looks like it won't be no different for me.  
That's how it is, Lady.  

No. Prison didn’t improve me none,  
“~anonymous, reprinted from The Chicago Seed.  

mxO04AMXOOW ZONPE