LeTTERS — entitled from pre 4

young leaders. Sharing organizational skills
and responsibilities is a two-way process—
people must want to learn. That desire
comes from a very real sense of the magni-
tude of the feminist struggle and the will-
ingness to dedicate much of one's time and
energy to tedious chores. That, in essence,
is the key to leadership. People who do not
fully understand the pressures and intrica-
cies of organizational work (because they
have not been in that position) obviously
cannot appreciate the perspective of active
organizers. The only way for them to learn
is to get their hands dirty with the chores
of responsibility—not just talk about ideas.
Implementation is the only standard by which
to judge the correctness of ideas and cor-
rectness makes for respected leadership.

Minnesota Feminists has inherited a fine
history of activism from Women's Liberation.
Strength and the ability to work effectively
around the issues that affect campus and
community women come from unity, not from
divisiveness on personal and political diff-
erences. My feelings at this point are ones
of extreme sadness. The feelings of many
women have been hurt. Some are YSA or Soci-
alist Workers Party members; others are wom-
en who also have been excluded from two
months of Minnesota Feminist meetings be-
cause they were considered to be too close
to members of the YSA on either a personal
or political level. That is not my defini-
tion of sisterhood. I think it's time this
divisiveness stops. We must concentrate our
efforts and energies on our real enemies,
not on each other.

Sincerely,

Becky Bohan

IDEALS OF FEMINISM DIE

I am not and have never been a member of
the Socialist Workers Party. Nonetheless,
I was lumped with the arbitrarily chosen
scapegoats, boxed in, and shoved out. I am
the victim of a purge of University of Minn-
esota Women's Liberation. My hopes about
sisterhood and the moral superiority of wom-
en have flown out the window. One whom I
once saw as a beloved sister, I now see as a
tragic power tripper.

The organization now called Minnesota Fem-
inists was not started this summer by twenty
dissatisfied women, as Jackie Byrd alleges.
It was started in 1971 during the student
strikes, under the name of University of
Minnesota Women's Liberation. Its purpose
was to meet and discuss the special needs of
women, which were not being met by the male-
dominated New Left, which Robin Morgan ref-
ers to as "The Boy's Movement." The organ-
ization has been extremely active and has
maintained its radical feminist line during
apathetic and hellsapoppin' political times.

One cannot accurately claim we met the
needs of only four or five women; or the
Socialist party. We have sponsored speak-
outs on rape, abortion, and day care. In the
1972-1973 school year we held campaigns for
legal abortion and exposed some of the
incompetent and dehumanizing gynecological
care women were getting at the University
health service. We demanded and got, with
the help of hundreds of righteously angry
women, pap smears at no additional charge,
pregnancy tests at no additional charge, and
an end to moral harassment at the hands of

certain gynecologists in the employ of the
University. In the same year, we sponsored,
with MWAAC, a conference and march for legal
abortion, both of which were attended by
several hundred people.

This past year our area of concentration
has been Women's Studies. Another victim of
exclusion, also not a socialist, developed
the idea for a course called "Feminism and
American Intellectual Life." The course
reached large numbers of women both in the
classroom and at the public lectures. One of
the seven speakers at the lectures was Robin
Morgan. Women's Liberation obtained a
Women's Studies Program at the University of
Minnesota, and we are determined to remain
available to agitate for more classes.

Women's Liberation has organized CR
groups and Women's Coalitions to lead anti-
war marches. Individually, we have been
involved in lobbying and letter writing cam-
paigns for the ERA, abortion, and we have
been involved in the political campaigns of
candidates from the Democrat and Socialist
parties. This spring we sponsored a confer-
ence featuring the great Flo Kennedy. (Who,
by the way, told us, "If you want to kick ass,
you've got to learn to aim high." She warned
us about "horizontal hostility," that is,
hostility toward one's equally oppressed
peers.) We also put on a Women's Fair and
Film Festival, providing an outlet to many
local female artists.

The activities we have sponsored have been
well attended and have turned thousands of
women on to the beauty of sisterhood. I
hope I have adequately illustrated that the
organization is not being run in the in-
terests of a few witches on red broomsticks
or some potentate in the Kremlin.

If things continue the way they have, the
organization may now be run in the interests
of one. It is amusing to the point of apop-
lexia to have Jackie declare, all innocent
of irony, "It doesn't do to have an organi-
zation that excludes women that are
different from us or doesn't think exactly
the way I think or someone else thinks."

Jackie Byrd met secretly all summer with
twenty women loosely connected with, but not
active in, Women's Liberation. The struct-
ural changes developed in these clandestine
meetings were not really changes, as I shall
illustrate. What was new was the undemo-
cratic way they were accomplished. Formerly
there had been a constant struggle to keep
the group non-exclusive. Not surprisingly,
some of the staunchest defenders of the
policy of non-exclusion were socialists.

With one exception, none of the ideas they
came up with were original. Task forces had
functioned most effectively on the issues of
the Health Service, Day Care, and Women's
Studies. As I already stated, Women's Lib-
eration was in favor of consciousness
raising groups and has sponsored them in the
past. We unfailingly held steering commit-
tee meetings to set policy and make the
agenda for meetings. The difference is that
then anyone who wanted to was encouraged to
attend. Now only elected CR 'representa-
tives' may attend! The one change which I
will remain opposed to is the institution
of "Star."

STAR? FEMINISM HAS NO STARS!

The original idea of the institution of
star was to poke fun at the media's habit of
continued on page 6