Since its formation, WPTC has held more-or
less weekly meetings, at which any of a va-
riety of activities can take place. Some-
times the evening is devoted to considering
the work of a major woman poet, sometimes

to a visit with poets of the reputation of
Diane Di Prima or Eve Merriam. There are
intensive individual critiques of the work
of individual members. There are open read-
ings, each poet presenting her latest work.
And sometimes WPTC holds business meetings
to plan an upcoming public reading and other
projects.

WPTC -- Public and Private

Shaw calls the group "organized anarchy,"
while Hanson suggests the milder term "re-
latively unstructured organization." Leader-
ship is fluid. "The leadership is passed
from one to another for brief periods. Any-
one who happens to have a project in mind is
leader for the moment," Hansen explains.

For a group which has no formal structure
-- "We'll never be a 'proper' organization,"
laughs Hanson -- WPTC has sponsored a remark-
able number of activities: six large-scale
public readings, 15 smaller readings at
such places as the St. Paul Open School and
Stillwater State Prison, a dozen mixed
readings in which women poets participated,
and six chapbooks featuring women poets. An
anthology is in progress.

Public activities reveal only one side
of the group's purpose, for WPTC functions
as much as a support group and critical
workshop as it does as a voice for women's
literary rights. This duality of function is
reflected in the different attitudes WPTC
members have about the organization, and
about their work. “Some of us are primarily
concerned with writing; our primary aim is
to be as professional as possible," says
Shaw. "For others, the writing is tangential
to political aspirations of liberating wo-
men." “Everyone comes to the group with dif-
ferent needs and expectations," Flandrick
explains.

Despite this, WPTC attempts to support
each woman's struggle to define an artistic
identity. For some, such support is a heady
experience. "I still feel like I'm giving
religious testimony when I talk about the
group," says Hanson. "Starting to think
about myself as a serious poet was an ec-
static experience. At first I was so fragile
and it was so scary. The Women Poets have
made me feel that what I have to say is im-
portant, that my experiences, however li-
mited, are valuable. It took me 25 years to
find that out." Women, Hanson claims, are
conditioned "to put ourselves and our own
experiences down. I remember, not long ago,
half-apologizing to a man for liking Joan
Didion."

Public and private activities merge, Wil-
liams feels, in the growing public aware-
ness of WPTC and of its members. "You never
heard of us as individuals. We have each
gained more public notice than we would have
without this group."

In addition to offering encouragement,
the group attempts to provide critical
analysis for the emerging poets. A problem
arises, however, in determining what stand-
ards to apply. Some women poets feel their
work has been judged by male standards, that
their unique vision has not been valued.

POETRY ...

"You can open your pants in public view,
but don't open the kitchen door,” snorts
Williams.

While Hanson denounces male critics for
being "not tuned in to female sensibility,"
she admits another problem, that "women
don't generally have the ego-strength of men
and are more vulnerable to criticism" -- for
which reason the group restricts its mem-
bership to women. Shaw elaborates: "We
felt that with only women, we'd work on a
sharing human basis; just because we're wo-
men. Well, it works and it doesn't work.
Right now it's the closest thing to an artis-
tic community there is here.

Flandrick describes it another way. "Most
women I know are just working on becoming
self-centered -- that's different, you know,
from being selfish. I used to buy the myth-
ology of artist-as-neurotic, of having to
transcend the ego. Well, women for the most
part don't have an ego to transcend. If
poetry is going to be saved, it's going to
be the women that save it."

Although the Women Poets profess to reject
male poetic sensibility, they have not yet
defined an alternative. "We've never evolved
a standard," Shaw says. "But I notice that
even when women write angry poems, there is
an element of tenderness, of sorrow," Wil-
liams sees women as "less myopic, more out
of the ego bubble, than men.

"What we do know," she sums up, "now that
we're hearing enough of women's poetry, is
that it is a different body than men's
poetry, and that some of it is vital, and
some is not."