By Heidi Reidel!

Finding the perfect obstetrical care took a lot of shopping around, but for Rebecca and Jose Barreiro of St. Paul, it was worth it. Rebecca explained their search and its fruits.

"I didn't want to have a doctor," said Rebecca. "I went to several but they didn't please me. They had an abrupt manner and I didn't feel they cared at all about me. I thought there had to be something else.”

Rebecca learned of Sharon Rising, a nurse midwife who teaches nurse-midwifery at the University of Minnesota School of Nursing. Rebecca said the way Rising treated her over the phone was a 100 percent improvement over the doctors she had seen.

"I decided I would go through with it. I'm a foreigner (she's from Cuba) and midwives were common where I came from. I wasn't scared of a midwife, but a lot of my friends said how could you do it? They think of midwifery as really medieval and spooky."

"I was her patient for four months before the baby was born. I liked the office visits a lot."

She said they were usually one-half hour to forty-five minutes long.

"Most doctors saw three or four patients in the time she saw me. She was not hurried and said I could call her any time. I didn't call. I'd save all my questions and take my time during the visit."

Rebecca spent the early part of her labor at home and didn't go to the hospital until her contractions came 30 seconds apart.

"She didn't rush me," continued Rebecca. "I checked with her all day long. I was educated as to the process so I could inform her fairly well about the timing and everything else."

Rebecca was glad to be home during her early labor. She thinks the bustle and confusion of a hospital would have detracted from the labor. "The sterility...the uncomfortable bed...the environment is not conducive to a relaxed labor," she explained.

When Rebecca, who hates the thought of hospitals, arrived, “it was great. When I was wheeled in, there was Sharon. She stayed with me all the time," said Rebecca. And that "all the time" amounted to seven more hours.

Like A Family Affair

"I'm a very high control person, I have to know what's happening to my body," Rebecca continued. "I had enough confidence in Sharon that I trusted what she said to me."

Sharon Rising's constant care had a special advantage for Rebecca. "I didn't have a whole barrage of nurses I didn't know coming in and out," she said.

Rebecca's exceptionally long labor had left her dehydrated and her muscles tense. Sharon decided she needed fluid intravenously and a muscle relaxing injection.

Rebecca didn't want the IV but, "I accepted it with Sharon, I wouldn't have with a nurse. She used a muscle relaxer that would leave me in control. She took a long time to explain it to me. Some just do, they don't explain. It was such an improvement over what my other American friends have told me."

"The whole thing was like a family affair. I didn't feel like I was sick. I had the best I could get," concluded Rebecca.

Midwifery Delivers Promises

Rebecca's and José's son should have been whisked off to the nursery because his temperature was 1/2 degree below normal. But Sharon let him stay with his new, excited parents to be nursed, photographed and played with for the first time.

Rebecca was ravenously hungry after 27 hours of labor. "No one eats at 3 a.m.," said Rebecca and all she got was toast and water. She fell asleep in the recovery room.

"When I woke up, Sharon was there. The nurse was still there." The hospital food wasn't enough to satisfy Rebecca's appetite so Sharon intervened on her behalf.

"She helped me a lot," said Rebecca. "All the other women were getting shit."

"Sharon came to see me twice a day,” continued Rebecca. "Most other women saw their doctors once a day or every other day and had no one to answer questions. Sharon came to visit me twice at home, too.”