Diaphragm

The diaphragm is a rubber, dome-shaped device that is inserted into the vagina before intercourse to cover the cervix to prevent sperm's entering it. To be effective, it must be used with a spermicidal cream or jelly, which is placed on both the inside and the outside and around the edge of the diaphragm. The diaphragm must be specially fitted for each woman by a physician. Refitting is sometimes necessary. For effective contraception, refitting is recommended if the original fitting was before or shortly after the loss of virginity, after a miscarriage or childbirth, after an operation, or after a weight gain or loss of at least ten pounds. A diaphragm will last for several years before it must be replaced.

The diaphragm can be inserted up to three to six hours before intercourse and shouldn't be removed until at least six hours after ejaculation. It may be left in place as long as twenty-four hours.

The diaphragm is less effective than the pill or the IUD. Out of every hundred women who use diaphragms for a full year, about twelve are likely to become pregnant. This failure rate, however, is largely due to improper use, and it is reduced to about three per year per hundred women if the diaphragm is carefully used with ample cream or jelly.

The main advantage of the diaphragm is that its use is completely safe. No side effects or long-range health hazards are associated with its use. A further advantage for those who have intercourse only occasionally is that it is used only at the time of intercourse and does not require taking medication for weeks or months when no intercourse is taking place.

The primary disadvantage of the diaphragm is that it must be inserted just before intercourse. Some feel that this action reduces spontaneity of the sex act. Also, it can become dislodged during intercourse. Masters and Johnson found that displacement occurs most often when a coital position other than the face-to-face, male-above position is used.

Condom

The condom, also called the rubber, the prophylactic, or the safety, is a thin rubber or animal-tissue sheath that is worn on the penis during intercourse. When used properly, it is about as effective as the diaphragm. The condom is unrolled onto the erect penis so that there is enough space at the tip for the ejaculate. Reservoir tip condoms are recommended. The penis must be withdrawn from the vagina immediately after the male ejaculates, while it is still erect.

The condom should be carefully removed, and the hands and the penis should be washed, particularly if the couple is going to continue to be in close physical contact.

A major advantage of the condom is that it is the only really effective means of contraception that can be purchased without a prescription. Another advantage is that, if used conscientiously and throughout the entire period of sexual contact, it may provide protection against venereal disease. Condoms are especially suited to those couples who have intercourse only occasionally and do not wish to go to the trouble and the expense of using the pill during periods in which there is no intercourse. Some problems with using the condom can be alleviated by careful selection. Condoms made of animal skin, while slightly more expensive, will minimize loss of sensation to the male. "Wet," or lubricated, condoms that will aid vaginal entry are also available.

A spermicidal cream or jelly can be used both to improve effectiveness and to aid in entry. One of these is applied to the condom after it is put on the penis. It should never be applied to the penis itself, because this could cause the condom to slip off during intercourse. Vaseline and other petroleum jelly should be avoided, because they can cause the rubber to deteriorate and tear.

Although condoms are 98 percent effective when used properly (put on before any penile penetration), even greater protection can be obtained by using the condom in combination with a spermicide, such as foam. This increases the protection to the same level as provided by the pill (100 percent).

Condoms are available at most pharmacies. The price varies by brand and by particular features, e.g., lubrication, and ranges from 30 cents to 75 cents each (10 cents each at Planned Parenthood).

Vaginal Spermicides

All spermicidal contraceptives consist of two components, a spermicide and a nonreactive base. The latter provides most of the substance and functions as a diaphragm to block mechanically. (See Figure 3.) Contraceptives include aerosol foams, gels, creams, and suppositories. They should be used immediately prior to intercourse, the time varying from type to type but ranging from fifteen minutes to one hour preceding intercourse.

Of all the types, the aerosol foam is probably the easiest to use and the least messy. It is also more likely to provide sufficient substance to cover the cervix and thus to prevent conception. Spermicidal suppositories are somewhat less effective. They should not be confused with "feminine hygiene" suppositories, which do not prevent conception.

The major disadvantage of using such contraceptives is that foreplay must be interrupted to apply them. Also, women may not urinate or walk around after they have been applied. Women who prefer to douche after intercourse must wait at least six hours. Spermicides must be reapplied if intercourse is to be repeated.

Vaginal spermicides are somewhat less effective than the diaphragm. Their effectiveness can be improved to 100 percent by using them in combination with the condom.

Spermicides can be purchased without prescription at most pharmacies. Aerosol foams are slightly more expensive than tablets or gels. The cost for this method would run between $1 and

NEXT TIME: Continuation of Part II: Contraception: HOW. To have, Satisfied Without Getting Screwed" was published by the ASUW Women's Commission in Seattle, Washington, in January 1972. This printing was funded by the Graduate and Professional Student Senate and by the Associated Students of the University of Washington. Authors are Lynn K. Hansen, Barbara Reskin, and Diana

Fallopian Tube— a

gest

Uterus

Bladder

Corde

Urethra. Bair

Spermicidal contraceptives must be used.

Each must be

Monthly contraceptive methods include coitus interruptus, rhythm, and douching.