Portrait of a Marriage

| Book Review

‘Vita, Violet

by Susan Cushman

My acquaintance with Vita Sackville-West has been a gradual and increasingly pleasant experience. I first noticed her while reading about Virginia Woolf; Vita was a writerly friend who lagged somewhat behind Virginia's literary tastes, yet thoroughly satisfied her as a companion. Virginia wrote, "I like her and being with her and the splendour... There is her maturity and full-breastedness; her being so much in full sail on the high tides, where I am coasting down backwaters; her capacity, I mean, to take the floor in any country... her being in short (what I have never been) a real woman. Then there is some voluptuousness about her; the grapes are ripe; and not reflective."

Virginia expressed her liking for Vita more fully in Orlando, a rambunctious, gallant novel about a hearty human being whose life spanned several centuries and encompassed an abrupt and final sex change. The book was dedicated to Vita and contained some curious photographs of her.

Orlando was perhaps the first positive public commemoration of a tumultuous, sexually ambivalent period in Vita's life. The second public recognition has come in the recently published Portrait of a Marriage (Atheneum, 249 pages, $10) by Nigel Nicolson, Vita's youngest son.

The book has five sections - two by Vita and three by Nicolson. Vita's are autobiographical, written when she was 28, married, and dramatically involved in a love affair with another woman - Violet Trefusis. She begins with her aristocratic heritage, passes through her apparently unhappy childhood, and finally concentrates on the conflict which arose when she could not decisively choose between Violet and her husband, diplomat Harold Nicolson. Her account gains momentum as she catches up to events in the final entries, which take on the immediacy of a diary.

‘An Absurd Circumstance’

Nicolson's portions serve as commentary and contextual filler, as he attempts to place Vita's incomplete autobiography within the framework of her entire life.

Vita had been married to Harold Nicolson for five years when she was reunited with Violet, a childhood friend, in a suddenly erotic relationship. It was not Vita's first homosexual involvement; prior to her marriage, she had been offhandedly conducting an affair with Rosamund, another childhood friend. Because she had not been seriously taken with Rosamund, whom she quite brutally shucked off after her wedding, Vita evidently considered sexual love between women a frivolous, easily controlled hobby.

But her love for Violet was powered by an irresistible impetus, for with Violet, Vita became a new, strangely exuberant person. Two years after the affair had begun in earnest, she wrote: "An absurd circumstance gave rise to the whole thing; I had just got clothes like the women-on-the-land were wearing, and in the unaccustomed freedom of breeches and gaiters I went into wild spirits; I ran, I shouted, I jumped, I climbed, I vaulted over gates, I felt like a schoolboy let out on a holiday; and Violet followed me across fields and woods with a new meekness, saying very little, but never taking her eyes off me... it was simply the drunkenness of liberation - the liberation of half my personality. She opened up to me a new sphere.”

After the sphere had lost its newness, it became infinitely complicated. Violet and Vita spent a passionate summer together, going off on small trips whenever they could. In late fall, they left for France with plans to return to England before Christmas. But in Paris, Vita took advantage of a newly discovered excitement.

The Boy Julian

"I dressed as a boy. It was easy, because I could put a khaki bandage round my head, which in those days was so common that it attracted no attention at all. I browned my face and hands... My height, of course, was my great advantage. I looked like a rather untidy young man, a sort of undergraduate, of about nineteen... Violet used to call me Julian. We dined together every evening in cafes and restaurants, and went to all the theatres. I shall never forget the evenings when we walked back slowly to our flat through the streets of Paris. I, personally, had never felt so free in my life. Perhaps we have never been so happy since."

The two lovers did not return at Christmas. By the time Vita and Violet meandered into London at the end of March, the "scandal" had become semi-public and Vita was urged to give Violet up to an impending marriage of her own.

Violet wanted to make a complete break and live with Vita in unhampered female freedom. Vita vacillated. Then Violet married, probably in an attempt to stir Vita into jealous action. The two rejected husbands conducted a united campaign in their efforts to separate their wives. In the end, after chases back and forth across Europe, the husbands were triumphant and the women parted in the spring of 1920. Their affair had lasted three years.

Soon after Vita's death in 1962, Nigel Nicolson found her short, handwritten autobiography locked away in her writing room. He waited until his father also died, and then a few years more, ten in all, before bringing the manuscript to light. Apparently, he feared that readers would condemn Vita and disregard the eventually stable and long-lasting marriage between his mother and father. As the title indicates, his commentary in Portrait of a Marriage reduces the affair with Violet to an episode within a larger, insulating framework. Harold Nicolson, also a homosexual, did not begrudge Vita an extramarital escapade, for he conducted some himself. But he was not prepared to let them permanently interrupt the continuum of his life with Vita. Though Vita had much the same attitude, the intensity of her relationship with Violet surprised. She wrote to 

"we married, you were older than I was, and far better informed. I was very