BROLLING  
AERP  

I happened to visit the Women's Erotic Art  
Show in the company of a man who joked about  
his nervousness at the prospect of being  
made into a sex symbol. As it turned out,  
nothing of the sort was in sight when we ar-  
rived at the Guild of Performing Arts where  
the show was held. I suspect that it will  
be some while before more people understand  
that feminists are not particularly interes-  
ted in mirror views, except perhaps as in-  
structive examples. We have too many objec-  
tions to the structure of society to blithe-  
ly do unto men as they have done unto us.  

So what constitutes female eroticism if  
not images of nude men with genitals waving?  
The women have put together a highly cere-  
bral collection which sees sexuality as a  
part of a social continuum, rather than a  
prurient pause. The almost formulaic attrac-  
tion of exposed organs topped by steamy  
glances plays a small role in this exhibi-  

tion.  
Humor rears its unpredictable head more  

than once, although I do not think every-  
body will laugh on cue. Take Susan Fiene  
Brown's ceramic "Adjustable Tit-Tureen" with  
its large breast demurely balanced on paw-  
like legs. The gears protrude from the base  
of the breast which is surrounded by a move-  
able shell. The idea is that the gears con-  
trol the position of the shell so that the  
viewer may have a breast of exactly the de-  
sired size.  

Another comic achievement is "What More Do  
You Want?" a cartoon by Marcella Williams.  
Somewhat in the Steig tradition, this simple  
drawing shows a naked woman reclining on her  
elbows. She is casting a wanly ironic gaze  
at a fierce little man who has entered her  
and lies engulfed to his shoulders. He has  
tossed the title question at his conqueror  
with such irritable ill will that I couldn't  
help but side with her. I imagine that  
other viewers, feminist or not, will enter  
much the same allegiance.  

These jocular approaches to the human body  
will probably arouse little erectile tissue  
in passersby. Eroticism has traditionally  
been a method of "getting away from it all,"  
and there has been no place in it for annoy-  
ing social commentary.  

The Women's Erotic Art Show changes all  
that. In practice, thought usually enhances,  
rather than inhibits, sexual pleasure. It's  
time that erotic artists appreciate the  
spice that comes from mental additives.  

Two related entries concentrate on female  
genitals. Debra Lorensen's fabric "Refuge"  
is a white cylinder with a warm red interior.  
Deep in the interior is a small, provocative  
button.  

A mixed media piece by Patricia Kerr exhi-  
bits a similarly impassive sensuality. A  
wooden carton with “Danger...Fuzes" marked  
on the sides is filled with white fur. A  
large, luminous red globe extrudes through  
a zippered opening in the furs and appears  

A Review  
by Susan Cushman  

almost to throb.  

I was not surprised at this interest in  
female bodies. The male body has been so  
diligently protected from the exposure which  
eroticism demands, that there is little  
groundwork for artists to share if they in-  
cline toward the subject. After all, do you  
show them up or down? How do you keep them  
from looking just a bit silly?  

Naked women, of course, never look silly,  
because we are too used to seeing ourselves  
portrayed that way. But women artists do  
have an obligation to invigorate some tired  
old conceptions that have been around too  
long. When women turn appreciative, knowing  
eyes on each other, the manmade artistic  
stereotypes are bound to slip out of view.  

The Women's Erotic Art Show is intimate,  
with 47 entries, and recommended. It con-  
tinues at the Guild of Performing Arts,  

504 Cedar Avenue through October 31.  

The gracefulness of Libra, it has been  
remarked, is like that of a Gothic arch:  
beauty based on balanced stress.  

Venus rules this sign: Venus, planet of  
love and art, representative of the des-  
cent of spirit into matter. For Venus-  
ruled Taurus, this manifests itself as  
earthy sensuality. But for Libra, the  
Venusian qualities are revealed as an  
abstract arrangement of opposing forces:  
hence the stereotypical disputative Libran  
always ready to take the "other side."  

The critical Libran consideration is  
the appropriate division of energy between  
social and personal needs. Born near the  
autumn equinox--when the light-ego is fast  
losing hours to the darkness-collective--  
Libra tends to overemphasize social  
demands. But the still-strong ego asserts  
itself regularly. Like its opposite, asser-  
tive Aries, the Libran perches on an un-  
easy edge between the demands of the inner  
self and those of the outward society. In  
contrast to Aries, however, Libra argues  
for the larger view, never using conflict  
to define personal territory.  

That Libra is often praised as a "femi-  
nine" sign--while it is actually an out-  
ward or "masculine" sign--is an interest-  
ing phenomenon. The rulership of Venus no  
doubt accounts for some of this attribu-  
tion, but Libra's tendency towards ex-  
cessive acculturation could as well be  
cited as cause. Luckily for Libran women,  
this balance between inward and outward  
represents a kind of androgyny, in that  
the Libran--always looking at both sides--  
is usually able to accept both her "male"  
and “female" qualities.  

NOTE: This article concludes Arcotti's  
year-long series of feminist interpreta-  
tions of zodiacal signs. Readers are in-  
vited to submit questions on astrological  
subjects, for answer in Gold Flower.