Joyce Guerrero

Continued from page 2

:

The denial of an Indian is
also a denial of constitu-

5 lar tribes. Both are designed
to keep Indian people in a subservient status in
order to continue the theft and exploitation of
their land and resources. Both are designed to
intimidate and silence those voices that are cal-
ling for full civil rights for Indian people.

The Watergate scandal has provided shocking testi-
mony to the ruthless and illegal use of federal
power in silencing those it considers "enemies."

We do not find it surprising that these same tac-
tics are used by federal authorities here in
Kansas.

no ai rte

Joyce Guerrero is a Pottawatomi Indian and proud
of it. Maybe it was her anger over the fact that
the Pottawatomi's had, in 1848, communal holdings
of nearly five million acres north of Topeka--they
now have communal holdings of 350 acres, with the
BIA a trustee for most of these 122 years, that
caused her to go on the Trail of Broken Treaties
and stand up for her rights. Excessive prison
terms are her rewards.

We believe that the protection of the civil
rights of each person, no matter how humble or
unknown, is crucial to the freedom of all the
American people. We have therefore formed the
Joyce Guerrero Support Committee, not only to
raise money for her appeal, but to serve notice
that the abuse of federal power will not go un-
challenged.

Make checks payable to Joyce Guerrero Defense Com-
mittee and mail to Topeka Indian Center, 407
West Lyman, Topeka, Kansas 66608, telephone
#913-357-1811. If you wish to contribute time,
contact Pavla Giese at AIM, tel. 227-0651 or
374-2833.
|

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

November 8, 1972

pafinpeee Pickers or there be no prose~-.
on for seizure and oc
the BIA building. si Ses,

J
EA

ct)
Deputy Director, Office
of Management & Budget

ee insiat
Leonard Garment

Special Assistant to
the President

Continued from page 1

Judy Chicago |
:

How does feminist art education differ from the
usual art education? For one thing, Chicago explained,
“Most schools don't give women a chance to struggle.
Women must struggle in order to become mature human
beings. Building in the opportunity for struggle is
one of the things we do in feminist art education.”

"One of the things our culture has not yet faced
is the damage done to women by our education. The
fact that women have been left out has meaning for our
self-image. Patriarchal assumptions are damaging us.

For a woman to be able to work in a new way, she must
be educated in a new way."
Ck > that the negative nature of female
f the reasons women have trouble

inist Art Workshop uses "modi-
raising techniques” to help women
get in touch with themselves and to give them the
support necessary for expanding their idea of what
they are capable of doing.

Chicago noted that the art at first produced by
women may be crude, but that it is necessary to ex-
press some of the anger and resentment before being
able to concentrate on technique.

Women in the Feminist Studio Workshop at first
had difficulty taking up the space available to them.
Most tended to work in a small corner. Giving each
person space and encouraging her to use it up is very
important in feminist art education, Chicago felt.

Another important factor is the study of other women
artists. "I had never known about many artists,”

Judy recalled, "I thought I was the first.”

"Work is the goal of feminist art education."
Judy noted that there were three stages involved:
1) Breaking our role-conditioned behavior; 2) Devel-
oping skills; and 3) Integrating skills and personal
sensibility.

The concept of feminist art education is an excit-
ing one and as Judy pointed out, the techniques being
used have implications for other types of education.
"Try using consciousness-raising techniques in the first
grade (asking the question to everyone and giving each
person the same amount of uninterrupted time in which
to answer). You'd be surprised how many children know
the answer."

The Feminist Art Workshop may not provide all the
answers to the question: How can education be struc-
tured so that it will be truly feminist and lead to
the development of whole human beings? But it certainly is
a magnificent start in the right direction. St. Cath-
erine's College must be congratulated for sponsoring
such an imaginative, forward-looking program.

GOLD FLOWER
P.O. BOX 8341
LAKE STREET STATION
MPLS MN 55408

Be Sor ‘inSt*siiorng.