10

Dainty June Only Peeks  
Through Wings of “Fly”  

by Mary Hastings  

Deeply-felt farewells are always eloquent to  

Lee Allen as Bunty Brads essays an energetic,  
the lover and the beloved.  

if drunken, roller skate dance.  

However, outsiders rarely can perceive the  
private beauty of these leavetakings and of-  
ten grow restive, embarrassed and, sadly,  
bored.  

After the "Montage," however, the play loses  
its vitality. “Ms. Havoc’s” characters suffer  
human weaknesses and are victims of cosmic  
cruelties. But the author does not engage  
the audience's sympathies.  

Such is the case with June Havoc's farewell  
to vaudeville, "I, Said the Fly," which had  
its world premiere September 20 at the Guth-  
rie Theater.  

Alma Marvel is pregnant and can't stop  
taking dangerous pratfalls because her hus-  
band/partner can't carry their act alone.  

The play, subtitled "A Souvenir," consti-  
tutes Ms. Havoc's remembrance of her life  

in vaudeville, which began when she was two-  
years-old "Baby June" and continued through  
her incarnation as "Miss Dainty June, the  
tiniest toe dancer in the world."  

Fanny Brad agonizes over Bunty's increasing  
dependence on the bottle.  

But I could perceive these dilemmas only at  
one remove--as though the author had anes-  
thetized her characters' pain.  

Vaudevillians and Geeks  

In "I, Said the Fly," Ms. Havoc presents the  
plight of a company of shopworn vaudevill-  

ians--Fanny and Bunty Brads, Big Gurn, Harry  
and Alma Marvel "And Company."  

Only Kenneth Welsh reached me in his por-  
trayal of Big Gurn, a second-rate performer  
who sadistically brutalizes "And Company,"  
the untalented young woman who assists him  
with the rats and guinea pigs who co-star  
with Big Gurn.  

The group is stranded in a mid-western tank  
town, struggling to avoid the fate of "geek  
acts" (performances in which animals are tor-  
tured and killed for the audience's edifica-  
tion).  

Welsh is repellant and convincing when he  
taunts "And Company" with her inability to  
commit suicide.  

Moths and Acrobats  

The group receives notifications from their  
agents that booking offices are closing:  
vaudeville is dead.  

The author mixes the dreamy, rather abstract  
quality of the "Montage" with the melo-  
dramatic "realism" of the second act.  

The finest moments in the production come at  
the beginning. A "Montage" of vaudevillians  
parades before the audience before the story  
begins.  

From time to time, silent tumblers and  
acrobats appear and mime a routine while  
the play's action goes forward. These  
attempts at surreal symbolism fail, as does  
the introduction of a moth-like figure in  
pink gauze who wafts across the stage dur-  
ing scene changes.  

Meet the Family  

The audience meets Bunty Brads and Family  
(Ms. Havoc plays Fanny Brads). In this re-  
creation of an old vaudeville routine, Ms.  
Havoc gives the audience the most fulfilling  
moments of the evening. Although she is  
well into middle age, she retains an econom-  
ical dancer's body and the confidence that  
must come from performing since infancy.  

Although "I, Said the Fly" is only as good  
as the "Montage" which opens it, the appear-  
ance of June Havoc is impressive.  

Seeing this talented, widely experienced  
woman was justification for my evening. I  
hope her next play is worthy of her.  

The "Montage" has a cinematic, "Felliniesque"  
quality. And, Barbara Byrne intensifies  

this mood as Alma Marvel, a sweet clown in  
baggy pants--very reminiscent of Giulietta  
Massina.  

Performances of "I, Said the Fly" continue  
with matinees and evening performances  
through September, October and November.  

PEOPLE’S | NATURAL FOODS  

COMPANY © =x«a0  

1534 EAST LAKE  

GRANOLA