enufocmenefor ono one acto nen cfu menSoa nonisfoxon

Dear Gold Flower Women,

I thought the August issue of your paper was magnificent: Your coverage of the socialist/feminist conference was excellent. I couldn't be there (I didn't even know about it), and I really appreciated seeing the many different feminist theories in print. Not only that, but your personal reactions to the conference gave me a good idea of the flavor of the weekend.

It was a packed issue, filled with good articles. I read it, cover to cover, in two sittings, underlining as I went!

Thank you very much.  
Kim Ardanuy

Yor sued for one em oner Yor onaxiYorr one efor one afore

A FEMINIST NEWSPAPER

$5 PER YEAR U.S. $4.50 CANADA & FOREIGN  
FREE TO PRISONERS IN JAILS AND MENTAL HOSPITALS.

WOMEN'S PRESS  
P.O. BOX 572  
EUGENE OREGON 97401

ABORTION update

Political threats. *The Church Amendment passed 92-1 in the U.S. Senate; it assures federally aided public and private hospitals that they can refuse to perform abortions or sterilizations because of the religious beliefs or moral convictions of the "institution."

*Legal Services attorneys are prohibited from helping with abortion cases.

*30 bills to amend the Constitution to prohibit abortions are presently in the U.S. House; 3 are in the U.S. Senate.

*Only 17% of public hospitals and 28% of private non-Catholic hospitals perform abortions.

Proposed Constitutional Amendments.

*S.J. Res. 1 Right to life guaranteed from moment of fertilization. Both abortion and IUD-type birth control devices preventing implantation banned.

*S.J. Res. 10 Ban on abortion except in cases where the pregnant woman's life is at stake.

*S.J. Res. 11 Would leave saving of women's life to the discretion of each state.

*S.J. Res. 91 Would return power to pass laws prohibiting abortion to the states.

WRITE: Senators Birch Bayh and Peter Rodino, United States Senate, Washington, D.C. 20510.

Watch for Martha Boesing's new play, "River Journal,” beginning November 7 and running Fridays, Saturdays, and Sundays for six weeks at the Walker Church. Next Gold Flower will present a feature article on Boesing.

17

THE SOCIOLOGY OF HOUSEWORK  
by Ann Oakley

This companion volume to Dr. Oakley's well-received Woman's Work will be required reading for anyone interested in issues affecting women’s liberation. It challenges both the conventional trivialization of housework and the sociological neglect of housework as a serious topic. In sociology, women tend to be studied either in their family roles—as wives and mothers—or as workers outside the home, but the role of unpaid domestic worker has not been studied seriously or systematically. This book examines the conventional treatment of women in sociology and analyzes interviews with forty young urban housewives.

“An intelligent, stimulating, densely-argued book."  
—The New Statesman  
“Original and absorbing."  
—The Times Literary Supplement

For review copies, please contact:  
Lynn C. Goldberg, Publicity Director  
Pantheon Books, 201 East 50th Street, New York, New York 10022  
(212) 572-2564.

NEW CO-OP

A new co-op, the Bryant-Central, is opening up October 1, at 3401 Fourth Avenue South. On Monday nights the members of the community meet to discuss the week's work needed to complete the project. It is still to be determined whether the co-op will hire workers or use volunteer helpers.

Individuals with technical skills are needed so the co-op can be finalized: electrician, carpenter, plumber, and refrigeration person. Anyone willing to volunteer services please call 827-7325.

Participation in our Food Coupon Program will bring the opening of the co-op to fruition. The Food Coupon Program sells coupons to the public in one and five dollar denominations and coupons are redeemable in three and six months. This way, people will not lose their money and at the same time are able to support the working people's store. Coupons can be purchased at the co-op or at Sabathani Community Center. Donations are accepted and may be sent to Bryant-Central Co-op, and are tax deductible.

MINNEAPOLIS  
WOMEN'S CLINIC, LTD.

Minneapolis Women's Clinic is a new clinic that offers free pregnancy testing, free family planning counseling, and abortions through the 12th week. For more information, call 612-870-7901. The new clinic is located at 2011 Chicago Avenue, Minneapolis, 55404.

EMPLOYMENT

The city of Minnetonka needs a city planner. Salary is open. Master's degree in planning with progressively responsible experience in the field, or bachelor's degree in planning with extensive progressively responsible experience in the field. The ability to communicate both orally and in writing with developers, local officials, employees, the general public, and citizen groups is essential. Will work within the Community Development Department in all phases of community planning and development. Excellent fringe benefits. Send resume or inquiries to Planning Applicant, Suite 535, 800 France Avenue South, Minneapolis, MN 55435.

An Equal Opportunity Employer

exter one xeYlorr cue efor one efor one refer onexeflore ona r tors :