feeling that she might be a lesbian. She  
said how beautiful women are. She talked  
about experiencing sensuality in what she  
thought would be a woman's way—not per-  
forming pre-established acts, but exploring  
sensations, textures, tastes. I learned a  
lot from this friend, and I would like to  
know her better. I hope our relationship  
can one day grow so that we can touch and  
give to each other on new levels. But for  
now, it has stopped growing. We do not  
even see each other as friends, only at  
meetings. I feel that the sexual pressure  
ruined our relationship. She was wondering  
whether she should sleep with me, while I  
wondered whether I would sleep with her. I  
was frustrated by not being able to show  
her, physically, my feelings for her. And  
she was not able, or ready, to consider  
herself a lesbian.  

One thing I've learned is that making love  
is not possible with all lesbians, not even  
with every lesbian that I care about. Each  
friendship seems to have a different physi-  
cal level. With some lesbian friends I  
barely touch. We hug hello and goodbye,  
and kiss on the cheek, or quickly on the  
lips. With other friends, I can walk hand-  
in-hand, rub noses, rock in one another's  
arms, and sleep face-to-face, embracing.  

I love each woman on a unique level, and I  
am learning to express my love for each  
woman in a unique and appropriate way. For  
one thing, I am learning that “sleeping  
with" doesn't necessarily mean "making  
love.” And neither does kissing, fondling,  
or loving glances necessarily mean that I  
want genital sex from the relationship.  

I was so happy after the last women poets'  
meeting when an old friend and I cuddled.  

I hadn't seen her for a long time. I was  
glad to see her. I was loving her. And  

I felt like being hugged, so I sat on her  
lap. She put her arms around me. We  
rocked, and patted, and fondled, and talked  
for a while. I have been touching my lesbian  
friends in that way, but this was the first  
time I had had such a positive and easy phys-  
ical experience with a straight woman.  
Usually I feel unsatisfied by the physical  
affection straight women show me. It often  

comes as a quick pat, halting, and with the  
hand quickly jerked away. No lingering  
touches. I like to be warmed by being  
touched. I like to warm other women by  
touching them. And the part of touching  
that seems to warm me best is the lingering  
kind of touch, a touch that conveys a feel-  
ing of comfort and acceptance. I hope that  
straight women and lesbians will learn to  
touch one another warmly, and without fear  
of what that touching means.  

Such open relationships will take hard work.  
We are going to have to be honest with one  
another, and talk to one another a lot about  
our different lifestyles. For me, it is  
difficult to understand the reality of a  

straight woman's life. I can't really pic-  
ture what she feels as she relates to men.  
I don't know what kind of changes or growth  
she expects to experience with men.  

Married women, family women, women living  
with men and doing the housekeeping, even  
women living with men and working to improve  
the relationship between men and women,  

all these are lifestyles which are foreign  
to my experience. Since I left my parents'  
home in 1967, I have shared a home with a  
man only once, for three months, more than  
two years ago. Since then, my closer  
friends and my roommates have all been  
lesbians.  

To straight women my experience is foreign.  
When I told the Twin City Women Poets that  
I was living in a women's culture, one  
woman said, "but that's not reality." We  
each have our own reality. Part of me  

goes to work forty hours a week at an alien-  
ating job. Part of me pays rent to a male  
landlord. Part of me spends money at  
capitalist food stores when I don't feel  
like walking six blocks to a food co-op.  
But there is a large part of me that works  
as fast as I can to learn about women.  

That means to learn about myself, too. It  
means looking for my roots in the history  
of the Matriarchy. Woman-centered cultures.  
Goddesses. Witches. Herbalists. Midwives.  
Hecate. Artemis. Diana. Athena. Joan  

of Arc. Amelia Earhart. Wonder Woman.  
Billy Jean King. All of our past and  

Our strength  
that never has been completely buried,  

that was here all along. I want to be  
strong, and I want to be able to give  
strength to other women.  

I see our strength building. I spent  
Thanksgiving on a farm in Wisconsin. Four  
women friends of mine live there, and two  
children friends. The women are raising  
the children, seven horses, chickens, ducks,  
three dogs, two cats, bees, and one another.  
They have cut a pile of wood bigger than  
their house. They eat their own bees'  

honey and use the beeswax in a salve for  
their horses' hooves. As for dreams, one  
of the finest I've known was a reality:  
White Mare galloping across a crisp, frosty  
field with Marea astride. The horse is all  
white, muscled, the most spirited of all  
their horses. Only Marea can handle her  
riding bareback. Marea's hair and White  
Mare's magnificent tail were flying behind  
as they galloped. Marea looked serious,  
resolute, not at all frightened. I thought  
of Joan of Arc. Heroines. A dream living.  

There are lots of women's farms. I have  
heard of them in Washington, Oregon, Cal-  
ifornia, Colorado, Arkansas, and Minnesota.  
I see women learning to become self-suffi-  
cient for food and energy. I see this  
learning as a reality which will help bring  
about the larger reality of a woman's cul-  
ture. I see dreams growing in the city,  
too. The Lesbian Resource Center, Twin  
City Women Poets, Goldflower, So's Your Old  
Lady, the Elizabeth Blackwell women’s health  
clinic, Women's Counseling Service, the  
food co-ops, and the North Country dry  
goods store have all grown from the dreams  
of women.  

A good thing that happened recently at a  
women poets’ meeting was one woman saying  
we need to write more about our hopes and  
accomplishments, and less about our troubles  
and shortcomings. I agree. I think we  
will truly begin to love and energize one  
another when we start giving other women  
our dreams. Goodbye to Sylvia Plath. I  
don't want to listen to her madness any  
more. And as for Virginia Woolf in the  
river, I'd like to see her come wading back  

out, unburdening herself of stones by throw-  
ing them at her oppressors. I don't want  

to think about her sinking. I won't give  

in to madness or suicide, as long as there  
are women to love me, touch me, and feed me  
dreams.