Women Poets:

Seeking Community,  
Exploring New Sensibility  

Collecting information on the Women Poets  
of the Twin Cities, I felt like the prover-  
bial blind men trying to understand an ele-  
phant by touch. It is a writer's workshop,  
I exclaimed, grabbing at one end. It's a  
feminist consciousness raising group, I  
thought, checking out another part. It  
exists to sponsor readings. No, its pur-  
pose is to establish critical standards.  
Each time I explored another aspect of the  
Women Poets of the Twin Cities, it seemed a  
different organization--and the whole makes  
up quite as unlikely an animal as that pro-  
verbial elephant.  

Undefinable and All-Embracing  

The Women Poets themselves are as undefi-  
nable as their organization. Looking at  
Phebe Hanson, one sees a Woman Poet to be a  
fortyish professional woman and mother who  
began writing recently after a long silence.  
But then, a Woman Poet seems to be academi-  
cally trained, published in literary maga-  
zines and involved in Minnesota publishing  
ventures, like Jenne Andrews. Or a faculty  
wife and mother long active in local liter-  
ary activities (like Beryle Williams), or  
a dedicated and experienced public reader  
(like Mary Ellen Shaw) or a college drop-  
out and former resistance worker (like Mary  
Pat Flandrick). Or some 30 other possibili-  
ties, one for each member of this amorphous  
organization.  

The Women Poets themselves are perhaps  
best described by the continuums upon which  
they fall: from teen-aged to middle-aged,  
from counterculture to middle-class, from  

gay to straight, from politically radical to  

moderate, from just embarking on a literary  

career to semi-established. Their rather an-  
archic organization slides across other con-  

tinuums, from private to public, from per-  

sonal to political, from poetic to polemical.  

The generic name is a symbol of the in-  
clusiveness and diversity of the group: to  
be a Woman Poet of the Twin Cities is to be  

just that. Patricia Hampl, who's too busy to  

attend meetings, still feels part of the  
group, saying, "I'm a woman writing poetry  
in St. Paul. By definition I'm a Woman Poet  

of the Twin Cities." There are active members  
and inactive members, and members who haven't  

yet joined.  

by Pat Monaghan  

Invisible Women Poets  

Doubtless, two years ago there were women  
poets in the Twin Cities. There were numer-  
ous poetry readings and a burgeoning sense  
of literary community. But women were rare  
on the platform and in local publications.  
They were excluded from speaking at poetry  
seminars and other educational events, or  
represented by a token few. There were  
women poets here, but no one knew how many,  
or who they were.  

Then at a reading featuring men poets,  
Penny Seuss abruptly turned to Beryle Willi  
ams and demanded, "If I have a reading, will  
you read?" Four women organized the first  
reading, held in November, 1971, that drew  
what Williams calls "a devoted audience."  

"We organized because we weren't hearing  
any women's poetry, and weren't getting ac-  
quainted in private ways,” Williams explain-  
ed. "It grew out of our need. We needed to  
write and share and have it heard."  

An open reading at the end of the program  
brought more women poets into evidence. A  
meeting soon after brought out even more,  
and the Women Poets of the Twin Cities (WP-  
TC) was launched.  

Some of the women are harsh on the poetic  
establishment that drove them to organize a  
separate group. "Men were turning poetry  
readings into wakes,” grimaces Flandrick.  
"Now, wakes can be very moving. But I want  
to go to poetry readings and find poets who  
excite me."  

Shaw, who organized the first meeting of  
the WPTC, deplores "the club of poets who  
were reading private jokes and disserta-  
tions." She remembers the "exciting vision"  
that led to the organization of the Women  
Poets. "We felt we could be a great new  
force in literature, writing not against but  
for each other. We felt that we could build  
a community of artists. We wanted to write  
closer to the life of people and to our own  
life, to speak to an audience that had been  
turned off by poetry. We felt that we could  
change the ideas of women and their lives."