SUMMER’S NIGHT

by Cindy Battis

That fierce summer night--I loved it. The wind  
howled through the woods throwing branches that top-  
pled and snapped against trees and rocks. The moon  
cast a faint yellow glow over the grey clouds. At  
times a clump of brush would run cartwheels across  
the old farm road in front of me. I had my hands  
tightly fisted in the pockets of my unzipped sweat-  
shirt; now and then, the hood flapped behind. The  
horses beyond the fence next to me were death-like in  
sleep and I could have pushed them over like statues  
if I'd wanted. I wondered if they could sense my  
being there.

I often walked the farm road at night; but the com-  
forting peace from the walk together with the fierce  
winds gave me a feeling of uneasiness which I couldn't  
understand. Leaves raced in lines around tree trunks,  
coarse tips of abandoned wheat stems rustled and  
scratched. I came to a bend in the road and sat on  

a fallen branch for a moment. The trees swayed so  
heavily that they creaked like old barn doors in  
chorus across the hill. They stood alone, solid,  

some swaying only at their tops. The pasture in front  
of me had been eaten to its skin with just a few re-  
maining stubbles. Far beyond it stood dark houses  
scattered in a row, their windows like eyes peering  
into the night.

The wind tossed my hair, pulling it away from my face  
when I bent to pick a stone. I stood up and resumed  
my walk, fearing nothing; I knew the road too well,  
and it comforted my uneasiness. I thought about the  
trees and the long white grass: could they feel my  
presence? Were they welcoming me? Once a family of  
skunks had crossed the road to the woods, stopping me  
in my tracks. Like a toy train they were, linked be-  
hind the engine, bobbling to and fro as they passed  
over uneven track. I imagined all the animals com-  
ing out of the forest to greet me. Would we play  
games? Maybe I could teach them. But I wouldn't  
want to teach them, I wouldn't want to play games  
because the power of the wild night was what intrigued  
me most. An old basswood tree, long dead, marked the  
end of the farm road. I was about a mile from home.  
A huge limb cracked by lightning clung desperately.  
The old tree was once like a playground with limbs  
low enough to scurry up but so big around, my hands  
could never touch. My brothers and I would often  
send someone up a branch to survey the land and make  
sure no enemies were planning attacks on our fort,  
sheltered by the old tree and the prime envy of the  
neighborhood kids.

Suddenly a hand slapped my face  

past the big tree on up the hill, through long, tang-  
led golden hair that I lost sight of my shoes in, and  
even through the maze of sumac near the top. The  
wind was so strong at the top that I had to shelter  
my face with my right arm, my hand holding its cuff  
by a thumb, and once in a while I'd turn my head to  
the side only to hear distant winds beyond the hill.  
I couldn't see much except swaying branches and dis-  
tant lights. I looked at the moon veiled with mist;  
I knew we'd get rain the next day. I started down  
the other side of the hill and put my arm down again.  
I could see the bottom, dark with heavy brush. I put  
my hands into my pockets and kept on going, content  
with the light.

Suddenly a hand slapped my face. I grabbed at it,  
unable to scream, my eyes wide and searching. The  
arm was bulky and heavy, and behind me there was deep  
laughter. I was being dragged backwards and couldn't  
turn to see what was happening. I gasped. I squirm-  
ed and broke away. A stocky man stood staring, his  

eyes like fire as he leered through rotting teeth.  
He was making sounds, but there were no words; his  

arms stood out from his sides as if he were ready to  
draw his guns. He took slow, staggering steps towards  
me still laughing that terrible laugh. My heart pu-  
pounded and the wind whistled through my mouth, ary-  
ing my teeth. Then he twitched his eyebrows and  
dropped his pants. I felt as death-like as the hor-  
ses. With one hand he beckoned me toward him, the  
other he held between his legs. I turned away sharp-  
ly and fell sprawling over a clump of soil; he began  

to run at me laughing, pulling at his pants. I scram-  
bled to my feet and ran back up to the top of the  
hill. The sumac whipped and scratched me; one branch  
hit me in the eye and I winced in pain. Breathing heav-  
ily, I rested a moment against the old basswood  
tree as the man's massive body came crashing through  
the sumac at the top of the hill.

I slid under the barbed wire fence, catching my sweat-  
shirt. Horrified, I swerved to see where the man was,  
ripped my arms from the sweatshirt sleeves and left it.  
My legs ached. My right knee was cold and wet and I  
knew it was cut. I glanced back to see the man  
was crawling beneath the fence, but I was gaining  
distance towards home. I alarmed the horses as I pas-  
sed and they began to run, their tails up on their  
backs, heads shifting to either side. I whistled but  
they couldn't hear in the wind. I reached a worn  
horse trail and ran towards the barn, hearing only my  
heavy breathing and the howling wind. Once past the  
barn, I felt safer but continued to glance at the  
trees as I ran, fearing he would pop out from behind  
one. I didn’t stop until I reached the kitchen door  
and then I almost pulled it off the hinges. I  
slammed it and locked it and then fell against the  
wall to catch my breath, closing my eyes to control  
my dizziness. I banged at the panel switch on the  
wall for the light that hung over the kitchen table and then fell to the floor.  
My whole body pounded as if I were all heart, and my  
sweat tickled. When I was breathing normally again,  

I got up, feeling as though I were floating, and I  
went to the sink for some water. My hands shook so,  
I could hardly pick up the glass and my legs trembled,  
though I knew I was safer now. I stumbled sloppily  

up the steps to my room. My face and hands were a  
mess and I spent a long time cleaning my wounds in  
the bathroom. My right eye was red; I could scarcely  
see from it. I wondered if it was bleeding or if  

eyes bled at all. My skin swelled around it. I  
wanted to wake my sister, her room was right next to  

the bathroom, but I was too shaken to do it. I  

felt my way back down the long hall to my room and  
wept.

Early the next morning  

Early the next morning I was awakened by whistling beyond  
my window that I knew couldn't be the birds. I  
crawled slowly out of bed to have a look. My brother  
was cutting across the neighbor's lawn, swinging a  
dirty sweatshirt at his side.

Only a man  
can have a  
vagina