When the Maid of Orleans  
entered Rheims  
Her beauty shamed the fleur de lis.  

But Bernadette,  
Your Celtic jaw moves me more,  

Your bodyguards carry Parnell's  
fire as they ring you here  

in this alien room.  

I love you, Bernadette,  

Make me understand  
your war.  

Sister, why do you  
lead an army of hating men  
who tear the arms from your child—  

the one they fathered?  

Leave them, Bernadette,  
and let the green of your land  
grow tight over their graves.  

Leave them, Bernadette,  

for I see they carry with them  
a stake  

Like Joan's.  

She looked like my sister, my cousins, my  
mother—sturdy Irish body, round gray eyes,  
strong jaw.  

And that familiar physique was only one sur-  
prise Bernadette Devlin had in store for me.  

I had misgivings as I crossed the Washington  
Avenue Bridge one rainy Friday night recently.  
I trudged along, and catalogued my reserva-  
tions about the Northern Irish Leader and for-  
mer member of the House of Commons:  

She adheres to a political philosophy I find  
limited, to say the least; I am opposed to  
violence as a revolutionary tool, and, most  
important, I believe she leads an essential-  
ly “male struggle”—she is no feminist.  

So I was cool and detached when I entered the  
West Bank Auditorium for the event, sponsored  
by West Bank Union, Young Socialist Alliance  
and Coffman Union Programs.  

The many activists in the audience rubbed  

elbows and thighs with middle-aged priests  
and curious students. I had a camera and  

ruefully reflected on my expectations of a  
small gathering as I threaded through the  

arms and legs in the aisles.  

I wanted to photograph Bernadette; pictures  
I'd seen revealed her to be small-eyed and  
tough. So I wandered about the stage area,  
wondering when she would arrive, impatient  
to return to my seat.  

I almost missed her because she was surround-  
ed by men and women, all taller than she.  

And when I approached with the camera, heard  
her gasping for air, clenching her fists, I  
sympathized. I would also be terrified to  
face a large, alien audience.  

But she swayed me with the Celtic gift of  
eloquence. "We want to own our country,"  
she declared. "As Irish workers, we want  
to control every blade of grass..."  

She led me through the streets of Belfast's  
ghettoes, "occupied by 16,000 British sol-  
diers." On those streets she and her com-  
patriots find their families and friends shat-  
tered or dead. Into those streets they are  

led at 3 a.m. toward internment camps. Along  
those streets, she and other Irish can be  
“stopped, searched at any time."  

Carrying on a day-to-day routine is impos-  

sible for the Northern Irish, she said.  

"You can be searched endless numbers of  
times."  

She told of liberal dissatisfaction from her  
cause. “Nothing goes to my heart like the  
sorrow liberals have for us," she said drily.  
"But we have one problem—we're violent.”  

"You can never support the oppressed if they  
are violent."  

But pacifism got the Irish Catholics nowhere,  
she said.  

"I used to be liberal," she continued. "I  
really believed if we asked the government  
for things we needed, we'd get them."  

And, like power hierarchies everywhere, the  
British establishment encouraged that be-  
lief in the Irish Catholics: "go to the bal-  
lot box to bring about change.”  

When the changes didn't come "we took to the  
streets; on the streets we got our education"  

"We discovered you could stretch and stand  
and see people who had been cowering in cor-  
ners all their lives."  

“Once people stretch with human dignity you  
can't put them back into the box."  

Violence is the last resort for the Northern  
Irish Catholics. "Let it be understood,"  
she stressed, "we don't like violence in  
Northern Ireland. But we are not left much  
choice when we have 16,000 soldiers with  
very modern weapons occupying us. We have a  
choice to lie down or stand up and fight."  
Con't on 16  

——_—— eS