The humanity, the life of Chinatown remains elusive  
to the "bok kwei," white devil. "The Chinese or  
Japanese or Koreans or Filipinos are such nice, quiet  
people. There's no juvenile delinquency." So quiet  
and hardworking that white society holds up our  
"success" as an example to other minorities. Yet it  
denies us entry to minority educational or employment  
programs because we have made it. We have learned  
the white man's game and sometimes beat him at it.  
Not only is there nothing to win but the competition  
between minorities and oppressed peoples keeps us  
distracted from the real source of our oppression.  

you would be quiet, too  

The stereotype evolves out of a keen sense of self-  
preservation. "I try to remember that in previous  
generations the Chinese in America were forced to  
assume the most servile roles to escape lynching  

mobs, house burnings, that even today they must kow-tow  
or be the first to be fired and the last to be  
promoted." (From Asian Women, "Oppression and  
Survival," Lai Jen.) The atomic bomb on Hiroshima-  
Nagasaki, 1942 internment of Japanese Americans, and  
the genocide of Vietnamese are recent reminders.  

asian women stereotypes  

The history of Asian American women is largely  
affected by American immigration laws. Through this  
history, the foundations of the oriental stereotype  
can be understood.  

Most of the stereotypes find their origins in the  
Anti-Chinese period of 1870-1900 in America. During  
this time racism took the form of anti-Chinese  
immigration laws, "Chinese Must Go" campaigns, 1892  
Geary Act denying equal protection of the courts.  
The phrase "not a Chinaman's chance" originated  
during this time and reflected the judicial treatment  
of Asian Americans. The immigration law history is  
too long to explain here. In 1882 the Chinese Exclusion  
Act was passed preventing the "undesirable" Chinese  
worker from coming over. It was the climax of yellow  
peril when thousands of Chinese families and workers  
were killed by vigilantes. The Immigration Act of  

1924 stated all non-whites except of African descent  
were forbidden entry.  

Few women were ever allowed entry which led to  
stealing women from China and selling them to  
brothels which paid off immigration officials.  

These women were the "slave girl" traffic frequently  
supervised by the tongs. Women of all classes were  
subject to kidnapping due to the desperate situation  
for Chinese males. Not until the 1930s was there a  
sizable proportion of Chinese females for families.  
So, immigration law was unjust as well as punitive  
by sex and class. Only workers and women were  
forbidden entry. But, few other Chinese came anyway,  
knowing of the unwelcome situation despite stories  
of the "Mountain of Gold."  

In sum, the Exclusion Laws set into motion forces  
that were to pollute Sino-American relations,  
perpetuate an unnatural migratory labor situation in  
California, depriving certain citizens of the right  
to a home (forbidden to own land) and family, and  
insulate the American people against a true under-  
standing of the Chinese (and other Asians) and their  

heritage. (See The Story of the Chinese in America,  
B. L. Sung.)  

This character, pronounced "onna" in Japanese and  
"niu" in Chinese, is the symbol for WOMAN.  

The image of prostitution of Asian women persisted  
from the Chinese Exclusion Act to the influx of  
Japanese in 1900-1910. The Japanese-American male in  
the 1900s used the method of “picture brides." It  
was an extension of the arranged Japanese marriage  
but it added fuel to the anti-Japanese movement.  
These were un-Christian practices. Clear evidence  
that the Japanese could not assimilate. That the  
women were immoral and did not care which man she  
married. What was directed against Chinese-American  
women has been used at later periods against the  
Japanese American and Filipino American women.  

When erotic art and literature of China and Japan  
became known to Americans, an exotic "oriental" aura  
was associated with women in Asia and consequently  
attributed to Asian American women. The image of  
geishas, courtesans and concubines remains a vivid  
part of the stereotype Asian American women confront.  
The racist-sexist portrayals of females in movies  
such as Suzie Wong and Charlie Chan and in advertising  
are commonplace. Current shaving lotion ads depict  
Asian women preferring white men thereby reinforcing  
the concept of the weak Asian male as counterpart to  
the sexy lady.  

World War II, Korean "Conflict" and the Vietnam  

War used the symbol of Asian women to perpetuate  
racism against Asians. "A good gook is a dead one."  
The G.I. experience is extremely important because  
G.I.s are the largest group of Americans to have  
contact with Asian cultures. They have helped form  
American attitudes toward Asians -- especially Asian  
women.  

Continued on page 10  

From GIDRA