Law::::

covered a girl who has lower scores than I do." There is not disdain for the brighter women - merely an attitude of "I wouldn't want to marry one."

There is a sort of fraternity atmosphere around the law school, complete with football pools and poker games. In fact, there is an actual law fraternity with "Mixers" with undergraduate sororities so "the guys in the house can get to meet some girls." Signs advertising such an event read "Law Students $1.50; Girls 50¢." In an attempt to remedy this inadvertent error - as it was explained to me - the word "male" was inserted after "Law Students."

To be fair to the law fraternity, though, while it houses only men at the present time I was told by the president that any woman who wanted could move in. It strikes me as not in the least surprising that no one has yet jumped at the opportunity.

Of course, it is not fair to let the assumption be made that all men in law school share the above outlook on life. The truth is that most law students ignore the whole issue and just keep on studying.

My real dissatisfaction with law school is not so much based on the personal attitudes of my "colleagues" or the gaps in the institutional attempts to promote equal treatment of men and women. In fact, my discontent has but with the basic attitudes, pressures, and practices of law school which affect all students and with the lack of any collective effort by women to counteract these traditions of legal education.

Humiliation & Razor Blades

I have already commented on the amount of time consumed in study. That there is a large amount of work to be done, but that there is the constant feeling that no matter how much you do, you should be doing more. I cannot pinpoint the source of the pressure - much of it is from the teaching technique of randomly calling on students in class and questioning an individual until confusion reigns supreme. The result is that students must constantly overprepare to avoid total humiliation should they be the victim of the day.

A great deal of pressure comes from the students themselves. The fierce sense of competitiveness that prevails is frightening. Books disappear, articles are razor-bladed from journals - not because a student needs such materials - but in order to keep other students from using them and possibly getting better grades. For after all, better grades, better jobs, and more money is the point of all this, is it not?

Cooperation sometimes exists, but the school's honor code prohibits it, even while doing research. For cooperation works against the grain of the adversary system - a system based on two people taking opposite sides of an issue, each arguing one side of the issue to its logical/illogical extreme and then, somehow in the process, "justice will be achieved."

My hope for the women's movement at large is that not only will it help to raise the level of consciousness and remove inequality but that it will also help remold the operation of those institutions in which women are demanding equal acceptance.

Caucus & Competition

This is unfortunately not the case at the University of Minnesota law school.

There is a caucus of Law Women which has developed programs to encourage women to attend law school, brought feminist speakers to campus, and even purchased a subscription to MS magazine for the library. But so far, the Women's Caucus has been unable to produce a spirit of cooperation, even among women, which might begin to counterbalance the competitive emphasis faced by all of us. What really bothers me is that the women at the law school are every bit as competitive as the men. And no one seems to have the time to contemplate change.

The reasons are not obvious, but they are easy to understand. In the past, women in law have had to work much harder than men to receive equal recognition, and somehow, once they have received that recognition, it is easy for them to forget the means by which they had achieved it. At the present, a number of women at law school have made careful and deliberate decisions to enter the legal profession and they are highly goal-oriented. Doing a good job in their chosen field is more important than attempting to reform the process. Similarly, a number of married women with children have a hard enough time carving out the time necessary to study without contemplating change.

In addition, the fact that the administration at the law school has taken the steps it has in some of the major issues means that there are no well-defined causes or grievances around which women might rally together. Without such a base, it is much more difficult to form a cohesive group to fight the more pervading atmosphere of law school itself.

I do not mean any of this as a condemnation of women in law school, and I certainly cannot exempt myself from the syndromes I have explained. Many of the women I meet are very strong individuals who are quite used to achieving on their own.

common base, even if it were to concern itself with changing the style of legal education. Many are quite content with the status quo, but a great number of men are also upset with the excessive emphasis on competition.

Women have gained much through legal channels in establishing their rights. And within its own structure, women are gaining status in the legal world. But these accomplishments and the concrete increase in the number of women law students should not lead women to think that all is over and we are on our way.

KKK KK KKK KK Kk

I take your watch off and lay it on my dresser.

Like a silk cloth from your wrist. You make love to me, changing now laughing. Gentler now I make love to you but you go you don't sleep. I feel useful.

Woman Sound

heard your clog-heavy footsteps heading up the stairs as I wake slow drain-like almost jumped out of bed to say nothing. A sudden release that closed on the door. I wish I could know you woman I've only touched the skin--without dangerous exposure of your flesh.

--Joanne McEntire LOATT3