A Rape Crisis Center has opened  
in Minneapolis to aid victims  
of the "nation's least reported  
violent crime against a person,"  
according to Rita Gallagher of  
the Center.  

Headquartered in the Women's  

Counseling Service, the Rape  
Crisis Center will operate 24  
hours a day from the phone num-  
ber 824-RAPE.  

STOP  
RAPE  

Another rape center was opened  
last month by a group of south  
Minneapolis churches. But "they  
will just offer counseling for  
a short time," says Kathy Mc-  
Connell of the Crisis Center.  
"We will offer both immediate  
counseling and carry through the  
entire medical and legal pro-  
cess."  

"When a rape victim calls in,"  
Ms. McConnell says, “a volunteer  

will talk to her, give immediate  
counseling and determine if she  
needs transportation to safety or  
to a hospital. Volunteers will  
also see that the medical exam is  
correct, both medically and leg-  
ally."  

In addition, volunteers will  
assist the victim in pressing  
charges against her assailant, as  
well as offering pertinent infor-  
mation and personal counseling.  
Self-defense classes and a speak-  
er's bureau will also be part of  
the Rape Crisis Center's program.  

“Women should be aware that no  
local hospital considers rape an  
emergency situation," Ms. Gallag-  
her explains. "And women don't  
realize that the hospital is part  
of the legal process. In Minnea-  
polis, they'll check for traces  
of sperm to prove rape. The wo-  
man's body is checked for bruises,  
scratches and signs of assault,  
which are sometimes photographed."  

The Rape Crisis Center will  
provide referrals to selected  
physicians. “Few physicians will  
take rape cases because of the  
possibility of court testimony,"  
Ms. Gallagher points out.  

Statistics indicate that the in-  
cidence of this crime is rising,  
Ms. Gallagher says. "A woman is  
raped every 14 minutes. There have  
been 340,270 reported rapes in the  
U.S. since 1970--and that doesn't  
include attempts. And it is es-  
timated that ten times as many  
rapes occur as are reported."  

As for the legal aspects of the  
crime, Ms. Gallagher indicates,  

"Women don't realize that they're  
just a piece of evidence in the  
case, a material witness for the  
prosecution." Rape Crisis Center  
volunteers will provide victims  
with necessary information about  
the legal process as well as ac-  
companying the women through the  
courts.  

“Women's traditional attitude is  
that when you're raped, there's  
nothing you can do," Ms. McCon-  
nell says. "We are trying to  
change that."  

Trick Knees, (Continued from page 1)  

were not always easy tasks for a supposed  
feminist.  

For my job status did depend on how well I  
executed my tasks, and there were several  
times that, with good judgment but a begrud-  

ging sense of resignation, I was forced to  
give over tasks and responsibilities to men.  
At the same time, there were really no tasks  
that I performed that one of the male in-  
structors could not have done as well. It  
was simply, and in the most primitive sense  
possible, division of labor according to  
ability, which, in extreme cases of emer-  
gency and exertion, was of necessity measur-  
ed in highly physical terms.  

Beating a man in a game of squash is satis-  
fying, mainly because you are still playing  
and struggling with society's rules and pre-  
conceptions. Arguing with a man at a party  
can be satisfying because you are standing  
on nearly equal ground. But finding your-  
self in a position where you must be treated  
differently because you no longer have the  
equalizing benefits of intelligence and so-  
ciety at your side is a difficult situation  
for contemporary men and women to handle  
without a certain degree of patronization.  
Even having a close relationship with a man  
in the city is far different than thirty  
miles back in the hills. There, you are  
both nearer to the fundamental differences  
between the sexes, yet, at the same time,  
you are freer and farther removed from so-  
ciety's crippling perversion of these physi-  
cally-based differences.  

When I returned to the city this fall, I  
talked to a very physically active friend of  
mine about these realizations of the summer.  

She understood immediately and said how glad  
she has been, in a way, to have had a trick  
knee most of her life. How much that freed  

her from any ultimate physical activity, how  
much easier it was to rely on a trick knee  
instead of having to admit to no longer hav-  
ing the strength or stamina to continue. I  
envied her, yet it also made me mad.  

For it is yet another aspect of society  
that makes physical women ashamed when they  
can no longer compete with men because of  
basic biological differences. It is just as  
important for a girl at camp to discover she  
can portage a canoe over a mile of twisty  
trails as it is for her to realize that a  
man can do it faster - and that she should  
let him do it in certain situations with no  
remorse or loss of self-worth.  

Society has done much toward the libera-  
tion of females, but it has also insulated  
them against a more fundamental and total  
acceptance of their physical selves in rela-  
tion to men and the tasks and crises of the  
physical world. A lack of this knowledge  
and/or experience results not only in a cri-  
tical naivete about the world and society,  
but hampers a full healthy contact with our-  
selves and our bodies.  

We will not all turn to organic farming  
and living off the land in our lifetimes. We  

may never suffer the horrors of war or flood,  

or disaster. Few of us will ever experience  
the frustration of female athletes competing  
in a world of male-dominated Olympics and  
record books.  

But we must, nevertheless, slowly begin to  
accept our bodies and their physical limita-  
tions, with or without trick knees, as sepa-  
rate from our feminist liberation. As a re-  
sult, women will end up feeling as strong  

and independent as ever, but simultaneously  

feeling free of the need to make apologies  
in whatever encounters they may have with  
the physical lives and abilities of the men  
with whom they work and live.