Our thanks to Representative Linda Berglin, who  
sponsored new rape legislation in the Minnesota  
legislature this session. I spoke with Ms. Berglin,  
and she told me that the bill passed both houses, and  
now awaits Governor Anderson's signature.  

Important changes have been made in Minnesota's rape  
laws, and Ms. Berglin is anxious that women be made  

aware of them so that they will be willing to report  
rape and pursue conviction—for she says conviction  

is far more likely under the new law.  

The bill includes four definitions of rape, and takes  
into account the amount of violence suffered by the  
victim as well. The four definitions include two  
degrees of penetration and two that do not consider  
penetration necessary for rape to have occurred.  

Semen need not be present, which is a good law, since  
about fifty percent of rapists do not ejaculate. But  
it is important that women have medical checkups im-  
mediately, just the same. Another good feature of  
the bill is that the county in which the rape occurs  
will pick up the bill for medical examination, regard-  
less of the hospital in which it is done. Thus one  
need not go to a county hospital.  

According to Ms. Berglin, the new bill takes into  
account just about any type of sexual contact of any  
part of the body—thus sexual intercourse per se  

is not the lone criteria.  

The evidentiary part of the bill did not pass in its  
original form. Ms. Berglin and her supporters felt  
that the victim's sexual history should not enter  
into evidence in the courtroom. However, Senator  
Jack Davies said such language would be "unconstitu-  
tional." Moreover, Ms. Berglin said that, no matter  

meanwhile, St. Paul,  

In the May issue of Gold Flower we told of a St. Paul  
woman's attempt to prosecute the man who raped her  
(his accomplice rapist got away). He plea-bargained  
his way to a lesser charge of breaking and entering  
and "attempted" rape. You will remember, the two  
men forced their way into her apartment with a gun,  
and she was on trial, so to speak, for “cooperating."  
Plea bargaining is used in about ninety percent of  
rape convictions.  

New York, (brace yourself)  
We have heard nothing as yet about the proceedings  
against the fourteen of twenty men who conducted two  
gang rapes in New York's Bronx on two separate week-  
ends. But we do have a nasty little tidbit from New  
York City. The Minneapolis Tribune reports that  
the judge who tried Beth Peterson's rape case against  
Martin E. Evans announced good news to rapists as he  
dismissed the charge: "Bachelors and other men on  
the make, fear not," said Supreme Court Justice  
Edward J. Greenfield, "It is still not illegal to feed  
a girl a line, to make promises that will not be kept  
or to indulge in exaggerations and hyperbole, or to  
assure her as in the fairy tale that the ugly frog is  
a handsome prince." The judge found Evans, a cable  
TV personality, guilty of criminal trespass for using  
an apartment without the owner's permission in his  
"seduction" of Ms. Peterson. The judge ignored Ms.  
Peterson's charge of rape, and further, he'd better  
re-study his law books, for seduction is included in  
the law defining rape.  

NEW RAPE BILL PROMISES MORE  
CONVICTIONS by Char Masterman  

how the bill reads, the Civil Liberties Union is  
sure to take it to court in order to protect the  
rights of the defendant—as if he doesn't have  
enough protection already!!  

The bill was changed so that, in essence, if the court  
finds, in examining the evidence, that the victim was,  
within the past year, in an identical or similar sit-  
uation, it may imply consent or fabrication (you know,  
“she asked for it" or "she's getting revenge"). I  
asked if one who has been robbed more than once in  
the past year is suspected of consenting or fabrica-  
ting. But Ms. Berglin felt that the changes did not  
mean a continuation of past practices in the court-  
room of putting the victim on the defensive. She  
wasn't happy with the changes, and said they'd try  

again next year. What the change seems to imply is  
that men are still defensive about men's interests—  
I suppose this is to be expected, since it is men who see  

are the aggressors and defendants, and women who are  
the victims. Obviously, as well-intended as support-  
ers of the bill are (male), it is still impossible  
for them to fully identify with what rape really is  
for the victim. They have a long, long way to go.  

I was curious to know whether or not the defendant's  
past may be dredged up in the courtroom. Ms. Berglin  
told me that this has always been a possibility—if  

the defendant takes the stand—which the new bill, as  
she says, will virtually force him to do. Then, the  
prosecution can bring up past convictions, arrests,  
and so on. Another plus is that pending cases do not  
have to show evidence of semen. The rest of the bill  
takes effect August 1 of this year.  

But if you think the good judge is light-hearted in  
his attitude toward rape, get this from the lords of  

England (equivalent of our Supreme Court): "Britain's  
law lords have decided that if a man thinks a woman  
means "yes" although she is saying "no" he is not  
guilty of rape.  

"The lords . . . ruled 3-2 that as long as a man  
thought he was really acting as a woman wanted he was  
innocent no matter how unreasonable his belief was.”  
(UPI, London, England) Well, folks, take one look at  
our movies, TV programs, and the porno, as well as  
lots of lit on rape—doesn't she (according to male  
fantasies) always mean yes? What all those bruises  
just go to show ya how masochistic she is to boot.  

Supplies  
Orchids  

Minneapolis  
at Reindeer Square