And the grandchildren are great and all. But  
that move was made knowing that I shouldn't  

I was very young and I was in school and I  
thought of myself as not being too bright.  
Very attractive, but not too bright. So I  
had not lived. I had no experience, be-  
cause in the country (Rockland, Maine) I  
was young and then there was no one around.  
I was already dreaming of other things, so  
I wasn't interested in local color.  

I was not seasoned enough to believe in my-  
self. I thought, ‘well, there's a world,  
they get married and who am I to think this?'  
So I didn't trust it. But after that marr-  
iage, I took the reins in my hands and I  
never permitted the outside to have influ-  
ence.  

Now, with Janis, I just wanted to croak. Be-  
cause I felt I had fallen into the most hel-  
lish pit in the world. If they say there's  

a hell, that was more. You know, I lost my  
voice and I used to have to get up in the  
morning about six and learn to walk. It  

was that bad. I lost a lot of weight, too.  

I had people, like collectors, that were  
friends of mine, I had rich people. There  
wasn't one that offered. I was in a spot.  
My overhead is big. And not one ever—  
well, yes one did in a way, but not of that  
type—came and asked me could they be of  
any help.  

Well, what do you think that did? It made  
me stronger. It pushed me right back into  
myself and I dismissed it. You see, it's  
funny because I speak to you and you might  
say, well, I'm bitter. I'm not bitter be-  
cause I have achieved for myself and for my  
wellbeing a great deal of living. So that's  
fine. But it only made me go back into my-  
self.  

I love people, but they are like you eat  
strawberry pie, you know? They're not the  
meat of my life. And I don't think there's  
a soul on earth who is. You see, I have my  
own interpretation of friendship. I have my  
own interpretation of the humanities and  

the relationships.  

I had to, in order to survive and do what I  
feel was my lot to do. For me, only for me.  

If you talk like I am speaking to you, three  
dimensionally, you see we're brought up that  
you bow to your elders and that you do this  
and that. That's something else. Do you  
get the message?  

The older I get the more I feel I sit on my  
own seat and push back like this on my own  
back. And I don't bow to anyone.  

Now, I don't mean that I have to be arrog-  
ant, but I mean there's nobody to bow to,  
only to yourself. Look in the mirror and  
bow to yourself.  

Q: You have played a role of establishing  
precedents for other women artists. You  
have been a pioneer in many senses. Do  
you think that there will be other women  

that will have the courage to follow after  
you?  

A: Let me tell you this. I think there  
will, but let me explain something. If  
Caruso wanted others to follow him, they  
would have the equivalent of that voice.  
Now, I wear myself out. I'm 74 and I wear  
myself out. And I get tired of all.  

I was born with ability and energy. And  
so, if another woman could match the ener-  
gy, I think they could. But that depends.  
Or maybe they won't need this. There are  
other ways of expressing creativity,  
besides the hard physical labor. So, I  
think, yes.  

Q: Where do you go from here?  

A: Oh my god, dear, just where I am. You  
can polish 'til doomsday. You see. I  
don't have to move a great deal, on the con-  
trary, it would be stupid for me. Because  
once you're in there and it's right, then,  
my god, it's unlimited, unlimited, and  
especially in our time with technology and  
the new materials. It isn't one thing,  
whole things burst open. Look, one rose has  
so many petals. And, my god, more than  
that, if you leave it, it gives other roses  
and more petals. But you don't become a  
violet, you're still a rose, you're true  

to that and then you multiply.  

Z  
:  
Ky  
IR  
&  
©  
z  

AY?  
DE,  
WALKER