|
|
I
|
}

|
|
|

| Religion.
} Symbol of a big gold star.

Hable than

} Wear your

} button proudly!
Available soon at feminist centers
and stores in this area.

# Soon the Bullies found a perfect group.

A TRUE FAIRY TALE

by Jackie Gohdes

(For Rita Mae,* who asks the question and lives the answer.)

Once upon a time, not long ago enough to be forgotten, there was a gang of
nasty Bullies who claimed to be the finest fellows ever. They were afraid,
as bullies often are, that no one in the kingdom would believe their claim
unless they could clearly show that they were indeed better than others.
So, as bullies often do, they set out to find a smaller group of folk in
the kingdom that was weaker and that could be safely pushed around and
blamed for all of the evil in the kingdom.

The Small People were fewer in
number, often able to speak a foreign and mysterious sounding language, but

best of all, their heritage and customs could be traced to their unique re-

That is why the Bullies made every Small Person wear the religious
symbol. It was a way of telling the whole kingdom that
the star wearers should be feared and kept under close watch because they
were different and therefore not as good as the Bullies.

The Bullies succeeded in getting so many people of their own kingdom to
join them in being cruel to the Small People, that soon they were able to
go into neighboring kingdoms to be mean to the Small People in those lands.
And everywhere the Bullies went, they hunted for the Small People and made
them wear the gold star.

Except for one small country. Although their army was too small to keep
out the Bullies, the Queen and King of the small country had big hearts and
loved all of their people. When they learned that the Bullies would hurt
some of their people by making them wear gold stars, the Queen and King
themselves put on the biggest gold stars they could find! And they got
everyone else in the small country to put on big stars, too.

Well! When the people of all the lands saw how confused the Bullies were
because they couldn't tell who the real Small People were and they couldn't
point to them as strange or different, good citizens everywhere put on gold
stars and the shining of the stars scared all the Bullies away!
Today we can see the same kind of bullying happening around us again. This
time the bullied are those, sometimes visible and often not, who are

unique because they love others who happen to have the same kind of body.
These bullied people have many kinds of homes, backgrounds, jobs, and
religions, so they have had to choose a uniting symbol—the purple color
often feared as the "lavender menace." This symbol must signify a very
great mystery, for it certainly has the power to frighten many bullies into
meanness against those who dare claim it.

These bullies are cruel to people who wear purple stars by refusing to give
them equal opportunity in employment, housing, public accommodations, and
services. Some bullies in our state legislature still believe in untrue
fairy tales (myths) and would require complete investigation of the private
lives of public school teachers—to disqualify any whom the bullies fear.
Others of our leaders who have hearts big enough to care for all citizens
wear the purple star of fairness.

Now the moral of this story is (yet once again): None are free until all
are free. And the morally true question is, dear gentle reader and good
citizen, where is your purple star?

*Rita Mae Brown; lesbian-feminist, poet-politician, writer-woman.

BEYOND

SANITY

We, the undersigned, wish to state pub-

licly our opposition to an archaic prac-

tice that is still alive in this country: 

the attempt by government to inter- 

fere in the sexual lives of consenting 

adults, and the failure by government to protect the civil 
rights of people who suffer such interference from others.
We believe all people to have common cause in elimi-
nating this practice. Though laws and regulations gov- 
erning private sexual behavior tend to be selectively en- 
forced against lesbians and male homosexuals—partic-
ularly from poor, minority, and politically unpopular 
groups—they potentially affect every person, regardless of
personal power or sexual orientation. Not only do
these laws and regulations leave privacy and individual
freedom to the whim of employers and legislators, land-
lords and judges, but their enforcement results in a tragic 
waste of human talent. Even when not enforced, their
existence serves to inhibit the free choice of lifestyle.
Therefore, we urge every person, regardless of race,
age, class, sex, or sexual orientation, to join us in estab-
lishing this fundamental right to privacy and individual
freedom.

As feminists, we sign this petition for one additional
reason. In the history of women’s struggle for self-deter-
mination, it has been a painful fact that almost any
woman who did not choose to play a traditional or sec-
ondary role might find herself labeled a lesbian, and
restricted in her efforts for fear of the effects of that label.
Indeed, even the Women’s Movement itself has some-
times been divided and weakened by this fear. Therefore,
we must unite on the issue of all women’s right to a free
choice of lifestyle, regardless of sexual orientation. Only
when the word lesbian has lost its power to intimidate
and oppress, when it is as positive as other human
choices, can each individual woman be fearless and free.

As women and as feminists, we pledge to work toward
the following goals which we believe will benefit all
citizens:

1. The repeal of all regulations and the elimination of
institutional practices that limit access to employment,
housing, public accommodations, credit, government or
military service and child custody because of sexual
orientation.

2. The repeal of all laws that make sexual acts between
consenting adults criminal.

3. The passage of legislation that will guarantee each
individual’s rights, regardless of sexual orientation, so
that those who suffer discrimination for that reason will
have the same access to redress as do the victims of
discrimination because of race, sex, religion, or national
origin.

4. The creation of a social climate in which lifestyles
may be freely chosen.

Work together
to change the
world and
make love
more respect-

able or fear.

purple star

THIS STATEMENT AND ITS LIST OF SIGNERS WILL
BE SENT TO THE UNITED STATES CONGRESS, STATE LEGISLATURES,
AND THE WHITE HOUSE; TO NATIONAL GROUPS
ALREADY FIGHTING FOR SUCH CHANGES; AND TO WOMEN’S GROUPS
IN OTHER COUNTRIES THAT MAY BE ORGANIZING SIMILAR
CAMPAIGNS. IF YOU WOULD LIKE TO BE INCLUDED, PLEASE FILL IN THE

Ms. MAGAZINE, 370 LEXINGTON AVENUE, NEW YORK, NEW YORK 10017.

Signature:

Occupation/Organization:

(please print)

State:

Zip: