14

Minds Come Together

— Robin Morgan

by Diana L. Antolik

I want a women’s revolution like a lover

I lust for it, I want so much this freedom
this end to struggle and fear and lies

we all exhale, that I could die just

with the passionate uttering of that desire,

Robin Morgan
Monster

May 30 and other notes; My mind has
been whirling ever since I left the Robin
Morgan Lecture. Lecture is not the word.
The word is some never-ending infinitely
high-pitched scream.

Tonight in a packed auditorium, a
gigantic auditorium, I felt something I
never had before. A super-consciousness of
energies, of emotions, of minds coming to-
gether.

I don't know if it was a lecture. Even
though it was labeled by the University 100-73-
803 The Emergence of Feminist Culture by
Robin Morgan. It seemed like a CR session
with over five hundred people.

Poet in Chem Lab

At seven thirty there was only a small
group of women in the Murphy Hall Auditor-
ium but more and more came. First in small
groups and finally in a flood. Every seat
was taken and there were women sitting two
abreast in the aisles and still more people
coming in. An advocacy for a spirit of love
and sisterhood to put up with the cramped
conditions until something could be worked
out was made. The request was unneeded.
The spirit existed from the start. Finally
the lecture was moved to a Chemistry hall
and there were still people sitting in the
aisles.

Morgan made comment on the setting in
the opening: "There are a number of chapters
in Shuly's book," (Shulamith Firestone's
The Dialectic of Sex) "in which she talks
about the patriarchal style compartmental-
ization. That is you have art over here and
science over there. It is very apt given
the theme I am trying to talk about under
all that. It's strange but it's apt."

Illness Due to Split

The lecture progressed too swiftly.
Morgan started threading her loom in the beg-
inning in which she was weaving the radical
ideas.

"On the relation of feminist culture and
feminist politics to me the relation between
feminist culture and feminist politics
doesn't exist because feminist culture and
feminist politics are inseparable and in-
deed synonymous.

“The feminist movement is about bridges
between things. At one point there was no
difference between art and science, between
thought and feeling, between intellect and
action. And that profound and deep illness
of our society and not just our society
but the patriarchy globally is due I would
say primarily to that split."

Reactions....

Spending the rest of the night after the
Robin Morgan Lecture awake and writing I
started to wonder around dawn how other women
had reacted during the night hours. So I
started to ask some of the feminists that I
was coming in contact with during the day.
Few of them said that they didn't go and the
reason then was because of work. But those
that did attend were shaken to say the least.

"I sat up and played two or three games
of chess. I hardly ever play chess," was the
reaction of one woman.

"I just sat and thought. Like I was in
a trance," was another woman's reaction.

"Some friends and I sat up most of the
night rapping --- there was so much there,"
was another's statement.

Some of the women could not utter the
thoughts inside of them. Others talked. Some
could not relate to any questions asked by
males they were in contact with. Others
rapped with friends until the grey hours of
the morning.

Through other sources, though (male) I did
find one middle-aged, balding pervert who
explained, "Oh, yeah, Gloria Steinem, naw, it
was Robin Morgan this time, yeah I saw her.
She's the one who talks of castrating men.
Well she's "funny" (I have the feeling that
he meant a Lesbian since there was that
ringing "you-know-what-I-mean-so-I-don't-
have-to-say-the-word" quality in his voice.)

And this whole women’s thing -~-it'll never
make it."

Personal = Political

And later Morgan progressed further
with her point by continuing, "I think one
of the primary places where the reintegration
has begun, and that is another pulse
beat of the feminist movement, is now the
classic phrase 'the personal is political.'

"For women who have been confined to
the ‘personal sphere' the personal is very
political. I could cite ten million
examples as could any woman in this room.
Just a few bases to touch. The housewife
is considered by the establishment a non-
worker. On a quiz show they say, ‘Honey
do you work or are you just a housewife.'
The average housewife works a 99.6 hour work
week."

Not After Equality

And finally after progressing through
many more examples of both the male right
and the male left she brought together the
heart of the thought. "And then there is
the area which I would call radical femin-
ism where there is one priority and that is
women. All women. We are not after equal-
ity with men. The notion makes me want to
throw up. We are not interested in becoming