On Fighting Sex Discrimination, Or --- -

A Three-Part Series

“YOU’RE NOTHING BUT A

PACK OF CARDS”

The author was, until re-
cently, employed by a Twin Cities firm. In
May 1972 she filed a sex discrimination
charge against the corporation with the Minn-
esota Department of Human Rights. Subse-
quently, she also filed a charge of race and
sex discrimination against the corporation
with the federal Equal Employment Opportuni-
ties Commission (EEOC).

The State Commissioner of Human Rights, in
January 1973, returned a decision of "no
probable cause” to assume the corporation
was discriminating against women. The auth-

PART I

"No, no:" said the Queen. "Sentence first--
verdict afterwards."

"Stuff and nonsense!" said Alice loudly.
"The idea of having the sentence first!"

"Hold your tongue:" said the Queen, turning
purple.

"I won't," said Alice.

"Off with her head!" the Queen shouted at the
top of her voice. Nobody moved.

"Who cares for you?" said Alice (she had
grown to her full size by this time).
"You're nothing but a pack of cards!"

--Alice in Wonderland, Lewis
Carroll

In the past four years, women have begun to
use the legal tools at their disposal in eff-
orts to attain jobs that pay fairly, promo-
tions they deserve and expanded educational
opportunities. Today, news of sex discrimi-
nation charges and lawsuits regularly appear
in urban newspapers. Indeed, women have won
spectacular victories against bigoted emp-
loyers--American Telephone and Telegraph,
General Mills and General Motors are three of
the most famous offenders.

But the newspaper accounts don't tell one

what to expect day-to-day from co-workers,
superiors and state functionaries after fil-
ing a sex discrimination charge. I have been
through this process; my experience is sig-
nificant because it mirrors that of so many
women. I have learned what can and cannot
be accomplished by fighting bigoted employ-
ers through a State Human Rights Department.

“Down the Rabbit Hole”

In 1971 the job market was tight. I had just
completed graduate work for a Master's Degree
in American Studies at the University of
Minnesota. I had a Bachelor's Degree in
Journalism and approximately 3 1/2 years'
professional experience (much less than most
college graduates of 31, but I had spent an
inordinate amount of time traveling about the

by Mary Hastings

and her attorney appealed that decision
to the State Appeal Board. It overturned
the Commissioner's decision and sent the
charge back for reinvestigation. The State
Department of Human Rights has been in the
"reinvestigation" process since April 1973.
The author has received no information con-
cerning this process and the State is under
no time limit. (The EEOC awaits the out-
come of the state charge before taking jur-
isdiction.)

"field" and "taking courses"

I was over-qualified for beginning journalism
positions and not at the “managerial” level.
I was in deep debt for my graduate education.
In November I accepted a position as editor
of an audio-tape program in the education de-
partment of a Twin Cities firm. I was seri-
ously underpaid, starting at $8,400 per year.
A man with the same job title and far less
education and responsibility started at
$10,000 per year and was raised, in six
months, to $11,000.

My first mistake was not negotiating for an
acceptable salary. My reasons for accepting
the low salary illustrate the confused state
I had been brought to by societal pressures
on and expectations of women. I needed money
but more pressing were my intense feelings
of failure. Most of these "failure pangs"
sprang from my male-oriented view of the
world. I had been trained, like my male
peers, to measure my worth in "impressive"
jobs, degrees and lifestyles--in a word, to
be a materialist.

Thus, I made a grave error even before I

was issued my employee I.D. (Later in my
battles with the company, the male attitude
was manifest: "Well, why did you take the
job if you didn't like the salary?" That
is, "You had a choice--take the job and
shut up or go elsewhere. It is unnatural
for women to make demands.")

continued on page 3