13

INTL A & W Ss > ABORTION LEGALIZED IN FRANCE

The French National Assembly passed a bill

November 29 liberalizing access to abortion. The old
law, passed in 1920, provided stiff penalties for
women receiving abortions and for persons performing
them. It was repealed after a stormy debate by a vote

of 284 to 189.

The new law, while a step forward, contains
reactionary restrictions. Abortions are to be made

legal only during the first ten weeks of pregnancy,
and then only for women who are permanent residents of
France. Women under the age of eighteen are required
to secure the approval of their parents. And the cost
of the abortion has to be paid by the patient instead
of by the national health system.

On September 16th, eleven Spanish intellectuals were
arrested and imprisoned in Madrid. Two of these
were Lidia Falcés and Eva Forest. Lidia Falcés
is an attorney and had much to do with the planning
of the Barcelona Women's Conference. Because of
her arrest, it was cancelled. Eva Forest is a
psychiatrist and a feminist, political activist.

The reason for the arrest was given as the bombing
on September 13th of a café that is frequented by
the Madrid police. However, since on that day no
police were in the café and apparently they had
been warned, it is thought that a right-wing group
might have planned it.

The eleven prisoners are now being held and charged
with being political terrorists, involved with both
the ETA and the communists. All have been tortured,
Eva Forest to such an extent that she has been charged
with the murder of Admiral Carrero Blanco.

Women involved in the cancelled Barcelona Women’s
Conference are now trying to win support for these
people, especially the two women. They put out a
newsletter which because of restrictions must be
mailed in France—no names involved. They can't
meet. Three people talking together constitutes a
meeting. Even though there are all these restrictions,
Falcés' books are still sold in Spain.

Their trial will be this month, January, in a
military court. Forest will probably get the death
sentence. It is hoped that international pressure
might lighten their sentences or might help in the
overthrow of fascism in Spain before they are sentenced
and/or executed.

by Coco Weber

taken from a letter from 374-5507

The Thursday/Friday Feminists

IT PAYS TO ADVERTISE IN GOLDFLOWER:

You may design your own ads and send them to us, or
have someone on our staff do the artwork if you'd
like. If you do design your own ad, be sure to use
the size as you want it to appear in the paper, and
use white paper and black ink or no. 2 or darker
pencil.

EDUCATION INFORMATION FEATURE ADS: $3.00 per column inch. (That's
HEALTH ACTION 1 X 3 actual inches.)
PATIENT ADVOCACY

$4.00 per column inch. (That's
4 X 1 actual inches.)

CLASSIFIED ADS: One line (about 7 words), 50¢.
Two lines (about 14 words), $1.00.
Three lines (about 21 words), $1.25.

Four lines, $1.50.
Make checks payable to Gold Flower and mail to
P.O. Box 8341 Lake St. Station, Mpls., 55408

335-69