8

5 ——————— The Gold Flower Story

GOLD FLOWER readers often ask how our newspaper got its name. The
paper is named after a Chinese woman whose story is told by Jack Belden
in the book “China Shakes the World” (available from Monthly Review
Press, 16 West 14th Street, New York 10011). Selections from that book
were reprinted in a pamphlet entitled “Gold Flower's Story.” Since this
Chinese woman's tale is so relevant to the women’s movement, and paral-
lels it in its implications, GOLD FLOWER is reprinting the pamphlet as

a series for our readers.

I emerged from the guerrilla areas of Anyang in a disturbed and confused
frame of mind. Many of the things that I had heard and seen in that dark
medieval world just would not fit into the usual Westerner’s conception of
war, revolution or even life itself. The fact that a woman should laugh just
after her husband had been murdered on a lonely hillside somehow seemed
inexplicable. Was there a connection between the woman’s laugh and the
Chinese Revolution? I soon came to think so. For it was a curious fact that
as I began to mull over in my mind all that I had learned during the land
reform and the people’s war, I discovered that the Communists’ drive for
power was touched at almost every point by women, by their feelings, by
their relationship to men, by their social status, by their symbol as an object
of property, religion and sex. Because of this discovery, I decided that I
would make use of the first available opportunity to talk with a Chinese farm
woman about her life, her innermost thoughts, her secret feelings.

This I knew would be difficult, for Chinese farm women will not usu-
ally talk alone with men, especially foreigners, yet an opportunity of this
kind was offered me sooner than I expected.

Having said goodbye to Mr. Chen and Liu Ming-chi, I made my way back
across the North China Plain and after several days’ journey came to Lichia
chuang, a small village of about three hundred people in central Hopei.
Here I found my further progress halted by the flood waters of the Grand
Canal which Kuomintang troops had broken open to block the advance of
Communist armies in the area. Not wishing to wander out across the flood
waters and offer myself as a target for potshots from either side, I decided

to sit down in the village for the moment and await developments. During
this period, I tried to persuade several farm women to talk to me about them-
selves, but they were never willing. After some difficulty, I managed to win
the confidence of a peasant girl named Kinhua, whose husband was away

in Chiang Kai-shek’s areas, and gradually I persuaded her to tell me the story
of her life. I found it so interesting that I postponed my departure from the
village another week and talked with her every day for eight, nine and ten
hours a day. I will try to tell her story here just as she told it to me in a
flood of bitter tears, angry imprecations and emotional outbursts of despair,
frustration and hope. I am condensing her words but nevertheless I shall

tell her story at some length because I think it reveals more clearly than a
dozen speeches by Mao Zedong just what are some of the techniques of

the Chinese Communist Party and why they were able to win so many people
to their cause.

I should perhaps mention here that I borrowed a young English-speaking
professor named Yang Biao, who had come over from Peiping, to translate

for me—not that this was necessary, for the girl, despite some peasant inflec-
tions and an initial embarrassment, spoke clearly enough for me to understand
and in a fashion more articulate than most anyone I met in the Liberated
Areas. However, having an interpreter enabled me to copy down everything
the girl said and this I did.

At the time I met Kinhua—which translates into English as Gold Flower—
she had just turned twenty-one. She was a rather attractive girl, with a pleasant
face, embellished by a tiny mouth, an upturned nose and a pair of somber
brown eyes. Thin and wiry, she appeared more dainty than the average North
China farm woman. She had the slender wrists and ankles that Frenchmen so
much admire. Her feet were not bound and her hair was bobbed. We sat and
talked in her home—a clay-hut affair of four rooms running in a square around
a courtyard—and this is the story she told me.

She had been born in a village ten miles away where conditions were primi-
tive, food scarce, comforts unknown, and she had worked hard ever since she
could remember.

When she was fifteen, during the middle of the Japanese invasion, she fell
in love with a boy named Lipao, the primary school classmate of her elder
brother. He was, to hear her tell it, a distinctly good-looking boy of seventeen
years, with a slender, trim body, odd, restless eyes, and a queer deep voice
that had the ring of an old bell. It was the voice that got under Gold Flower’s
reserve: it was so different from the coarse peasant tones to which she was
accustomed. Whenever he came to see her brother, Gold Flower would drop
whatever she was doing and go and listen to their conversation.

As she heard Lipao talking, his eyes earnest with youthful enthusiasm, his
whole body bent forward intent on what he was saying, talking of such grand
and, to her, unheard of things as freedom, democracy and the future of China,
her heart yearned over him. He was so noble! She wanted to tell him so, but
her brother was always present and she never had the opportunity. So she just
sat near him, sent him secret smiles and followed his every movement with
her eyes.

He soon became aware of her interest, and once, when her brother left the
room for a moment, he leaned over close to Gold Flower and said: “I have
learned something from your eyes. I know your heart.”

Ashamed, yet delighted, Gold Flower was so excited she could make no
reply. Later, she longed to have a secret conversation with him. But how?

It is necessary for a North China village girl to give the appearance, if not

of disdain for men, at least of disinterest in them, since decorum and dignity
rank above love as the virtues most highly prized in China, and girls stay behind
the walls of their homes until they are married and even after that. Although
there are thousands of authentic instances of Chinese men selling their women
into wifery, concubinage or whoredom, there is scarcely any record of a girl
indulging a romance with a boy with the consent and knowledge of her parents;
and the descent for a girl breaking this rule is very swift, since anyone finding
her along with a boy could accuse her of selling her maidenhood. So hypocri-
tical is Chinese society that while farmers may commit adultery with their
tenants’ wives without fear of punishment and while every village has and
tolerates at least one “broken shoe,” a young boy and girl, no matter how
innocent their intentions, may neither talk alone together, hold hands nor

much less kiss.

Under these circumstances, it must be accounted an act of courage, infatu-
ation, or insanity that Gold Flower, another time, when her brother left the
room for a moment, leaned over and whispered in Lipao’s ear: “My family
will be away tomorrow, will you come?”

The next day, he obtained leave from school, and by nine o'clock was at
her gate. She blushed as he entered, and she gave a little affected laugh to
keep herself in countenance. Then—so a stray visitor or her family returning
would think no one was at home—she led him to her room and immediately
closed and bolted the door.

Gold Flower had thought only to have a secret talk with a boy whose
intellectual attainments she admired. But her companion mistook her uncon-
ventional behavior and the bolted door for an invitation of another sort, and
he tried to make love to her. At first shocked, then excited, then frightened,
Gold Flower rebuffed him, half-succumbed to him, then angrily told him to
leave. But when he rose to go, Gold Flower’s heart was thrown into a turmoil.
At one moment she was afraid of not being loved, at another the thought that
Lipao wanted her virginity as a kind of medal of conquest tortured her. Had
she been sure of his affections, or had she ever had another experience with
a man, perhaps she would have let him go, but to lose the friendship of such
a boy seemed to her at the moment the worst possible disaster.

Her passion carried her to the point of falling at Lipao’s feet and throwing

her arms around his knees. She pleaded with him not to try to make love to her—
for she would be betrothed to another man—while at the same time she begged
him not to desert her for she was lonely. “Be my friend, my elder brother, my
lover—in everything but that be my lover,” she had cried. Moved by her words
and her attitude of humility, the boy overcame his annoyance at being thwarted
and agreed to her conditions.

In this way, a romance—childish, but forbidden by Chinese village code—had
begun. And so it continued, for when her family returned Gold Flower still
contrived ways to meet her lover. Every night when the others were in bed—her
three brothers, father and mother, all together on one kang—Gold Flower would
tiptoe out her door and softly let back the latch on the front gate. Soon there
would be a creaking at the gate and then a shadowy form would flit swiftly

across the courtyard and Gold Flower’s door would open and then shut again.

During these nightly meetings in Gold Flower’s room, the couple poured
out much talk from their hearts, but they did not make love, never kissed,

only held hands, looked deeply into one another’s eyes and swore eternal
friendship.

Because her actions were so contrary to village morality, Gold Flower when
she first paused to think about her conduct, felt stunned with remorse. But one
day when her girlfriends gathered in her room to sew flowered shoes she began
to feel differently. The girls played the game: “What kind of a man would you
like to marry?” and Gold Flower, her cheeks faintly red, replied: “I should

like to marry someone like my neighbor Lipao; he is so handsome and tender.”

Then teased to distraction by her friends, and in terror lest her secret be
discovered, she shrugged her shoulders and said with an air of worldly wisdom:

“What is the use of talking about what kind of a man we would like to marry,
when we have no choice in the matter?”

“Yes,” her friends had answered. “How stupid it all is! Our parents arrange
everything for us. Like as not we'll get an ugly husband.”

The girls wished they had been born in England, France or America, where
they heard women married men they loved. They had vague feelings that they
were living in a “black society,” and since in their hearts they were rebels
against this society, every one of them thought it all right to have a secret lover.

These conversations gave Gold Flower pleasure, for they clothed her affair
with Lipao in a moral garment of which it had hitherto been barren. She even
began to revel in her defiance of society and sought proofs that her adventure
was making a better woman of her. Sometimes she would take her small mirror
from under her pillow and look happily at her own face. Never had it seemed
more beautiful. “I have a lover! a lover!” she would say, delighting in the idea
like a child with a new toy.

The days following passed with new sweetness. The first time Lipao told

her he loved her she nearly fell fainting in his arms with ecstasy. Then, because
he asked for nothing in exchange for this love, she began to think that generosity,
nobility of soul and humanity existed only in this young student.

Lipao taught her how to write a few simple characters. Thenceforth, when
she wanted to see him, she wrote the character “come” on a scrap of paper
and put it in the hollow of a tree by the village pond. Lipao came to find it
and put there another note saying “yes” or “no,” or “tonight” or “tomorrow,”
or “my room” or “your room,” for these were nearly all the characters she
could read.

Brief as were these notes, Gold Flower guarded them like a treasure, hiding
them in a corner of her kang beneath the reed matting, and taking them out
every once in a while and tracing the characters Lipao had written over again
with her finger.

In fact, the whole art of writing seemed to Gold Flower some powerful
black magic. The word “come” often had for her the semblance of a holy
and potent incantation, for she only had to write and suddenly—poof!—in
answer to her sorcery, Lipao would be in her room.

In other ways, too, the whole horizon of her thoughts and life lifted.
Entirely absorbed, before Lipao’s coming, with that mass of work which is
the lot of any Chinese farm girl, Gold Flower had never thought about passions
and love affairs, save in relation to the gossip she had heard in the mouths of
other women.

But now these stories began to seem almost as real to her as her own life,
and she began to adopt the tricks of every romance of which she had ever
heard. Because it was traditional with the heroines of her remembered stories

to sew garments for their lovers, Gold Flower began to make Lipao a jacket.
Her mother noticed this and became suspicious. Gold Flower put her off, saying:

“His mother has no time to sew, I'll just throw this together carelessly and
help her out.”

To herself, however, she said: “I must show my love through my work,”
and she began to make a jacket of which any big city tailor might well have
been proud. Instead of the usual five buttonholes, she made thirteen, and
around each hole she embroidered a flower. Such buttonholes are known to
young boys and girls in this part of China as “the thirteen precious jewels,”
and Gold Flower was very happy in her work, believing she was having a
romance in the best tradition.

Because she had grown very sentimental, she ran with the jacket to Lipao
and insisted that he try it on. All the while she danced around him crying,
“Do you like it? Oh, tell me, do you like it?”

Her enthusiasm was so captivating and her sentiment so infectious that
Lipao had answered just as her heart had wished.

“I love it because it was made by my own true love’s hands.”

As was the custom, he tried to give Gold Flower money to buy thread to
make herself a pair of flowered shoes. At first she refused, saying, "I don’t
want anything from you, but your love.” But when she saw her refusal sad-
dened him, she took the money, but she never bought anything for herself
and spent every dollar to buy cloth, thread and needles to make garments
for Lipao.

Gold Flower often thought this was the happiest time of her life—a honey-
moon she might have called it had she known the word or been aware of the
custom. She would have liked to shout her love for Lipao to the whole village,
and though this was impossible, she longed for some friend in whom she
could confide. But not only was this denied her, but she had to redouble her
caution to prevent the affair from becoming known. By degrees a vague uneasi-
ness took possession of her. She was no longer, as formerly, completely care-
free. She began to wonder if she ought not to yield to Lipao, or whether,
since she could not completely satisfy his love, cease to see him any more.
Her refusal to give herself to him had at first proceeded from strength, but
now she found herself wondering if it was not weakness that prevented her
from fully consummating their love.

Then she asked herself what would become of her—if her parents would
betroth her, and to whom? But Lipao’s face always rose before her and she
could not picture any other husband. Yet there always rang in her mind that
thought: “If you should be betrothed! If you should be betrothed!” At
night she could not sleep; she tossed and turned and beat her pillow. Think-
ing that, after all, it would be worse to give herself to someone she did not
know than to Lipao, whom she loved, she promised herself to throw herself
in Lipao’s arms the next time he came, but when he did come, she could
not do it and remained silent.

In the autumn of 1942, Gold Flower was betrothed to a man named
Chang, who lived in the village where we were now sitting, and whom she
had never seen. At almost the same time, Lipao was also betrothed by his
parents to another girl.

As was customary in many Chinese villages, Gold Flower was not informed
of her betrothal and only gradually grew aware of it through the frequent
visits of the matchmaker, the unwonted preparations in the house and the

sly jibes made to her by the neighbors.

It was an unusually lovely autumn. But Gold Flower was miserable most

of the time. The matchmaker had told her parents her betrothed was only two
years older than her and would make her an excellent husband, but her friends
who had seen Chang said he was fifteen years older and had an ugly white
face. Gold Flower was depressed.

Only with Lipao was she gay. Her tenderness, in fact, grew each day as
she thought of her husband-to-be. The more she thought of her real sweet-
heart, the more she loathed her intended husband. Never had Lipao seemed
so desirable to her, and never had marriage seemed more hateful. Never had
her parents appeared more disagreeable, society more unfair, life more unjust.
She insisted that Lipao come to see her every night, and when he came she
decked herself out in her finest clothes. But there came a time when she
could not see him any more. Neighbors were constantly in the house, helping
with preparations for the wedding