a)

My beautiful sisters, we have many dif-
ferences, but we all as people have one
common enemy—the American imperialist.
Our sisters of the Vencermos Brigade
state, "Although we have certain dif-
ferences, we are affected by the same
general oppression. This capitalist
oppressive society has put many obstacles
before us as people and as women to keep
us divided, to impair and destroy the
struggle as a whole."
What do the American imperialists do
to prove they are the true enemy?
They play many devious destructive
games with us to keep us separated and
our minds off of the real problem—then.
They keep most of us living or to be
more accurate, struggling for survival
in this dog-eat-dog corrupt, money mak-
ing, people-killing society. They have
the majority of us duped with their
endless line of trickery. It is time to
open your eyes and see the enemy for
what they are. They are just what they
say they are, that is capitalistic.
And they are capitalizing on us all
using any means necessary. For example,
in 1972, 7.7 million Black people still
lived in what the United States Census
Bureau defined as poverty (income less
than $2,272 for a non-farm family of
four). Another two million were near-
poor with only another mere 25% of the
above threshold. Together this makes
42% of all Black people in poverty;
these figures are just from the inac-
curate census, however.

The American imperialist has also broken
down the Black women's family structure.
Aid to Families with Dependent Children
has destroyed the Black man by not al-
lowing him the right to be a man to his
family. One and one-tenth million

Black families who received AFDC in 1972
were triple the number a decade earlier.
Fewer than three out of one hundred
white families were supported by AFDC

WOMEN’S ADVOCATES

Women's Advocates provides emergency
housing for women alone and with children who have
found themselves in intolerable situations.

THIRD WORLD WOMEN SPEAK

&
BY ALICE

compared to one in five Black families.
It is notorious that health care for
Black and poor people is atrocious.

The Ralph Nader research group re-
ported in 1973 that many women are
undergoing sterilization and are un-
aware that the effects of the surgery
are permanent. Much experimentation
with other forms of birth control has
been performed on Black and minority
women. In 18 counties of North Carolina,
a long-range study of 938 women, 518
of whom were Black, has lasted from
1937 for 43 years. In this study,
the Mecklenburg County Department of
Public Welfare (seat of Charlotte)
forced on the average of 50 steriliz-
ations per year on poor and Black women.
This is just one example of the inhum-
anity of the imperialist medical pro-
fession.
As can be seen from the above inform-
ation, as third world women, we have
special needs for liberation and there-
fore, different roles in the struggle.
In order for us to be fully and success-
fully liberated ourselves as women, we
must combine our strength with our men.
The Vencermos Brigade agrees, "We can-
not nor do we wish to solely deal with
the oppression of the third world women,
but we must deal with the oppression of
third world people as a whole. Only
by uniting with each other and our men
will come the unity and the strength
we need for the eventual overthrow of a
capitalist society.”
Advanced third world women have a
special role in the women's movement
due to the fact that we are the most
oppressed women in this country and
this fact contributes to a deeper in-
sight in us and added strength in
our revolutionary character. As the
Vencermos Brigade has guided us,
“Third world women recognize the op-
pression of all women and in that

respect, there is a connection be-
tween us and the white women's
liberation movement. Nevertheless,
because the third world people

are the most oppressed, we see our
primary fight as being the overthrow

of capitalism and racism. Any white
group that does not have an anti-
capitalist and anti-racist ideology
has absolutely nothing in common with
the third world women's struggle."

PANTONIA BRICO

"ANTONIA—PORTRAIT OF A WOMAN," the
acclaimed documentary film about
Antonia Brico, a talented but often
thwarted orchestral conductor, will
be shown March 5. If you haven't
already seen "Antonia," don't miss
the chance to get acquainted with
this very special musician.

Perhaps after seeing the film, you
will want to make the above head-
line come true. With the ideas and
energy of dedicated women, we can
and will bring Brico to Minneapolis
during International Women's Year!
If you can help in any way, call
re = (698-5290) or Jackie (724-

CORRECTION: If you send a check for
Joyce Guerrero's defense fund,
send to Joyce Guerrero Defense
Fund at Topeka Indian Center,

407 West Lyman, Topeka, KA 66608.

MAZ ON

While searching for a house and for funding, Women's
Advocates provided housing in private homes for two
years. In August 1974 a house was found at 584
Grand Avenue. The house cost $134,000. The Bush
Foundation provided a $10,000 down payment. After
unsuccessfully trying numerous banks and savings
and loan institutions, a loan was finally obtained

from Commercial State Bank. This is not a mortgage,
but a 15% two-year loan of $24,000. Every month
$300 is paid as interest on this loan. In two years,
after paying $7,200 in interest alone, Women's Advo-
cates will still not be one cent closer to owning
the house.

HOW YOU CAN HELP:

You can help purchase the house by giving or lending
money. Women by themselves have no financial power
but pooling financial resources gives all of us power.

FOR MORE INFORMATION:

Women's Advocates

P.O. Box 30533

St. Paul, Minnesota 55175
Telephone: (612) 227-2504

UCKS STORE

Q6OT-HENNEPIN