2

At Dunwoody Institute

First Woman Student Enrolls

in Auto Mechanics Course

by Shirley Heyer

The first two women to ever enter Dunwoody Industrial Institute began full-time classes there this winter. Dunwoody, one of the best-known trade schools in the nation, has been an all-male institution for 57 years.

One of the women is Pamela Spence, 24, an ex-college student and Army veteran (she served with the U.S. Intelligence Agency from 1965-68). She is taking an 18-month course in auto mechanics and eventually hopes to open her own garage.

The other woman student is Pat Schaeffer, 18, from New England, N.D., who is enrolled in a one-month baking course in cake decorating. She graduated from high school last spring and came down to Minneapolis to take the course in order to get a job with a baking company in Dickinson, N.D.

Pam said she picked Dunwoody "because of its reputation for training people in the trades. It's really thorough and gives you the kind of background you need to be a competent tradesman."

Getting into the school, however, wasn't as easy as making the initial choice. She first called Dunwoody in July of 1971 about entering their January 1972 auto mechanics class. "They said no," she said, "because they didn't take women—they were a men's school. I said that I didn't think they could be a men's school and to please send me an application anyway. They did."

Pam's initial efforts were followed up with a phone call in which "a different man told me they were a men's school and wouldn't take an application from a woman."

After that phone call, Pam contacted the Minnesota Department of Human Rights "to be advised of my legal rights. They said Dunwoody would have to admit me. So, I filled out the application and took it to Dunwoody.

"The admissions officer said he would take my application, but he didn't know if I would be accepted, because I was a woman and because the class might already be full," she said.

Early in fall, while she was in Illinois visiting her family, Pam received a call from Dunwoody telling her that the board had voted to let her in, "that I would be admitted to the January class even though there was no room."

"I think that the boys that are in my classes are no trouble," Pam said. "I don't get any special treatment, nor do I ask for it—I'm just as competent and do just as well. In fact, I'm maybe doing too well for some of them, because that's what one of the boys said one day—as if to imply that I had no right to do better than the guys, being a mere woman and all that malarkey."

In the hallways and lunchroom, "they are sometimes obnoxious and usually crude. I'm constantly being stared at, or whistled at, or hearing crude remarks. But none of this really upsets me, because that's the type of behavior I expect from men.

"To yell at me across the lunchroom, 'Is it a boy, or is that a girl?'—that seems to give them a great deal of satisfaction, and, of course, they think it's really hot shit—they whistle sarcastically—which means I no longer eat in the lunchroom.

"At first," Pam said, "I thought it was hiding out. But now I don't because I can only take so much strain and because I have only so much energy. I can't improve the situation by myself, so now I eat in the women's lounge and don't have much contact with boys other than those in my classroom.

"They think," she said, "that if they're man enough, I'll go away—drop out of school and never come back. I think if they don't like me, they can go away. I also think things will get better when some more women come—because then they will see that doing these things won't make women go away.

"Just making women feel uncomfortable is not going to make them go away. There is more to women than just tough."

Pam added, "I wear functional clothes. I think they are giving me a bad time for not being 'feminine.' That word is not in my vocabulary. As far as I'm concerned, I was born a woman and don't have to spend the rest of my life proving it.

"So, I do my work and I behave in a friendly manner, only I do not behave in the manner they expect me to (that is, feminine). So, I consequently have trouble with them."

(continued on page 3)