Feminist Perspective and Cake 3

Within the man's system, coitus blatantly
exemplifies sexual politics on an individual
or personal level. Women's sexuality has
been defined by men to benefit men until
women have learned to believe in their own
sexual inferiority.

A long-standing myth of western patriar-
chal society contends that women have a
lesser sex drive than men. Krafft-Ebing, a
well-known sexologist of a generation ago,
said of women:

"...if she is normally developed
mentally and well-bred, her sexual
desire is small. If this were not
so, the whole world would become

a brothel and marriage and family
impossible. It is certain that the
man that avoids women and the woman
who seeks men are abnormal."

A 1869 marriage manual read:

"...There can be no doubt that sexual
feeling in the female is, in a
majority of cases, in abeyance, and
that it requires positive and con-
siderable excitement to be roused

at all; and even if roused (which in
many instances it never can be), is
very moderate, compared with that

of the male.

The correlate to this thought is that, since
women have a lesser sexual desire, they do
not require as much sexual gratification.

Sexual politics was probably most severely
codified by Sigmund Freud. I don't believe
he was consciously malicious, but rather the
confused legatee of a Jewish Viennese patri-
archy. He lamented, on one hand, his
inability to understand women, while, on the
other, he continually diagnosed, defined,
and labeled them: less than men.

According to his psychoanalytic perspec-
tive, women were not whole human beings,
but mutilated males who longed all their
lives for a penis and must compensate for
its lack. Further, women did not possess a
libido, or sex drive. Libido belonged to
men. Hence, women were innately passive;
men, active.

Freud believed that during the phallic
phase of psychosexual development, both boys
and girls shift from a primary focus on the
mouth and anus as sources of erotic pleasure
to their genitalia, the penis for boys, the
clitoris for girls. He considered the
clitoris to be an atrophied penis, and he
defined girls as "little boys" who had
literally come too short. However, as the
little girl grows up, she must transfer any

pleasurable sensations from the clitoris to
the vagina, which she discovers later:

"The clitoris in the girl...is in every
way equivalent during childhood to the
penis....The transition to womanhood
very much depends upon the early and
complete relegation of this sensitivity
from the clitoris over to the vaginal
orifice."

The superiority of vaginal over clitoral
orgasm was a particularly useful theory.
Clitoral women were labeled immature,
neurotic, bitchy, masculine, infantile.
Vaginal women, on the other hand, were
maternal, feminine, mature, normal. Normal,
because it was, and is, convenient for men:
Vaginal insertion facilitates, both physio-
logically and psychologically, orgasm for
men. Also, to the degree that women believe
in vaginal orgasm, they are dependent upon
an erect penis, upon a man. Clitoral orgasm
affords sexual pleasure independent of the

male.

Vaginal orgasm is a myth. Anatomically,
all orgasms are centered in the clitoris.
This is not to imply that women do not, and
cannot, learn to experience orgasm through
vaginal insertion, but that the vagina it-
self is devoid of nerve endings. Dr. Judd
Marnor, representative of one of the newer
schools of psychoanalysis, frankly admits:

"...The chief sensory area for erogenous
sensation in women is localized in the
glans clitoris, just as in men it is
localized in the homologous glans
penis. (The shaft of the penis, like
the vagina, is lacking in genital cor-
puscles.)...Strictly speaking, there
is no such thing as vaginal orgasm in
the female, any more than we might
speak of scrotal, anal, or prostatic
orgasm in the male.

Even the adjectives vaginal and clitoral
create unnecessary confusion. We must eli-
minate them. Women, like men, experience
orgasm.

One final Freudian myth deserves explana-
tion: penis envy. The penis has served for
Freud and his followers as the "unalterable
determinant of maleness which women could
symbolically envy instead of the power and
prestige afforded men in society." And,
this plight was conferred on her, not by men
but by God, who created women without a
penis. Further, the lack of a penis legiti-
mized her role as wife and mother: She
transferred her desire for a penis to a de-
sire for a child, and she was especially
fortunate if it were a male child. Hence,
she was kept home and in a family way. (The
Roman etymology for family, familius, means
domestic servants.)

Anthropologists have shown that women's
sexual response is culturally conditioned.
Margaret Mead contends that whether or not a
woman experiences orgasm depends not only on
physical factors, but even more on where she
happens to have been born and reared:

"...Clearly those societies which
believe in orgasms for women and
produce orgiastic behavior in them
are also the ones which employ
effective stimulation techniques..."

The ability to achieve orgasm is a
potential; it is a learned response. Almost
any woman can experience orgasm if effective
stimulation is applied in a favorable social
and psychological milieu.

Interestingly, the phenomenon of orgasm as
a learned response is applicable to men as
well as women. According to Doctors
Eberhard and Phyllis Kronhausen, ejaculation
does not a priori spell orgasm in men. Eja-
culation may produce a physiological tension
release, but it is not as great as when
ejaculation and orgasm coincide. Because
ejaculation and orgasm have several aspects
in common and outwardly resemble one another,
they have been confused as the same thing.
This also suggests that some men may be
nonorgasmic. In men we call it impotence,
implying an unwillingness to act, rather
than frigidity, as in women, implying an in-
active passivity that simply froze over.

Historically, however, women have learned
from, and deferred to, whatever model of
sexuality was prescribed by men. Within the

*Recommended reading: "The Myth of the
Vaginal Orgasm," by Ann Koedt. Published by
New England Free Press, 791 Tremont Street,
Boston, Mass. 02118.