THE UNGILDED CAGE -

The Shadow

Every time I look around,

I see your shadow disappearing
Around the corner of my mind.

I see you always walking away from me
I know you are close to me

And if I should call out to you

I know you will be there.

I see your shadow everywhere

I can hear you walking to and fro—

But I cannot see you

And I can't reach out to you.

Why must you hide from me?

Or is it me hiding from you?

Maybe I just don't really see you at all.
Where are you going when you are leaving me?
Where have you been all this time?

When will I be able to join you?

Is it too late to change my mind?

I want to be with you all the time;

So I can have peace of mind....

Please don't leave me behind anymore.

I can't bear to see your shadow disappearing.
PLEASE WALK as secretly as possible

Hey, listen to me, please.

I know where I am going and

What the future holds for me

While I'm in your presence.

If I should look up at the sky
and breathe in a breath of fresh air

I want to be able to say
This is for real—

My day has come.

Freedom at last you are here.
I am free; really free;

Take me with you this time.

Samantha Maria Xanthes

by Char Masterman

The Minnesota River Valley is incredibly beautiful

on a sunny day. Enough to numb unpleasant thoughts.
The road to Shakopee overlooks the great river snaking
through forested hills, quickening my imagination back
to earlier times when this country's Natives roamed
the unspoiled soil freely. Railroad ties, electric
wires, telephone cables, humming tires—these jerked
me back to the present, back to my purpose, on toward
the women's prison, a shroud of gloom wrapping itself
around the thought of incarcerated women.

MCIW. Minnesota Correctional Institution for Women.
Correctional. Right. They need to be shaped and re-
shaped into the mold designed by others, the mold in
which they will fit so that they can be properly ex-
ploited—that is, inside the law rather than outside.

I thought of the hooker in Studs Terkel's book, Working,
who's done seven years. She told Studs, "A hustler is
any woman in American society. I was the kind of
hustler who received money for favors granted rather
than the type of hustler who signs a Lifetime contract
for her trick... I learned it from the society around
me, just as a woman. We're taught how to hustle, how to
attract, hold a man, give sexual favors in return...
It's a market place transaction." She had very clear
vision, the hooker.

MCIW looks much like a tiny college campus—small red
brick buildings shaded by large trees. No high spiked
walls, no armed guards. The guards there are differ-
ent than in men's prisons. The guards there deal with
psychological violence—more subtle, but “effective”.
The guard is called Behavior Modification. It rein-
forces the notion that there is something wrong with
the woman, not the system. It separates the woman

from the other women and from society at large. It
separates her from her loved ones, from all that is
normal and healthy.
to “enone” without getting into trouble.

It teaches her very quickly how
You know the

Kathy Menard

familiar prescription—smile pretty, do as you're
told, act like a lady, be acquiescent, not aggressive,
don't ask impertinent questions, make presumptuous
demands and the like. Or you'll never get out of
here.

Behavior Modification is, by administrative admission,
punitive, not rehabilitative. Be good, you get a
cookie. Be bad, you have the cookie snatched away.
This is like the "real" world, you say? Ah, but who
makes the rules? And to what purpose? For whose
benefit?

One of the rules—there are 26 in all—for visiting
caught my eye. "Residents are to maintain a dignified
and respectable appearance. Residents and visitors
will sit side by side, each in his or her own chair
(chairs facing staff)." And another; "Intimacy will
be limited to an embrace on the arrival and departure
of the visitors. Hand holding is permissible." Why
not? Whoever heard of a “hand orgasm"?

A few vignettes. Samantha (Sam) Xanthes—a striking
young woman of generous warmth, somewhat shy and at
the same time very proud of her poetry, and justly

so. Sam sends her poetry for publication, hopes to
see it in print, and hopes to make a few extra dollars
at the same time. The prison pays 25¢ an hour for her
labor and she has to save half that. She understates
things—but one can sense there is much that is unsaid,
much that is hoped for. Sam desperately misses being
with people. She is not unlike the other women.

Margaret Reynolds—an energetic, animated woman, a
political-woman daring to overstep the boundaries
set before her. Margaret is incredibly busy, with
studies mostly. She likes to study law, but needs
law books. She is constantly concerned about the
women's rights at the prison, and is probably more

outspoken than most. CONT. PG 2