THE HOUSE OF ELIMA

BY MARY ELLEN SHAW

HE SAYS: There haven't been any women of  
real genius.

SHE SAYS: You never see the mountain rising  
up behind your back.

"Elima" is a new magazine of poetry, jour-  
nals and reviews edited by Annie Gottlieb.  
An elima, she explains, is a house in a  
pygmy tribe set aside for the young girl/  
woman just unfolding into maturity. All of  
the women in the village, old and young,  
join together to sing and celebrate; the old-  
er women teaching lessons of an adult life.  
"Day after day, night after night, the elima  
house resounds with the throaty contralto of  
the older women and the high, piping voices  
of the youngest. It is a time of gladness  
and happiness, not for the women alone but  
for the whole people."

In “Elima," the same singing, the same  
unfolding takes place. The women writers  
speak from different backgrounds and decades:  

practiced poets of vision and sparse words;  
young poets raising up words like torches;  
women exploring the fragments of their  
childhoods and collisions with society.  
“Elima" incorporates journals, letters,  
poems and sympathetic quotes from estab-  
lished (male) literature. The magazine em-  
phasizes communicating what the experience  
of women has been, experimenting and prob-  
ing new ways of writing, and the process of  
fully-sexed, adult and potent.

In future issues, I would like to see some  
variety in format. The typesetting is  
blocked and unvaried, not inviting immediate  
or easy access. Another thing to look for-  
ward to is the tightening up of style. Work  
which is a beginning and exploration is nec-  
essary, but can't be kept up forever. If it  
were, it might put the magazine in that un-  
comfortable position so familiar to women's  
work, i.e., as an auxiliary and interesting  
sideline, but nothing to be taken seriously.  
There is a danger, on one hand, in bending  
too far to outside pressure, thus losing vi-  
tality and originality. But there is a  
greater danger, on the other hand, in not being  
as tough and demanding toward each other  
as the world will be.

There is an earthiness about much of the  
work, a focus, contact with the landscape on  
intimate, if sometimes brutal, terms. Tex-  
tures, plant life, paints, pots, glass, me-  
tal, body, animal. A child in Mexico with  
ulcerated eyes. The reality of bare walls  
in a New York prison cell, and the real wo-  

men who talked and fought and loved and  
lived there.

The journal fragments are personal and un-  
selfconscious. Each of them transfers a per-  
sonality, a person; someone known from years  
of late night word-fests; or that familiar  
voice in every woman's mind which tallies  
lists of betrayals and confusion. There is  

a concern with girlhood, of recreating the  

past to see what was forced, wheedled and  
conned; what was wasted and thrown away;  
what might have been possible.

Each poet gives us a handful of her voice.  
Styles and concerns vary, and there is a de-  
liberate range of deftness and facility.

Juli Loesch is flamboyant, outre, right-on  
and gentle:

Opened by a mailed fist  

on the carapace  
Opened by a  
tender craziness  
We open and open  

Roa Lynn has a terse, finely-sharpened  
bitterness, and she, too, is gentle:

So over the years  

The whole female world fragilely falls  

Into two groups, those that have, and  
those that haven't  

Got the courage to pierce their ears; a  
little American girl  

From Pittsburgh unexpectedly thrust her  
freckled cheek forward.

April Murphy speaks body-talk and cele-  
brates the rarely spoken-of phenomenon of  
active female sexuality:

lithe animal of my center, playful as an  

otter with her inside-out body.

Carol Muske speaks with a bony vividness.  
She uses images in a private, almost mythic  
vision:

My body moves like a blade through mirrors  

My head turns, a spool winding down  

To the last great ring of bone at the  

throat.

In this dark season  

I have grown a rough coat for winter  
Feel my hand budding with hardware  
My sweet smile  

Moving quiet through stone  

Like a new species.

There is a review of "Women and Madness."  
Marge Piercy is the reviewer; she is urgent  
and a bit frightening: what is being built/  
born/explored has to be done for survival.  
"Women can't yet believe we can be enhanced  
and protected by the achievements of any  
other women." "Women must feed one another  
emotionally, sexually, and intellectually,  
must support one another if the loser's  
cycle is to be broken.

I'm not sure absolute retreat and exile  
are necessary, but there is surely a need  
for a time of withdrawal and renewal. The  
house of elima is a good place to start;  
trading stories and songs, sharing harsh  
lessons if necessary, learning the duties  
and joyous freedom of maturity. A sounding  
out, a stretching, a testing begins here, as  
well as a ripening sense of community.

Before the door opens, the house of elima  
will rock and rock with laughter and song -  
and loud anger. And when the door does  
open, we will emerge in strength with full  
hands.