“TO KATE”

been  
"Device Piece for Walker-to Kate" has so  

many elements within it to talk about that I  
have opted for a brief description: as a  
means of encouraging all women out there to  
see the piece or at least be on the alert for  
other works by Carole Fischer, and then I shall  
devote myself to totally subjective feelings  
on the subject.  

Materials used are brick, glass, red elastic  
and Kotex. As shown in the photo, the materials  
are either balanced or stretched over one a-  
nother. Not evident in the photo is the soft  
breeze which plays over the lines of stretched  
elastic.  

Now to the subjective area. Obvious vis-  
ual contrasts have been pointed out in other  
reviews; shiny glass against dull bricks, trans-  
parent alongside opaque, hard brick versus soft  
Kotex, etc. Simplistic observations which do  
little justice to the artist's efforts.  

Similes and metaphors abound to further  
"explain" what is happening vis-à-vis the  
Walker's Invitation Catalogue: "...sheets of  
glass propped against a wall, with taut bands  
of elastic pinned beside them and stretched  
across the floor, allude to gossamer curtains  
on a drying frame."  

Thus we are told that a work which is capable  
of evoking diverse memories and feelings; a  
work which understands the dynamic use of space  
and concrete “earthly” objects to draw us into  
the realm of abstraction essentially comes down  
to gossamer curtains. The woman's experience in  
art?  

oe  

EOL  

AMS  

Carole Fisher with components far Device Piece Series  

a review by Margaret Hastings  

The catalogue continues. "For the first  
time socio-political statement is also intro-  
duced in her use of sanitary napkins as an in-  
tegral part of her construction." In a woman's  
life, Kotex, Tampax, etc. are hardly socio-  
political; they are necessities. It is the died  
world's unhealthy reaction to them which brings  
into play the political element. It is also  
easier to dismiss such a reminder of women's  
bodily functions with political clichés than  
express honest reactions. If red elastic  
stretched full length conjures images of cur-  
tains then certainly the Kotex reminds us of  
menstruation.  

Trying to tell you what "...-to Kate" is all  
about, what it reminds me of or its political  
intentions would be a bit pretentious. Its  
very strength lies in its unlimited implica-  
tions, ideas and visual imagery. Is the red  
elastic blood? Possibly. Does the glass sig-  
nify fragile prettiness or a sinister quality  
with its sharp cutting edges? Choose one, both  
or neither.  

Carole Fisher has taken separate units  
and formed connections of movement, reflection,  
repetition, contradictions—all that stuff one  
learns in art schools. Through such connections  
common, identifiable objects merge into one  
another to express a world outside of their  
limited forms. Louise Nevelson does this in her  
works; good poets use words to the same end.  

Gossamer curtains are only a small part of it.  

Continued on page 7  

Photo: David Thomag