Women and Feminism

New Tomorrow

Audrey Colom Speaks  
To Minnesota Women’s  
Political Caucus  

\ BY SHIRLEY HEYER  

Audrey Colom, vice chair of the National  
Women's Political Caucus, spoke on the “Myth  
of Black Women and Feminism," at the annual  
meeting of the Minnesota Women's Political  
Caucus at Hamline University Nov. 17.  

"Feminist issues are clearly relevant to  
us," she said. "Our double jeopardy--based  
on sex and race--places us at the bottom.  

"For example, the annual median income for  
individuals places black women at the  
bottom, white women third, black males sec-  
ond, and white males at the top."  

In the struggle for equal rights, she  
said, "We need to avoid the 'd&c' (divide  
and conquer) tactic.  

"The civil rights movement and the femin-  
ist movement are addressing the white male  
club--with all women and minority men at the  
bottom. We, all women and minority men, are  
the majority in this country."  

The “myth” of black women and feminism,  
Ms. Colom said, is caused largely by false  
stereotypes, many of which are perpetuated  
by the media. These stereotypes are, she  
said:  

1) trying to "divide our loyalties.  

Telling us that we are black first and  
women second, or as Margaret Sloan, black  
feminist from Chicago, said, ‘That means on  
Mondays through Wednesdays they'll mess you  
over because you're female and Thursdays  
through Sundays they'll mess you over be-  
cause you're black."  

2) "the women's movement is a middle-class  
movement. Some of us accept the stereotype  
that the women's liberation movement is  
‘middle-class women trying to escape the  
home.' We don't need to be liberated to escape  
the home. Work in the home and child care  
are valid. Who says liberation is getting  
up at five, taking care of the family, going  
to a job and then coming home to take care  
of the family again? This is not women's  
liberation!"  

3) "the black woman's place is behind her  
man, pushing him into his manhood. ...32%  
of black families are headed by women.  
Where are the men they are supposed to push  
into manhood? Don't lay the emasculation of  
black men on us black women. Bobby Seale  
said, 'Real manhood is not the subjugation  
of anyone.'"  

4) "this is a white/racist women's move-  
ment. A media cliché. The women's movement  
is actually as diverse as the black movement  
is. Just as there are sexists in the black  
liberation movement, there are racists in  
the women's liberation movement.  

"We need the Coalitions, such as the one  
between the Urban Coalition and NOW in the  
boycott against General Mills, or the action  

Continued on page  

Standard Questions You  
Might Be Asked...  

Suggested Answers  
That Might Work  

Q. What is Feminism?  
A. Feminism is the belief of  
the political, economic and  
social equality of the sexes.  
A Feminist is one who  
believes in feminism and  
(hopefully) works to elimin-  
ate that inequality between  
men and women. A Feminist  
believes that society  
should provide the opportuni-  
ty for women to develop as  
whole human beings...that  
choices should be provided  
according to their interests  
and talents and not solely  
according to their sex.  

Q. What is Sexism?  

A. Sexism is prejudice or  
discrimination towards women  
on the basis of their sex.  

Continued on next page