Female Orgasm

In the female, the organ of sexual pleasure, the clitoris, is distinct from the organs of reproduction. The vagina, although it reacts to sexual stimulation, is almost without nerve endings, and the role that penetration plays in orgasm is almost entirely psychological. (See Appendix II for a discussion of the myth of vaginal orgasm.) Generally, orgasm is the result of direct or indirect clitoral stimulation; this stimulation may occur directly by manual or oral means or indirectly by secondary contact during intercourse. Masters and Johnson discuss techniques for stimulating the female in Human Sexual Inadequacy (see Appendix IV).

Male

In contrast with the sexual organs of the female, those of the male are primarily external. They consist of the penis, the scrotum (a sac containing the two sperm-producing organs, or testes), and the sperm-carrying ducts from the testicles in the scrotum to the penis. Under mental or physical sexual stimulation, the penis can become engorged with blood so that it becomes stiff, or erect. Immediately at, or shortly after, sexual climax, a seminal fluid containing sperm from the testicles and a secretion from the seminal vesicles and the prostate is ejaculated. Muscular contractions taking place at the base of the penis force the seminal fluid past the prostate gland, through the urethral canal, and out the meatus, or the opening at the tip of the penis. This ejaculate will generally contain between thirty million and sixty million sperm cells. Secretions from the penis often occur prior to climax and ejaculation. These secretions, supplemented by the secretions from the female, aid the entry of the penis into the vagina. This fluid contains active sperm that are capable of fertilizing an egg and causing pregnancy.

Conception

The initial step of conception occurs when the ovum, the female sex cell, is penetrated by a spermatozoon, the male sex cell, and the two cells fuse into a single new cell. From this united, fertilized cell originate all the billions of cells that will eventually become an infant.

After ovulation, the egg travels from the ovary toward the uterus through the fallopian tube. During intercourse, the sperm are deposited into the upper part of the vagina in the region of the cervix. Most of the sperm are immobilized by the acid condition of the vagina. However, a small proportion of the total number ejaculated eventually reach the protective alkaline fluids of the cervix, enter the cavity of the uterus, and begin their upward movement into the opening of the fallopian tubes. There one of them may fertilize the ovum, which is migrating toward the uterus. Following its penetration, the sperm progresses to the pole of the egg opposite its point of entry and there comes to rest. No more sperm can enter the egg or fertilize it. The next step is the fusion of the two cells’ nuclei into one parent nucleus; when this has been accomplished, fertilization is complete.

The fertilized ovum then divides into two cells, then the two into four, the four into eight, and so on. The still developing fertilized egg continues its journey through the fallopian tubes, reaching the uterus on the third or fourth day. It travels around the uterine cavity a day or two before it adheres to the uterine lining and becomes firmly implanted. Pregnancy now has begun.

For the fertilization process to occur, sexual intercourse must take place within a period of from five to seven days before ovulation or two to three days after ovulation. The unfertilized ovum lives only from twenty-four to seventy-two hours after ovulation. Evidence indicates, however, that a sperm cell may live for up to seven days in the female genital tract, and hence any unprotected intercourse within seven days before ovulation might result in pregnancy.

(Next time: Contraception and Nonmethods of Contraception)

Appendix IV References

Appendix IV: Masters, William H., and Virginia E. Johnson Human Sexual Inadequacy

(continued on page 4)