Toward A World Without Labels

by Dianna Hunter

I've been thinking a lot lately about how I,  
a lesbian woman, can love women who choose  
to live with and love men. By this I mean  
both the so-called "straight" woman whose  
most intimate energies go into men and the  
so-called “bisexual” woman whose most inti-  
mate energies may also go into women.

It's been about two and a half years since  
I realized I was a lesbian and came out in  
my consciousness-raising group. And now  
I've had about two and a half years of  
problems in dealing with "bisexual" and  
"straight" women.

When I came out, I was living with four other  
women. We had gotten together by chance  

to rent a professor's house, which turned  

out to be the perfect setting for my coming  
out. Two of the other women and I were  
involved in feminist consciousness-raising  
groups. We talked about women, sexism,  
sexuality, lesbianism, and other feminist  
issues at length, both inside and outside  

the groups. For me, this was a major part  

of all that I learned from those women. I  
also learned about cooking, painting, weav-  
ing, and pottery. I felt this time was a  
vibrant time, a time pregnant with personal  
growth. The feminist ideas, my relationships  
with the women of my house and with one  

other close friend, my friends' work in  

the arts—all these influences moved me to  
realize the deep love I had for other women.

I was coming out slowly, learning new ways  
that I could touch women with my body, my  
feelings, and my ideas—in other words, with  
my intimate self. I was loving this inti-  
macy, and wanting more. I guess the point  
at which I decided I was a lesbian was when  
I realized I wanted to make love to other  
women, not just hug them hello and goodbye  
or catch a quick pat on the back. At that  
time I felt defenses going up between me as  
lesbian and them as straight. I sensed a  
definite limit in how much they would give  
to me. Because I loved them, I wanted to  
sleep with them. They loved me but did not  
want to lead me on or give me any false im-  
pressions of their affection for me. They  
did not want to sleep with me. I began to  
feel one major difference standing between  
them and me: They wanted to sleep with men;  
I wanted to sleep with women. This dif-  
ference gave each of us her label. I became  
"lesbian." They became "straight women."

Women have asked me, "Don't you want to get  
rid of labels?" Yes, of course I do. But  

first I want to get rid of the things that  

cause us to use labels. For now, "lesbian"  
and "straight woman" have meaning to me.

With a lesbian, I feel our love for one anoth-  

er could advance to any level. This is not  

to say that love between lesbians is perfect,  

always advancing on to higher and higher  
levels, both women desiring the same love  
experiences. It does mean that with each  
lesbian I meet, there is a chance that we  
may make love. I know that I cannot sleep  
with a straight woman. Consequently, I  
have felt that I could not put much energy  
into a relationship with a straight woman.  
Whatever ways we found to love one another  
would be blocked at a level which I have  
found fulfilling. Joni Mitchell wrote,  
"making love is touching souls." I was  

afraid I would fall in love with a straight  
woman, and we would not be able to touch  
souls.

I envision a world where there will be no  
labels "straight woman" or "lesbian." There  
we will relate on all levels that feel right,  
at the time that they feel right. We will  
touch souls if you and I both desire it. I  
will be true to myself. I will do the things  
that I want to do. You will also act as you  
truly wish. We will be honest with one  
another about which ways we want our relation  
ship to grow. When we stop growing together,  
we will part without fear, still loving and  
respecting one another. For now, though, I  
do see fears in the way of our loving one  
another. I want to identify my own fears of  
straight women (By this term I also mean  
bisexual women.), so I can work through the  
fears. I think identifying them will help  
begin the process of eliminating them.

When talking to straight women, I feel fear,  
in both myself and them, associated with  
the question of men. I am a member of the  
Twin City Women Poets. Recently, in that  
group, we hassled because another lesbian  
and I wanted the group to sponsor a woman-  
centered poetry reading. By this we meant  
the poems would be about women, and only  
women could attend. The straight women  
poets said they would accept the idea of  
reading poems about women. But they would  
not accept keeping men out of the reading.  
I do not want to relate to men. I do not  
wish to read my poetry to men. I don't  
wish to deny other women the option of re-  
lating to men, but I want straight women to  
recognize my need not to deal with men.

As soon as the argument over the woman-cen-  
tered reading began, I felt my defenses  

go up against the straight woman poets.

Just to know that a woman has a man in her  
heart frightens me. I have tried to carry  
on sexual relationships with two women who  
considered themselves bisexual, and in both  
cases, I felt very threatened by the other  
woman's relationships with men.

The first woman and I knew one another for  
about six months before we made love. We  
had kissed a lot one night at the bar, and  
she had invited me home and then decided  
that she didn't want to make love with me  
because of a relationship she was having  
with a man. After we did finally consum-  
mate our relationship, we spent approxi-  
mately another six months of being friends  
and lovers, sometimes sleeping together and  
sometimes not. I felt that I was in a more  
vulnerable position than she because I saw  
myself as a lesbian. I was stuck there, as  
a lover of women, loving her in particular.  
She was free to abandon her lesbianism, and  
me, and to go on relating to men. She was  

never very comfortable thinking of herself as  
a lesbian, anyway. She once told me that  

she formed her closer and more honest re-  
lationships with women, but that she just  
liked sleeping with men.

The other straight woman whom I really cared  
for never was my lover. We talked a lot,  
kissed and hugged, fondled, and slept to-  

gether, but we never made love. She was  

continued on next page