letters vese oe a ies ny

Dear Sisters,  
The Women's Music Network has received mail from women  
all over the country who would like to make contact with  
other women musicians. We've heard about everything from  
woodwind quintets, vocalists and banjo players to research  
papers on women composers.  
Until now we haven't been able to offer much help to  
these people, but we've decided to change that. We plan  
to compile a list of women composers, performers, ensembles,  
musicologists, concert producers, music publishers,  
record companies and other women who are involved in music.  
We'd like to close the gap between women musicians in  
the United States and Canada by feeding our information  
back to you. So if you're starting a woodwind quintet in  
Iowa City, maybe we know of a woman oboe player there.  
Or if you're composing country songs in Pennsylvania, we  
can put you in touch with a woman country singer or a  
woman's band.  
The success of this project depends largely on how many  
women respond. We already have a good start with information  
from women in many areas of the country. If you  
would like to be listed, please send us a postcard with  
your name, address, phone number, musical area (what in-  
strument you play, what type of music you play, whether  
you perform, compose, produce, etc.), and who you're  
interested in finding. It would also be helpful if you  
told us briefly about women's musical activities in  
your area.  
Women's Music Network Listings  
224 East 10th Street  
New York, New York 10003  

SEP  

IT PAYS TO ADVERTISE IN GOLDFLOWER:  

You may design your own ads and send them to us, or  
have someone on our staff do the artwork if you'd  
like. If you do design your own ad, be sure to use  
the size as you want it to appear in the paper, and  
use white paper and black ink or no. 2 or darker  
pencil.  
FEATURE ADS: $3.00 per column inch. (That's  
1 X 3 actual inches.)  
$4.00 per column inch. (That's  
4 X 1 actual inches.)  

CLASSIFIED ADS: One line (about 7 words), 50¢.  
Two lines (about 14 words), $1.00.  
Three lines (about 21 words), $1.25.  
Four lines, $1.50.  

Make checks payable to Gold Flower and mail to  

P.O. Box 8341 Lake St. Station, Mpls., 55408  

PPS  

Poetry and Politics: a workshop  

Current domestic and international conditions have  
brought personal responsibility for political concerns back  
to the foreground.  
The Workshop will present some precedents for literary  
involvement in politics, but will  
concentrate on sharing and responding to participants'  
writing. Concern will be directed especially toward  
the anger/frustration of the situation. (The Workshop  
will begin with an examination of these highly suspicious  
categories.)  

Limited enrollment.  
Contact the facilitator, Susan Hauser, at 9900 Bluebird,  
Coon Rapids, Minn. 55433 or phone 755-5134.  

Date: Saturday May 31, 1975, 9 a.m.- 4 p.m. Fee: $20.00;  
includes materials and lunch.  

(Susan Hauser has published poems and criticism in Granite,  
New York Quarterly, New Letters, North Country Anvil and  
others, edits Raspberry Press publications, and has an  
MFA/Poetry from Bowling Green State University, Ohio.)  

out the indulgent political poem from the one that transcends  

For more information, and to register,  

Dear Gold Flower:  

Thank you for sending me your April issue.  

Upsetting though those pictures may be, I  
am afraid that the message they contain is  
one that must still be publicized.  

I am happy to report that the latest attempt  
to limit the access of poor women to abortion  
was roundly defeated in the Senate. That  
together with the report of the Civil Rights  
Commission naming abortion as an important  
civil right will, I hope, have an effect  
on the Congress and strengthen the Supreme  
Court decision.  

Best wishes.  
Sincerely,  

Donald M. Fraser  

AMAZON POETRY.  

We are inviting submission of poems to  
Amazon Poetry: An Anthology, a collection of  
writing by living lesbian poets, to be pub-  
lished in the fall of 1975. Although we know  
that lesbian poets are writing in all parts of  
the country, we have not yet heard of most of  
these women. Excellent poems are going unread,  
in large part for lack of publishing outlets  
and limited space in those that do exist. We  
want both to open more space for these writers  
and to make their poetry visible to those  
presently unaware of the existence of a vital  
lesbian literature.  

Please send poems (typed, on 8½x11 paper)  
to Amazon Poetry, 496 3rd Street, Brooklyn,  
New York, 11215. Include your name and  
address on each page of poetry you submit.  

If a poem has been published previously,  
please indicate this clearly on the same page  
as the poem itself, so that we can request  
permission to reprint (however, no special  
preference will be given to previously pub-  
lished poems). Only poems accompanied by a  
stamped, self-addressed envelope will be re-  
turned. Deadline: July 15, 1975  

Supplies  
Orchids  

Minneapolis  
at Reindeer Square  

AT  
Find by Critters  
TROP! (SH & HOUSE PLANTS)  

232 So. Snelling  

ACROSS FROM MACALESTER