It's all overgrown now. Waist-high grass  
camouflages the places where the community outdoor  
kitchen, this tipi and that summer shelter stood.  
Hard work is just memories.  

Four years ago, two Minneapolis women birthed the  
idea of a women's community in northern Minnesota.  
The community was to be man-free and eventually,  
self-subsistent. Women who preferred a rural lifestyle  
would live there and women wanting to escape  
city life for a weekend or a week could come up to a  
retreat setting.  

Both women were in the final stages of their  
marriages. The first woman was from an upper-middle  
class family and married an upper-middle class man.  
She would supply the money for the land; share her  
class privileges with more common, low-income  
women. She wished to remain anonymous.  

The second woman's husband was offered a beautiful  
plot of land in Aitkin County for $3,500, one-  
third of its value. This was Rising Moon. Pooling  
one husband/father's resources with another husband's  
connections, the women bought the land. But, because  
of then sexist property laws which would have auto-  
matically put both husbands' names on the land title  
with their own, the women asked a friend to lend her  
name to the title of the "community land.” In the  
four-year history of Rising Moon, this third woman  
spent only a couple of hours on the land.  

Rising Moon. It was meadows, woods, bogs and  
river. It was wild asparagus, raspberries and black-  
berries. A pump out front, a three-walled, roofless remnant of a  
barn and a 20 x 12 leaky storage shed. It was  
secluded; 33 miles from the nearest blacktop road  
with a half-mile drive leading off a dirt township road.  

In the summer when the sun set directly west, evening  
skies would flame out over the hayfield in red and  
gold.  

The following April at a national lesbian con-  
ference in California, the two women spread word of  
Rising Moon and women interested in rural living  
were invited to join the community. More women  
heard of Rising Moon at the summer solstice festival  
in the Jemez Mountains of New Mexico in June. By  
July, eight women and two horses had arrived at  
Rising Moon to make a community, be a community.  
Four women left after a couple of months but a new  
woman arrived.  

In December the first tragedy struck Rising  
Moon. With only two women and several cats home,  
a spark apparently jumped out of the cook-stove and  
burned the small house to the ground. The women  
escaped uninjured but only one cat survived. It was  
-20°.  

For three weeks the women lived in the only  
place they could, the NW corner of the barn. (Another  
woman had built a temporary roof over this corner  
and lived there in the fall.) Temperatures were  
staying near -20 not counting the wind chill.  
Keeping warm meant staying alive so for most of the  
three weeks the women spent huddled next to each  
other inside their double sleeping bags. Waking up  
in the morning included touching their fingertips to  
their eyes to thaw the lashes. Frozen peanut butter,  
raisins and figs were meals. When the cold became  
unbearable, out of the sleeping bag and handsaw  
wood to create body heat. "Don't sit for too long  
in the outhouse. There's nowhere to go afterwards  
to warm up."  

Their stove was the only one they could afford,  
an inefficient, $12 model designed for ice-fishing  
houses.  

It was a small house, no electricity, water-  

G MCON: THE END OR  

BEGINNING?  

In the middle of the winter, a new home had to  
be built. On their backs the women carried boards,  
fiberboard, insulation and anything else the next  
door neighbor could scrounge up. Down the hill,  
across the river, through tangling willow bushes,  
up the hill, load after load until they had enough  
materials to semi-insulate the 1-inch thick shed.  
Hard to hammer nails with your mittens on. Harder  
still to hold a nail with cold-stiffened, bare  
fingers.  

First usable space of the shed was 8 x 8.  

A tarp separated it from the rest of the room where  
the wind through the cracks made it seem like there  
were no walls at all. Blasts from the west.  

Occasional weekend visitors from the city  
brought needed encouragement, fresh fruit, and  
vegetables. Many of them spent their entire visit  
beneath layers of long underwear, sweaters and  
scarves. Friends in Wisconsin donated a cast-iron  
stove.  

The reconstruction project neared completion  
as the other three Rising Moon residents arrived.  
The first two left for a short visit with family  
and friends, but soon it was five people living  
in one room, plus the weekenders plus four cats,  
two dogs and a litter of puppies. Bedding was  
layered; a loft and two mattress-less bunks. It  
was a Little House on the Prairie or Giants of the  
Earth type winter. Much time spent huddled around  
the stove reading, writing letters, making music,  
anything to forget how cold the side away from the  
stove was. A typical Minnesota winter, it seemed  
never to end. Day after day after day.  

The snow level dropped and days lengthened.  
Hands searched through hair, inside shirts and up  
pants legs for ticks. Dogs had to be picked clean  
at least once a day. Spring air felt good.  

Two women set up a camp on the edge of a field  
about 4 miles from the shed. Two others set up a  
camp on the side of a hill overlooking the river.  

Two more residents arrived. Then four more.  
Also, more horses, dogs, cats and soon, a goat.  
People lived by ones and twos in a tarp-roofed  
shelter in the woods or a tipi in the middle of the  
pasture. Morning sounded like a chipmunk's chatter  
or a horse's munching two feet away.  

Sod pulled up by hand for days. The land  
hadn't been tilled in several years. Took turns  
pulling and beating rhythms on the drum.  
to a beat. But no one thought of a fence so horses  
destroyed most of the garden.  

Thick as mist. Mosquitoes are cruel and for  
almost a month no progressive work was accomplished  
because no one could get a decent night's sleep.  

As with the garden fence, preventative mosquito  
netting wasn't thought of until later. So many  
lessons learned the hard way.  
Daily chores took up enough time. Someone  

has read that living at a survival level this way  
takes three times more energy than living a "normal”  
gas, electricity, bathtub, four walls and a roof  
type life. Pump the water, haul the water, chop  
wood to heat it, then take a bath. Equal amounts  
of energy were spent initiating many Rising Moon  
visitors to the skills of the lifestyle.  

Some people started odd-jobbing at whatever  
came up. Two of the women got steady part-time  
jobs at the motel in town.  

But which way were we to go? Everyone with  
the same desire to live in the country but from  
there everyone had developed their own fantasies.  

Raise horses or goats or build a house? What were  

those original dreams way back in the heads of two  

cont, pg. 15  

Easier working.