NEVELSON continued from page 21

and the men were this and the men were that.  
So, when they do a thing, they do it almost  
professionally. They'll bang and pound. And  
I think it's a riot. I have people, men who  
work with me, for instance, and they think if  
the thing is heavy they take a big nail and,  
oh, wow. Actually, the harder it is, we have  
used pins, you know, these pins, and were  
able to penetrate because if you're taking  
hard with hard it's almost impossible.

Because do men use a voice like a female,  
if women are women and men are men? So why  
should I superimpose in labor and in work  
and change who I am? The work is a total  
reflection of the person that made it.

Now, of course, a lot of people, even  
critics in New York, have said, ‘she works  
like a man.' I wouldn't have known it was a  
woman that did it.'

Well now, you see, who says that we're the  
weaker sex? We're different, but not the  
weaker sex. We were in a society that  
didn't permit us to blossom. But let them  
permit us to. But we have to take it and  
blossom. I don't want anyone to permit me  
that is also a slave mentality. I have  
chosen from childhood to live, or project,  

a life that I understand. And no one has to  
tell me.

Now, I got an assistant by accident—I al-  
ways had men work with me—but this girl  
graduated Yale in art and she was a friend  
of a young man who was working with me. He  
had to go away and she stayed on. I let her  
stay because I travel and I wanted not to be  
in the house alone. So she stayed on.

Q: Is this Diana MacKown?

A: That's right. Put her in, too, she'll  
love it and send me a copy, she'll love this.  
Well, because she's neglected when people  
come to the house.

But I have never felt anything but female.  
Now, if the things look big, well, so what?  
So I have more energy than a lot of men  
that haven't.

So I let her stay, but I didn't let her work  
with me. In other words, you see, I don't  
make drawings of things, but I compare right  
on there; to get many things, but particular-  
ly the immediacy, which I believe in a great  
deal. I don't believe in churning, I believe  
in action.

Q: This is my own interpretation, but your  
life seems to make a pattern. You have a  

few difficult situations in your life. You  
have your marriage and you have the terrible  
thing with Janis and your things being held  
hostage.

A: That's right, you're absolutely right.

So, after she stayed in the house awhile, I  
said all right, I'm going to let you work.  
And she did. And she hammered. She was  
divine. And I said 'Did you take a course  
in carpentry at Yale?' And she said, ‘no.'  
And I said, ‘did you ever do this work?'

She said, 'no'.

Q: And you somehow break out of these  
things. You break out of these dominated  
situations and you get free and each time  
you do it you come back better than before,  
you're strong, your work is stronger.

How do you do that?

SELF REPORT CARD

Now both her parents were professional mus-  
icians of high quality. And I said, 'well,  
how do you know to take this kind of nail  
for this and this kind of nail for that.'

A: Let me tell you before I start this,  

that I have a record for myself. You know  
that in school you have a report card. Well, I  
have had her since, since 10 years. Isn't that fantastic? In other  
words, she wasn't working like a carpenter.  
She was working through music, she was com-  
posing. That's 10 years ago, and I still am  
in awe of a statement like that. I think  

it's great. And the results show it.

Out of this marriage, I have a son and grand-  
children and all. That's fine. But I can-  
not be appeased with all of it. Because I  
had my eyes wide open in both cases. There  
were things that both had that I wanted and  
it isn't very nice, but that's the way it  
was. And I live with that. Now, I didn't  
murder anyone and I didn't hurt anyone.

But for my kind of thinking I would have  
given myself a hundred plus if it weren't  
for those.

Now, I wanted some years ago a circle, like  
a drawing, like a line circle in wood to  

put in a box. Of course, I didn't know how  
to get it, but I knew if I could find the  
thinnest wood, a strip, I could put it in  
the bathtub and keep tying it as it got wet-  
ter and wetter. And so I went to the lumber  
yard and did get what you call clapboards.  
They put them in buildings, you know, before  
they put the plaster. That's about as thin  
as you can get them. And I took one home  
and I did put it in the tub and I tied it  
and tied it. And it got to the point where  
I could use it and then I did a few like  
that.

Isn't that funny? Now, you say, did I have  
such a high standard. I didn't think of it  
as high standard, but I did know in my con-  
sciousness, and I think every human being  

does, that, that is not for me.

Well, no man would be patient like that.  
They'd do something else, but they wouldn't  
nurse it. This is really a feminine thing.  
And even the way when I hammer. I knew men  
don't do it that way. I know that myself.

But, you see, when I married I only kind of  
excused it. You can say I have all the com-  
pensation because I have this gorgeous son  
who is a sculptor and is adorable to me.