Women’s Magazines: A Cursory Review

Time was, about a year ago, when everything would stop once the newest issue of Ms. magazine hit the supermarket magazine rack. Projects, work, and plans for the day were all pushed aside until the magazine had been read cover to cover.

But things change. And so do people.

Many of my friends are finding Ms. less interesting this fall. Is the magazine fading, or are we just finding other forums for feminist debates? Are other magazines picking up the cause? Do new magazines like Playgirl and New Woman have any implications for the women's movement? And are the old newsstand (un)reliables to be trusted any more than before?

New Woman competes well with Ms. from the looks of the cover. But there the similarity ends. While the flashy headline "What About POW Wives?" on the cover of Ms. belies a more serious article within, "The Three Faces of the Single Parent" on the cover of New Woman leads to little more than scant copy and photographs of a fashionable bleached blonde running through parks with her kids and standing in the moonlight on the shore of Lake Michigan with her lover. Topics that deserve in-depth treatment ("Why Women Go Winky-Wonky Over Homosexual Men") are given a flip review which is more infuriating than disappointing. Columns for the trendy hostess on "What's In and Out in Food" are more boring than most, and reprints from Reader's Digest about "How a (Female) High School Dropout Built a Business That Does More Than $150 Million a Year" simply do not interest me. But the main quality which makes New Woman by far the most offensive women's magazine on the market is its guise of not only showing a very glamorous swinging lifestyle which is as unrealistic as ever, but daring to call it that of the "new woman." Heaven forbid.

A Pleasant Relief

A new crop of magazines dealing with the life of single persons is encouraging and generally aimed at both sexes. Singles is written for the swinging crowd with neither the pretensions nor pocketbooks of the Playboy crew. Although it promotes a classic stereotype of dating and socialization on the way to marriage, it is no more condescending to women than it is to men. Single (without the "s") has a few shallow articles, but attempts to confront the subject of living alone more realistically than any other periodical. For one thing, it accepts the situation as being normal and even desirable for most adults at some stage in their lives. Articles like "Why Should Singles Pay 20% More in Taxes?", "Sex When You're Alone," and a story on the National Organization for Non-Parents raise some important questions, but unfortunately gloss over the answers. The magazine simply lacks sufficient depth in its reporting. Although its bias is clearly towards the "unmarried, divorced, widowed and unattached" of either sex, it also reflects positively on the female single which is a pleasant relief.

The Playful Penis

For people who get off on penises bathed in red-gold light, Playgirl, Viva, Venus and a good slug of companion magazines are stylishly filling a void of sorts in the pornographic world. At least women now have the chance to participate legitimately in the drugstore ritual of paging through magazine racks with all the nonchalance one can muster. If you're curious, you won't be disappointed.

Playgirl has a four-page fully phallic foldout which is stunning, although the man looks about as comfortable as the cougar on top of the Lincoln-Mercury sign. The lucky lad who is the “Discovery of the Month" is pictured building a house in the nude. His body looked fine, but an electric saw and sawdust are not my idea of the most erotic things in the world. Viva's editor, Bob Guccione, declares that "Viva will be a woman, my kind of woman," and the same trend continues through all of these male-edited and produced pornographic magazines for women. I found myself flipping through a 15-page color erotic version of an Elvira Madigan picnic with the same detached fascination I used to have when I looked at Playboy; I wanted to see what kind of body they thought was sexy and what kind of photography they thought was erotic. But as far as arousing my sexual desire in Woolworth's, Playgirl and friends have a long way to go.

The Pornographic Ultimate

Far more pornographic for women in a certain sense are the stories in Good Housekeeping, Ladies' Home Journal, and McCall's. The exact female counterpart to the stereotyped "pulsing virile man beating his way into the woman and driving her into fits of ecstasy and sobbing relief" is to be found in the sweet stories of dreams at the kitchen sink as "petite, blue-eyed Angie watched Jim come home from the office and remembered their first date at the beach and how handsome he was that Christmas, and how proud she was to be his girl." Unfortunately, little has changed.

Hairdos, diets, recipes, do-it-yourself budget-decorating, and unreal fashions that are guaranteed to make you feel hopelessly dumpy and unattractive still fill the pages of all the traditional women's magazines. Sophia Loren, Elizabeth Taylor, and Pat Nixon are still on the cover, "The World's Most Famous Hairdresser (male) Talks About the World's Most Famous Women" inside, and one column on the "Working Woman" by Letty Cottin Pogrebin of Ms. does little to stem the tide. Women's lib is a curio like yoga, but husband, children, and home still come first. The only commendable thing about these magazines is that they are consistent and they deliver exactly what they promise.

Fluff Holding at 20%

Ditto for fashion magazines. Ditto for high school and college magazines for females. (The New Ingenue still advocates the virtues of being an ingenue.) Ditto for needlework and craft magazines which refuse to respect the craft that they are promoting. Ditto for bridal magazines. And baby magazines.

Women's magazines and those with a female orientation are one of the largest topical sub-groups of magazines in the country. Nearly one out of five popular magazines carried in the Minneapolis Public Library Branch system are for women. However, with one exception (Ms.), obviously none are meant to be taken at all seriously. Certainly nowhere near 20% of the entries in the Reader's Guide to Periodical Literature are from women's magazines.

continued on page 9