How to Have Intercourse...  
Without Getting Screwed  

Part VII  

Female Sexuality: A Feminist  
Perspective  

This treatise is the outgrowth of my fem-  
inist curiosity about the quality of hetero-  
sexual relationships in Western society.  
What is the fundamental nature of male-fe-  
male relationships as enacted too often  
through sexual intercourse? Why do women  
engage in coitus?  

Substantive factors differentiate the  
coital experience for men and for women. In  
coitus, men experience a definite physical  
release that is usually accompanied by a  
more intensive orgasmic release. In short,  
men come. Women, on the other hand, do not  
necessarily experience orgasm, do not always  
come. Statistics vary from the initial Kin-  
sey study, which reports that only one-third  
of American women experience orgasm during  
their first year of marriage, to a recent  
study published in Psychology Today of a  
supposedly enlightened, sexually free audi-  
ence, which reports that 20 percent of the  
women never achieve orgasm during inter-  
course and another 10 percent achieve orgasm  
in only one of four coital experiences.  

Further heterosexual discrepancies include  
contraception, pregnancy, abortion, and  
child care. When and if contraception is  
practiced, women are generally responsible.  
Women, not men, become pregnant. Women can-  
not get legal, medically safe abortions, ex-  
cept at unreasonable emotional and financial  
costs. Finally, if a child is born, women  
bear the primary responsibility for its  
care. In sum, in coitus, women do not  
necessarily experience physical release or  
pleasure; whereas, they do bear tremendous  
responsibility.  

Sexual attitudes and behavior reflect the  
attitudes and behavior that govern any cul-  
ture or society. Sexual behavior is symbo-  
lic behavior. As Kate Millett puts it in  
Sexual Politics:  

Coitus can scarcely be said to take  
place in a vacuum; although of itself  
it appears a biological and physical  
activity, it is set so deeply within  
the larger context of human affairs  
that it serves as a charged microcosm  
of the variety of attitudes and  
values to which a culture subscribes.  
American society subscribes to the patri-  
archy. Its most pervasive ideology is sex-  
ual dominion, specifically male supremacy.  

"How to Have Intercourse...Without  
Getting Screwed" was published by the  
ASUW Women's Commission in Seattle, Wash-  
ington, in January 1972. The second  
printing was funded by the Graduate and  
Professional Student Senate and by the  
Associated Students of the University of  
Washington. Authors are Lynn K. Hansen,  
Barbara Reskin, and Diana Gray.  

Anne E. Schwiesow  

Two principles are paramount: (a) male  
shall dominate female, and (b) elder male  
shall dominate younger.  
Sex is a status category with political  

implications. Sex defines a relationship  

of dominance and subordinance; it defines  
power-structured relationships in which  
one group, men, controls another, women. As  
such, it is a model for all other exploitive  
systems, for the larger schema of American  
politics. The domination of women by men  

is a prototype of the control men have tried  
to exercise over other men, that groups,  
e.g., racial, have tried to exercise over  
other groups, that America as a nation has  
tried to exercise over other nations.  

According to Hannah Arendt, there are two  
ways of maintaining or perpetuating any  
power structure: by force or by condition-  
ing. Through socialization or "internal  
colonization,” most men and most women ac-  
cept three basic patriarchal polities or  
structures:  

1. The first is status: Men are ascribed  
superior status; women, inferior status.  

2. The second is temperament: The develop-  
ment of temperament is based on the needs  

of the dominant group (men) and dictated by  
what they cherish in themselves and find con-  
venient in their subordinates (women). Ac-  
cordingly, men are supposed to be rational,  
aggressive, intelligent, forceful; women  
are supposed to be emotional, passive, ig-  
norant, docile, virtuous.  

3. The final, and codifying, structure is  
role: Women are relegated to menial, domes-  
tic labor and to attending children. The  
rest of human interest and achievement is  
the legitimate concern and dominion of men.  

In short, we subscribe to a male supremacist  
value system in which the function of the  
norm is unthinkingly dictated by, and dele-  
gated to, the man; it is a value system  
based upon the perpetuation of that which is  
convenient for men.  

It logically follows that that which is  
not convenient for men is not acceptable.  
Behavior that is not complementary to male  
behavior--normal behavior--is abnormal.  
Hence, authentic female behavior (not  
defined by, or necessarily in accordance  
with, or dependent upon male behavior) is  
a priori abnormal. The result is alienation  
on the part of most women: alienation from  
themselves, in intimate relationships, from  
society in general. Women are not rewarded  
for being independent, self-determining,  
whole human beings. Further, those who dare  
to deviate from the norm, those who resist,  
or by some accident, miss socialization, are  
dealt with by force, the second means of  
maintaining the power structure.  

(continued on page 8)