FROM THE REAR

(A TRULY ORGANIC ACCUMULATION)  
by Monica Manning  

A naked woman laying on her side showing large curvy hips, long legs split from not touching and a sphere in her crotch caught my eye. The sphere held  

New York City and the woman had a smile on her lovely face. A sense of admiration swelled within me as I continued to stare at the drawing performed with red ink and black felt tip pen. Ah, the walls of women's rooms never cease to amaze me. I spotted this particular drawing at the Black Forest Inn along with memorable verse such as,  
"Fuck Indians  
that's what whites  
have done  
to Indians for a long time  
sisters unite  
brothers let's fuck  
what about the  
Wounded Knee Indians?"  
Flash, flash - the awareness of words on bathroom walls.  

I remember a time I was placated upon the toilet in that place. The walls were sterile white with fresh paint. I  

was not only constipated, but mortified in my search for something to read because there was nothing. As I reached for the T.P. I noticed a scrawl. My mortification turned to gratification as I read 'what happened to all my  

reading material?' That satiated me like a good grunt, bringing to mind another public bathroom.  

In July of 1973 on a hopping Friday evening I wandered into the Dibbo Hotel on Main Street in Hudson, Wisconsin to hear a friend play music. Time was about 7:30 p.m. as I entered the can to make my bladder gladder. The walls were barren so I made my way to  

the bar. There was a smoky aura out there but I stayed true and listened to the music. Round about closing time (1:00 a.m.) I ventured back into the head finding the walls plastered with jabberwocky. Since I was hassled by the local police to get my rear in gear I didn't have time to read it all so I took note of the biggest boldest writing which was glaring on the door leading out. DEAD NIGGERS SUCK. Such was the consciousness of the Dibbo. My friend got sick on the way home.  

Seems to me that women's poddies have been the place to let it all hang out. Brenners Pub is a good example.  

'Lesbians! women unite, Gay  

is good.  

Love is what you feel not who  
The hanging it out leads to the getting it out in terms of thoughtful retorts like 'I don't know about the rest of you chicks but I really groove on my husband! (That's so incredible Fuck forever!) (Yeah I think he's pretty good too)' or 'Why do all these good gay women write on anonymous bathroom walls? I wish I could meet you all / Lesbian love is beautiful... if it's so beautiful then why is it on a wall?)  

I wonder if Venus kept herself above arousal or did she merely rain her assessments downward as a lady cleaning a toilet may lift her eyes to the mixture of madness gushing forth a streamlined flush of mastered manure mixing feces with faces.  

Once when I was sipping hot cider in the Riverside Cafe the natural urge got to me so I strolled through the kitchen to a communal toilet. The surrounding walls were confining but not the writing. 'Rejoice Sisters  

God is a beautiful  
black lesbian'  
retort "and he's dead!"  

I checked out the same walls today and found a new retort. 'It's true It's true  

but she's been beat up by a cop and,  

strapped down in a mental hospital, and put down, put down by vicious, whiter, 'classier straighter females (sisters?)'  

What to say but overloading. shit make  

big pile. Don't settle for Granny Goose  

while Old Dutch is around.  
On and on and on roll the graffiti.  

Spaced womb make for babe's cry (mynese proverb). If Dulcinea wasn't a man's dream would she be? Womenstration is coming! Ah, the orgasms abounding  

from women's writings in women's spaces are fetching.  

FROM THE FEMINIST ENGLISH DICTIONARY...  

Pudendum / from Latin (something) to be ashamed of / 1. the external genitals of the female: vulva. (Webster's New World Dictionary of the English Language, College Edition 1964)  

Published by the Loop Center YWCA, Chicago.  

Also known as An Intelligent Woman's Guide to Dirty Words: English Words and Phrases Reflecting Sexist Attitudes to Women in  

Patriarchal Society, Arranged According to Usage and Idea.