bee ee ane eee

A recent article in the Tribune said that  
the Minneapolis police do not consider my  
neighborhood, the Grant-Nicollet area, “the  
friendliest part of town," because of the  
"derelicts, prostitutes and drug peddlers"  
it harbors. Now what the neighborhood is  
like all depends on who you are, and if you  
are a youngish woman, then you do not suffer  
from lack of "friendly" attention.  

Uninvited attention is, for me, the great-  
est drawback of the neighborhood. I can go  
scarcely a block on foot, night or day, with-  
out slowing down cars and attracting offers  
of this and that. But this persistent inter-  
ference does not come from area residents -  
it comes from the hands and mouths and minds  
of invading men from all over the city and  
suburbs who are out to purchase a pound or  
two of female flesh.  

Drunks sprawled insensible at bus stops or  
stray dogs soiling city streets are both con-  
sidered public nuisances and are properly  
dispatched by the authorities. But the case  
of marauding men harassing women because they  
live in a given area is another matter en-  
tirely, because these men are the authori-  
ties, or their friends, or their brothers-in-  
law. During the national VFW convention this  
summer, the number of solitary men in big  
cars patrolling our streets was easily  
doubled.  

Oh, Those Solicitation Myths  

Of course, taxpayers could not consider  
derelicts, prostitutes, drug peddlers, or  
the people who live near them, the public.  
Whatever indignities the neighborhood must  
bear are naturally its own fault and are  
bred by its own inner forces. If anyone is  
responsible for the male behavior in the  
area, it is the prostitutes, not the men  
themselves.  

So the thinking goes, and so the soliciti-  
ng goes on. But contrary to popular soli-  
citation myths, it is not jaded profession-  
als snaring unwary teenage boys; rather it  
is men of all professions grasping myopically  
after any woman they see.  

Maybe we have always thought it is one de-  
vil of a fine thing for men to want us even  
when we do not want them. When they so  
prize us, separately or collectively, either  

| When You Are Booty Too  

BY SUSAN CUSHMAN  

HMM — THAT'S ONLY  
$12.50 FOR ME...  
I COULD DO BETTER.  
WITH THE NEXT  

as a temporary taste delight or as an inex-  
haustible source of sustenance, it is only  
natural, indeed stimulating, for us to give  
them some reward for their efforts.  

But picture yourself walking, quite pur-  
posefully, to work, complete with briefcase,  
bag lunch, and a few library books. A car  
turns in front of you and the man inside  
gives you the eye, just as he gives every  
moving figure in his range that selfsame  
eye. You return his burning gaze, hoping to  
singe him back with your somewhat different  
feelings of distaste and belligerence. But  
unfortunately your look is only one sensuous  
ingredient away from pouty provocation; he  
speeds around the block after confirming his  
chances with a double-take and arrives along-  
side you with an open door and a confident,  
"Hop in." It is 8:30 a.m. and you are late  
for work.  

I have not been stopped with curlers in my  
hair only because I do not use curlers. Give  
me a full grocery bag, a box of glass for  
recycling, a struggling child to be carried,  
and I will still receive my regular quota of  
cocky propositions. The only time I am not  
pursued is when I am with another man, and  
even then the second glances flurry around  
us to make sure he is not a woman too.  

In the eyes of these men, who by the looks  
of their cars and their clothes, are a rea-  
sonable cross-section of middle class Minne-  
apolis, most women are only one neighborhood  
away from being prostitutes. If black peo-  
ple all look alike to bigots, then we should  
not be too surprised when women all look  
alike to souped-up sexists.  

Men eyeballing women is the most wide-  
spread form of bad manners that is still  
considered to be acceptable. If street con-  
frontations stop short of actual rape,  
women have, supposedly, nothing to complain  
about. But nobody, not even a realistic  
woman, ever gets used to abuse.  

What do you do? Send your amusement, your  
anger, your disinterest straight to the next  
man who solicits your charms and hope that  
a fraction of it gets through. Then hold  
some of those same reactions in reserve and  
have your own jokes ready the next time you  
hear solid citizens snicker about women in  
the street.