Te Ou Sistiis —

Girls Are Equal Too: The Women's Movement
for Teenagers, by Dale Carlson (Atheneum,
146 pages, hardcover, $6.25).

“A liberated woman is a woman who thinks
of herself as a human being; who thinks of
herself as an individual with her own inter-
ests and abilities . . . Above all, a liber-
ated woman is a woman who believes she has
the same right to choose what she will do
with her life as a man does and to take the
same responsibility for her life as a man
does."

Only love for our younger sisters could
have motivated Dale Carlson's book--her wish
for them to have real rather than supposed
choices. Carlson takes us from childhood
through college/altar/job (or all three),
exposing in rapid-fire succession sex-role
stereotyping with its damage to female self
image. As she shows how we are systematical-
ly categorized for no other reason than that
we are female, she builds our confidence in
ourselves as human beings, challenging us to
claim for ourselves all the rights and
choices open to males. For self-hatred is
perhaps the biggest struggle woman faces in
her struggle for a full existence.

While Carlson's book is addressed to teen-
agers, it is an excellent "crash course" for
anyone of any age. I know of no other femi-
nist book that concentrates so much into so
little space, and yet is comprehensive with-
out being at all patronizing or simplistic.
While some of the young women in my seventh
grade classes found other feminist books
hard to understand because of references,
allusions, or vocabulary unfamiliar to them,
they found Carlson's book easy to relate to.
And they loved it:

Carlson places myth next to fact as she
traces sex-role stereotyping that casts
women into roles of stupid, inferior, ador-
able, passive, dependent "little girls".
(Even at eighty you're still one of the
"girls!") If it weren't for Carlson's wry
humor, her quick pace, and her challenge to
intellect, we might be tempted to toss the
book aside, for the truth of her statements
is painful to face.

By junior high school we are aware that
"boys don't want any competition from you.
All you have to be from here on in is sexy
enough to catch one of them. Never mind the
books now, the good marks, the basketball
practice. Concentrate on makeup, miniskirts,
and man-catching facial expressions." (Ever
observe the girls' lav between classes?)
Education plays a heavy hand in the pattern-
ing process--girls are automatically placed
in home ec, boys in shop; the schools "just
seem to assume that all boys have more talent
for electronics, mechanical drawing, machine
parts (not true; girls' aptitudes have been
tested and are just as good as boys'); and
that all girls are just fascinated with
chocolate pudding, needlepoint, and diaper-
ing doll bottoms (false!)." Boys are encour-
aged from toddlers to explore; their world
expands and widens. But girls are increas-
ingly protected until their only "proper"
role is that of somebody's wife and mother--
all their satisfactions supposedly come
through others, while boys discover and
create their own.

Carlson tells why women acquiesce to this
programming: "Girls . . . learn to value
themselves only if other people love and
value them. In the beginning a little girl
looks to her parents for approval and love,
then she looks to her teachers; eventually,
as she grows up, she transfers her need for
approval to boys. Most girls never learn to
look to themselves, to rely on their own
achievements to make them feel important.
So girls go on playing up to boys because
they can't afford to lose their only source
of love. They have so little self-love to
go on."

In Part One several remarkably condensed
chapters deal with discrimination in college
and employment, women's media image, mar-
riage, divorce, child care, abortion, hous-
ing, credit, women and the arts, legal
rights, the beauty game (and who profits
from it--cosmetics, fashion houses, etc.),
"neurosis" redefined, and the myth of house-
work as total fulfillment. Carlson does not
deliver a philippic against men and marriage
but treats sexism on a cultural rather than
a personal basis. But given our condition-
ing, honest, open relationships are all but
impossible. She stresses full human growth
and independence as a prerequisite for
healthy, realistic love to survive.

Part Two gets at the origins of sexism,
its worldwide perpetuation by law, religion,
and custom; women's (lack of) education,
their physical abuse, selling of women for
marriage or slavery, and popular myths that
persist to this day. The section on the
early feminist movement thrills us with
"Ain't I a Woman?" and the Seneca Falls
Declaration. Carlson covers the fifty
years' silence, the depressing fifties
(Back to the Cave!), and the civil rights
movement of the sixties that led, much like
the fight for abolition, to women's renewed
fight for their rights. Included is a list
ing of a few women's rights organizations
that have emerged from the new feminism.