Hughes, continued

state that the demonstration was a college  
matter, not a civil issue.

Sally has been Student Senate president  
since the resignation of former president,  
Tim McHie.

She ran for the Senate presidency to bring  
unity to the school and to get us better  
facilities."

She explained that Metropolitan has "very  
serious space problems." (The school has  
an enrollment of 2,600 students, about half  
part-time. The college uses six buildings.  
But one is the library and the other is  
McPhail Center, which also rents space to  
the University of Minnesota.)

Resignation and  
Day-Care -- Top Priorities

Sally showed me a list of student demands,  
arranged according to priority.

The first was the resignation of Bergstrom  
(He has resigned, effective July 1; he  
said his timing was "embarrassing" but co-  
incidental).

“We want a day-care center on campus," she  
continued. Day-care is the students' second  
priority concern, despite the media's fas-  
cination with a request for an integrated  
restroom in the commons area.

"The administration has been working on a  
day-care center for three years," Sally  

in response to the protesters' de-  
mands, Bergstrom  
State Board (which governs Metropolitan) a  
"strongly worded statement" in support of  
on-campus day-care.

The students also demanded that the  
only parking lot run on a first-come-first-  
served basis. Bergstrom had allowed about  
one-third of the lot to be cordoned off  
and reserved for faculty and staff but has  
agreed to accommodate the students' request.

(Other than the very small school parking  
lot, the only parking I noticed were metered  
areas bordering Loring Park.)

Among the students' other demands were:

Partial tuition refunds. (At  
present students get no refund  
if they drop a course mid-  
quarter or drop below a full  
course load.)

"The only way we can get any  
tuition refund is to withdraw  
from school," Sally noted.

Student input into all major  
college decisions.

More suitable tables in the  
cafeteria and commons area.

Research into eligibility re-  
quirements of the National  
Junior College Athletic Assoc-  
iation and an integrated lab-  
oratory in the commons area.

The students also demanded  
that charges against Sally be  
dropped.

The fact that so many of the demands had  
been met within 24 hours of the demonstra-  

tion speaks well for the Senate's organiz-  
ation and efficiency.

Woman-Power

Sally pointed out that this year all Sen-  
ate officers, with one exception, are wo-  
men. Indeed, the school as a whole appears  
congenial to women.

The college newspaper, "Metropolitan  
Journal," has its first woman editor this  
year, Sherry Strong.

"Metropolitan has the first women's stud-  
ies program among the state's community col-  
leges," Sally said.

The program has been operating for a year  
under the tutelage of two female faculty  
members and offers two courses a quarter:  
"Women in the 70's" and “Advanced Critical  
Readings."

Several of the women in the Senate off-  
ice agreed that "there are a lot of Metro-  
politan women involved in outside women's  
groups," although the college has not yet  
started its own women's group.

As impressive as the heightened conscious-  
ness of Metropolitan's women was the coop-  
eration evident between men and women in  
the Student Senate office. The women were  
obviously very much in charge of themselves  
and the men accorded them the easy respect  
and camaraderie that flourishes between  
equals.

That atmosphere allayed my pessimism at  
least temporarily. Feeling positive, I  
study the photograph below: There is vio-  
lence in it, which I deplore, but there is  

3 ,