FROM TAKING A LETTER  
TO TAKING ACTION  

“9 TO 5”--- WOMEN OFFICE WORKERS UNITE  

LOVING OUR CHAINS--for decades the patriarchal  
system that exploits us has justified its crimes  
with that phrase. And, ironically, we ourselves  
have often acquiesced in that "love". No group of  
women has suffered more from such propaganda than  
clerical and secretarial workers.  

Reflect for a moment--women over 30 can surely  
recall the paragon of efficient femininity--the  
Katherine Gibbs secretary: white gloves, perfect  
nylons, good business English and the all-import-  
ant "discretion". For many middle- and upper-mid-  
dle class women, the Gibbs paragon was a goal to  
strive toward, a predictable, if temporary, way-  
station on the way to marriage and motherhood.  
Good shorthand and even a bachelor's degree in  
English were desirable assets for a private secre-  
tary.  

For working class women, of course, the desk out-  
side the executive suite was all but unattainable.  
So those women filled the ranks of so-called  
"lower" clerical workers--long rows of them caught  
like flies in an iron web--supporting the enorm-  
ous paper bureaucracy that underpins industrial  
capitalism.  

These women, like their apparently wealthier  
sisters, were biding time until marriage, also.  
The working class woman's marriage would most like-  
ly be non-remunerative, but nonetheless vital and  
messianic. The "lower" clerical workers performed  
grueling tasks--filing endless sheets of papers:  
accounts due, accounts receivable, automobile in-  
surance binders and death reports.  

Both groups of women, needless to say, were  
operating under the delusion that marriage would  
offer them a meaningful life role and freedom  
from the drudgery of clerical work. Certainly,  
lower-class women often found marriage and mother-  
hood only meant that she added two other jobs to  
her clerical position. And wealthier women, dis-  
carded by their husbands, had to return to the lab-  
or pool, also.  

Despite their long histories as exploited work-  
ers, neither the Gibbs prototype nor the clerical  
toiler has ever organized effectively. The upper  
echelon secretary was largely prevented from or-  
ganizing by her identification with her "boss"  
and the rank and file by fear, repressive working  
conditions and lack of leisure time.  

The second wave of feminism has not yet been of  
much help to female office workers--as laboring  
groups. Individual women, of course, have joined  
the movement and most likely have left the ranks  
of clerical workers. At last, however, women off-  
ice workers have begun to organize around their  
needs.  

REELILLLLILIIP LILI IL EL IL LILLIE LEG  

OIILIOLGIGIDILIGIIGIGILIOLIGILOIIIISLILILILIDIIGS:  

IDH:  

fo  

hd  

PIPIADIIIDID IDS:  

by MARY HASTINGS  

"9 to 5", succinctly defined as an organization  
for women office workers, was born three years  
ago in the Boston area. A group of clericals at  
Harvard were concerned about “respect and compen-  
sation," according to Karen Nussbaum, one of the  
original members. "We started a Harvard office  
workers group,” Nussbaum explained. As their  
strength grew, she continued, the group started a  
citywide newsletter and discovered other women with  
similar problems.  

Today, "9 to 5" occupies a busy suite of rooms  
in the Boston YWCA. The organization now has five  
paid staff, plus volunteers, and even in late Aug-  
ust, vacation time for the world, the office was  
busy. However, the women were generous with their  
time; they explained they had received visitors  
from all over the country wanting advice on how to  
start groups like "9 to 5”.  

Nussbaum sketched the organization's history:  
Until the fall of 1973, "9 to 5" members worked  
in off hours, but in the fall the group raised mon-  
ey to pay one staff worker. With increased mem-  
berships and proceeds from fundraisers, the group  
added more paid staff. Currently, four of the five  
paid staff function as field organizers.  

Nussbaum explained "9 to 5" defines itself as a  
body trying to raise issues on many different lev-  
els. She stressed the group believes in "very pub-  
lic campaigns."  

"9 to 5" has four industrial committees to deal  
with abuses in publishing, insurance, universities  
and temporary employment agencies.  

"Insurance is the biggest business in Boston,"  
Nussbaum said. And "9 to 5" has worked diligently  
to correct industry abuses such as dress codes,  
lack of affirmative action plans and promotion  
opportunities. Very recently, the Massachusetts  
Insurance Commissioner ordered the state's insur-  
ance companies to post jobs, provide complete job  
descriptions, create career ladders and value job  
experience equally with formal education when con-  
sidering an employee for promotion. "Petty  
rules and regulations--such as bells and late slips  
which apply to ONLY ONE CLASS OF EMPLOYEES are to  
be abolished." In addition, the "9 to 5" newsletter  
reported, "each insurance company will have to  
file an affirmative action program with the Com-  
missioner, and companies whose plans reveal dis-  
crimination will face action from both the Mass-  
achusetts Commission Against Discrimination and the  
Commissioner's office..."  

Nussbaum said "9 to 5" "acts as an advocate to  
help women with individual work problems and helps  
women to organize in their workplaces.  

cont, pg. 14  

POPE LE LOIRE GLI LLLLI IIL IDID  

CREOCLRELCEEL:  
A group of women within the Worker's  
Rights Center has been formed to attack  
job discrimination of women. They are  
the Women's Action Committee. Their  

of traditional legal routes in fighting  
discrimination.  

Although local and federal laws exist  
to protect the rights of women, and  
although regulatory agencies are set up  
to enforce these laws, women continue to  
be victims of discrimination.  

There are several reasons for this.  

First of all, staffing of the regula-  
tory agencies appears to be inadequate  
to meet their heavy case loads. Accord-  
ing to the Women's Action Committee (WAC)  
the Equal Employment Opportunity Commis-  

sion reportedly has a backlog of 100,000  

cases and the State Human Rights Depart-  
ment has about 200 cases sitting on the  
attorney general's desk.  

Secondly, a woman who files a com-  
plaint must rely on the agency's inves-  
tigators and the cooperation of her  
employer to disclose the facts. Fre-  
quently it ends up being a case of her  
voice against the employer's. And in  
addition, she can expect to find, espe-  
cially if she works for a large company,  
that her employer has hired lawyers to  
prepare a slick case against her.  

And finally, there is the problem of  
the isolation a woman may experience if  
she files a complaint as an individual  
and has no group to support her action.  
Many women are reluctant to risk chal-  
lenging discrimination for fear of  
retaliation, which, if faced alone, can  
be a very lonely experience. Likewise,  
dealing with the red tape of a govern-  
ment agency by oneself can be most diffi-  

cult.  

WAC is determined to defend the rights  
of working women without relying solely  
on anti-discrimination agencies. Be-  
cause these agencies have been able to  
win some sex discrimination cases in the  
past, they continue to be used in some  
instances. However, WAC seeks to change  
things primarily by collective efforts  
at the workplaces of women rather than  
lone in the state bureaucracy.  

They hope to eventually see support  
groups develop in which women working  
in the same plant or office sit down regu-  

larly and discuss common problems and  

ways to confront these problems. Direct  
action tactics of picketing, publicity  
and pressure on the employer will be  

employed to combat discrimination.  

After the program was developed, the  
women in the group printed a leaflet  
describing their intent. About 4,000  
copies of it were distributed to hospi-  

tals, large office buildings and factor-  

ies where there is a high proportion of  
women workers.  

aim: use of direct action methods instead  

To gain experience in working together  

and to increase their credibility with  

the public, they have since concentrated  
their energy on researching discriminatory  
practices at a large local retail store  
that has nationwide branches.  

They hope that as they become more  

widely known, women will actively seek  
their help when faced with job discrimina-  
tion or other problems at work.  

The Women's Action Committee can be  
contacted at the Worker's Rights Center,  
6 East Lake Street, Minneapolis. Office  
hours are as follows: Monday, Tuesday,  
Thursday and Friday, 10-5, Wednesday, 12-  
9. Their telephone number is 625-3533.  

against women - a  

time-honored institution  

The July '75 issue of Gold Flower reported on the upcoming International  
Tribunal on Crimes Against Women. The Tribunal is now taking place (the  
first two weeks in November) in Europe with the goal of raising conscious-  
ness and initiating action on a worldwide scale in an effort to combat the  
many crimes against women. The following testimonial is an excerpted letter  
from a European woman married to a Sudanese and living in Sudan.  

“I write to you on woman's situation here. The woman is oppressed in TOTAL  
slavery, but it is especially one of the links of her oppression that I  
would try to create an opinion against. That link is circumcision, actually  
amputation. When the girls are between 7 and 13 years of age they are "cir-  
cumcised". The clitoris is cut off, the labia minor and labia major  
well. After that the girl is sewn together, and these stitches break at  
delivery of a child. In addition to cutting off all those parts, the va-  
gina is also sewn together, like a reinforced hymen. So, as a rule, it  
takes several weeks before the husband has penetrated his wife.  

"The amputation is executed in the home by a ‘midwife’. The family has a  
big party when it is executed; and everybody is happy. The women sing and  
shout in order to overrule the cries of pain from the child. If everything  

turns out 'well' the parents are congratulated that the girl did not lose  
too much blood.  

“The custom to circumcise the girls is 4000 years old! This amputation is  
called Pharaonic circumcision. EVERYBODY does that with their daughters  
except the tiny minority of whites. The ‘European influenced’ upper class  
also perform the circumcision; even gynecologists and other physicians do  
it.  

"The amputation is said to be prohibited according to a law - for appearance's  
sake - that nobody heeds anyway. Circumcision of girls is not discussed, is  
never mentioned in newspapers, TV or radio, and the people refuse to talk  
about it with foreigners. I feel powerless."  

(translator's note: The custom of clitoridectomy and infibulation, which is  
the most drastic form of the above-mentioned amputation, is practiced more  
commonly than implied in the letter, i.e., in Kenya and Tanzania. Also we  
have taken precautions to protect the writer's anonymity.)  

Clitoridectomy is but one of the crimes that will take an international  
effort to eradicate, and the Tribunal has a critical need for financial  
assistance. To help expand the Women's Communication network in the U.S.  
send your contribution to: United States Committee  

International Tribunal on Crimes Against Women  

2112 Channing Way  

Berkeley, California 94704