4

Claremore, Oklahoma — Investigations, denials,  
hearings and transfers have followed in the wake of  
charges of widespread sterilization of young native  
women in the U.S.-operated Indian Health Service  
Hospital.  

Although native nurses and staff employed at the  
hospital had been making complaints through IHS  
channels since last June without results, IHS area  
director John Davis issued a directive to employees to  
refrain from speaking to the press and to use IHS  
channels for all complaints, upon penalty of dismissal.  
Dr. Richard W. Stander, who has received a number of  
USPHS grants in the past for scientific investigation  
regarding pregnant poverty-status women in Indiana  
and Ohio, was sent to Claremore by the U.S. Depart-  
ment of Health, Education, and Welfare. He stated that  
he found no support for the allegations of genocide,  
saying “all sterilization procedures are performed only  
after extensive counseling by medical and social service  
personnel.” He said the rate of sterilizations was “not  
unusual.”  

Dr. Connie Uri, a Los Angeles physician and a native  
woman, replied with statistics which said differently.  
In the fiscal year 1973, there were 132 native women  
sterilized at Claremore — 100 of these were non-  
therapeutic, meaning they had the sole purpose of  
rendering a young woman incapable of reproduction.  
“From the IHS records, 19% of Indian women are of  
child-bearing age, or 45,000 women. Claremore was  
and still is sterilizing one woman for every seven births  
that occur in the hospital. This is genocide to Indian  
people.”  

Dr. Uri said that consent forms are written in English  
of a grade-12 level, and many women may not  
understand what they are signing. She said there should  
also be a policy of informed consent, addressing a  
family-planning program that offers other means of  
birth control and instituting extensive counseling.  
Emery A. Johnson, director of the Indian Health  
Service, told questioning congressmen that IHS “con-  
sidered non-therapeutic sterilization a legitimate  
method of family planning. We would be concerned  
only if these procedures were performed under  
coercion, or if there was evidence that the operations  
were carried out without informed voluntary consent.  
We are not aware of any instance in which such services  
have been abused.”  

An official report of the Senate subcommittee con-  
firmed that the hospital's sterilization procedures do  
“not set forth as clearly as possible the fact that the  
procedures are irreversible,” however.  

“To sterilize any women for non-therapeutic reasons in  
their teens or in their twenties is absolutely callous and  
criminal,” Dr. Uri said.  

“Zero population growth may be all right for the white  
man, because he’s crowding this continent,” says Dr.  
Uri. “But for the Indian, it’s genocidal. Let's control  
our own reproduction, instead of meeting the demands  
of the white economic-social values.”  

At a meeting before a regional IHS board, Dr. Uri  
attacked arguments that a poor woman with several  
children was “better off” sterilized. “She's still going  
to be poor. She just won't be able to have more  
children,” Dr. Uri maintained.  

Native people demonstrate for end to sterilization  
practices at Claremore  

And in Puerto Rico...  

A recent survey by Vasquez Carsada at the University  
of Puerto Rico indicates that while in 1947 only 7% of  
the women of the island were sterilized, now over  
one-third of the women who are of child-bearing age  
will ever again have children. The Puerto Rican  
government is considering developing an even wider  
network of sterilization centers.  

STERILIZATION  
OF NATIVE  

WOMEN  

Dr. Helen Rodriguez trained and practiced medicine in  
Puerto Rico. She gives information useful in under-  
standing how native women may fall victim to steriliza-  
tion even by their “own consent.”  

“By and large, it’s the women with the least education  
who get sterilized,” Dr. Rodríguez says. “Most of the  
women have had some failure in contraceptive use and  
do not have access to contraceptives on an equal level  
with women who are not sterilized.” She charges that  
the Puerto Rican government is unhappy about a  
Supreme Court decision legalizing abortions, because  
this means fewer women will turn to sterilization to  
prevent conception.  

“If you deny a woman a way out in a situation that she  
considers desperate, and on the other hand you open  
the door to another way which is sponsored by the  
government, which is free, which is accepted privately  
and publicly as the right thing to do, the likelihood is  
that she’s going to choose sterilization.  

Dr. Rodriguez says other methods of temporary birth  
control are not presented fairly as an alternative to  
sterilization, and that many women are led to believe  
that when they again desire to have children, that the  
operation can be reversed. It cannot.  

Ironically, “the pill” was first used in Puerto Rico on a  
wide level for purposes of experimentation in 1952-60  
with levels of estrogen that are now considered quite  
unsafe. Now that contraceptive pills are safe for use,  
they are priced beyond the reach of most Puerto Rican  
women.  

Heavy industrialization of Puerto Rico by American  
interests has limited space for housing and farming to  
support the population, causing the current govern-  
ment to consider limiting the population rather than  
limiting industrialization.  

A study by the Public Citizen’s Health Research Group  
(2000 P St., NW, Washington, D.C. 20036), reported  
that often sterilizations are “sold” by physicians who  
request women to sign sterilization consent forms  
while they are in the labor pains of childbirth. “In fact,  
medical staff pressures are often brought to bear upon  
the intern who balks at such practices,” the report said.  

Other studies have shown that the three factors that  
contribute most to later regret over sterilization are:  
being very young (most of the women sterilized at  
Claremore are in their teens and twenties), deciding  
under duress; the procedure suggested by the physician  
rather than the patient. As many as one out of four  
patients find out they are wrong in discovering the  
operation is reversible, and said had they known, they  
would have chosen another form of contraception.  

* Plan Your Family *  

The research group reported too that complete  
hysterectomies are done instead of tubal ligations, a  
relatively simple procedure, as part of the training of a  
surgeon which holds cutting sacred. A young surgeon is  
“rewarded” for performing more operations, even if on  
Indian women, in the form of residence certification  
and specialty board qualifications, which are later  
translated into financial rewards wherein the same  
principle applies: the more you cut, the more money  
you make.  

A new medical ethics is also being encountered more  
and more — the physician who takes it upon himself to  
remedy the affairs of the world as he sees it. “People  
pollute, and too many people crowded too close  
together cause many of our social and economic  
problems. These in turn are aggravated by involuntary  
and irresponsible parenthood,” wrote one doctor in  
Contemporary Ob/Gyn, a medical journal. “As physicians,  
we have obligations to our individual patients, but we  
also have obligations to the society of which we are a  
part. The welfare mess, as it has been called, cries out  
for solutions, one of which is fertility control.”  

This is Your Population Control Center  

In Washington, D.C., there is an HEW agency called the  
Population Control Center, headed by Dr. Louis  
Hellman. It pours out money to groups working with  
poor people to control their births. PCC started  
funding Indian groups in 1965, and perhaps not so  
coincidentally, the rising rate of native births over the  
decade before began to fall. Requests for statistics on  
PCC's involvement with native peoples have gone  
unanswered, even when coming from congressmen.  

Persons concerned about the sterilization of native  
women should contact their senators and representa-  
tives in Washington, demanding a halt on sterilizations  
until proper guidelines and safeguards have been  
instituted. (And while you're at it, let them know how  
you feel about cuts in the Indian health budget — about  
30% last year.)  

From  

AKWESASNE NOTES.  

These illustrations are part of a pamphlet produced by the U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare  
to induce native people to have fewer children so that they will become wealthy. The net result seems parents  
end up with neither children, riches, nor future instead. “Women who are poor don’t get rich by having their  
tubes tied,” says Dr. Constance Uri, a native physician.