Hysteria as Protest

century America.

"Hysteria was considered to be a quin-
tessentially female disease, linked to the
reproductive system. It had an infinity of
symptoms with no physical basis."

Rosenberg suggested that hysteria may
have been a protest against the traditional
role of women in the Victorian era.

"Women chose to be sick instead of overt-
ly deviant." But doctors displayed a signif-
icant level of hostility toward hysterics.
"They felt women weren't acting as women
should—the doctors were baffled as physici-
ans and men."

How did hysteria relate to the way 19th
century women were raised?

"Many 19th century women reached maturity
retaining a child-woman mentality; women were
discouraged from displaying competition or
mastery of 'male' skills. Overt anger and
violence were forbidden to women.

These strictures resulted in women having
weak ego structures and forced them into
menial functions.

"Such character formation would be con-
sidered dysfunctional in a man," Rosenberg
noted.

Because of the weak ego structures of
many 19th century women, they often adopted
hysterical behavior patterns to deal with
stress.

Rosenberg dealt with one final issue pre-
viously obscured by the male historical view-
point: The question of intimate friendships

‘Choisir’ Leaders to Participate in

International Women’s

Women throughout the world will gather in
New York City Saturday, March 19 for a sol-
idarity meeting in observance of International
Women's Day.

Claude Servan-Schreiber, French journal-
ist for "Le Monde," will attend the meeting.
Giselle Halimi, leader of "Choisir," a
French abortion rights group, and defender
of Marie-Claire Chevalier, will also attend.
Marie-Claire is a 16-year-old French girl
who was recently tried for undergoing an
abortion. Marie-Claire's mother, Michelle
Chevalier, a defendant in the trial, will
participate in the Solidarity meeting.

Barbara Mutnik, staff member of the Wom-
en's National Abortion Action Coalition in
New York City, said she expects 500 to 800
persons to attend the meeting.

between members of the same sex in the 19th
century.

"Some critics have called these friend-
ships latently homosexual,” Rosenberg said.
"But they have not taken 19th century struc-
tures into account. A study of such friend-
ships can help us to understand bisexuality
and homosexuality."

Rosenberg explained that there was a wide
spread, culturally accepted behavior pattern
of intense friendships between members of
the same sex in the 19th century. She fo-
cused on intense friendships between women.

"Correspondence could play a large role
in women's emotional lives at that time.

An emotionally viable female world emerges
from these letters, in which men play only
a shadow role."
Nineteenth-century women lived in an all-
female world and men even more so in an all-
male world.

Relations between the sexes were difficult
because of sexual taboos.

She noted that the 19th century pattern
of intense friendships could help us to view
sexuality as a continuum affected by social
norms and cultural environment.

"The 19th century permitted easy movement
across these sexual boundaries."

Rosenberg interprets such friendships in
light of Freud's belief in all people's bi-
sexuality and the sexual nature of all love.

As paradoxical as it may seem, Rosenberg
concluded, perhaps the Victorian sexual struc-
ture was more supportive of individuals
than our sexual mores.
The third lecture of the series will
be February 14 in Murphy Hall Auditorium.
Sociologist Jacquelyne Jackson will speak
on the relation of Black women to the dom-
inant society and to feminism. All lectures
are free and open to the public.

Solidarity Meeting

She added that such national women's
movement leaders as Gloria Steinem and Bella
Abzug have been invited to participate.

The meeting will center on the interna-
tional struggle for abortion rights. Mutnik
said participants can also use the meeting
as an opportunity to draw together reports
about how the Supreme Court decision on ab-
ortion is being implemented throughout the
country.

The March 10 meeting will convene in lieu
of a previously planned weekend-long Inter-
national Abortion Tribunal.

If you are interested in further information
about the Solidarity meeting, please call
Mary Hastings at "Gola Flower": 827-3810
after March 1.