‘Vaginal Politics’ Rejects  
Blood, Birth, and Death  

by Mary Hastings  

Woman is victim. And no institution  
has tested the culturally approved martyrdom  
of women more than the American health care  
system.  

In Vaginal Politics (Quadrangle Books,  
Inc.: $6.95), Ellen Frankfort explores the  
daily horrors of women's victimization by  
the medical establishment as well as its all  
encompassing oppression of poor, black and  
female.  

Frankfort delineates this area in which  
women are uniquely suited to effect a change  
in our society. For in health care nothing  
less than a revolution will do.  

She offers the example of the Los Angeles  
Self-Help Center as one alternative to  
the existing health care quagmire.  

The Self-Help Center can be regarded as  
an "extreme" reaction to the mortifying  
experience that all women endure at the  
hands of the OB-Gyn specialist:  

Frankfort saw women reacting radically  
to the often dirty, embarrassing ritual of  
being draped and "guarded" by a harried  
nurse when "...Carol, a woman from the Los  
Angeles Self-Help Clinic slipped off her  
dungarees and underpants, borrowed somebody's  
coat and stretched out on a long  
table..." to insert a speculum into herself  
so that each of "fifty women present could  
take a flashlight and look inside."  

By this action, women rejected the male  
gynecologist's cold, insulting examination--  
a situation in which the woman somehow feels  
that she should apologize for her sex, in  
which the gynecologist is a high priest ob-  
viating the “blood, birth and death" that is  
woman.  

The reader could argue that the Self-  
Help Center's suggestion that women repeatedly  
dash the hated drape to the doctor's exam  
ination room floor is unnecessarily violent,  

but then the treatment women have suffered  

at the gynecologist's hand is unnecessarily  
violent.  

Frankfort also reports on the "period  
extraction” method advocated by the Los  
Angeles Self-Help Center. This procedure  
employs a syringe and tube device that  
allows a woman to extract her menstrual  
flow by herself, in five minutes. Period  
extraction is the opposite pole from Freud's  
assertion that "Anatomy is Destiny". For  

in this procedure lies the final and  
complete control of woman over her body.  

There is great merit in Frankfort's in-  
itial reaction to period extraction:  
"...concern about the immediate dangers or  
risks of a totally new device being tried  
out by man or woman ...."  

Naturally, the medical profession re-  
acts violently against the concept and has  
marshalled its considerable forces to argue  
against period extraction.  

Frankfort asserts that she still fears  
for the safety of women who attempt period  
extraction "...at this date...." But she  
also notes that the method is "truly orig-  
inal". And like all original concepts, the  
establishment flails at it.  

Frankfort's present fears for women's  
use of period extraction seem well-founded;  
indeed one might very seriously question  
the motivation for this procedure. Per-  
haps many women have bought wholesale the  
male concept that to be female is to be  
dirty, sexually menacing and inferior  
because of the menstrual cycle. The claims  
of males that females are ruled by their  
"cyclical natures" is nonsense.  

Thus women should closely examine their in-  
terest in period extraction.  

Possibly even more important than  
Frankfort's report on the "revolutionary"  
activities of the Self-Help Center is her  
vividly written account of women's (and  
all minorities') treatment at the hands of  
the American Medical Profession.  

The author reports on women and psy-  
chiatrists. At the outset psychiatrists  
were the only persons to whom women could  
reveal their dissatisfactions with their  
domestic universe. However, the male psy-  
chiatrist maintained and elaborated on the  
power relationships that rule male society.  
(Frankfort wryly notes the baroque device  
of psychiatrists' maintaining separate en-  
trances and exits so patients would never  
meet one another, a trick contributing to  
the mystique of the all-mighty male.) She  
feels psychiatry failed so many women  
"..-Partly because, while the technique of  
psychoanalysis might have something in  
common with consciousness-raising, the the-  
ory was filled with assumptions about women  
based on the limited experiences and in-  
sights of one man...." Freud.  

Frankfort is kind to Freud. She be-  
lieves that were he alive today he would see  
the error of his "Anatomy is Destiny" dic-  
tum. That is doubtful but irrelevant. For  
now women are not afraid to question the  
sacrosanct rituals of the psychiatrists and  
may be able to truly free themselves  
from the pressures of mediocre analysts,  
trying to mold women into HAPPY super-con-  
sumers or domestic servants.  

continued on page 9