out _an accompanying culture. The culture is  
obtained by placing some of the same dis-  
charge on a culture medium, allowing it to  
grow for several days, and examining it un-  
der a microscope for gonocci. Unfortunately  
the culture is also unreliable. Many cul-  
tures die between the doctor's office and  
the lab. To insure that cultures survive,  
special incubators have been developed for  
use in doctor's offices and clinics, so the  
culture can be immediately placed in a ben-  
eficial environment.  

It should also be noted that the vagina is  
not the only place where the infection can  
start and be detected. Infections can start  
in one of four places: the urethra, cervix,  
vagina, and rectum. It is usually impos-  
sible for the doctor to do a culture from  
all four places, but cultures for women  
should be taken from at least the cervix and  
rectum. The cervical culture is about 82%  
reliable, and studies show that 50% of women  
infected with gonorrhea have infections in  
the rectum. It is important that we demand  
at least these two cultures to insure a  

Treatment  

The treatment for gonorrhea is a high dose  
of penicillin or antibiotics. Since the  
1930's, when penicillin was first used to  
treat gonorrhea, the dosage needed to get  
rid of the infection has been rising. The  
gonococcus has become highly resistant to  
penicillin and one strain coming from Viet  
Nam is totally resistant to the drug. Pres-  
ently, 4-8 million units (the largest quan-  
tity injectable at one time) is required to  
stop the infection in women, and 2.4 million  
units is required for men. These high dos-  
ages can only be administered by injection.  
Beware of any doctor who prescribes oral  
penicillin for gonorrhea; the bacteria will  
only become more highly resistant, because  
the dosage is not big enough to kill it, but  
only creates an environment in which it can  
get used to the penicillin. Fini  

For persons allergic to penicillin, or  
when it is ineffective, antibiotics like  
tetracycline and vibramycin are used. An-  
other method of treatment uses oral proben-  

Yarns for  
weaving, knitting  
and macrame,  

looms, beads, and  

candlemaking  
supplies.  

8 p.m.  

425-13th Avenue SE  

on the west bank  

EARTH WORKS  
407 CEDAR  

Mpls. Minn. 55404  

ALIVE AND TRUCKING THEATRE  
PRESENTS  

‘PIS IN A BLAMRET’  

Fri-sat-Sun FEB. 18-19-20  
25-26-27  

"WAX MUSEUM"  

419 W. LAKE ST.  

NEW & USED RECORDS  
AT THE RIGHT PRICES  

8 TRACK TAPES.......  

acid, a drug which retards urination so  
penicillin levels will stay high for a long-  
er period of time.  
Test for cure  

After treatment, a woman should have two  
negative culture tests before the doctor  
sends her away cured. If these subsequent  
cultures are positive, retreatment with  
double the initial dosage is recommended.  
In men the disappearance of the symptoms  
like the discharge is usually enough evid-  
ence to show that he has been cured.  

Where to go for help  

Responsibility for providing adequate  
testing and treatment to keep VD under con-  
trol lies in the hands of the state and city  
health departments. Obviously this respons-  
ibility is not being met.  

The St. Paul Health Department operates  
one clinic expressly for VD testing and  
treatment in the entire city. The clinic is  
located in the downtown headquarters of the  
city's health department: 555 Cedar Ave.  

227-7741  
The clinic is open from 8:00 am - 4:30 pm (not  
overly convenient for people with jobs!)  

The Minneapolis Health Department current-  
ly operates NO VD clinic in their city, at  
least at the time of this printing. A VD  
clinic will be opening (hopefully-finally)  
in February. The clinic will be located at  
527 Park Ave., open from 11 am - 7 pm. The  
service will be free, but patients will be  
asked to make a donation.  

Meanwhile, in Minneapolis, the main source  
of testing and treatment is none other than  
the General Hospital emergency room. We are  
told that the best hours to be tested there  
(the place is open 24 hours a day) are early  
morning before 8:00 am or evenings after 9 pm.  

The various free clinics throughout the  
Twin Cities provide this service free, and  
women who are enrolled in the various birth  
control and maternity-infant care programs  
operated by the city health departments are  
also screened for VD.  

For more information about VD, where to go  
for testing, or for copies of informational  
pamphlets, contact the Women's Counseling  
Service 827-3819.  

JOIN U of M  
WOMEN’S LIBERATION  

MEETINGS: every WED., 3:30 pm, Women's Lounge  
Coffman Union  

OFFICE: 203 Coffman  
PHONE: 373-0033  

THE HAND THAT ROCKS THE CRADLE  

Dinkytown SHOULD ROCK THE BOAT!  

Cra  

8 4.99