“Wisdom from the Pain”

by Julie Landsman

QUESTION: "Since you have written 'I am Woman' and since you seem to represent the women's liberation movement, what is your true opinion of us male chauvinist pigs?"

REPLY:
SOUL

"Oh, I think there is some hope for

Breakthrough

The Helen Reddy Show included this kind of exchange every week it was on the air. Like Ms. magazine, the show was slick, controversial and extremely well done. And, hopefully, like Ms. magazine, it got to more and more people as the summer wore on. I am not one of those who feel that because something is popular, then it must be of poor quality. I do have friends who refuse to read books on the best sellers list simply because “everyone" is reading them. (“Everyone" in this context sounds kind of like "the plebeians"). The more people who saw the Helen Reddy Show, the better. As I watched Ms. Reddy hold up her fist and say something like "keep fighting, sisters", I felt that an important development had occurred in the history of the media. Beside the fact that the show had a woman producer and a large number of female crew members, which are notable breakthroughs in themselves, what actually went on in front of the cameras seemed even more remarkable.

Natural Style

There was Helen Reddy herself. She appeared in marked contrast to every other singer or variety show hostess I've seen on similar productions. Unlike Cher, of Sonny and Cher, she did not depend on fantastic clothes or wild hairstyles or undulating movements for her appeal. She was natural in every sense of the word, from her straight hair, to her quiet singing style, to the way she held her body. Ms. Reddy spoke directly to the audience without a hint of coyness or pretension. As I listened to her musical speaking voice, I wondered if an American performer could do as well. Perhaps, there is something in her Australian background that enables Helen Reddy to have her own show without becoming encumbered with false glamour, flashy sets or the skin-tight gowns of almost every other female singer.

Women Get Together

The show itself was different from any other. It was warm, chatty, funny and touching, and it was nothing like the sappy sugary stuff that characterized the Glen Campbell approach on a similar set. The guests included Brenda Vaccaro, the Pointer Sisters, Ruth Buzzi, and, in what seemed a historical event, Gloria Steinem. As I sat watching Ms. Steinem read a biting feminist newscast (When the Republicans hired call girls to infiltrate the Democratic Convention as spies, they increased their female employment rate by 150%) I had to keep reminding myself: this is prime time TV: As I sat watching Betty Wright singing "I Am Woman", I kept thinking how beautifully this defied all those tiring articles about how black and white women couldn't get together.

Questions

But the part of the show that seemed unusual to me was when Helen and her guests sat on the stage and answered questions: "When did you stop wearing a bra?" "Don't you think women want to stay in the home?" Ms. Reddy and her guests answered these questions directly and without embarrassment. On the final show, during this part, a pimply-faced boy asked, nervously, if he could come up and kiss each of the women. He was told he could do so and, somehow as I watched him kiss each woman on the cheek, it was not a corny scene or an obscene one.

Touching Lives

I'm not sure a TV show can ever reach people or touch them deeply. That screen separating us and the performers prevents us from experiencing anything live, as in a theater. I am sure that this particular show made me laugh a lot, made me feel better about myself, and a few times, moved me. I admit I am biased. I have been strongly influenced by the women's liberation movement. I support it wholeheartedly. Finally, a show came along that appealed to this bias. It's about time! Sparkling kitchen floors, spotless dishes and giggling sink scrubbers never have appealed to me. So, I guess I deserve this show. All women and men deserve more shows like the Helen Reddy Show. She has come the closest to using television in a non-manipulative way. This demonstrates, to me, that when strong, independent women get some power in this media, they can humanize it, using it in creative ways, perhaps even to touch people's lives.

MON -FRI
Noon-- 3
(sexy. 12-6)

FEMINIST LITERATURE
NEW LOCATION
gov W. LAKE ST.

Mpls. 55407
phone FaN-5407