21.

Galencdate

Come and join us...to found National Organization for
a radical women's union... Women (NOW) 333-6870, 459-
founding conference Sat., 2826, 336-9727
NOV: seek people aliens oe Os ee ee se
19, 9:30 a.m....at Wesley Minnesota Women's Political
Foundation, corner of 4th Caucus (MWPC) annual meeting
St. and 12th Ave., Mpls. Saturday, November 18, Cen-
Bring $1--materials, bag tral High School, St. Paul
lunch for both days: potluck - 2, SiS sade =
Sat. evening, daycare avail- Women's International League
: able. Sat. night--open for Peace and Freedom

Solid Oak Carpentry Collec- | stage, dance, songs, women's (WILPF) 336-9716 weekdays
tive Inc. is a non-profit or- from 9-1 p.m.
ganization located aN ENe ne en eee eee | ee ee

Southern Community Services 2 Lesbian Rap Groups every Women's Advocates, St. Paul
S02 Ey eee fC eres oe Thursday, 8 p.m., Gay House, 227-2504

were started last spring by 216 Ridgewood, moving soon [| = £4=----=----

New Vocations bees provide = to 304 E. 22nd St., Mpls., Socialist-Feminism at the
new ideas for aie ena Soe | -sgqsgane Praxis School of the New
vice for Conscientious Objec- American Models.. claus
tors. Now there are several ‘meets Wed. evenings, 7:30,
one woman working with the Franklin Hall, 2421 £.
collective and we are really
needing to work with more wo-

men. Dipl oe = ei a re a
Currently we are trying to yo we ADVOCACY

buy a condemned house that we | ~~ ~~
can renovate and resell at a Vietnam for the Vietnamese! CENTER
low price. We feel this is March against the war Satur-
an effective way to fight ur- ae PI aaa ws ameeanereend

: day, November 18, assemble
ban renewal. Hopefully, if 11:30 a.m. Northrup Mall,
we do this once, we'll learn

: U of M, Minnesota Peace Ac~ ee
to work more effectively to- tion Coalition Women's Con and is in need of women who
gether and gain some needed 5

tingent 331-2851 would be interested in get-
skills and energy to do it Ss ot eae oa ting the program off the
again. ground. The center will
We're also doing low cost start out by focusing in a
home repairs, mainly in South very specific area, such as
Minneapolis and Seward West emergency housing. The e-
neighborhoods: This is not xact focus will be decided
steady work and we're all by the group that gets in-
making very little money. volved. We hope to have the
None of us are very experi- center provide women who can
enced, but slowly we're go with other women when
learning skills from each ot- they need support, or make
her and from working. Any calls for them, or help find
women who are interested in a specific community re-
doing some carpentry work can source they need.
call KATY STOCKS at 822-1293 Anyone ‘interested in help-

or come to our next Thursday ing, or who wants more in-
night meeting, Nov. 30, at formation, call Beth Green

7:30 p.m. at 332-0501, YWCA.

PEOPLE’S
COMPANY

Pour it all slowly over beaten eggs

Gay Community Services...
counseling...Cindy Hanson,
P.O. Box 3592, Upper Nicol-
let Station, Mpls.

_ The YWCA of Minneapolis is
in the process of developing
a women's advocacy center,

Vacation in Hawaii

The Minneapolis YWCA is of-
fering a mid-winter tour to
Hawaii for members and their
families this year. Cost for
the one week's vacation is
$299. Details of the trip
are available through the
YWCA at 1130 Nicollet Ave.,
Mpls., phone 332-0501. Mem-
bership and tour information
will be sent on request.

2% cups dry bread pieces (If bread is going

to get stale because it's not being used, in- Add vanilla extract

stead of keeping it in a bag where it will Mix well

mold, expose it to the air and let it harden. Pour into greased baking dish

It will keep for a long time and work fine in Bake in pan of hot water in moderate oven
this pudding no matter how hard it gets.) (350°) until firm--50 min.

3 3/4 cups milk, scalded (Sour milk is good.) The pudding is especially good warm

1 Tablespoon butter Some like it better with a sauce:

% teaspoon salt

3/4 cup honey Boil 1 cup water

4 slightly beaten eggs 4 cup honey

1 teaspoon vanilla extract 1 Tablespoon butter

Add a big handful of nuts and/or % cup raisins if you like

raisins if you like. The raisins make it a lot

sweeter so you might want to use a bit less Thicken

honey. 14 teaspoons corn starch. Stir corn
starch quickly into a small amount of

Scald milk the hot liquid and dump back in with

Soak bread in milk 5 minutes the rest when it is all dissolved.

Add butter, salt, and honey and raisins and Wait for the rest to thicken over the

nuts if you're using them heat and keep stirring it.