young, and very innocent. I knew nothing  
about homosexuality. I didn't even know  
that such a thing existed either between men  
or between women. You should have told me.  
You should have warned me. You should have  
told me about yourself and warned me that  
the same sort of thing was likely to happen  
to myself. It would have saved us a lot of  
trouble and misunderstanding. But I simply  
didn't know.”

What Vita didn't know, or Harold either,  

I think, was that sexual love of any sort  
could be an overwhelming, sustained exper-  
ience. While they had been sexually inter-  
ested in each other at the beginning of their  
marriage, this facet of their relationship,  
which was probably never too enthusiastic,  
was eliminated after the birth of their  
second son. Harold's involvements with men  
were brief and inconsequential. No doubt he  
assumed that Vita's would be the same; and  
once her ardor for Violet had been stilled,  
Vita did in fact conduct subsequent affairs  
lightheartedly.

Portrait of a Marriage is both provocative  
and unyielding. Vita's account was written  
during an emotionally turbulent time, when  
she believed that her life was "a morass...  
a bog, a swamp, a deceitful country” and her  
writing seems hurried and incomplete. She  
began the story because she wanted to tell  
the truth about a habitually secret sort of  
relationship and "because I hold the convic-  
tion that as centuries go on, and the sexes  
become more nearly merged...such connections  
will to a very large extent cease to be re-  
garded as merely unnatural, and will be un-  
derstood far better...I believe that then  

the psychology of people like myself will be  
a matter of interest, and I believe it will  
be recognized that many more people of my  
type do exist than under the present-day  
system of hypocrisy is commonly admitted."

Vita went on to say that even if homosex-  
uality is an “evil” it should be treated  
with candor. Her ambivalence toward homo-  
sexuality was never resolved.

Sympathy, Neutrality & Flatness  

In his chapters, Nicolson alternates be-  
tween sympathy and neutrality toward his  
mother's private life. However, his collec-  
tion of surrounding facts, while no doubt  
carefully gathered, serve to flatten, rather  
than illuminate Vita's recollection. Be-  
tween the two of them, Violet remains a  
shadowy figure and the sequence of events an  
undeciphered jumble. Still, the book is a  
breakthrough of sorts, since the very pri-  
vate lives of famous people are not often  
revealed when homosexuality is a significant  
factor. Portrait of a Marriage would have  
been a more satisfying book, however, if  
Nicolson had not been so concerned with the  
reticent dictates of "good taste."

Vita's best writing describes her exuber-  
ant transformation into “Julian." The  
switch had cultural, as well as sexual, con-  
notations. Vita wrote: "I never appreciated  
anything so much as living like that with  
my tongue perpetually in my cheek, and in  
defiance of every policeman I passed."

Nigel Nicolson assumed that Vita was re-  
lieved to have emerged from the Violet/Ju-  
lian period to settle down to a calmer 40  
years as Harold's definite wife. I wonder  
about that, particularly when I read Vir-  
ginia Woolf's knowing passage in Orlando  
where she describes a change from male to  
female. Orlando is sailing for England and  
ponders the thing that has taken place.

"It is a strange fact, but a true one that  
up to this moment she had scarcely given her  
sex a thought...it was not until she felt  

“These skirts are plaguey things”  

the coil of skirts about her legs and the  
Captain offered, with the greatest polite-  
ness, to have an awning for her on deck that  
she realised, with a start, the penalties and  
the privileges of her position..."Lord," she  
thought, when she had recovered from her  
start..."this is a pleasant, lazy way of  
life, to be sure. But," she thought, giving  
her legs a kick, “these skirts are plaguey  
things to have about one's heels"...Here  

she tossed her foot impatiently, and showed  
an inch or two of calf. A sailor on the  
mast, who happened to look down at the moment  
started so violently that he missed his foot-  
ing and only saved himself by the skin of  
his teeth. "If the sight of my ankles means  
death to an honest fellow who, no doubt, has  
a wife and family to support, I must, in all  
humanity, keep them covered," Orlando  
thought..."A pox on them!" she said, realis-  
ing for the first time, what, in other cir-  
cumstances she would have been taught as a  
child, that is to say, the sacred responsi-  
bilities of womanhood..."All I can do, once  
I set foot on English soil, is to pour out  
tea and ask my lords how they like it. D'you  
take sugar? D'you take cream?" And mincing  
out the words, she was horrified to perceive  
how low an opinion she was forming of the  
other sex, the manly, to which it had once  
been her pride to belong."

Orlando the man into Orlando the woman,  
Julian back into Vita, and I somehow see  
this passage Virginia Woolf wrote for Vita  
Sackville-West as one of the finer tributes  
one woman has ever paid another.

That very special holiday  
gift for your favorite child  
is waiting for you at  
LEARN ME —  
the shop which has unique and wholesome toys, games, books,  
educational aids and wondrous treasures.

For instance, we have ROBOT cards — the replacement for  
Old Maid, wooden jigsaw puzzles, reusable wipe-off activity  
cards, lacing cards, Alpha Blocks.

Drop in any time. We're open 10:30 a.m. — 5:30 p.m.,  

M-F, M & Th 'til 8:30 p.m., Sat., 9:30 a.m. — 4:30 p.m.

642 Grand Ave., St. Paul  
222-5583 ;  

Kathy Olson - Shirley Keenan  
and Me - the special 3 record  

You  

Free to Be  

Magazines... continued from page 3  

The reasons are economic and sexist in  
origin. ‘The advertisers (on whom the maga-  
zine depends) depend themselves on promoting  
a reading base of unenlightened, unliberated,  
insecure females who will buy their products.  
Women's magazines are designed to be picked  
up while waiting in line at the supermarket  
or waiting in the doctor's office or waiting  
for the sauce to thicken. If a woman's time  
was viewed as being valuable, magazines  
could no longer afford to waste their energy  
on such fluff and still remain solvent. And  
those magazines without the fluff (Women:  

A Journal of Liberation, the second wave)  
do not have advertisements and therefore  
never reach the popular newsstands.

Ms. magazine has its faults. It is slick  
to excess. It is heavily oriented to the  
East. I miss the column “Found Women."  
After reviewing the competition, I was so  
glad to receive the December issue of Ms.  
that once again, life stopped for an after-  
noon until it was read cover to cover. It  
was time well spent.

But