12

Letters from our  
READERS  

The Equality Act of 1974  
GAY RIGHTS and NBC  

Dear Friends,  

AMAZON  
BOOKSTORE  

There are two matters that I feel Goldflower  
would appreciate information about. First,  
Bella Abzug is sponsoring a bill in the House  
the "Equality Act of 1974". This bill would  
amend the 1964 Civil Rights Act to include  
"sex, marital status, and sexual orientation."  
People should write to their representative  
asking him or her to co-sponsor the bill.  

Secondly, on Friday Nov. 8, NBC network  

aired an episode of "Policewoman" concerning  
three suit-and-tie Lesbians who murder an  

old woman in a rest home. NBC had earlier  
promised National Gay Task Force and Lesbian  
Feminist Liberation that the program would  
either not be shown, or that all references  
to Lesbianism would be cut. The network then  
said the show would be aired on November 15.  
The show was shown a week earlier, without  
warning, and offensive to the point of being  
ridiculous.  

NBC's treatment of National Gay Task Force  
and Lesbian Feminist Liberation was shabby.  
But that was to be expected considering  

their media portrayal of gays in general:  

The networks are willing to use gays as crim-  
inal characters in their prime time cops-and-  
robbers and doctor shows--provided they are  

sufficiently hateful and subhuman. Any other  
sort of characterization is labelled "prose-  
lytizing" and is not allowed. When gay men  
and Lesbians object, the networks argue that  
these situations could occur or did occur  
once somewhere. That is not the point. The  
point is that in less than a month, prime  
time TV has dealt with homosexuality twice:  
first with a child rapist on "Marcus Welby";  
now with a Charlie-Manson-type "family" of  
murderers. In suits and ties, no less. The  
networks dare not treat any other minority in  
this fashion.  

This type of coverage on prime time TV is  
unfair. The individual to complain to is  

Herminio Treviñas, the Vice President for  
Program Standards at NBC. His address is:  

NBC, 30 Rockefeller Plaza, N.Y. 10020  
Straight women concerned about the mass media  
image of women should support attempts to  
force responsible TV programming.  

Sue Christopherson, Director of Media  
and Public Relations, Minnesota  
Committee for Gay Rights  

MEN’S PLACE  

There will undoubtedly be a great deal of  
controversy about this article. I feel sure  
of such a reaction because of the heated  
argument that went on at the Rape Speak Out  
regarding just this topic. As a rape victim  
(8 years ago, knife point, oral sodomy, rape)  
I went to the Speak Out slightly uneasy  
about whether I would be able to tolerate  
reliving my own rape. It was difficult for  
me to sit and listen to the similar experi-  
ences of the two panelists Vicki and Joan,  

but it was also supportive.  
con't on pg..14