RAPE, from 5

I got the definite impression he expected at  
least one broken limb, bloody contusions, swollen  
eyes, not to mention torn genitals, before accept-  
ing the possibility of rape.

One task force speaker asked the men about their  
feelings of anger toward women who report they have  
been raped.

"How do you feel when you think of a woman false-  
ly reporting rape?" she inquired.

No response.

“Tell me about your feelings about women and  
rape," she tried again. —

No response.

She tried another tack, still admirably con-  
trolled and patient beyond my understanding.

Rape, she pointed out, has a peculiar significance.  
It is a crime perpetrated against a class of people.  
It is NOT a crime of overriding sexual passion,  
exacerbated by the Bitch Goddess who haunts male  
dreams. Rape is, rather, a violently aggressive  
act, an assault of one human being on another, a  
vicious crime caused by male attitudes toward  
women, and, she said, in part by women's attitudes  
toward themselves.

No response.  
Then a garrulous officer spoke up:

"We've got some things we could tell women about  
now to avoid rapes—about how to be discreet in their —  
dating patterns, about how not to go out at night,  
about how to avoid dangerous areas, about how to  
ULCER 6g

From that point on, the task force speakers  
apparently also realized their audience was hope-  
less. In a competent and professional manner, they  
finished their presentation, packed up their mater-  
ials, politely listened to the patronizing comments  
from some members of the audience and left.

I left with the women, trying to digest what I  
had observed and experienced. I had expected surface  
acceptance of male guilt and responsibility for  
rape. I had even expected a superficially cooper-  
ative attitude.

I was lulled by favorable reports of the effect-  
iveness of the Minneapolis police force in dealing  
with rape victims. Unfortunately, the good offices  
of Minneapolis police are not enough.

Women get raped on carpeted floors in $50,000  
suburban homes; women fear walking to their cars in  
suburban parking lots, as their sisters fear inner  
city streets.

And what can these suburban women hope for if  
they are the victims of rape? If they report the  
crime to police?

NOT MUCH, apparently.

I left the meeting room knowing I would never  
report a rape to these men. Indeed, I left know-  
ing what I and the other women had experienced was  
a further lesson in the politics of rape. We had,  
in fact, faced the rapist—we had been raped, in  
thought.

Each of us knew that for two hours she had been  
in the enemy's camp. And if we encounter him in a  
dark corner, in the privacy of our homes, on a  
beach, at a clothesline—if we have the temerity  
to pursue our lives as upright women, to dare to  
choose freedom; if we have the "unfeminine” will to  
live after a rape, well - -

WE ASKED FOR IT.

17

ACTION  
ALERT

Anti-abortionists are at it again! No surprise, but  
it certainly keeps one busy. Get your pens out again  
and protest riders that may be offered to HR 4925,  
The Health Revenue Sharing and Health Service Act of  
1975. Your congressional representative will be lis-  
ted by district at the end of this article, along  
with the address. It is imperative that you write  
immediately, as hearings will begin June 2.

The essence of the riders is thus:  
1--An amendment which would ban use of Medicaid, or  
possibly all federal funds to pay for or encourage  
performance of abortions.

2--An amendment banning research on abortion methods  
using family planning funds under Title X.

The first is discriminatory to poor women, as is the  
second. The second bans funds to develop safer later  
abortion methods, and falls heaviest upon women who  
seek later abortions. Often teenagers procrastinate  
out of fear of reaction. Other women must wait until  
amniocentesis (detection of defective fetus) is safe.

HR 4925 is an important bill, and should not be held  
up by these riders. But anti people are myopic, and  
keep only one vision in mind, letting all else go by  
the board.

Address letters to: House of Representatives, Washington  
D.C. 20515.

District 1 - Albert Quie, District 2 - Tom Hagedorn  
District 3 - William Frenzel, District 4 - Joseph Karth  
District 5 - Donald Fraser, District 6 - Rick Nolan  
District 7 - Robert Berglund, Dis. 8 - James Oberstar.

A word about our action on abortion legislation from  
a pamphlet entitled "Socialist Feminism: A Strategy  
for The Women's Movement," by the Chicago Women's  
Union, 819 W. George, Chicago, IL 60657 ($.50).  
While the fight to win favorable legislation for women  
is vital, we need to get closer to the sources respon-  
sible for repressive riders and anti-woman legisla-  
tion. "This approach is broader than a ‘write your  
senator’ campaign. It means, for example, finding  
out and publicizing the church groups lobbying against  
abortion and challenging their tax-exempt status for  
lobbying (it is against the law for them to spend  
"substantial amounts" lobbying, since they are tax  
exempt—their last effort cost them over $200,000!).  
It also means finding out what corporate executives  
are on those church boards and launching consumer  
action against them and their businesses for their  
support of the church's lobby. Any campaign under-  
taken should identify such interconnections. We must  
unite women in direct, political action to change such  
repressive measures as the abortion law and at the  

same time focus on the power relations of those invol-  
ved.

"Positive action may include a variety of activities:

--Confrontation with specific demands

--Negotiation

--Forcing an issue at a public hearing

--Embarrassment pressure—picketing, for example

--Mass public protest meeting

--Strikes, boycotts, disruptive actions at stockholder  
meetings."  

BREED OF  
GT FEES