9 to 5 cont. fr. page 4

The organization has endorsed one clerical workers union—local #925 with the service employees union. The union is being organized by staff and membership of "9 to 5", although Nussbaum stressed the union is A SEPARATE ENTITY from "9 to 5".

"We talked with 10 or 12 unions before getting a charter that allows us autonomy,” she said. "We knew unionizing of women workers would be on the agenda of labor unions around the country" and "9 to 5" believes the organizing should be done by WOMEN clerical workers.

Nussbaum pointed out that there are no private industry clerical workers in Boston who are organized at this time. This fall "9 to 5" will be active in campaigns to organize women office workers.

"9 to 5" is dedicated to helping women organize in whatever way they feel most appropriate, Nussbaum stressed.

She smiled when asked about the organization members’ political identification: "Most members do not define themselves as feminists . . . many say 'I'm no women's libber, but . . .”

"9 to 5" has discovered the importance of women office workers organizing around their working needs. "These are women who are going to be office workers throughout their working lives; it is important to be able to take pride in that work. "9 to 5" is not geared to the frustrations of women college graduates anxious to leave the ranks of office workers, she noted.

"Our members are mostly middle-level secretaries and clerks."

"9 to 5" members stress planning and action. "It's very important to be on the move and to be deliberate about organizing,” Nussbaum said. Women must learn skills that will allow them to meet the press, to be self-possessed on television and to lobby effectively.

She notes the organization does not stress working through existing governmental arms ostensibly designed to help women. "We've used our dealings with them to raise issues, but they take a lot of time" to accomplish goals, she said.

Nussbaum notes that women office workers from all over the country have contacted "9 to 5" asking for advice and help to start similar groups. Chicago, San Francisco and Dayton, Ohio, already have active office workers' organizations. Women in New York and Philadelphia are starting groups.

Nussbaum suggests that women office workers who want to organize can start with a job survey: "Ask questions about clerical workers' jobs."

DO YOU HAVE TO DO PERSONAL ERRANDS FOR YOUR BOSS?

DO YOU GET PAID OVERTIME?

etc.

She suggests attaching a mail-in coupon to the form so women who are interested in such an organization can be contacted. After the initial survey and collection of a mailing list, she suggests interested women get together to discuss their ideas for organizing. Do a lot of leafletting in areas where many clericals are concentrated. Write a fact sheet. Hold a large meeting to inform interested women about organizing.

Above all, Nussbaum stressed action. She returned to that theme several times in her conversation. A women's office workers' organization must be on the move, taking concrete steps to change working conditions and compensation.

Notify the press about your group’s activities, she added. Often, she noted, there will be one or two sympathetic women working on daily newspapers and for other media.

"9 to 5" started in the frustrations of a small group of women office workers; it has expanded to become a serious organizing force. "9 to 5" has formulated its bill of rights, a document that clearly states the group's aims and acts as a support and rallying point for a vital segment of workers. And, obviously, "9 to 5" has met Nussbaum's criterion for success: "To be successful, a women's office workers' organization has got to supply answers.”

Any woman interested in organizing can contact "9 to 5" for advice or for a newsletter subscription by writing: "9 to 5", 140 Clarendon St., Boston, Mass. 02116, or write the local WOMEN'S ACTION COMMITTEE, Worker's Rights Center, 6 East Lake St., Mpls. Call 825-3533. (See story on the WOMEN'S ACTION COMMITTEE in this issue of "Goldflower”.