berg ~~ struggle against the dictatorship of Chiang Kai-shek and the landlords we shall
- “I shall find faithful allies among the village women.” Her voice sounded like a trumpet to
Gold Flower. “At the front, the workers and peasants of our democratic army are

of this newly promised life might be. She made up her mind, after rallying the other
two on their temerity, that they had confidence in being able to obtain equality for
the women in the village. Suddenly she blurted out to the two girls everything she

had suffered. Once the words were out she had to use all her strength. The speaking

about what had been going round and round in her brought a
rush of feeling such as she had not experienced since the late past:
She bit her lips to keep back tears and sobs. Then she was glad to hear her friends.

about it, apparently, she was not curious to understand. The girls advised her to
stay quietly (there are) developments.

Within a few days, four women called on Gold Flower’s father-in-law.

“Our investigation department has found out that you are treating your daughter-
in-law badly,” said Dark Jade.

The old man’s jaws dropped open. He could not believe what he had heard.
Recovering from his first astonishment, he burst out angrily, “Don’t interfere with
my family. I can do what I want with my daughter-in-law.”

For a moment, the women cadres were nonplussed. Then Dark Jade spoke firmly.
“We have been polite with you. We are doing this for your own welfare. We are trying
to unite your family and make it happy.”

Gold Flower’s father-in-law jumped up excitedly. “Go away! Get out!” he shouted,

gesturing with his arms.

One girl went away. The others fell into silence. In a moment the girl came back
with fifteen more women. They were all carrying clubs and ropes. The old man was
startled.

“Won't you really change your mind?” asked Dark Jade.
The old man raised his fists. “Nothing! Get out!”
“Bind him up!” shouted Dark Jade.

The old man’s arm was just rising up when four women reached for it. The next
moment he was caught like a fish in a net, both his arms bound with ropes. Gold
Flower looked on amazed. This terror of her life had been overcome with miraculous
ease. But when she saw her father-in-law being led through the gate, she experienced
a momentary twinge of fear. “I have not suffered,” she called. “Don’t hurt
my dear father.”

She ran after the procession. “Father, don’t worry,” she said. But the old man
was thoroughly alarmed. Wriggling his head from side to side, he tried to free himself
from the rope. “Don’t hurt my father,” Gold Flower called, but her insides were
turning over with laughter.

The procession went around a corner. Suddenly Gold Flower stopped short in
the middle of the street. So this is what happiness is! she thought.

At last she believed in the 8th Route Army.

Gold Flower’s father-in-law was held a prisoner for two days in a room in the
building of the Women’s Association. On the third day a general meeting of all the
women in the village was called to decide what to do with him. Groups of women
were making their way toward the center of the village. Never had they all come
out on the streets before, and Gold Flower realized with a start that there were
many women in the village whom she scarcely knew, so close had they heretofore
kept indoors. Dark Jade and Taowa sought her out at home and led her to the hall
of the Women’s Association which had been established in the house of a puppet
who had fled away when the Japanese had gone.

When they arrived, the meeting was in full swing. Forty or fifty women were
crowded into the room and on the steps of the courtyard outside. Up front, behind
a table, was a smaller group of women, among them a girl whom Gold Flower had
never seen before. Dark Jade went up to the front of the room and called for silence.

“Sisters,” she announced, “a cadre from the district will now speak. I ask you
to keep order.”

The woman whom Gold Flower did not know stood up. From the very first
words of her speech, the others all came under the spell of her eloquence. She spoke

of the feudalism of China, which was making the women slaves of men, of the common
interests of brides and maidens, of the necessity to struggle against in-laws who oppress

daughters-in-law, of the need to fight parents who opposed freedom of marriage, of
the aims of the 8th Route Army and the Communist Party, which were carrying on
the fight against all reactionaries for the people.

“We must rise up as sisters, heads held high, and hope that in

pouring out their blood against the soldiers of Chiang Kai-shek, armed by the Ameri-
can reactionaries; and in the rear, here in the villages, we must stand together and
build a new society. And we shall build it! Hand in hand we shall go into the struggle
against those who have enslaved us for two thousand years. And any man, any hus-
band, any father-in-law who opposes us we shall beat to the ground and treat without

mercy.”

“That’s right. Ah, that’s right!” Gold Flower said to herself over and over again,
as she listened to this woman who seemed to be speaking directly to her heart.

After the cadre finished speaking, Dark Jade, as chairman of the meeting, stood
up. Her talk was burdened with clumsy, involved phrases, for she had never made
a speech before. But the women listened to her with a great deal of sympathy as
she was from their own village and was one of them. Rarely did someone speak so
and her words found a vivid response.

“Suddenly she paused, and Gold Flower felt herself grow weak as Dark Jade
looked directly at her and spoke in an intimate way.

“Now,” she said, “the time has come to talk of the case of our dearest sister Gold
Flower. Her sufferings are the sufferings of all women. If she is not freed, we cannot
be free ourselves...”

“That’s true,” shouted a voice from the center of the room. “Let us free Gold
Flower.”

“We must beat that old man,” shrieked a voice in Gold Flower’s ear. “Beat him.
Beat him.”

The other women began to take up the cry. Dark Jade pounded on the table
with her fist, and the roar died away.

“Sisters! We must take our meeting to be a serious business so that it should not
be shameful to the people and so that we should get a good result from our actions.
As it is we have been treated unjustly enough by men, but we should not fall into
the same error. We must have respect for our Women’s Association so that everyone
shall respect it. Let us first discuss how we shall treat the old man before we decide
on anything.”

The meeting finally decided to call in the old man.

Dark Jade threw open the door at Gold Flower’s back and her father-in-law, his
arms bound to his sides, was led in, guarded by two women. His face was pale and
he glanced around the room uncertainly, blinking his old eyes.

“Old man! Be frank. Tell of your bad treatment,” said Dark Jade, and the rest of
the women echoed her shouting: “Be frank!”

“I have done nothing.” The father-in-law spoke with deliberate roughness. “If
you don’t believe me, you can ask my daughter-in-law.” His eyes looked over the
heads of the other women and fell on Gold Flower with a look that expressed his
hostility, and seemed to say: “Be careful.”

Looking at him from afar, Gold Flower felt a shiver of apprehension. She saw
all eyes were on her. Pressing her fists against her chest, she ran on her toes to the
front of the room. Then feeling it was now or never, she summoned all her deter-
mination.

“I married into your family — yes!” she hissed into his face. “But there’s been no
millet for me to eat. No clothes in the winter. Are these not facts? Do you remember
how badly you have treated me in these past five years? Have you forgotten the time
my mother was sick and you made me kneel in the courtyard for half a day? In the
past I suffered from you. But I shall never suffer again. I must turn over now. I
have all my sisters in back of me and I have the 8th Route Army.”

She shouted these words. His face grew dark and red.

“Is it right for you to treat me like this? There is much that I could say. If I
should speak, all these women would beat you to death.”

As she said this, a wave of agitation ran through the meeting and a loud shout
arose. “Speak!” Then as the roar of the voices sank, a thin girlish shriek pierced
the growing quiet:

“Down with those who treat daughters-in-law badly! Long live our Women’s
Association!”

“You ate wheat flour bread and let me eat husks!” Gold Flower said, growing
excited.

“Ai-a-a-ah!” a shout like a bursting shell rose from the women.

The crowd groaned. In the heavy swelling voices, the sound of shuffling

feet could be heard. Gold Flower felt herself being pushed aside. A fat girl was at
her elbow and others were crowding close. “Let us spit in his face,” said the fat
girl. She drew back her lips over her gums and spat between the old man’s eyes.
Others darted in, spat in his face, and darted away again. The roar of voices grew
louder. The old man remained standing with his face red and his beard matted with
saliva. His knees were trembling and he looked such a poor object that the women
laughed and their grumbling and groaning grew quieter. Then Dark Jade, —

the others back, cried:

“Are you ready to reform yourself?”

“I will change.” The old man's voice was low and subdued.
“Will you torture your daughter-in-law any more?”

“No.”

“All women unite,” the same girlish voice that had cried from the crowd before
shouted out in another slogan.

“Women unite,” echoed the crowd.