AIM Walk for Henry George

On September 5, the American Indian Movement led a  
march in Saint Paul Park that began at the police  
station, stopped at the site where Henry George was  
murdered, and continued to the home of Officer Kelly,  
the man who shot Henry George.

Henry George was a fourteen-year-old Cree from Canada,  
who was in the Twin Cities visiting friends. There  

had been a fight at the scene of the killing, between  
Henry George and some other boys. All the details of  
the fight are not known. What is known is that Kelly  
was told by a bystander, “Kill that Indian bastard,”  

and Kelly fired point-blank into Henry's head.

AIM is demanding that Officer Kelly be dismissed imme-  
diately, and that an investigation be conducted. Thus  
far the demand for an investigation has been denied.

The wind was chilly during the long march, which was  
conducted in a quiet, somber manner by the many who  
participated. A few townspeople joined the marchers;  
two women spoke out bravely in support of AIM. One  
stubborn citizen held a sign over his head that read,  
“SUPPORT YOUR POLICE." He moved along with the marchers  
a good distance, but was given little more than passing  
glances.

As darkness overtook the marchers, an uneasiness set  
in—headlights from cars slowly following us revealed  
armed police at several corners. Their presence alone  
invited the fear of violence. The fear was diminished  
somewhat by the lovely, haunting refrains of the Indian  
National Anthem drifting over the heads of the marchers.

Clyde Bellecourte spoke at all three stops, citing  
Indian history and culture never taught in public  
schools, the present situation in Pine Ridge, and the  
Indians’ feelings about the murder of Henry George.

I was struck, as always, by the clarity, simplicity,  
honesty, and reasonableness so customary of AIM. Their demands  
are laced with truth, however, and that truth carries  
with it a profound, moving effect. One wonders how  
anyone can help but support demands which are modest  

when compared to the relentless war that has been  
waged against America’s Natives all these centuries.

Char Masterman

Spirit of the People  
A new newsletter, "Spirit of the People," is available  
at most co-ops and at Amazon Bookstore. The newsletter  
is published by the Native American Solidarity Committee,  
a coalition of organizations and individuals who are  
united in support of the struggles of Indian people.  
These struggles include decent jobs, health care, educa-  
tion, land and treaty rights, and respect for Native  
American culture and beliefs. The Committee recognizes  
Native Americans' right to conduct their own affairs.

The activities of the group include rallies and pickets  
at the Minneapolis Federal building protesting the vio-  
lence at Pine Ridge Reservation by FBI and police, sup-  
porting the boycott of the Aquatennial, and protest  
displays at the Freedom Train.

For more information and direct action you can take,  
call 822-6583 or write 2953 Bloomington Avenue South,  
Minneapolis, 55407.

Staff for this issue: Margaret Hastings, Margot  
Rideau, Char Masterman, Jackie Gohdes, Kathy Menard,  
Carol Masterman, Mary Ellen McGinnis, Benedette  
Knopik, Michelle Connor, Mary Hastings, Kathy  
McConnell.

The next General Meeting for Goldflower will be  
held on October 12, at 10:00 a.m. Newcomers  
are welcome. Call 374-4371 for more information.

YOUR FRIENDLY S.W.A.T.

HERSTORY

The Freedom Train visited the Twin Cities August 26-30.  
Below, some women observe the displays Gold Flower and  
eight other groups set up across the street from the  
train. The displays were sponsored by the People's  
Bicentennial Commission, who were determined to show  
some of the huge hunks of American history that were  
purposely left out of the displays on the train, while  
such things as the eye patch John Wayne wore in "True  
Grit" and Gerald Ford's Bible were displayed!

The various displays we set up told herstory, revealed  
the genocidal policies our government perpetrates  
against Native Americans and blacks, and poor whites,  
showed class oppression, and this country's love affair  
with violence. One display was a mock-up of the bomb  
dropped over Hiroshima, which held a peculiar fascina-  
tion for many observers. Eye of the Potato did some  

fine guerrilla theatre, a parody of the Freedom Train,  

and "Uncle Sam" gave a speech on freedom—from the  
point of view of the unfree, that is.

The groups leafletted as people emerged from the train,  
telling why we felt our display was necessary. The  
responses to the leaflets and displays ranged from  
hostile to very receptive; most were hesitant and  
noncommittal, however—as if they weren't quite sure  
how they ought to respond.

SQUAD ....

The latest in "law and order" is the Special Weapons  
and Tactics squads throughout the nation. They are  
called SWAT, and are paramilitary units within city  
police departments. They typically operate from  
armored vehicles loaded with weaponry including explo-  
sives and chemicals. These units, which according to  
some estimates now number 300 nationally, stem from a  
1960s Pentagon program to deploy "civil disturbance  
forces" throughout the U.S. The very existence of  
such squads is enough to cause alarm to anyone con-  
cerned with civil rights and liberties—an alarm which  
is increased by a brief look at their history.

A Los Angeles SWAT Lieutenant recently described its  
mission as "to do battle with terrorists, radicals,  
revolutionaries, and cop-haters.” As recently as  
February, after the San Diego SWAT squad executed a  
"successful" mission resulting in two Black teenagers'  
deaths, the county sheriff told a TV audience, "It's  
just like taking a house in a Vietnamese village."

The spread of SWAT units is a dangerous phenomenon, but  
something CAN be done. In Berkeley, public protests  
forced the city to cancel SWAT training sessions. We  
should all be alert in our own communities for initia-  
tion of such squads.

In the meantime, ABC (channel 9) is showing a series  
called "S.W.A.T." at 8 p.m. Saturdays. Those who wish  
to protest the glamorization of violence can write to  
channel 9 at KMSP TV or the American Broadcasting  
Company, 1330 Ave. of the Americas, N.Y. 10019.

from WEAL newsletter