WOMEN’S RESTAURANT

We are born into this world women. We  
live in this year 1974. We live in this  
place on this continent of this planet.  
We hold these things in common. We begin  

to define ourselves on this base. That  
is our beginning. To continue, to grow,  
to change, we must know one another. We  
must create the opportunity to share with  
one another. That is our strength. We  
must take control of our future. Full  
Cycle is the form of these possibilities.  

Full Cycle is being born now. The midwives  
are a group of women committed to her life.  
Believing in the natural order of women.  
Seeing the necessity, creating the process.  
We are practical. We need money. We need  
support. We have time. We have hope.  
Women are our hope.  

We have been meeting as a group since late  
last summer, refining and developing the  
idea of a women's restaurant. At this time,  
we would like to share with the women of our  
community some of the ideas that have evolved  
from our coming together.  

As we envision it, Full Cycle will provide  
the following:  
*A place with an open and relaxed atmos-  
phere where women can gather and organize  
-a place to exchange ideas  
-a center for communication among groups  
-a place for women to meet other women  
-a showcase for women artists, poets, and  
musicians  
As women's lives become more complex and  
diverse, we feel a place is needed where  
we can all meet on common ground. Isol-  
ation from one another can be as great  
a threat to our collective existence as  

is the patriarchy.  
*Employment for women  

*An opportunity to learn and share the  
skills and knowledge necessary to operate  
a business.  

*Good, nutritious food  

The manner in which we operate as a group is  
important to us on two levels. As feminists,  
we are committed to developing and sustaining  
unique female systems of cooperation. As op-  
erators of a restaurant, we will be faced  
with specific functions that must be carried  
out. To integrate these two, we have decided  
to work as a collective. Decisions con-  
cerning the structure and overall processes  
of operation are made jointly, at weekly  
meetings. All areas of responsibility are  
spelled out and made clear to all who become  
involved with the restaurant. Because we all  
have diverse skills and areas of expertise,  
we will not be responsible, as individuals,  
for every aspect of operation, but rather will  
perform those tasks with which we are most  
familiar or those we are most interested in  
performing.  

At present, we all have a strong commitment  
to establish and maintain the restaurant.  

But we also see the restaurant as a process  
in itself, which is independent of the indiv-  
idual members of the collective—a female in-  
stitution which perpetuates itself and which  
will not fold if any or all of the present  
members leave.  

We want to make enough money from the start  
to pay every worker a reasonable amount of  
money for the amount of time and energy she  
puts into the restaurant. We plan to have  
at least one full-time paid worker when we  
open.  

We are non-profit. That is, none of us ex-  
pects to become rich from the restaurant, but  
we all expect to make enough money so that  
is our primary source of income.  

We want the restaurant to be economically  
self-sustaining by the end of the first year  
of operation. But until we open and begin to  
make money, we are dependent on outside  
sources for funds. We estimate that we will  
need at least $5,000 before we can begin to  
think about opening.  

At this point, we are in the process of rais-  
ing funds, gathering equipment, working out  
our non-profit status, and searching for a  
location. In order to begin operation now  
with the few resources we have, we are hold-  
ing a series of fund-raising dinners. The  
first was on December 13th, and more are being  
planned for the near future.  

We operate, and will continue to operate when  
we open, by cultivating trust in community  
women and in each other. We are taking risks  
and will need each other for support and en-  
couragement. We will have to struggle with  
individual doubts and problems inherent in  
any group endeavor. But we are confident  
that what we are doing is needed in our com-  
munity, that it is right for us and for other  
women, and that we have the skills, energy,  
and desire to make it work.  

We will be happy to provide any additional  
information, and we welcome any feedback re-  
garding our plans. Our mailing address is:  
723 7th St., S.E., Apts 6  
Mpls., Mn. 55414  
And we can be reached by calling:  
Robin - 378-0163  

or  
Kit - 729-1723