Taking Your Chances

by Susan Cushman

When I was growing up my father had a ram-
rod policy about young women and travel. He
combined the interests of respectability and
safety in his edict that my sisters and I
could not travel alone or with female
friends because that was dangerous. We also
could not travel with male friends for fear
of losing our real or figurative virginity.
In short, trips were to be made with our
parents or not at all.

Many parents enforced similar stifling
rules which drastically curtailed our young
movements. Colleges and universities fol-
lowed the parental lead in establishing
hours for women while the men did as they
liked. “In the small midwestern town where
I was in undergraduate school, the dean of
women warned us many times about the "tran-
sient perverts" who unaccountably stalked
the cornfields. She advised us to have es-
corts after sundown, yet for four years I
took a nightly walk expressly for the soli-
tude, without encountering anything more
than an occasional overzealous dog.

It took a few months in a truly dangerous
city (St. Louis) for me to realize that
these authority figures had been right about
one thing - women are favorite targets of
most crimes. The question is what to do
about it. Each individual, it seems, must
find a comfortable balance between personal
safety and personal freedom. If the danger
is greater for a given group of people, the
freedom must apparently shrink to maintain
comparable survival odds.

A recently published book supports this
conclusion while at the same time offering
some useful suggestions for increasing fe-
male safety without seriously limiting li-
berty. "Lady Beware" by Peter Arnold (Dou-
bleday, 182 pages, $5.95) is written in a
somewhat annoying fashion, frequently speci-
fying times when a woman is alone as times
when "your man" is away. Nevertheless, the
book is valuable because it explicitly des-
cribes crimes against women and possible
preventative measures.

Some of these measures, such as installing
effective locks, can be taken infrequently
and require just one burst of determination
and concern. Others necessitate a change in
daily habits. Arnold presents everyday ways
of carrying a purse so as to discourage
purse snatchers; leaving an apartment so as
to discourage burglars, and walking so as to
discourage prospective muggers or rapists.

Perhaps the most helpful advice comes from
convicted men who describe their selective
attitudes when choosing victims. In many
cases the enticing combination is solitude
and preoccupation - a woman alone who does
not appear to be paying attention to her
surroundings. By making herself an easy
mark, a woman seemingly invites the most
simplistic and even half-hearted crimes.

The solution, of course, is not to cower
indoors with a cadre of male protectors.
Rather, each woman should analyze the way
she lives and then make that particular way
as safe as possible. If you frequently walk
at night, you'll be safer if you carry a po-
lice whistle. If you get around mostly by
car, it's a good idea to check the back seat
floor before you get in and to keep your
doors locked while driving to protect your-
self from unwanted passengers. Habits like
these improve your safety without interfer-
ing with your movements or compromising your
independence.

If you do suspect that someone is sizing
you up in an unfriendly manner, don't be re-
luctant to do something about it before you
are proved right. Policewomen who were
interviewed in "Lady Beware" agree that most
women who are attacked have a premonition
of danger but don't do anything about it.
Alertness doesn't help if women don't act
decisively on their perceptions. Stepping
into a lighted store or out of an uncomfor-
tably intimate elevator won't implicate a
possibly innocent person and can perhaps
save you a bad experience.