LESBIAN RESOURCE CENTER: The Center “offers  
an alternative to a bar" and a place where  
lesbian women can affirm and re-affirm their  
lifestyle as a legitimate, alternative life-  
style. Members stress LRC is a resource cen-  
ter; that is, the Center needs as much input  
from interested women as it dispenses to them.  
The Center offers:  

Counselors for one-to-one and couple  
counseling  

"The Lavender Cellar Theater"  
Continuing Rap Groups  

Softball team, canoeing trips and other  
camping activities.  

Any interested woman may attend the Wednesday  
night Community Meeting at 7:30 p.m., or call:  
374-2345 (if no answer, a recorded message will  
give hours and other information, or you can  
leave a message.)  

LRC is a non-profit, non-political group;  
Volunteers are welcome.  

WOMEN'S INSTITUTE FOR SOCIAL CHANGE: The  
Institute's goal is to activate women into  
the community. To that end the Institute,  
which is in its fourth year, offers a course  
on effective community involvement. (This  
course is offered fall through spring. In  
fall 1974 the Institute will offer specific  
skills sessions, also, including lobbying,  
effective board membership, etc. The Insti-  
tute is "dormant" from June 15 - August 15.  
Present address and phone number are:  

1130 Nicollet Ave.  
Minneapolis, Minn. 332-3833  

Hours: 9 a.m. - 3 p.m., Monday through Friday  

WOMEN'S UNION: A socialist-feminist group.  
Among its projects (in addition to Women's  
School) are: Socialist-Feminist Study Group  
at 11 a.m. Sundays; Twin Cities Women's Gra-  
phics Collective--a group of women silkscreen  
artists who do posters, T-shirts and cards on  
commission and for sale; "Circle of The Witch"  
Feminist Theater, which offers Saturday aft-  
ernoon workshops for women at 1 p.m., 2448 -  
18th Ave. South, Minneapolis. (See Women's  
School listing, also.) The Women's Union has  
a lending library, which women may use during  
office hours-- 1 - 4 p.m., Monday, Thursday  
and Saturday.  

Address: 2953 Bloomington Ave. South  

Minneapolis, Minn.  
Telephone: 729-6200  
The Women's Union is holding a picnic-potluck  
June 10 in Powderhorn Park near the bandstand.  

(Bring food, frisbees, etc.; picnic to start  
at 6 p.m.)  

WOMEN'S SCHOOL: The Women's School is a pro-  
ject of The Twin Cities Women's Union. (See  
above.) Any woman interested in alternative  

education should contact The Women's School.  

This summer's major effort will be re-organ-  
ization of the School. Volunteers for a Work  
Group are needed. The School, of course, of-  
fers courses throughout the summer. Follow-  
ing are courses already in progress which will  
accept new members:  

Women and Religion  

Women's Studies Collective  

Saturday Afternoon Theater Workshop  
Literature Collective  

A new Poetry Collective will be convened by  
Coco Weber. If you wish to join the collec-  
tive, call Coco at 722-0783 after June 1. She  
would like to have the collective started by  
mid-June.  

Beginning Silkscreening, The Graphics  
Collective will also accept new mem-  
bers for the summer.  

Women have expressed interest in the follow-  
ing courses. If convenors come forward, these  
classes can also be offered:  

Drawing  

Self-Defense  

Auto and Bicycle Mechanics  
Video Workshop  

Chinese Brush Painting  

For information on any aspect of the School,  
call: The Women's Union, 729-6200; or  
Fluffy at 874-9597; Sue at 729-6942; or Kiki  
at 338-5367.  

The Women's School mailing address is:  

2953 Bloomington Ave. South  

Minneapolis, Minn. 55407  
Registration fees (very reasonable) are coll-  
ected at meetings of the various collectives.  

Donations are accepted.  

"GOLD FLOWER": A feminist, collective news-  
paper, which has published since November  
1971. "Gold Flower” encourages new members  
and contributors of writing or artwork.  

The paper practices freedom in publishing, has  
no censorship policies, no editors. "Gold  
Flower" may also take on other publishing ven-  
tures in the near future. Anyone interested  
in becoming a member or in contributing to the  
paper, call: Jan, 870-1395; Mary or Margaret  
at 378-1848; Susan at 338-6313 (evening hours  
best). Or write to:  

"Gold Flower"  

P.O. Box 8341  

Lake Street Station  
Minneapolis, Minn. 55408  

$4.00  
35 cents per copy.  

Yearly subscription:  
Newsstand price:  

(Meeting notices are posted in every "Gold  
Flower"; if you are interested, please attend.