ON  
RAPE  

asking for it ...  

A  
NON-POLEMIC  

The pattern on the tile of the meeting room floor  
was obscured with coke stains, and an unfashionable  
smoke haze hung over the assemblage. About 30  
mostly middle-aged men and three or four women  
occupied the folding chairs, buzzing companionably,  
the men snorting with laughter occasionally.  

Hardly the setting I expected as an observer at  
a recent, so-called “rape sensitivity session" for  
a suburban Twin Cities police force.  

I was prepared for the men attending to be polite  
if unresponsive. I was NOT prepared for the open  
resistance and hostility—the "armed camp" atmos-  
phere—that permeated the two-hour session con-  
ducted by two NOW Task Force on Rape representa-  
tives. The women were competent and obviously  
committed to their task and they displayed the pat-  
ience of saints.  

After a somewhat nervous introduction by a pol-  
ice department functionary, the women began their  
talk.  

“WOMEN WHO GET RAPED USUALLY ASK FOR IT," one  
woman began and proceeded to demonstrate the fallacy  
of that myth. However, her listeners never got  
beyond the bald statement of the myth; they con-  
curred heartily. One grizzled veteran of the force  
chortled and murmured encouragement to a companion,  
who related, sotto voce, his theories of exactly  
why and how women ask for rape.  

"Just last week we had a case where a girl  
accepted a ride with two guys in St. Paul...”  
one human relations expert interjected.  

"Yeah, and they were drunk . . ." another chimed.  

"Yeah, well, we knew she had a bad moral history,”  
a third announced to the speakers, as if his  
judgments on the victim's "moral history” were rel-  
evant to the proper prosecution of a rape case.  

by Mary Hastings  

My grizzled friend gurgled and whispered further  
bits of information into his neighbor's ear. He  
had evidently compiled a file on the “wayward” 18-  
year-old who had "asked" for rape.  

By this time, it was apparent to me that the  
task force speakers would meet nothing but hostil-  
ity. The men in the room obviously felt it pre-  
sumptuous for women to dare advise them on how to  
humanely deal with rape victims.  

The policemen's resistance and hostility took  
various forms—probably dependent on the listeners’  
individual personalities. One, a senior member of  
the force, chose "logical sleuthing” as his app-  
roach. The force often encountered difficulties,  
he declared, because women have "fantasies about  
rape."  

"I think these women must have some kind of  
HANG-UP," he said.  

Another—younger and slicker—chose to quibble  
about statistics. He would not accept the speaker's  
statement that false rape reports constitute only  
two percent of total rape statistics—the same rate  
as false reporting for all crimes.  

"I can't believe that,” he snorted. "Where did  
you get your figures?”  

"The federal government," came the reply.  

No matter. The young man was off on his own  
theories of rape—what a problem it is to deal with  
female complaints about rape, etc., etc.  

Yet another officer approached the problem of  
proof—how much evidence of physical struggle should  
there be to substantiate a woman's report she has  
been raped?  

to page 17