sex discrimination, continued from page 7

“The Pool of Tears”

Also, over my seven months' employment, I  
had discovered I could work very well with  
women. This statement comes from one who  
had always been hostile to "female subord-  
inates", fearing association with them, and  
separating myself from them as much as poss-  
ible. But having embraced feminism, I dev-  
eloped rapport with my female co-workers.  
Ninety-nine percent were secretaries.

(There were several other women profession-  
als in the company, but we all had "service-  
oriented" jobs.) I grew to understand that  

I worked with a female secretary. She did  
not work for me; she was not my secretary.

Shortly after my transfer, I enrolled in a  
two-week seminar and was absent from the  
communications department.

Upon my return, a corporate executive gave  

me the greatest gift I have ever received--  
the opportunity to free myself forever from  
male standards.

The executive--for reasons still unclear to  
me--complained to my supervisor that I  
should not produce a program dealing with  
"technical" endeavors exclusively the pro-  
vince of males. My supervisor who--con-  
sciously or unconsciously--had been awaiting  
an opportunity to curtail my activities had  
a "heart-to-heart" talk with me in which he  
informed me it was not appropriate for a  
woman to take a large role in a "technical"  
field. He declaimed for some time, quoting  
Scripture and recalling the natural order  
of things. He concluded in a patronizing  
tone that I would be allowed to "coordinate"  
the program but would no longer play a ma-  
jor role in it.

During this amazing interview, I responded  
in a passive, non-involved manner. I had  

just had a job review that rated me an ex-  
cellent employee. Needless to say, I was  

nonplused.

“The Rabbit  
Sends in a Little ‘Bill’

That hot May weekend I made the decision to  
file a sex discrimination charge against my  
employer. I was frightened but did not  
want to be humiliated further by the male  

On Monday morning, I arrived at work, att-  
ended to some details and informed my sup-  
ervisor I would be “out of the building"  
for a time. I proceeded to the Minnesota  
Department of Human Rights in St. Paul. I  
had little hope that my claim could be acc-  
epted for investigation. I was inter-  

viewed by a very intelligent young woman  
who heard my nervous but factual account of  
my supervisor's sermon. She informed me  
that the case was "difficult" but the State  
could investigate.

Following the interview, I signed a form and  
dated it. Within a week or so, I would re-  
ceive a copy and the company would be served  
with a copy by mail. The charge was address-  
ed to the President of the corporation and my  
supervisor.

(I had not retained an attorney and did not  
plan to.) This is a grave error. Consult an  
attorney immediately if you feel you have  
just cause to file a sex discrimination  
charge. Because I had not consulted an att-  
orney at the outset, I did not know that I  
could have filed a charge with the Federal  
Equal Employment Opportunities Commission at  
the same time I filed the state charge.

I fear that initially I viewed the State De-  
partment as a "protector". Nothing is fur-  
ther from the truth. This Department should  
be absolutely neutral in investigations--  

it is neither an advocate for complainant  
(myself) nor respondent (the company). The  
Minnesota Department of Human Rights is also  
understaffed and overworked. And I regard  
its male employees as a fair cross-section  
of male attitudes toward women.

If you need an attorney and are in the Twin  
Cities area, contact Women's Advocates:  
227-2504 (St. Paul)  

for attorney referral.)  
I returned to my office and proceeded for the  

next week and a half to work in the mode dic-  
tated by my supervisor.

Nothing changed--on the surface. My super-  
visor did, indeed, treat me with more kind-  
ly condescension than had been his wont. (I  
found I preferred the wary measuring of two  
weeks past.) I behaved in my usual manner.  
I had been a most accommodating, soft-voiced  
woman. I had never visibly lost my temper,  
although it cost me many stomach pains and  
tight lines at the mouth. I had never de-  
manded what was my due, had never insisted  
on cooperation or timely performance of  
interviews, "reviews" or conferences.

One noon hour I drove home to check my mail  
continued on page 1>