RAPE: A FIRST SOURCEBOOK FOR WOMEN

New York Radical Feminists, Editors, Noreen Connell  
and Cassandra Wilson, Plume Books, New York, 1974.

review by char masterman

Open the cover of the book and there it is--a state-  
ment about the historical 1971 New York Rape Speak-  
out that generated this book:

“Organized by the New York Radical Feminists in Jan-  
uary, 1971, this was the first time women began to  
tell their stories publicly. One woman remembered  
the “depantsing" ritual where grade-school boys forc-  
ibly removed the underpants of little girls; another  
was raped by a gynecologist; another recalled being  
forced to masturbate in front of her psychiatrist as  
part of her "treatment". There were women raped by  
their husbands, on the street by strangers, on dates,  
by house-breakers. One woman, a near victim, sugges-  
ted castration as an appropriate punishment for the  
rapist, and her suggestion was greeted with wild ap-  
plause by the almost all-female audience. Had all  
these women been raped on the street by strangers, or  
was there something in their relationships with men  
that gave them a gut understanding of the meaning of  
rape?

WHAT CONSTITUTES RAPE?

t

+. OF was there something in their relationships  
with men that gave them a gut understanding of the  
meaning of rape?" This statement stuck in my mind as  
I read the book, is now my constant companion, nig-  
gling away as I think about women and degrees of  
rape: the uncertain look of dread written on a wom-  
an's face as silent, subtle pressures leap at her  
from her lover; a little woman-child running tear-  
fully, terrified, from mocking brothers, and recoil-  
ing from dear old Uncle's advances, he who'd always  
seemed so nice; soft cries in the night as an insom-  
niac wife lay seething and humiliated, listening to  
her husband's satisfied snores; rough, groping hands  
in the back seat of a car, a snarling voice--"god-  
damit, I thought you loved me?!"

Within the past year, slowly--it's too painful to  
handle all at once!--I have begun to realize that  
rape is more than, worse than the brutal back-alley  
attacks I'd heard about. These are heinous enough!  
But it's the mind-screw that is even more horrible.  
Rape is, as this book points out so very well, sexism  
in its most brutal manifestation. It begins with our  
(female) childhood--begins with the insidious train-  
ing of little women to revel in being the "weaker  
sex", protected--by our attackers!--submissive, jug-  
gling the schizophrenic whore/angel role, the better  
to please him.

Rape is a compendium of personal testimonies, C-R  
discussions, fine essays, and various feminist group  
efforts. The only valid, repeat valid information we  
have about rape victims, for it comes straight from  
the victims. What men have said and written ad naus-  
eum about women and rape doesn't count. How the hell  
would they know!

EARLY TRAINING FOR THE FEMALE ROLE

Here are a few mind-benders from Florence Rush's  
section on the sexual abuse of children, a problem of  
much larger dimensions than we can imagine--and this  
is where it all begins.*

"By an overwhelming ratio--97 per cent, offenders  
were male and ranged in age from seventeen to sixty-  
eight.

"Victims were in a ratio of ten girls to one boy.  
The boys were victims of male homosexuals. The vic-  
tims ranged in age from infants to children under  
sixteen, and the median age was eleven.

"In seventy-five per cent of the cases, the offender  
was known to the child or family, such as a father,  
stepfather, mother's lover, brother, uncle, or friend  
of the family--25 per cent of the offenders were al-  
leged to be strangers.

*(from a study by the American Humane Ass'n., the  
most objective one Rush was able to find.)

In another study this not surprising attitude was  
found by the "researchers":

"There follows several examples of father behavior  
described by thirteen mothers and, in every instance,  
corroborated by the child victim; breaking a radio  
over the mother's head; burning the child with hot  
irons, chasing the mother out of the house with a  
gun; . . . locking mother or children in closets  
while he sexually abused the child victim . . . forc-  
ing sexual intercourse with the child in the mother's  
presence.”

Here's the kicker--"After examining the character of  
incest family . . . the unavoidable conclusion seems  
to be that the failure of the mother to protect the  
child against the contingency of incestuous victimi-  
zation is a crucial and fruitful area of study. . .  
and “Considering the father offender as a possible  
source of control of incest behavior seems . . . like  
considering the fox . . . as guard in the henhouse--"  
"The mother is the only possible agent of incest con-  
trol within the family group." The author (Rush)  
goes on to ask the logical question--has anyone ever  
thought of the fantastic notion of getting rid of the  
father? Even in sexual abuse of children the rapist  
is somehow innocent--poor fellow has that "uncontrol-  
lable" button, and it's up to mother to control it.

n

Our old friend Sigmund Freud is dredged up from his  
casket to aid and abet the “researchers” with his  
notion that not only could most child victims prob-  
ably escape their attacker (was he there?), but no  
doubt she was secretly (he's so great on secrets!)  
attracted to this "forbidden" seduction. Ah, here we  
go again with the old sexist truism--she really likes  
it. Bender and Blau (whoever the hell they are) top  
it off with making the child the seducer.

Photo by Carolyn Lee

THE POLITICS OF RAPE

Rape is not aberrational behavior, unfortunately.  
The politics of rape as a manifestation of sexist  
acculturation is thoroughly explored. Among the  
conclusions of Lilia Melani and Linda Fodaski as they  
explore rapist psychology, are:

“. . . we live in a culture that, at best, condones  
and, at worst, encourages women to be perennial vic-  
tims, men to be continual predators, and sexual rela-  
tions to be fundamentally aggressive.  
rape, cont’d page 7.