12

"Twenty women started this organization,  
Minnesota Feminists. Some were involved  
in the University Women's Liberation, and  
many of the women were disappointed with  
University Women's Liberation. There were  
the negative feelings of the group being a  
YSA (Young Socialist Alliance) front, a  
clique that was meeting the needs of only  
four or five women, the awareness groups  
were absent, the power was not organized  
and the group operated in a vacuum,” began  
Jackie Byrd, spokeswoman for Minnesota  
Feminists.  

“The organization was formed because a num-  
ber of members in University Women's Lib-  
eration felt that the organization had be-  
come unhealthy and needed changes. The  
organization had become unhealthy in our  
minds because we felt that the number of  
women's needs being met were almost nil.  
And it was really important to the women  
that were discussing the problems of the  
organization that more women's needs be met.  

"Some of the problems that we felt were  
happening were political ideologies were  
infringing on various women's rights. Fem-  
inism we felt should become the ideology.  
That women should come first and be the prim-  
ary focus. And the issues worked upon  
should be woman-oriented and we found in  
University Women's Liberation this wasn't  
happening and the changes were really nec-  
essary in order to make feminism the prime  
factor in a feminist organization.  

A Positive Name  

"First off we changed the name from Uni-  
versity Women's Liberation to Minnesota  
Feminists. Because we felt that University  
Women's Liberation was a name that had come  
from that past. And we are now moving for-  
ward in a positive direction. Which means  
that feminism is a positive name, a pro-  
active name, a name that is right now and  
that is very productive. Whereas women's  
liberation is a negative name. Liberation  
from something as opposed to feminism which  
is moving towards something. With a new  
name we could change the image and we could  
change a great many of the problems that had  
developed in University Women's Liberation.  
So out of the new name grew—one: a philos-  
ophy; two: a structure; and three: a pol-  
icy," continued Jackie.  

"Feminism the pro-active versus the react-  
ive. We see ourselves as a pro-active, pro-  
women and positive directed organization.  
This is what we need to keep. And to do this  
we have to meet the needs of more than four  
or five women.  

Feminist Philosophy  
"When we were discussing the change in  
the organization's direction we discussed  
philosophy a great deal. What we discovered  
was feminism is what each one of us lived  
day by day. It is integrated into our day-  
to-day behavior. Since it is integrated in-  
to our daily behavior, it also has to be  
integrated into the organization. It is done  
by implementing the things learned, the  
things we experience day by day, into the  
organization, which is very difficult. When  
we espouse feminism, it means we are willing  
to care about other women, to help other wo-  
men, not to stab other women in the back,  

Pro-active Women—  
Minnesota Feminists Born  

Diana Lynn Antolik  

which is very hard not to do. But those  

ideas have to live in Minnesota Feminists.  
‘If we say we want to meet all women's  

needs, if we say ‘I won't be around and I  
want to be active with women, I want to help  
women, and I want to share with women', it  
doesn't do to have an organization which ex-  
cludes women. Or excludes women that are  
different from us or doesn't think exactly  
the way I think or someone else thinks. Fem-  
inists are all going to be different types  
of women, from all different backgrounds and  
with different ideas. But the one thing we  
have in common is that we are all women, and  
we are all feminists. We can't close off  
other women.  
"It is also developing a way of looking at  

things from a totally feminist viewpoint."  

“The philosophy of the Minnesota Feminists  
is basically to admit the differences among  
women—race, class, sexual preference, pol-  
itical ideology (in the male sense) and to  
look beneath those differences to see that  
they are women and feminists and meet on  
that level.”  

Unique Structure  

"To have input that is total we have set  
up a unique organization," Jackie started  
explaining the structure of Minnesota Femin-  
ists. "It involves the large group which  
is divided into awareness groups, specific  
task-oriented groups, ongoing groups and a  
steering committee.  

"We had all read a number of articles and  
specifically 'The Tyranny of Structureless-  
ness' by Jo Freeman in MS (July 1973) and  
decided that one of the basic problems with  
University Women's Liberation was this tyr-  
anny of structurelessness. A few women gain-  
ed power in an organization because there  
wasn't any delineated power. This was frus-  
trating because no new women could get into  
the organization because of the clique. The  
older women with the group were not willing  
to teach other women. This produced a lot  
of hostility and dissonance within the group.  
That is why it was decided to give the org-  
anization a structure. To be as free as  
possible but also have worked out areas and  
lines of communication and teaching.  

"The most important group is the awareness  
group (once called consciousness raising  
groups). They are a way of reaching new wom-  
en. It is very important to involve the  
personnel. It is also important for the sup-  
port of a woman involved in feminism for a  
long time or just starting out to continue  
the individual contact with other women.  

“The task forces—women's studies,  
abortion, day care and others are task-orien-  
ted. (They can also serve as awareness group  
groups.) These task forces change, grow or  
end depending on what needs are to be met.  
These groups take action on various areas con-  
cerning women.  

“Ongoing groups are the ones that are need-  
ed on a permanent basis. For example;  
running and staffing the office; a clearing  
house so there is contact with other women's  
organizations and will be information and  
knowledge flowing between them. The "Minn-  
esota Daily" page for contact inter-univer-  
sity, a finance committee, a public relations  
group and more or less as needs arise that