INTERNATIONAL

Since 1910 women throughout the world have celebrated  
March 8 as International Women's Day. The day was  
originally proposed by the German socialist, Clara  
Zetkin, to commemorate two all-women strikes, one in  
1857 by the garment workers of New York City and one  
in 1908 by women in the New York needle trades. To-  
day it is celebrated to honor not only working women,  
but women in struggle everywhere. It is celebrated  
as an expression of sisterhood and solidarity among  
women throughout the world. From Vietnam to Cuba to  
the cities of Europe and the United States, women will  
gather by the hundreds and thousands to celebrate  

International Women's Day. It is truly our holiday!  
United by the theme of international women's solidar-  
ity--One Ocean, Many Waves--women from more than a  

dozen Twin Cities organizations have come together  
for this year's celebration of March 8. The  
celebration will include a march, a rally, and a dance--a combi-  
nation of celebration, education, and solidarity.  

In addition to the theme "One Ocean, Many Waves,” the  
early afternoon march will protest the high prices  
paid for food. In particular, we want to emphasize  
the relationship of women to the current food situa-  
tion--both as consumers and as low-paid workers in the  
food industry. We want to point out who is responsi-  
ble for the high price of feeding a family--not the  
woman, unable to make ends meet, but the food industry  
itself. Giant agribusiness corporations are making  
huge profits while women struggle to feed their fami-  
lies. We will be focusing our march on Cargill Cor-  
poration, one of this area's and the nation's largest  
grain dealers, as one example of an agribusiness cor-  
poration whose profits are soaring.  

The rally will continue the theme of international  
solidarity with speeches by Cora Weiss, recently re-  
turned from Cuba, Madonna Gilbert, of the American  
Indian Movement, and other local speakers. Women's  
groups throughout the Twin Cities will have tables  
set up with information about themselves and other  
literature available. The day will conclude with an  
evening celebration and dance.  

In addition to uniting around the general theme,  
several women's groups, led by the Twin Cities  
Women's Union and New American Movement, have come  
together to raise six additional issues.  

1. We call for a ceiling on food industry profits  
and a nutritionally adequate food stamp program.  

photo by Carolyn Lee  

WOMEN OF THE WORLD ARE AWAKENING - ONE OCEAN, MANY WAVES!  

WOMEN’S  

DAY  

2. We demand safe, effective birth control and  
abortion, and an end to U.S. administered "popula-  
tion control" programs (i.e. forced sterilization  
and birth control experimentation--see this issue,  
"Sterilization of Native Women") at home and abroad.  

3. End all aid to Thieu and Lon Nol; implement the  
peace agreement.  

4. Free the Wounded Knee defendants.  
5. End discriminatory lay-offs of women.  

6. We support and affirm the right to sexual pref-  
erence and demand an end to discrimination against  
homosexuals.  

We encourage all women who can to unite behind these  
issues as well.  
Please join us!  

Pam Costain  
Twin Cities Women's Union  
729-6200  

*See pages 11 and 12 for scheduled events.  

The following is a partial list of sponsors for  
International Women's Day. More join us each day.  

Emma Willard Task Force  
Chrysalis Women's Center  
Gold Flower Newspaper  
Lawyers Guild - TC Chapter  
Women's Law School Caucus  
New American Movement  
Twin Cities Women's Union  
International Committee  
Elizabeth Blackwell Women's Health Center  
Women's Advocates  
Minnesota Women's Center  
St. Paul YWCA  
Socialist Workers Party  
Young Socialist Alliance  
Young Workers Liberation League  
Lesbian Resource Center  
Sagaris  
Committee of Labor Union Women  
Macalester Feminists