The ARA petition campaign  
is a major project of WONAAC  
as it relates directly to  
our demand to repeal all  
abortion laws. The peti-  
tion campaign offers great  
opportunities to the abor-  
tion repeal movement by not  
only providing strong proof  
of the support of our de-  
mands but also by intro-  
ducing women to WONAAC and  
encouraging them to acti-  
vities by getting signatures.  

New York Congresswoman  
Bella Abzug introduced the  
bill into Congress in May of  
1972, and she has called for  
hearings to get the bill  
out of the House Judiciary  
Committee and onto the  
floor. Abzug was re-elected  
on Nov. 7 and will continue  
the fight when Congress  
reopens in January. Our  
strong, visible petition  
campaign on both a national  
and local level will give  
credence and support for  
the Abortion Rights Act  
of 1972.  

Locally, the Minnesota  
Women's Abortion Action  
Coalition is planning to  
collect 25,000 of the  
million needed signatures.  

At this point, we have only  
5,000, and need lots of help  
to reach our goal. Petition-  
ing can be done anywhere,  
in neighborhoods, local  
shopping areas, downtown,  
schools, etc.-- the poss-  
ibilities are endless.  

MWAAC meets every Tuesday  
at 7:30 p.m. Everyone is  
welcome. We meet at the Old  
Millsbury Library, 100 Uni-  
versity Ave S. Our phone  
number is 341-3844. Abortion  
is a woman's right to choose;  
join us to help win this  
struggle.  

Please put me on your  
mailing list and send me more  
information on MWAAC.  
Enclosed is a donation  
to help MWAAC continue the  

IN THE BELIEF THAT ABORTION  

is a woman's right to choose,  
we, the undersigned residents of the United States of America, call upon  
Congress to enact the Abortion Rights Act of 1972.  

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress  
assembled, that  

(a) The Congress finds and declares that  

(1) the constitutional right of privacy, embodied in the First, Third, Fourth, Fifth, and Ninth Amend-  
ments to the Constitution of the United States, and applicable to the States through the due process clause  
of the Fourteenth Amendment thereto, includes the right of any female to terminate a pregnancy that she  
does not wish to continue;  

(2) this right is a fundamental and inherent right, and is likewise not subject to infringement by the  
United States or by several States by virtue of the due process clause of the Fifth Amendment to the Con-  
stitution of the United States and the due process and equal protection clauses of the Fourteenth Amend-  
ment thereto;  

(3) there is no countervailing federal, State, or public interest of a compelling or other nature suf-  
ficient to justify the infringement of this right by the United States or any State.  

(b) In order to secure the constitutional rights set forth in subsection (a) and this subsection, and in  
the exercise of its power to enforce the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments to the Constitution of the United  
States, the Congress declares that it is necessary to prohibit the United States and the several States from  
enacting or enforcing any law, State constitutional provision, regulation, policy or other device which  
infringes upon the said right in any way, or which deprives any female of access to adequate medical  
assistance in the exercise of such right.  

SEC. 2. Neither the United States nor any State shall enact or enforce any law, State constitutional  
provision, regulation, policy, or other device which infringes the right of any female to terminate a preg-  
nancy that she does not wish to continue, or which deprives any female of access to adequate medical  
assistance in the exercise of such right.  

SEC. 3. Notwithstanding the amount in controversy, and notwithstanding the provisions of section 2283  
of title 28, United States Code, or any successor provision thereto, the district courts of the United States  
shall have jurisdiction over actions brought to enforce the provisions of this Act; including but not limited  
to jurisdiction to grant injunctive relief to enforce the provisions of this Act.  

SEC. 4. As used in this Act, the term "State” means any of the several States of the United States, the  
District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and the territories and possessions of the United  
States.  

SEC. 5. If any provision of this Act or the application of any provision thereof to any person or cir-  
cumstance is judicially determined to be invalid, the remainder of this Act or the application of such provi-  
sion to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected by such determination.  

SEC. 6. This Act may be cited as the "Abortion Rights Act of 1972.”  

Name Address  

Return completed petitions to: Minnesota Women's Abortion  
Action Coalition, 100 University S. Mpls., Minn. 55414  
(612) 341-3844