| Se ee ee

LETTERS from our READERS con’t

I feel now that I saw and went through the history of the present day feminist movement in a two hour period—a microcosmic time. I have drawn some conclusions from that experience, and these conclusions surprise me.

When I walked into the room I felt excited and pleased to see all those fine women—a drama presentation was going on. I barely noticed the few men in the audience. I am still constantly elated at the way women can run things themselves! Stage 1—showed by the presence of strong women.

But as the morning wore on, I began to feel slightly uneasy at the presence of men.

When one of them asked the panelists to come on and tell us about your personal experiences, I felt angry and worried. This led me to a separatist stage—Stage 2: Why don't all these damn men get the hell out? A woman stood up and berated the panelists for letting men in on their rape experiences.

For a moment I agreed with her. I felt angry at all men. After all, if we were all potential rape victims, weren't they all potential rapists?

Then Vicki, one of the panelists, spoke to the men, and said, essentially—"I'm glad you're here. If you want to help, that's great. I admire you for putting yourself on the line." Vicki had been raped only one week previous to the Speak Out. To me she personified a third stage—strength so great that it didn't matter that men were there—women were running the show. If some men came to set up their own men's groups or help on specific details with women, that was fine. If men came as voyeurs, with sick minds who enjoyed rape stories, that was their problem—not everyone else's who was there to support and work.

I believe there are times for separatism—women's support groups, classes where only women are allowed, lesbian support groups, rap sessions, or simply at times when the women involved feel uncomfortable with men present. I also feel that it is because of such separatist experiences that women develop and maintain the strength to speak out and organize mixed groups. We need both kinds of groups. We do not need to make men feel “afraid to speak," as one man said at the Speak Out. If we do this, make men afraid, aren't we participating in macho tactics? Putting people down, oppressing them, intimidating them?

Because of the differing reactions to my rape experience by those around me, I cannot make generalizations. Some men were extremely crude, others extremely sensitive—and the same goes for my women friends. Thus, I do feel that men can work with and participate in action to change the way rape is handled in this country. I do not believe they should be a part of other kinds of rape groups: rap sessions, telephone answering services, etc.

I feel the women's movement can encompass all three stages in its experience—awe and joy in the sheer strength of emerging women running the show, separatism, and acceptance of men at times when we can participate together in liberation. There are days when I still want to stay in Stage 2 and deny men any access to women's activities, simply because he is a man. However, I don't feel this is a place to stop. And, like I said, this conclusion surprises me.

Name withheld

CHINA cont from pg. 11

Bibliography:

Ch'iu Chai and Winberg Chai, The Changing Society of China, Mentor Books, New York, 1969.

Mao Tse-Tung Anthology, ed. Anne Fremantle, Mentor Books, N. Y. 1962.

Mao Tse-tung, "On the Revolutionary 'Three 7. one' Combination", Foreign Language Press, 1968.

Mao Tse-tung, "On the Question of Agricultural Co-operation,” Foreign Language Press, 194.

Monthly Review: May, 1973, "China," ". and D. Hunter gone, 1972, “Western China, = Mos we Macciocchi.

September, 1973, "China," I. Wallerstein.

New Women in New China, Foreign Language Press, Peking, 1972.

Women, Culture and Society, ed. Michelle Rosaldo and Louise Lamphere, Stanford U Press, Stanford, Conn. 1974.

** (Note from G.F.—Sidel's book tells of many specific rights and benefits Chinese women have won that have served to free them from their former restrictions.)

SELF DEFENSE KARATE

taught by and for

G

Meechee ee

1809 E. LAKE St.

Mpls., Mn. 

qiL- 3234 Do Yourself a favor!

Mardi Steinau * 3515 Fremont Ave. S. © Mpls., Mn. 55408

typesetting .. printing E- layout & design

822-4637

errr