12

Women Behind Bars... “The physical institution you can cope with... :
The psychological you cannot...”

Marilyn: The worst aspect is the dehumanizing, the
reducing of you as a person, making you into a thing,
stereotyping you and refusing to see you as you are.
For instance, the greatest humiliation that I've ever
seen bestowed upon a woman is when a woman has to walk
up to a correctional guard, which is a woman, and ask
her for a sanitary napkin or to ask her permission to
take a douche, or to ask her permission to go to the
bathroom. The way that they refuse to let you be a
full-grown woman; the way they always refer to you as
a girl; the way they never give you a choice of any-
thing—you do it my way and that's all there is to it.
The way they refuse to give you an explanation for

doing certain things. It's like you don't have any mind.

I think the greatest anger comes out of that. The phy-
sical institution you can cope with. The psychological
institution you cannot cope with. There's so much anger
and bitterness out of that. Anger and bitterness over
how they pit you one against each other, how they pit
the Blacks against the Whites, or Whites against Chi-

nese psychologically because there are a lot of cam-
eras and mikes hidden all through the place, and we
would have the feeling of being doubly paranoid. We
would lose in so many ways it wasn't funny. Beyond
that there was great fear among the gay members of the
population because of certain staff members who open-

ly admitted what they would do to gay people once
they got there. There was a plan to separate us and
classify us as young aggressives, young passives, and
gays.

We had some law students coming down teaching us
law. Together we came up with approximately 150 things
that we would suffer if we were removed from the en-
vironment we were in. We got the support of the com-
munity behind us: the Ecumenical Women's Center, the
Chicago Women's Prison Project, Chicago Women's Lib-
eration Union, Rising Up Angry, other groups, and we
filed a federal lawsuit against the head of the De-
partment of Corrections. And we won. They stopped the
move. It's the first time in the history of this country that a class action suit like that has ever
been won.

The most effective tactic in our organizing was
to find people who had nothing to lose. When I say
that, I mean if a person was there doing a year, they
wouldn't be the healthiest person to get involved as
a leader, because you've got women down there doing for
forty to a hundred years and they're not going to re-
spect a person who's only going to be there a year.
It pays to get people who don't mind saying what's
on their mind, people who are aggressive. It also
pays to get people who are repeaters, because they
tend to say, "well, I may have to come back, and I
want the situation to be better." Strangely enough,
it's best to get everybody who the administration
considers to be trouble-makers.

WHAT INCIDENTS AFFECTED YOU MOST?

Tig: You get put into segregation for damn near nothing.
I went to segregation at one point for wearing a hat—
you're not supposed to wear a hat; you could be carry-
ing something. They went to segregation for supposedly
threatening guards with abusive language, just a bunch
of different things. Sometimes the medicine cart, where
they keep the diagnostic medication, Thorazine, Mel-
laril, all designed to keep you doped up, would get
ripped off. And if they found out, you definitely went
into segregation. Actually that was more of a slap on
the hand type of thing, because if you really wanted the
medication, they'd give it to you. They'll give you as
much as you want.

Joanne: They got people walking around CIW so
loaded that they don't know their hand from a hole
in the ground.

WHAT IS YOUR PERSPECTIVE ON IN-PRISON
ORGANIZING TACTICS, STRATEGIES, AND
PROBLEMS?

Joanne: As far as I was concerned, the most ef-
fective tactics were speaking up, speaking out, try-
ing to educate the people to what was really happen-
ing to us. Because the worst thing that happens in
women's prisons is that women don't know that they're
being abused. California has a hell of a labor ex-
ploitation; the average woman in the penitentiary
doesn't realize that they're making millions off of
our labor and paying us 40 cents an hour, 80 cents an
hour. No one ever questions the fact that these people
who are “experts in human behavior” are middle class,
White, retired people who have no idea, no thought
whatsoever of our background and our lifestyle. They
never question any of the policies, they never question
any of the illegal things, and it's all a matter,
I think, of making people aware of what's happening.

Marilyn: In Illinois, I don't know if you're a-
ware of one thing we're organizing behind, and it was
a first. The Department of Corrections with their
sexist policy decided to ship the women out of Dwight
and turn it into an all-male institution. That meant
women would be shipped to the Cook County Jail's new
complex or Vienna State Correctional Center, which is
an all-male institution 350 miles from Chicago. We
resented being sent to Cook County Jail, for a num-
ber of reasons. We were all gonna have to be re-class-
ified. Most of the women had worked themselves up to
minimum security status, and they would lose that
status because the whole institution is a maximum se-
curity institution. We would lose a lot of physical
privileges that we had worked hard to get. We would

WHAT CAN OUTSIDE SUPPORT GROUPS DO?

Ila: One of the best things they can do is fight
hard to continue to exist. They have access to the
jail so that they can carry a lot of information in
and people cannot be cut off from the outside world.
I think the next most important thing is to make sure
that there are other people that they talk to on the
outside, get those people interested in what's hap-
pening to those women in jail so that there's even
more pressure put on the prison system and the court
system to keep those people coming in and out of
there.

The cadre of people who go in and out of prison
can be cut off at any point. I mean passes and stuff
can be taken away, but what happens when you have
this mass of people who are beating down the prison
door, demanding to have these people let back into
the prison, demanding to know what's going on inside.

Joanne: I think the most important ways for people
outside to support women inside are writing about
them or helping them organize on the inside, contact-
ing them, telling it like it is.

CONT. PG. 13...