LESBIAN CENTER OPENS

Gay women in the Twin Cities area will be
opening a Lesbian Resource Center in Minnea-
polis this month to better serve the speci-
fic needs of lesbians here. We have found
that Gay House, due to its male orientation,
and existing women's groups, due to their
straight orientation, have given us secon-
dary, if any, consideration. This has re-
sulted in having to fight a sense of invisi-
bility for years. We are now coming out
completely, affirming that we are here and
that we can no longer be ignored.

The center will serve several purposes,
with the goal of building a lesbian communi-
ty in the area. A small but exclusive li-
brary exists which will eventually contain
all periodicals and books concerning les-
bians. There will be a lounge to allow wo-
men to drop in, look at the literature and
meet other women. One important function
will be that of acting as a clearinghouse
and facilitator for any groups, activities
or actions which women want to do - provi-
ding a place to meet and find other women
who are also interested. We will also be in
contact with other gay women's organizations
across the country to provide an exchange of
ideas and support.

The storefront we have found is at 710 W.
22nd St. (just west of Lyndale), but it will
not be vacant until December 18. At that
time we will be moving in, painting and
shelf building. Soon after that we will be
in full operation. Gay women in the area
who have ideas, want to see what is happen-
ing or just want to drop in should come by
then. For a start our hours will be 12-9,
Tuesday thru Saturday. And keep looking in
Gold Flower for further specific information,
including our phone number.

j ~~
j LADIES ALMANACK

written and illustrated by

DJUNA BARNES

“is funny...trenchant. It has too long been one of the
very rarest ‘items’ of modern literature.”— Kenneth Rev-
roth, A literary masterpiece “which all Ladies should
carry about with them, as the Priest his Breviary, as the
Cook his Recipes, as the Doctor his Physic, as the Bride
her Fears, and as the Lion his Roar.”

Privately printed in Paris 44 years ago, this fac-
simile edition of a famed collector's item is a whimsical,
tongue-in-cheek satire on the subject of women in love
with other women.

Though Miss Barnes regards the book affectionately
as a simple piece of fun, in no way to be considered
among her serious works, it clearly bears the stamp of
her inimitable genius.

i -# Harper & Row

$5.95 at bookstores

gay women

% Groups begin Sunday, Jan.

flashes of lesbos on your mind?
coming out?

As gay sisters we're all coming out--
it's a continual growing process........
A group of sisters is gathering

each Sunday to share their
beings: to rap about feelings
for one another--what it means
to commit ourselves to women--
sharing joys and hassles--
exploring sexual and emotional
needs......

17 -at-6 p.m.
We're at 2314 Elliot Ave. So., Mpls. For
* more info: Gay Community Services, Box
3592, Upper Nicollet Station, Mpls. 55403
or Karen, 335-4813; Cindy, 332-7855.

Ba P.S. Got a gay brother? There's a group
for him too. Same time and place.

—90-B? —89 — 9 — 9 — 999 —#
Lesbian Mothers

A group for Lesbian mothers is beginning.
The group is being formed by those Les-
bians whose particular needs haven't been
met in either the women's movement or the
gay movement.

I don't have children - I am a Lesbian -
that does not qualify me to adequately
communicate the special problems and needs
of these sisters whose existence is doubly
oppressed - that of being a Lesbian and a
mother. I can state some realities which
these women face, but the frustrations,
struggles, and experiences they must cope
with daily can only be expressed by them-

selves.
Some realities: The courts which too often

rip off their children because these women
love women; the mental health profession
with the "expertise" to label Lesbians as
"unfit mothers", again because we are
committed to and love women; the suffering
the children of gays receive at the hands

of the straight world; the pressures to con-
ceal one's identity from friends, family,
employers, and children; the rejection from
other Lesbians without children; the myth

of motherhood which only perpetuates the
sacrificial rite of leading a double or even
triple life; economic survival in a society
which discriminates against single women/mothers and
twice over those who love another of the
same sex; the isolation and lack of models
for those who reject the hetero-nuclear
family; and the anguish, fears, guilt, and
pressures which these women share.

Because of these conditions, a need has been
expressed by Lesbians with children to get
together, discuss problems, and lend one
another support. The group's direction is
its own--whether political, social, sup-
portive, or any combination, it will be a
beginning.

Depending on numbers, two groups are
forming--Mondays at 4 p.m. and Tuesdays at
7 p.m. Groups start the second week of
January and, of course, children are more
than welcome.

For more information, contact:
Gay Community Services, Box 3592, Upper Nicollet
Station, Mpls. 55403; or Karen, 335-4813,
or Cindy, 332-7855.