4

= APE-= TWO EXPERIENCES

The names of the people are not used to protect

the women, the experiences are true.

Before I was raped, I felt a woman should always
report a rape. I didn't have any fear, it couldn't
happen to me attitude. I was naive, I didn't compre-
hend the violence of the world. Rape was a very
distant act.

I was around 17 when the rape took place. I was
going out with P, going over to his apt. I knew he
was violent, never thinking he would turn his vio-
lence on me.

I went over to his apt., we were sitting around
getting high. I remember looking around and feel-
ing a little strange being the only woman in the
room. P wanted to talk in his bedroom, the two of
us went in. He started telling me I had lied to
him about my car. He slapped me and said to take
my clothes off. I told him I had my period and
didn't want to sleep with him. I was frightened;
when he said he'd take my clothes off, I undressed.
I didn't think of rape; it never entered my mind.

P opened the door and said come in. Around 12
men walked in; P turned the lights off and asked who
wanted to be first. I tried to get up, I started
pleading; some of the men took belts and tied my
arms down. I knew what was happening but that it was
happening to me was difficult to realize. The rape
and sodomy were singular and multiple. I had no re-
sponse; one man told me if I didn’t start moving,
they would kill me - I started.

One man asked, “Don’t you enjoy this? I want you
to enjoy this.” Another man was almost gentle; I
felt he was crazier than the others, acting as if we
were lovers. I did appreciate his gentleness. One
man did not participate; he came into the room and
talked. I tried to make him realize I was a human
being, that I wasn't bad. I still hated him for not
stopping the rape.

P had stayed out of the room; when he came back
he had a flashlight. They started inspecting me.
They were talking about me as if I was cattle. I
felt like a piece of beef. They talked as if I was
not there.

I would do anything to get out alive. Two men
wanted to be alone with me. They locked the door;

I was not that frightened - the others were out,
they could not get in. One of the men got on top
of me; he put his penis in my mouth, I couldn't
breathe, I kept choking. I kept trying not to throw
up. When I would stop, he would get extremely
violent. He started choking me with his hands. His
eyes were crazy; he was going to kill me. The other
man pulled him off; I believe if it hadn't been for
him I would be dead.

After they left, P came in; he said he had run a
bath for me. While I was taking the bath, he told
me he had done it because I had lied. He acted as
if nothing had happened. If I had been a good woman
this would not have happened.

A woman friend of mine was outside honking; she
had come to pick me up. P told me I better not tell
anyone; he knew where I lived, and he would kill me.
We went into the living room; the men were sitting
around. P told me to thank everyone for the enjoy-
able evening. I looked at P's face and saw the anger
in him - I thanked everyone. As I was leaving I
heard them talking - unbelievable she can walk; they
were calm, as if nothing had happened.

I got in the car and said nothing. I had to give
one of the men a ride home. After everyone was drop-
ped off, I went home. I took a bath and brushed my
teeth around 50 times. I wanted to wash everything
away. I went right to sleep. Looking back I find
it hard to believe I could sleep.

told to Mickey Connor

TZ

LEARN
SELF

DEFENSE

The next morning I was physically and emotionally
sick. Thoughts raced through my mind - I'd handle it
myself - I must keep myself together - my family
must not find out. I was frightened to tell the
police; I knew I'd get killed. If P could get 12
men to rape me, he could get someone to kill me.

I was out in the yard when I saw P with 5 men
coming toward me. I'm not sure if these men par-
ticipated; the room had been dark, I didn't really
look at any of them. I didn't want to see. P told
me if I had been a good woman it wouldn't have hap-
pened. The other men started talking with me. P
said that I was his woman and not to touch me.

I saw P again because I was frightened not to.

I tried to ease out of his life; I tried not to make
him angry. I went to college in another town; that
ended the relationship.

After the rape I felt I had to go. I had known
P was violent; I felt, and at times still do, that
I put myself in a position to be raped.

I found out how sick and violent the world was; I
was brought up to believe otherwise. I will not go
out at night alone; dark hallways frighten me. I
feel if I think about the rape a lot I'll crack up.
I am careful about people; I trust very few men.
Women are so vulnerable when they can't protect
themselves. I blame myself for not going to the
police. I feel I let other women down - those men
could rape again. When you're frightened to go to
the police, who can you go to? It shows how men con-
trol and how women are controlled.

I find men can't understand about rape; I feel
because of their strength. Men ask why did or do
you let it happen? I feel one side of them wants
to be compassionate; the other side believes the
woman wanted it done. As the old saying goes - Women

can't be raped. I believe society has done this to
men.

Before I was raped, I felt a woman should report
a rape. I knew if I ever were raped, I would not.
The idea of my sexuality being made public frightened
me. I wanted the world to believe I was asexual; at
the time that is what I felt nice girls were. The
idea that it was wrong never entered my mind.

I was around 19 or 20 when I was raped. I had
gone over to see a woman friend. We went out for a
few drinks, came back and went to a party upstairs.
During the party a man asked me if I wanted to pick
up some records. His house was only a short walk.

I said ok; the idea was not frightening. We had
walked about two houses down when I changed my mind.
I was about to turn when another man appeared. I
think he had been waiting, setting a small trap. I
didn't believe they would hurt me; I tried talking

to them, taking a step or so backwards. One of the
men grabbed my arm and twisted it in back of me. They
had a gun; they told me if I started screaming, I'd
either get a broken arm or get killed. We walked to
his house; there were about 6 or 7 men waiting. I
had never seen any of them. X took me to his bedroom
and closed the door. He told me to take my dress off.
I said no. He looked at me calmly and said either
take it off or I will rip it off; he then grabbed at
my dress. I undressed; I remember thinking if I can
escape, I can't run naked. He went out and started
talking with the other men. He came back and told me
if I did what he said, he wouldn't let the others
have me. At first I started pleading; he pushed me
down and put his leg around my neck and started chok-

ing me. Continued on page 5