CHRYSALIS: A

Chrysalis means the cocoon from which the matured
butterfly emerges. A beautiful and fitting metaphor
for women as they emerge and grow into the beings
they are capable of becoming. But not without pain.
Chrysalis is there to serve such women. Women helping
women in the ongoing process of becoming.

Chrysalis has three components: Women's Advocacy
Service, the Chemical Dependency Unit, and one yet to
be fully developed, Resource-Educational.

WHEN YOU NEED A FRIEND

Are you having hassles with the welfare department?
Or your landlord? Or do you want a referral to a
good, non-sexist ob-gyn? Or a feminist therapist who
isn't going to tell you to "adjust" to a sick society?
The Women's Advocacy Service can help you. This
branch of Chrysalis is both referral and direct ser-
vice. The women are trained volunteers who put in
about four hours a week. They provide help with day-
to-day problems.

The Women's Advocacy Service welcomes women to be-
come advocates through the intensive workshops they
offer. Volunteers will be trained by staff and re-
source people. The Advocacy Service phone number
is 871-2603. Ask for Karen or Rosie.

THE PAIN OF LIMBO

The Chemical Dependency Unit of Chrysalis is impres-
sive. Nancy Parlin explained that many of the women
whom they see have become chemically dependent as a
direct result of other problems such as separation,
divorce, or the trauma of growing feminist awareness
and its concomitant feelings of floating in an alien
world. The chemical takes on meaning when the arti-
ficiality of woman's prescribed roles is realized and
no longer carries any meaning. This unit aids with
support groups, AA groups, and various counseling
services.

Ms. Parlin says that many of the women who come in
feel they are trapped, that there are no alternatives.
The women at the Chemical Dependency Unit try to help
them see that there are choices, to give them the emotional
support they so desperately need and cannot get from
other sources. (The AA groups are composed of mem-
bers who may be dependent on chemicals other than
alcohol. One need not be chemically dependent to be
part of a support group.)

WOMEN HELPING WOMEN

The AA groups are all women, for very good reasons.
In mixed AA groups, men tend to disregard what women
say and how they feel--again, women aren't taken as
seriously as men. Moreover, in an all-women group,
there is no necessity to play the games men want us to
play. No pressure to smile pretty and shut up, or to
play to the male ego. Another advantage is that women
are more likely to come out from behind those closed
doors that hide so many chemically dependent women be-
cause it isn't socially acceptable for women to be
alcoholic--people expect it more from men, which ex-
plains the predominance of males in AA membership.

The women who have been in both types of groups say
that they receive far more help in the all-women
groups.

Counseling is done on a one-to-one basis as well as
in groups. Referrals are made by such agencies as
St. Mary's Alcoholic Division, former members, walk-in
and neighborhood counseling services, and Northwestern
Hospital.

There are several support groups at present (see the
listings of events happening at Chrysalis in this
issue). Ms. Parlin told me that she sees many suburb-
an women who find themselves in tears they can't
explain. They have nice homes, children, husbands who
provide for them--they should be happy, but they're
not. Many do not have a feminist awareness when they
come into support groups, but develop it within the
group. As any feminist knows, when a woman realizes
her life is not fulfilled by the medicine society
prescribes, she feels at first that there must be
something wrong with her. One of the best supports
a women's group can offer is to assure members that
they're not "crazy"--only the demands made on them are
crazy.

If you (or a friend) feel you need help from this arm
of Chrysalis, contact Nancy Parlin, Jeanne Young,
Nancy Collins-Jabis, or Marcia Thompson (phone 871-
0118).

WOMAN POWER IN CLASS ACTION

The Resource-Educational part of Chrysalis will be to
know what's going on and to coordinate programs in
order to prevent duplication, to plan areas that are
needed, such as class advocacy. There are whole areas
in which women are discriminated against. These call
for class action so that whole groups can accomplish
what individuals have struggled for for so long. For
example, women have to hire lawyers and go back into
court to collect child support payments which were
already decreed by the court--why should they have to
do battle in court when, supposedly, the courts have
already awarded them support? On top of that, these
are the women who can least afford an attorney and
court costs. Other areas of concern would be corpor-
ate discrimination and unfair laws and regulations.
Karen Starr will be coordinator of this part of
Chrysalis.

COLLECTIVE POWER WITHOUT MACHO

Chrysalis operates as a collective, and is one more
example of how an agency can be successful without
the usual hierarchical structure of power. There are
several "energy units" such as personnel, planning,
accountability, community funding, legal accountabil-
ity, resources, outreach, consultants, and so on. A
representative from each meets once a month as a
group to bring information together. When the women
are paid--when funding is available, which is, as
usual, not as it should be--all are paid the same
wage regardless of function.

Some of the programs going on at Chrysalis are facili-
tator training (for support groups), sex-role stereo-
typing workshops, and assertiveness training, and are
open to anyone who is interested. There are classes
in Yoga and one called Breaking Loose. For a complete
listing, see the Chrysalis listing facing the calendar
page.

Chrysalis will hold an open house on February 14 from
3:00 to 8:00 p.m. "If you are curious, seek involve-
ment, feel gregarious," plan to go. Staff and volun-
teers will be there to chat with you and explain more
about Chrysalis. If you wish to help in planning the
open house, call 871-0018.

WOMEN'S NETWORK PROGRESS REPORT

The Women's Network has filed its Articles of
Incorporation and passed its By-Laws and is now able
to officially begin business. The office is located
at 2104 Stevens in Minneapolis.

A questionnaire has been prepared which will be
sent to all the women's organizations on the Network
list. Any organization wishing to receive the ques-
tionnaire but not sure if it is on the list may send
the following information to Women's Network, 2104
Stevens Avenue, Minneapolis, MN 55404; Name of or-
ganization, current mailing address and name and tele-
phone of contact person who would be willing to see
that the questionnaire is answered. All organizations
previously contacted by Network will receive the ques-
tionnaire. By completing and returning the question-
naire, organizations can greatly facilitate the infor-
mation gathering aspect of our work.

Network's first monthly meeting will be held at
7:30 on Sunday, February 23 at 2104 Stevens. Come and
hear what we've accomplished and help us get off to a
rousing start.