RAPE, cont'd.

"One of the most curious facts in the study of sexual

assaults is that the mothers and/or wives of many con

victed rapists have been characterized as "seductive
and rejecting". Is this not, however, what most wom-
en are taught to be? Are we not entreated again and
again to make ourselves attractive but cautioned at
every turn, always, always, to remain "good girls"?

“Women are conditioned to be helpless property re-
quiring the protection of a male owner. We find

John Kerner implying that the home is the right place
for the woman, and that she may be raped because she
leaves it... ." Some way to keep us in our place,
huh? One of the ploys used to excuse men from rape
is the "uncontrollable sex button" they're supposed
to have. But what, then, of the many married men who
have sex at their disposal (the law says men can't be

accused of raping their wives--thus, there is nothing

to stop them from having their way with her, short of
an ax murder.)

In her "Rape Bibliography" Joan Matthews gives in-
sight about why rape benefits all men. "Every man,
every husband may not be a rapist, but all of them
benefit from the existence of rape in their daily
struggle to subjugate women, physically and psycholo-
gically. By minimizing its importance, blaming women
for it, or even denying that there is such a thing,
men permit rape to continue, and all of them continue
to benefit from the fear it casts over all women, a
fear that inhibits the growth of our independence."

The notes alone in the section on "Legal Aspects”
will be enough to send you into orbit. Documented
cases, judges' dicta, etc., all with an eye toward

the woman victim as the guilty party, serve up one
of the tastiest gourmet dishes (from a sexist point
of view) I've ever seen!

BEYOND PISTOLS AND KARATE

Rape is not a natural act, but a learned response;
while we need to help women through the traumatic
aftermath, we need to get at the root--woman hatred.
“Feminist Action” deals with both individual and co-
operative efforts. Another important section deals
with a nasty problem Third World women face, espec-
ially black women. The black man has been mytholo-
gized into a "natural-born rapist", all very handy
for the white male rapist. Action against black men
who do rape may perpetuate the myth, though white men
are equally guilty. Thus the black woman is caught
in the double bind of racism/sexism, a bind the white
man has developed for his own vested interests. "Fem-
inist Action" deals with many steps women can take
such as C-R groups, self-defense, political action.
There are also good sections on rape crisis centers,
medical and police policies, and the law, and an
appendix with many sources for further study.

AN END TO RAPE
The concluding statement of the psychology of rape
speaks to the monumental task of eliminating rape

from taking place at all:

"In a sense, rape is not a reformist but a revolu-
tionary issue because our ultimate goal is to elimi-
nate rape and that goal cannot be achieved without

a revolutionary transformation of our society. It
means a transformation of the family, of the econo-
mic system and the psychology of men and women so
that sexual exploitation along with economic exploi-
tation becomes impossible and even unimaginable. We
cannot achieve this goal unless we continue as a
movement to make increasing demands on the social
system, to remain critical of minor reforms because
they are minor reforms, and to constantly raise new
issues that expose the sexism that pervades our
lives. . . . We have passed beyond the state where we
have discovered that rape affects all our lives, we
must now go on to eliminate it.”

Rape offers insight into what it is that causes men
to rape women, whether they do it with mindless im-
punity or subsequent remorse, and whether the rape

consists of a mind screw, a violent physical aggres-
sion, or both. It is more than a sexual act. It is
sexism at its most blatant, woman's image as it is

projected by a sick society--and centuries old!

“4

women’s RIGHT to
Choose

The Women's Right to Choose had its first meeting on
April 15 and began its plan of action. Our purpose
is to get people who support the 1973 Supreme Court
Decision on abortion to write their Congresspeople.
If a twenty-eighth amendment to the Constitution is
passed, abortion for any reason will be considered
murder, and the fetus upon conception will be given
full legal status as a citizen--something women don't
even have as yet! If we are to retain our right to
choose, we will have to continue to work for it.

Anyone interested may still join. For information
call Mary Hastings at 378-1848 or Char Masterman at
374-4486. Contributions of any amount are welcome.
Thus far we have received $6.00 and spent $11.00.
Mail contributions to Women's Right to Choose,

2324 Girard Avenue S., Mpls. 55405.

We do have one good piece of news. The Bartlett
amendment to S. 66 Nurse Training Act was tabled.

What this means is that this attempt to prohibit
federal funds being used for abortion, which is both
unconstitutional and discriminatory to poor women,

has failed and will be followed by other attempts.

For the anti people have tried this ploy over 200
times, and have been successful in getting prohibitive
legislation passed in nineteen states. We need to
keep the pressure on as long as they do.

*Women's Right to Choose is independent of GOLD
FLOWER Newspaper.

keep informed!
As of now, there are rumbles of anti-abortion
legislation the anti people are trying to
push through the legislature at the eleventh
hour of its session. You may keep informed
as to what, if any, legislation on this and
any other issue is coming before the house
and senate (Minnesota) by calling the follow-
ing numbers: House, 296-6646, and Senate,
296-2887. Just ask if there are any bills
being considered on the issue you are con-
cerned about. To find out in a hurry which
district you are in, call 296-2146, give your
address, and you will be informed about the
number of your district, your senator, and
your representative.