10

How to Have Intercourse...
Without Getting Screwed

Part V: Disease

Venereal Diseases

A venereal disease is one that is transmit-
ted only through sexual contact, genital,
oral, or anal. Both major types, syphilis
and gonorrhea, can be cured easily if treated
in the early stages, but both can result in
permanent disability or death if untreated.

SYPHILIS

Symptoms: A symptom of the primary, or
first, stage of syphilis is the appearance of
a small sore or "chancre" on either the geni-
tal area or the anus, or even on lips, tongue,
and fingers. It appears from ten days to
three months after exposure to the disease
and may disappear without treatment after a
few days. This does not mean that the disease
has gone away; it has entered a secondary
stage, where it is highly contagious and can
do crippling damage to the body. In the sec-
ondary stage, symptoms include rashes, sore
throat, sore joints, headache, fever, and en-
larged glands. These symptoms may come and
go over a period of years. These symptoms
also eventually will disappear without treat-
ment. In the final stage of the disease, no
visible symptoms exist. However, untreated
syphilis will persist and ultimately can lead
to blindness, insanity, paralysis, heart dis-
ease, or death. A pregnant woman who has
syphilis can pass it on to newborn children,
who may be stillborn or blind.

Diagnosis and treatment: Certain diagnosis
can only be made through blood tests. These
are available without charge through public
health agencies in Seattle and most other
large cities. Through the use of penicillin,
syphilis can be successfully treated in its
early stages, and in the later stages, the
destructive processes can be stopped by treat-
ment.

GONORRHEA

Symptoms: Gonorrhea ("the clap") is usually
limited to the genitourinary organs, and it
is in these organs that the symptoms appear.
Female symptoms include pain upon urination,
inflammation of the rectum, swollen glands in
the genital area, and vaginal discharge.

More serious symptoms may occur, such as in-
flammation of the reproductive organs. How-
ever, a woman may have no symptoms at all,
except for slight discomfort while urinating,
and still be a highly contagious carrier of
the disease. The symptoms in males are more
obvious and include a burning sensation during
urination and a discharge of yellow pus. Fur-
ther complications include bladder infections
and a hard, tender swelling in the scrotum.

In both males and females, the untreated dis-
ease can lead to peritonitis, sterility, ar-
thritis, or irritation of the joints, and it
can affect the heart. Women can experience
additional complications that include a gen-
eralized infection of the uterus and ovarian
tubes called pelvic inflammatory disease.

This is associated with pain, fever, and ab-
cesses in the tubes, sometimes known as "pus
tubes."

Diagnosis and treatment: Gonorrhea is
usually diagnosed by use of laboratory tests
performed on discharge from infected organs.
Treatment at an early stage can cure the in-
fection. Women who are sexually active should
request an intracervical smear test for
gonorrhea at the same time they have a Pap
smear test.

PROTECTION FROM VENEREAL DISEASES

Venereal diseases are highly contagious and
highly dangerous. The only device that pro-
tects against venereal diseases is the condom,
and this does not offer complete protection!
Previous successful treatment for a venereal
disease is no protection against reinfection.
Since no immunity develops, people can be re-
infected. The only reliable protection
against a disabling venereal disease is infor-
mation and prompt treatment when symptoms are
present.

Although the symptoms of syphilis and gonor-
rhea have been described above, it is impos-
sible to diagnose oneself. Laboratory tests
are necessary. If you have any symptoms or
have reason to believe that you have been ex-
posed to venereal disease, see one of the

“How to Have Intercourse...Without
Getting Screwed" was published by the
ASUW Women's Commission in Seattle, Wash-
ington, in January 1972. The second

printing was funded by the Graduate and
Professional Student Senate and by the
Associated Students of the University of
Washington. Authors are Lynn K. Hansen,
Barbara Reskin, and Diana Gray.

public health agencies available in this
city, or see your private physician.

Because of the severity of venereal disease
epidemics in some cities and because of its
destructive potential, we react to the very
term "venereal disease" with fear and dis-
taste. And we may associate the disease with
people who are "unclean," "unhealthy," or
"promiscuous." Venereal disease can strike
any sexually active individual. The only
stigma associated with venereal disease falls
on those who allow it to go untreated, there-
by endangering themselves, sexual partners,
and yet-unborn children.

A final note: If you acquire a venereal
disease, be sure to inform your sexual part-
ner so that he or she can obtain treatment.

Infections
VAGINITIS

Vaginitis is any inflammation of the vagina—
inflammation due to irritation, to infection,
or to some process that disturbs normal phy-
siology. Anything which interferes with the
protective mechanism normally present in the
vagina causes vaginitis.

The most common complaints associated with
vaginitis are pain, vaginal discharge, itch-
ing, and burning.

VAGINAL DISCHARGE

Some vaginal discharge is normal. This
normal discharge may increase with the use of
the birth-control pill, especially sequen-
tials, and with emotional stress. However,
vaginal discharge also may be caused by in-
fection or chemical or mechanical irritation.
These are listed below.

Infections that cause vaginal discharge:
gonorrhea, trichomonas, monilia, mycoplasma,
and mixed infections.

Chemical and mechanical irritants that cause
vaginal discharge: douches, if too often or
too strong; feminine hygiene sprays; foams,
vaginal creams, and gels (occasionally);
soaps and bubble baths (sometimes); and
foreign objects, such as lost tampons or
dirty fingers.

As a general rule, to guard against vaginal
irritation, don't put anything in your vagina
that you wouldn't put in your mouth.

TRICHOMONAL VAGINITIS (“TRICH”)

Trichomonas vaginalis is a parasite (proto-
zoa) that is spread by sexual contact. In
males, the organism may live under the fore-
skin, in the urethra, or in the prostate
gland. In women, the organism may be found
in the vagina or the cervix and sometimes in
the urethra or the bladder.

Men often have no symptoms. Women have
itching and usually a discharge that is thin,
yellow-greenish, frothy, and smelly.

Since the infecting organism is transmitted
by sexual contact, both female and male part-
ners must be treated. Treatment is an oral
medication, Flagyl, which is expensive but ef-
fective. Vaginal suppositories also may be
prescribed. Like other sexually transmitted
diseases, prevention depends on infected
people being treated. Men who have been ex-
posed but not treated can protect their part-
ners by using a condom.

MONILIA VAGINITIS (CANDIDA, YEAST)

Monilia vaginitis is caused by a yeast-like
organism, candida, that is normally found in
the bowel and on the skin and is commonly
found in the vagina.

Many women harbor candida without symptoms.
Symptomatic yeast infections are common in
pregnancy, in diabetes, in women using the
pill, premenstrually, and sometimes after
diarrhea. In women, the symptoms include
vaginal itching and a discharge, which is us-
ually white, may be thick or thin, and is
sometimes curdy like cottage cheese. It is
usually not smelly. Men will occasionally get
a rash or irritation on the penis.

Treatment with specific antimonilial creams
or suppositories may be prescribed. Sometimes
an at-home use of a vinegar douche (one table-
spoon of vinegar in a pint of lukewarm water
is sufficient). Symptoms often recur, even
after treatment. Continuous good hygiene is
helpful in preventing monilia. Cotton under-
pants that absorb moisture may prevent symp-
toms. However, yeast infections can occur
even when the best rules of hygiene are prac-

* Syphilis may be transmitted congenitally
if the pregnant mother has venereal disease
and is not treated. It also can be trans-
mitted by contact to small children and
babies.

Almost 80 percent of infected females
are asymptomatic carriers; that is, they
are contagious and transmit the disease
but have no symptoms.

2

* While women who carry the infecting or-
ganism, mycoplasma, usually do not have
symptoms, mycoplasma can produce vaginal
discharge in women. This condition is very
difficult to diagnose in women. It must be
diagnosed in the male partner, who then
brings the infected woman for treatment.

PENILE DISCHARGE

Urethral discharge can occur in men. Com-
mon causes of penile discharge are gonorrhea,
occasionally trichomonas, and non-specific
urethritis (NSU).

Nonspecific urethritis occurs primarily in
males. It usually is caused by an organism
called mycoplasma. It is sexually transmit-
ted, often from asymptomatic females. The
symptoms are burning on urination and a dis-
charge that is similar to that of gonorrhea.
Since the organism producing NSU is difficult
to detect in a laboratory test, diagnosis of
NSU is made by ruling out gonorrhea. However,
when it is correctly diagnosed, NSU responds
well to treatment by antibiotics. A seven-
to-ten day treatment is usually successful.

BLADDER INFECTIONS (CYSTITIS)

Cystitis is usually caused by bacteria
found in the lower gastrointestinal tract
(the rectum), the skin, or the vagina. The
major symptoms are burning sensation during
urination with high frequency and urgency,
and, at times, bloody urine. Cystitis often
occurs in otherwise healthy young women who
recently have become sexually active; hence,
it is sometimes called "honeymoon cystitis."
It may be caused, in part, by the swelling
and irritation of the urethra during inter-
course, with resultant bacterial contamination
of the bladder. If the infection is not
treated with antibiotics, it may progress to
involvement of the kidneys. However, it is
easy to diagnose and responds well to treat-
ment.

Pubic Lice

Pubic lice, also known as "crotch lice" or
"crabs," live in the pubic hair of human be-
ings and feed on blood. They also can survive
in the underarm hair, in the hair around the
nipples, in beards, or in eyebrows. Pubic
lice are transmitted through sexual contact.
Often, the first sign of their presence is
itching in the affected areas. Furthermore,
if you look for them, they are not hard to
see. The eggs (nits) look like small freck-
les. After they have hatched, they can be
recognized as tiny vermin. The nits are
visible as tiny translucent lumps attached to
the base and shaft of the pubic hairs, which
look like pussy willows. After they hatch,
they are mobile. (See drawing.)

Pubic lice are easy to exterminate. Two
applications of gamma benzene hexachloride
(Kwell), which is available by prescription,
should be shampooed into the affected areas.
The preparation begins to work quickly and
will eliminate the lice within a day or two.
Since lice cannot live apart from their human
host, any lice on clothing or linen will die
in twenty-four hours. But to be on the safe
side, you should launder clothing and linen
after treatment has started.

Ne

(continued on page 12)