8  
AMAZON ODYSSEY  

Jeannette Sullivan  

The term "radical feminism" was coined and its  
concept essentially propounded by Ti Grace Atkinson.  
She is an intelligent, extremely logical woman dedi-  
cated to methodically searching for the basis of, and  
solution to, the oppression of women—both by males  
and by themselves. She has proven herself an uncom-  
promising person who lives according to her own con-  
ception of the truth, even if it means standing  
alone. In AMAZON ODYSSEY Atkinson has compiled a  
fraction of her writings from 1967 through 1972.  
Odyssey because these writings trace a painful and  
difficult search for answers; and Amazon because she  
views female oppression as basically a class confron-  
tation.  

In the foreword Atkinson notes two distinct in-  
terlocking concerns—the ideological and the tacti-  
cal: finding the problem, and developing solutions.  
These concerns are evident in all her writings.  

There are three principal parts to the book: the  
first part concerns the issues and struggles during  
the early days of the current Feminist Movement. The  
second part represents the years 1968 to 1969 during  
which Atkinson began her philosophical analysis of  
female oppression. The third section deals with the  
"disintegration of all (her) prior certainties"; her  
disillusion with others in the Movement and confron-  
tation with them and with herself over the many self-  
deceptions she had become aware of.  

Atkinson's analysis led her to the conclusion  
that male oppression of females was the original  
class system, and that all other forms of class op-  
pression are variations. Power, or the lack thereof,  
is an essential element in oppression. The act of  
oppression gives the oppressor a feeling of power  
over others, and also a chance to vent hostility. Un-  
fortunately, oppression only increases the oppressor's  
appetite for power; and the oppressed is immobilized,  
turns her hostility on herself, and escapes through  
insanity or more often through love—the oppressor  
becomes her redeemer. Sex roles must be destroyed in  
order for there to be a change since they are the  
principal means of perpetuating the system. Atkinson  
suggests that we make our lives self-justifying, that  
we build our identity from inside rather than depend-  
ing on outside recognition. This sounds like the ob-  
jective of any mature person, but she doesn't elabor-  
ate on how one is to do this. Can it be taught, or  
only encouraged by respect for others' individuality?  

Atkinson tried to implement her ideas within  
Feminist groups as she saw women using the same op-  
pressive tactics against each other that they con-  
demned when used by males. In 1968 she left the New  
York chapter of NOW which she had helped organize be-  
cause they would not adopt her plans to encourage and  
require complete participation by all members in all  
decisions, and the rotation of all power positions is by  
lot. In 1971 she withdrew from the left wing of the  
Movement because they too, contrary to what they said,  
continued forms of class privilege and the use of op-  
pressive tactics among themselves. Many people in  
the Movement thought it more important that all state-  
ments be "group statements" and resented anyone  
speaking out on her own without group backing. This  
went against Atkinson's ideas about self-identity.  
She advocated individual responsibility and saw "class  
identity" useful only to the oppressor who could hide  
all manner of irresponsibility and immorality behind  
"group responsibility."  

Atkinson provides 35 tactical and strategic maps  
to outline her war on oppression. Atkinson developed  
this strategic plan because she realized that there  
really was none in the Movement. Tactics, yes, but  
they were short range and by no means a frontal at-  
tack, more of a guerrilla warfare which serves to  
throw the enemy off balance, but wins no wars.  

Lesbians form an essential role in Atkinson's  
strategy. She considers them a "buffer zone" be-  
tween the oppressor and the oppressed since they are  
more autonomous and less susceptible to the strategy  
of the oppressor. This buffer zone can also include  
others who have not allowed themselves to be confined  
by marriage and the family—the classic sex institu-  

REVIEWS  

tions. Her strategy also is dependent on forming  
alliances with what she calls factions among the op-  
pressor, i.e., those males who are themselves vic-  
tims of oppression—gays, racial minorities, economi-  
cally oppressed, etc. These alliances are a means  
of infiltrating the enemy.  

Don't be put off by all the charts and outlines  
Atkinson uses. I found her a very lucid and logical  
writer who presents her ideas without a lot of super-  
fluous explanations that can lose a reader before  
the main point is made. The afterward is an interest-  
ing and helpful explanation of the artwork by Bar-  
bara Nessim, and of how it developed in relation to  
the text. The book was published by Links Books in  
New York this past August, and appears in paperback  
as well as hardbound.  

BETWEEN MYTH AND MORNING  

COCO WEBER  

Between Myth and Morning: Women Awakening  
by Elizabeth Janeway. William Morrow & Co.,  
Inc. 273 pages, 1974. $7.95  

Reviewed by Elizabeth (Coco) Weber  

When first faced with the prospect of reading  
another book on the women's movement, I  
was tempted to read Ernest Hemingway's The  
Sun Also Rises instead. Most books about the  
movement either lament about the state of wo-  
men or glorify women and make them into such  
superpeople that I get depressed wondering  
how I can ever live up to such an ideal.  
Consequently, I did not look forward to read-  
ing Elizabeth Janeway's new book. After I  
began to read it, I was glad I had. Janeway  
writes the book in a very nonpartial, calm  
manner. She does not scream whose fault it  
was or try to say that women are better than  
men, both of which accomplish nothing. She  
just gives the facts as to where women are  
coming from, where they are now and where  
they have to go, in a very practical manner.  
It is extremely refreshing, like smog being  
blown away from your mind.  

She writes that women get trapped in their  
conceptions of themselves, that they must  
reevaluate their values and the values of  
society. For strategy, she advises:  

".. rethink big: ... put your practical think-  
ing in its proper place. Understand that  
tactics are vital, but they can both win  
small goals and fail at large ones—unless  
they fit into strategic purposes. We can't  
get ourselves better jobs and equal pay and  
a fair share of elective offices if these  
ends aren't being seen as being connected  
with other factors in society, other aspir-  
ations, hopes and fears." (pg. 45)  

She stresses the fact that it is not just  
women who have been put into all these boxes,  
rather, all people in general. She is just  
devoting herself to women. The aspirations  
that society has are warped. These aspir-  
ations separate families and people from  
themselves and the rest of the world. They  
make people fearful and insecure, alienated  
from the rest of society. What people do  
at their job has been separated from what  
they do with the rest of their lives. This  
causes people to become rather schizoid.  

On how the sexual revolution has affected  
women, Janeway maintains that one of the  

CONT. ON PAGE 97