BY SUSAN CUSHMAN

When a new book by-for-or-about-women is launched, feminists around the nation gravitate toward it with friendly eagerness, but almost insatiable, intimidating expectations. Our understanding of Women's Condition is on the borderline between diagnosis and solution. We are hovering between recognition and reconstruction and need but one exact pointer to set us bounding in the right direction.

Maybe it will be a book, a rally, an election, a massive women's union...whatever it will be, we are working and waiting for that joyous push to come.

Women and Madness by Phyllis Chesler (Doubleday, $8.95) now faces such strict, hopeful scrutiny that its chances for success are far outweighed by its chances for near success, which at this point, runs only slightly ahead of mediocrity and sheer failure. The feminist literary market is becoming more experienced and our critical faculties are well-honed. We have had good books; now we want great ones, books that will shatter the world.

Daddy’s Kind Hands Can Hurt

Mental health has long been blessed by hands deeply creased with paternalism. Chesler's book is precisely timed, because women, mad or sane, are just beginning to realize how little those guiding hands have helped them.

Chesler recognizes her burden in her introduction: "In bringing you this book, I feel like a time-traveler turned messenger, a bearer of bad news. I wonder how you will receive it, I wonder what will you do?"

Her message is that there exists a double standard of mental health so rigid that there is not a woman alive who could possibly qualify as normal under it. There are two kinds of sanity, and they are by no means "equal." In unassailable first and foremost place is sanity for adults, that is, for men. In a cozy niche somewhat further down the scale of normality, there resides a compact, neatly wrapped package which is sanity for women.

So women have two kinds of abnormality to choose from. They can behave like women, which makes them abnormal adults; or they can behave like adults (read men), and thus become abnormal women. Either way, most women have within them great potential for long-lasting "psychiatric careers."

That Portable Thin Line

Chesler points out, very effectively, that the difference between sane, acceptable behavior and mad, antisocial behavior on the part of women is often in the eye of the beholder. The line between feminine madness and sanity is not only thin; it is also portable. Just where that line is drawn at any given time often depends on the convenience of those who control a woman's life, usually a husband or parents.

A study of ex-mental patients and ordinary housewives quoted in Women and Madness points out a number of characteristics the two groups share. Husbands and mothers described women in both groups as "making no sense when talking; walking, sitting, or standing awkwardly; moving around restlessly; saying she hears voices; trying to hurt or kill herself; needing help in dressing; being bad-tempered; not knowing what is going on around her; saying she sees people who aren't there."

Yet once she is in the care of a (usually male) psychiatrist or plunged into a mental asylum, a disturbed woman is firmly directed toward traditional feminine behavior. A recent article in Rough Times (formerly The Radical Therapist) reports the experience of a woman who was immediately released from a hospital mental ward when she began wearing a skirt and promised to seek a job with Bell Telephone. Her involuntary admission to the hospital had been based on her reluctance to do these approved feminine things.

Similarly, women in asylums who are not inclined toward sex-stereotyped domestic labor are diagnosed as unwell. Chesler writes, "Those women remanded to state asylums worked as unpaid domestics, laundresses, ward aides, cooks, and commissary saleswomen. If they refused these jobs they were considered 'crazy' and 'uncooperative' and punished with drugs, shock treatments, beatings, mockery, and longer hospital stays. If they accepted these jobs, and performed them well, the hospital staff was often reluctant to let them go."

Women and Madness suggests that an increasing number of women are inextricably involved in psychiatric careers because “they feel, quite horribly, at home within them." A typical career woman is admitted to mental hospitals more often and is retained for longer periods of time than the average male mental patient. This statistic makes inexorable sense, for women cannot help but be confused and irresolute when their cure so closely resembles their malady.

‘Anatomy is history, not destiny’

The last half of the book is comprised of sixty interviews with "mad" women. Chesler divides them into five groups; those who have been sexually involved with their therapist, psychiatrically institutionalized women, lesbians, Third World women, and feminists.

No paraphrase of these interviews can convey the bristling energy of some or the limpid piteousness of others. They must be read verbatim, which is one reason why women everywhere in the English-speaking world should search out this book. The rest of the world's women must wait until it is translated.

Women and Madness fairly billows with great gusts of fear and promise, yet it does not quite fulfill the anticipation its opening chapters arouse. Chesler's concluding discussion of Amazon society and her psychological prescriptions are too general to lead psychiatric career women to the realm of genuine good health. I suspect that most of this vagueness stems from her hesitancy to prescribe feminism as a miracle cure. But she will not have written the breakthrough book we await until this indecision is resolved in a second volume.

As a time-traveler, Phyllis Chesler brings bad news from the past with dazzling boldness and accuracy. I hope she can do as well with good news from the future.