Discrimination, continued

@Personnel and top management would keep my action quiet and I would abet them because of a personal dislike of notoriety.

@I would not be dramatically dismissed, as I had thought. (Nothing so clean or kind lay in store for me.)

@The company would attempt to appease me in the initial phase of dealing with my charge.

@The company would try to wear me down. Less than a month had passed since I filed the charge, and already I was tired. Now I realized that my anticipation of confrontation and resolution was illusory. I still only dimly perceived, however, the difficulty of watching my every word and act, of performing my job satisfactorily and of somehow finding the mental and emotional reserves to withstand the company's onslaught. This pattern would undergo some significant modifications in what I think of as "Phase II and III" of the prosecution of my charge, but the basic pattern—set less than one month after I filed—remained in force until I quit my job two months ago.

Jolt Pemthe Gucdauin? ©

The Art of Conciliation:— or What Every Trojan Should Know About Greeks

If you file a sex discrimination charge against your employer in Minnesota, you are required to partake of "conciliation" if respondent (your employer) so wishes. Thus, you should be prepared to abide by the law, but always remember that a sincere employer is as rare as a rich man in heaven.

Your employer will be ever so eager to have you drop the charge so that you and the company can "work together" to clear up the "misunderstanding." Never, never drop your charge. You will have wasted all the pain and energy it cost you to file. And your employer will simply wear you down until you quit or, in a few months, a plausible reason will be found to fire you.

As I noted in Part I of this series, it is best to retain an attorney before you ever file a charge. But certainly, if you are approaching "conciliation" and do not have legal counsel, hesitate no longer. Do not go into conciliation meetings without prior advice from an attorney.

Be sure to limit your employer's "conciliation" attempts. Do not allow it to postpone action with sharp maneuvers.

Your employer will, of course, make fulsome promises. In my case, the only concrete result of conciliation was an inadequate salary adjustment. (See details of my first conciliation meeting in Part III of this series next month.) My salary was adjusted back several months—NOT to my starting date. Thus, I could not claim my employer had admitted that I was treated unfairly at the outset.

All other promises revolved around my completing "career counseling" and "job clarification" with my supervisor. It is interesting to note that, once again, the female was assumed to be lacking in some way. I was forced into these ridiculous exercises, even though I was the aggrieved party. This "turning the tables" on women is the second important weapon men have.

I spent many hours listing my job functions, categorizing them on 3 x 5 note cards and assigning a mysterious "A, B or C" authority rating to each task. These exercises were a burden on me and detracted from the time I could spend doing my job. Meanwhile, my employer was hiding in the blizzard of note cards, thoughtfully planning its next step.

(The company's enthusiasm for making me happy in my work declined precipitously when they realized I would not drop the charge.)

You should understand that while your employer is tiring you out with countless interviews and heaping insulting "concern" on you over your “unhappiness” with your job, it is busily marshalling its defenses. And they are impressive.

Your employer has unlimited money. (Relatively speaking)

Your employer either has its own legal staff or the ability to retain legal experts.

Your employer has reams of statistics that can be molded like hot gold to present an innocent face.

@YOUR EMPLOYER HAS RESPECTABILITY.

And you have:

™ the right to retain an attorney. Do so, for your peace of mind and the proper prosecution of your charge.

Your employer's fear of publicity. I could not exploit this, because of personal squeamishness. But carefully consider the value of this fear. I think that group actions might be particularly aided by public exposure of your employer. (Your employer will, of course, find your perverted love of publicity morally repugnant.)

Female Co-workers. Supposedly "non-feminist" women can be extremely supportive of a woman involved in a sex discrimination charge. I made the mistake of hiding my action from most of my female colleagues. Although it is not advisable to aggressively proselytize "non-political" women, it is wise to tell them about your action and how it can affect them.