s °
Feminist Comedians.
Another out-of-town act not to be missed
whenever they return (and I hope that's soon)
is Harrison and Tyler, a feminist comedy
team. They played to a disappointingly

small crowd during the women's week activi-
ties at the College of St. Catherine.

They are radical feminists who use the sugar
coating of humor over the lances they aim at
prejudiced patterns of thinking that are all
too common in our sexist society. As opposed
to the self-deprecating patterns of

humor of Totie Fields, Joan Rivers and Phyllis
Niller, Harrison and Tyler point out the
positive ways women can work to improve them-
selves and the world by using humor "not as

a shield, but as a sword to cut away myths."

They have the distinction of being the only
USO act to be thrown out of Vietnam for
using anti-war material. Their attempts to
organize women in New Zealand gained them
the heave-ho from that country's government.
Could they be doing something right? You
bet?!

Tyler's monologue poked holes through sexist
advertising, anti-woman religions, institu-
tions, racism, homophobia and the semantic
entrapments faced by women. She was at her
best when spontaneously kidding members of
the audience in a friendly way and clowning
for shutterbugs. Unfortunately, illness
had forced Harrison to take only a brief
role in the act; would that we could have
seen more of this ex-model's tremendous
comic mime.

Tyler's warmth came through even more at the
end of the act when she fielded questions
from the audience and spoke ad lib on femi-
nist thoughts which are obviously important
to her. In regard to her commitment to the
women's movement she cited the psychotic
condition (societally induced?) of her
brilliant mother, to whom she says, "I have
to save every woman in the world, Mom, be-
cause I can't save you."

After the show the fans who joined Harrison
and Tyler for refreshments and feminist con-
versation in a local middle-class establish-
ment were treated to some inane verbal and
musical comments about women

by the male banjo-player-in-residence. To the
delight of the women around the table and the
smiles and cheers of other patrons, Tyler led
the group in a hearty chorus of "Move over or

or we'll move on over you, for women's time
has come", "here after the banjo instrumental:
were delivered without remarks about "women
libbers!" It was a great time:

In addition to touring, Harrison & Tyler do a
TV show in Los Angeles and have a couple of
recordings out on the 20th Century label.
They are eager to do more shows in the mid-
west and really enjoy playing to women and
collegiate audiences. Their agent is Harry
Walker, Inc. of New York. Please, somebody,
bring Harrison and Tyler back to the cities
and give us all another chance to laugh with
these beautiful people.

SIGHTS & SOUNDS

&
THINGS AROUND

Numerous events of the past several weeks in
our twin towns have reminded me of the di-
verse capabilities of local women. Certainly
the theatrical production, "Pimp", written by
Martha Roesing and acted by members of the
Foot of the Mountain theater company, pro-
vides a showcase for the acting talents of
Jan Maarane, Cathy Rives and Martha Boesing.

The play covers a lot of territory in explor-
ing ways in which women relate to each other
in the context of a male-dominated world.
"Pimp" is thought provoking at times, occas-
sionally bewildering, and sometimes delicate
with fantasy. The play continually reaches
out to connect with the life experiences of
its women viewers. One is not emotionally
unaffected by it. It alternately drained
and re-energized me. I want to see it again.
"Pimp" is not currently holding to a formal
production schedule. Interested groups may
call 825-2820 for booking information about
this touring company.

Flamenco Guitar

If you appreciate the guitar and/or are
curious about flamenco music, Barbara Davis
is just the musician to turn you into a
rabid flamenco fan. Despite her claim of
technical difficulties (the problems of a
Spanish guitar adjusting to the Minnesota
climate and variations therein), Ms. Davis
gave an impressive recital recently at
Macalester College. Admittedly difficult to
define, flamenco has been called the voice
"of the individual, weeping alone, in the
face of sorrows of which s/he is the hope-
less victim". As Ms. Davis played a variety
of these complex songs, dances, and accom-
paniments with an obvious love for the
plaintive, sensual melodies and dancing
rhythms, I became a devotee of this intricat-
ely woven music. Yes, there was an occas-
sional sound of a finger slipping down the
string, but one hears more of that on a
Segovia recording. With an ebb and flow of
intensity in her running finger work and
rhythmic paintings of barefoot dances, she
captured her audience.

In the near future Ms. Davis will be continu-
ing her guitar studies in Spain, so don't
miss the opportunity to be touched by the
sounds of her Ramirez guitar in her remain-
ing Minnesota recitals.

REMINDER

THE AMAZON BOOKSTORE lending library is
running low.

If you have taken books, periodicals out, and have finished them, check
around and if you find the materials, PLEASE
RETURN. Thanks.

GOLDFLOWER hopes to publish a monthly
calendar of women’s organizational meetings, social
events, cultural and sports activities and any other
women’s happenings in our area. Please help us serve you
by sending your calendar information to: GOLDFLOWER,
P.O. Box 8341, Lake St. Station, Mpls., MN 55408 or call
724-8036 [early a.m. or evenings].