B  
Credit (continued from page 4)  

on sex or marital status.  

One is the public accommodations section which is 363.03 subdivision 3: "It is an unfair discriminatory practice:  

To deny any person full and equal enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, and accommodations of a place of public accommodation because of race, color, creed, religion, national origin or sex."  

In the view of the department of human rights, public accommodations includes any credit or loan granting.  

But there is a more specific provision which is in subdivision 7 of that same section and that plainly says: Credit Sex Discrimination: “It is an unfair discriminatory practice to discriminate in the extension of credit to a person because of sex."  

So hopefully these two provisions will alleviate a lot of this real hardship. You know, the attitude of some credit grantors...I've even known of bank officials to say, "I don't want my wife going around town running up charge accounts." This was actually said by a bank official to a woman seeking to  

set up an independent checking account. Now this was an appalling statement for him to make.  

You must understand that these new provisions don't mean that every woman is going to be granted a charge account, credit card or a loan. She will be subject to the same criteria that a man is, but this is fine. Many times, in fact it's almost  

been universal, the criteria for extending credit has been different for men than for women. This is what the law intends to remedy. If a person is credit worthy under a certain set of circumstances, that is, has a certain job, a certain amount of assets, a bank account, home ownership, a car, then that person, whether the person be male or female, should be judged as a credit risk on an equal basis with all others in the same group.  

WHAT SHOULD A WOMAN DO IF SHE FEELS SHE'S BEEN UNFAIRLY DENIED CREDIT?  

Of course, being affiliated with the Department of Human Rights, I believe that the first thing she should do  

would be to contact our department with an accurate description of what has happened and file a charge of discrimination. Now you know discrimination on the basis of sex in credit has been banned prior to August 1 in the cities of Minneapolis and St. Paul. Now, however, the state has the same provision. Our enforcement procedures  

in my opinion work a little more efficiently. I'm sure that if any of the representatives of the other departments read this they will challenge that. But it is  

my opinion that we do have a more protective investigation and complaint handling procedure so that we could get faster, equitable relief.  

Why I Didn’t Review Mailer  

When I was in high school, I often engaged in a characteristic fantasy of the oppressed. I imagined myself a famous writer, embarking on a long-awaited autobiography. One day I would stroll into the office of the assistant principal, who was the discipline officer, and ask for permission to tour the school. My reason, I would drawlingly explain, was that I was writing this autobiography, but unfortunately could not remember a thing about my years at his school. I hoped that a short walk about would spur my reluctant memory.  
I had the same kind of fantasy when I began reading  

The “Liberal”  

or  

Norman Mailer's Marilyn for review in Gold Flower. The competition has been great, but he probably qualifies as an archenemy of feminism. I wanted to unseat him. Halfway through the book I had the same revengeful urge. But now that I have finished the pasteboard biography, I have lost my impulse to demolish Mailer in the same way that I outgrew my wish to insult my old school. It's not that I like either of them any better; it's just that they have become incidental, albeit unsavory, spectres. They may haunt, but can't block, any of our ways.  

— Susan Cushman  

“OK, So you’re getting screwed--you don’t have to get upset about it.”  

It happens every time. I meet a man who bears all the "right" signs--longish hair, faded jeans, McGovern sticker on his VW. His conversation puts me at ease (making yogurt at home, corporate waste, Nixon's latest incredible move) and before I know it, I find myself relaxed, opening up, trusting him.  

"My wife used to be in Women's Advocates."  

"Oh, really?" I ask excitedly.  

"Yes. A lot of those women were quite upset when she picked up with me." Soon I find out why. "Some of them would rather hate you than look at you," is the beginning of a long and increasingly insensitive succession of complaints about reverse discrimination. I am unprepared, my defenses down (I had trusted him), helpless. I manage, "People can get bitter when they've been kicked around enough." Both he and my liberal female (male-identified) friend miss the understatement. She speaks, not of the immeasurable destruction that women have suffered at the hands of men, but of the  

“alienating effect of women's  

bitterness.  

Why is it that no self-respecting liberal would speak of how "alienating" black hatred of whites is, yet would seek to rob women of one means of regaining self-respect, righteous anger? My female friend fears anger, because she sees only its destructive potential, and because it's not “nice.” Men fear anger in women, because they fear that once women regain a healthy  

sense of themselves, they may no longer need men—and they are right.  

I, too, agree that an excess of bitterness can be destructive (though my concern is for the woman who feels the bitterness). But the way for men to deal with that bitterness is not to criticize (a very male reaction, and the way the bitterness started in the first place) but to understand and empathize. The feminist revolution is more than equal rights for women. It is a triumph of creative "female" values over destructive "male" values. And when our revolution is accomplished, I, a woman who trusts over and over and over again, will no longer have to listen to men lecture on female bitterness.