Part 2 of a 3-Part Series

“We Want to Help You, Dear”

by Mary Hastings

NOTE TO READERS: The author was, until recently, employed by a Twin Cities firm. In May 1972 she filed
a sex discrimination charge against the corporation with the Minnesota Department of Human Rights. Sub-
sequently, she also filed a charge of race and sex discrimination against the corporation with the federal

Equal Employment Opportunities Commission (EEOC).

The State Commissioner of Human Rights, in November 1972, returned a decision of "no probable cause" to

assume the corporation had discriminated against women.

The author and her attorney appealed that decision

to the State Appeal Board. It overturned the Commissioner's decision and sent the charge back for reinvesti-
gation. The State Department of Human Rights has been in the reinvestigation process since April 1973. At this
writing, the author has received no information from the State concerning the disposition of her charge. (The
EEOC awaits the outcome of the State charge before taking jurisdiction.)

Part I of this series outlined events leading up to the filing of a sex discrimination charge, the filing pro-
cedure and the confrontation of the author and her supervisor after he was served with the charge.

Part II covers the three weeks following this confrontation:

Corporate Persuasion

Sisters, what is happening to you when:

* You take notes at a meeting with male
peers, even though you have the only
Master's Degree in the room, are demon-
strably the most intelligent and are
supposedly equal to the males?

* You attempt to introduce an equitable

system of housekeeping to your husband,
but clean the toilet, wash the dishes
and carry out the stacks of newspapers
collecting dust in the hall closet, after
you have been subjected to a week-long
silent treatment, accompanied by slamming
doors and crashing pots and pans.

* You are huffily asked if you've read
Henry Steele Commager's history of
American expansionism after you've shot
holes in a man's sophomoric political
vaporings.

You are on a guided tour of the male
arsenal, bristling with weapons to keep an
aberrant woman in her place. In the three
weeks following service of my charge against
the company, I took the first conscious steps
on my year-and-a-half tour of that arsenal.

Two hours after my supervisor acknowledged
my charge, I received a call from the
Vice President of Planning and Administra-
tion, a woman. She asked me if I would meet
her to "discuss this charge". I agreed and
met her late that afternoon at a downtown
motel where she and other top management
were in a "planning session". I was treated
to dinner on the corporate expense account
and the threat (larded with "concern") that
if I did not drop my charge my working life
would be--at best--unpleasant.

I said little, realizing that silence was
my proper state. I discounted much of the
menace underlying her "sisterly concern".

I knew that the woman was, unfortunately,
ignorant, with little understanding of the
issues involved in my charge.

Thanks to her, I had a first painful
glimpse of the limitations of sisterhood. I
had hoped—because of our common womanhood—
for an unguarded exchange. But I believe
that anyone involved in a sex discrimination

charge will encounter such untrustworthy wo-
men. They are "shills", to be dealt with as
a man, except for a measure of pity.

I also was introduced to the venality of
the company's top executives. She regaled me
with a sordid account of the personal did-
oes of her colleagues. She vilified my su-
pervisor and expressed considerable satisfac-
tion that my charge would "put him in his
place". I gathered that this outpouring
sprang from her personal frustrations and a
misguided attempt to disarm me.

When we completed our very brief dinner,
she announced that personnel representatives
would contact me in an effort to resolve
this "misunderstanding".

As I left the dining room, I noticed four
of her male colleagues at a back table. I
imagined that they already knew their "stalk-
ing horse" had failed.

Sinister Silence

When I arrived at work the following morn-
ing, I expected to be the object of whispered
conversations in the cafeteria and stares in
the hallways. Any other bad news traveled
rapidly at the company. Indeed, it seemed
that the prevailing management technique com-
bined general gossip and specific character
assassination. But, oddly, nothing changed in
my co-workers' attitudes toward me. For the