rar nn 2 2 2 2 22 ee eee eee eee eee eee eee eee a eo

Battles Won

"The state Human Rights Board has made a
finding of discrimination in the decision of
an Austin radio and television station not to
hire a woman for a news job.

"The complaint was filed March 6, 1973, by
Elizabeth R. Watson against station KAUS.
Mrs. Watson contended she was promised a
broadcast news job but then was not hired by
news director Gary Peterson because of her
sex.

"State Human Rights Commissioner Samuel
Richardson had found that there was not prob-
able cause for a finding of discrimination.
His decision was overruled by the board af-
ter an appeal by Mrs. Watson.

"Thomas Donaldson, deputy human rights com-
missioner, said the case will be reinvesti-
gated prior to setting up a conciliation
meeting.

"Donaldson said the board's finding was is-
sued Aug. 20. He said the board found that
discrimination existed but declined to re-
lease the board's decision in full."

St. Paul Dispatch

KKK KKK KKK KKK KKK KKK

"Some 150 University of Minnesota Hospital
employees will get monthly pay increases of
$85 to $100 based on an agreement to end "sex
discrimination" against a predominantly fe-
male group of custodial workers, a union off-
icial said.

"(Paul Goldberg, director of American Feder-
ation of State, County and Municipal Employ-
ees) said that previously a predominantly fe-
male group of hospital employees, classed as
custodial workers, were paid $440 to $550 a
month. The hospital janitor classification,
mostly male employees, received $525 to $650
a month, he said.

"The custodial workers will be reclassified
to the new position of hospital custodian at
the same pay as janitors, he said.

"Our concern was, right on the surface, sex
discrimination because cleaning is cleaning,"
he said. "In the past we heard arguments
that a janitor does all the heavy work--run-
ning the buffer and big mops--while custodial
workers do only light chores. But it was our
judgment that there's not $100 a month diff-
erence between the two positions."

St. Paul Dispatch

KKK KKK KKK KKK KKK KKK Kk

"A consulting firm in Silver Spring has a-
greed to pay more than $53,000 in back pay
and court fees to women employees who accu-
sed the company of salary discrimination to-
ward them.

"Miss Patrick (a research analyst) noted
that the firm also agreed to count teaching
experience as professional experience. Call-
ing it "a big victory" because the firm tend-
ed not to credit such work when determining
salaries for women but did so for men with
experience in other fields.

Battles Lost

"Much as I have already stated on the viru-
lent effects of this discharge, I have to
state, in addition, that bees, it is a well-
known fact, will forsake their hives if
touched by a menstruous woman; that linen
boiling in the cauldron will turn black,
that the edge of a razor will become
blunted, and that copper vessels will con-
tract a fetid smell and become covered with
‘verdigrease, on coming in contact with her.
A mare big with foal, if touched by a woman
in this state, will be sure to miscarry; nay,
even more than this, at the very sight of a
woman, though seen at a distance even should
she happen to be menstruating for the first
time after the loss of her virginity, or for
the first time, while in a state of virgini-
ty. The bitumen that is found in Judaea,
will yield to nothing but the menstrual dis-
charge; its tenacity being overcome, as al-
ready stated, by the agency of a thread from
a garment which has been brought in contact
with this fluid. Fire itself even, an ele-
ment which triumphs over every other sub-
stance, is unable to conquer this; for if re-
duced to ashes and then sprinkled upon gar-
ments when about to be scoured, it will
change their purple tint, and tarnish the
brightness of the colors. Indeed so perni-
cious are its properties, that women them-
selves, the source from which it is derived,
are far from being proof against its effects;
a pregnant woman, for instance, if touched
with it, or indeed if she so much as steps
over it, will be liable to miscarry.

The National History of Pliny
Volume V

KKK KKKKK KKK KK KKK KKK

"Controversy entered the Miss America Pa-
geant Friday when Miss New Hampshire, 22-year
old Michelle Arnette Cote, lost the support
of her hometown newspaper because of her
frank view on gay liberation, women's rights
and other topics.

"They asked my opinion on certain things
like women's liberation and the gay move-
ment," Miss Cote said. "I said I supported
any liberation movement that would restore
dignity and allow people not to be discrimin-
ated against."

St. Paul Dispatch

wk Kk kkk kkk kkk kk kkk

Keen, sometimes tearful disappointment was
voiced by many representatives of the Epis-
copal Church after its convention refused to
admit women to its priesthood...The narrow
defeat of the proposal to permit ordination
came in a complex bloc-voting system that
rejected it even though a majority of in-
dividual votes actually were for it. Oppo-
nents insisted that preservation of an ex-
clusively male clergy was essential to main-
tain the church's tradition and further re-
lationships with Roman Catholicism and East-
ern Orthodoxy, which do not ordain women.

=-Mplis. Star, Oct. 5

Pe PK KK HK I KK KK KI KK KKK KK KKK KKKKK KKK KKK