Sex Discrimination, continued

Next week, I expected momentarily to be ostracized. This never happened on a wide scale. Certain selected males were eventually told of my heresy. Interestingly, these men were in positions to adversely affect my ability to do my job. But news of my charge was never generally bruited about. It was the special hope of the company's personnel people to guard news of my action from women, who might be emboldened.

A week and a half following my dinner with Q, the Personnel Director summoned me to his office. J was a suave, wolf-like man with iron-tinted hair, black bullet eyes, and a reputation for canniness in "employee relations." I had heard from my male friends that he was a shouter and desk pounder when confronted with problems he could not smother with unction. Naively, I assumed I would have to face such violence. I didn't realize that this approach was reserved for males—full-fledged members of humanity. Women could be gotten around with a minimum of energy.

J introduced me to the most important and pervasive weapon men use against women—AUTHORITY.

As I sat opposite his laminated walnut-stained desk, I became 10-year-old Mary again, a straight-A student who rarely misbehaved in school but who nonetheless chafed at the Calvinistic hypocrisy of the teachers—indeed, who felt secret kinship with a fourth-grade reprobate named Clarence who was the object of our teacher's shocking cruelty because the unfortunate boy didn't have the ability to stud his report cards with A's and to confine his rebellion to the perimeters of his mind.

J, of course, knew nothing of Clarence and 10-year-old Mary. Before him sat a strange, "wrong-headed" woman who needed setting straight.

"I wish you had come to us first," he declared. "I'm sure we could settle this misunderstanding within the company, without a formal, legalistic structure."

J hoped I would seriously consider dropping the charge and "working with the Personnel Department to correct any misunderstanding."

He had been in touch with the State Department of Human Rights. He had vast experience in minority employee problems. He was a friend of the State Commissioner of Human Rights. These credentials presented, J launched a monologue about his daughters, who were track stars, and could compete as fiercely as any man. Women were, naturally, equal to men. (I privately wondered if he felt the appropriate female costume to be a brass-buttoned jacket and tin cup.)

All a Misunderstanding

While the edge of my mind accompanied J's daughters around the race track, the core of my thoughts rested on the mildly ominous word "misunderstanding." Q had also used it. I had anticipated many unpleasant consequences of filing the charge. But I had expected the company to defend itself against that charge of sex discrimination. It devolved upon Q, and especially J, to point out that there had been no discrimination, only "misunderstanding."

There is nothing so characteristic of late 20th century Americans as their practice of denying a problem, a crime, a wart on a backside. And since America is male, I should not have been surprised to discover that my problem with my employer lay in faulty understanding, not oppression.

I was drawn from my sociological ruminations to J's conciliatory smile. "Of course," I responded guiltily. Guilt? Why that? Because of that female burden, I made the error of ever seriously countenancing the company's empty blandishments. But I had been raised to strive toward honesty and empathy with my fellows. I should have approached the Pandora's Box of conciliation more cautiously. (See box, page a)

J relaxed as he read the familiar signs of female hesitation and guilt at creating "obstacles and unpleasantness."

As far as I was concerned, our meeting was over. (Although yet afflicted with many "female weaknesses," I had already allowed my naturally strong personality to assert itself by terminating meetings when I chose, rather than awaiting dismissal from the patriarch/male.) Accordingly, I arose, informed J I would contact the State Investigator on my case about a "conciliation meeting" and left.

On returning to my office I called the State Investigator and we settled on a meeting date two weeks distant.

I then had 14 days to analyze my situation. As the gears of American due process missed and meshed, I became aware of a pattern forming in my relationship with the company: