In Part Three, Carlson discusses ways to  
achieve liberation, stressing that it re-  
quires both public and private assertiveness.  
She takes us through a quick re-examination  
of our lives, in search for an awareness of  
the sexist traps that keep us "in our place."  
She encourages women to come out of isola-  
tion from one another (sisterhood is power-  
ful!), giving resources for beginning rap  
groups, advice for fighting job discrimina-  
tion, and so on. Five "sample" marriages  
offer insights into varying degrees of sex-  
role indoctrination and their consequences.  
She puts responsibility for fulfillment  
where it belongs—with each woman, rather  
than through a male intermediary. An anno-  
tated bibliography of suggested readings  
reveals Carlson's sources, and they are ex-  
cellent. She is well read—lurking in the  
pages of her book are some of the finest  
feminists and a good deal of research.  

Carlson never tries to soften the truth of  
women's status. Without a trace of Polly-  
anna, she insists upon a re-evaluation of  
our self-worth and dares us to stand up and  
fight for our right to be full-fledged, in-  
dependent, complete human beings. Her anger  
and ours is channeled into positive attempts  
to take hold of our lives.  

". . . what we are learning, all the gen-  
erations together, is that it is wonderful  
to be a woman, a strong, independent, able  
woman who is free to stretch and stretch and  
stretch until she can admire herself because  
of her own efforts rather than seek admira-  
tion in the eyes of a boy or a man.  

"Never mind the jeers of those who are  
quick to remind us of what we have not yet  
done. Who knows what women will accomplish  
when they have learned finally to be free?  
Who knows what the intelligence of women  
will contribute to the world now that the  
search of women has finally begun?"  

I think that Carlson's book is a basic  
primer for those new to the notion of  
women's liberation, and that, when finished  
with her book, her readers will hunger for  
those books and essays that treat each of  
her many topics in greater detail. (In  
reference to her remark about what women  
will accomplish—I strongly recommend The  
First Sex, by Elizabeth Gould Davis, which  
shows what women have already done. There  
has simply been a few thousand years' lapse  
since the time when men usurped power from  
the matriarchs and took credit for the great  
civilizations women had built! And ever  
since that time women's accomplishments have  
been hidden, ridiculed, or stopped in their  
tracks because of her entrapment into her  
limited sphere.)  

Copyright 1974  

Car Mlaslitinen)  

WANTED:  
WOMEN ARTISTS  

Feminist Formations has added another ser-  
vice for women—a cooperative of women  
artists. They contacted a few of us, who  
contacted others, and slowly the coop  
started taking shape. But we need more  
people if it's going to work.  

We'd like you to join in expanding the co-  
op while it is still in its infancy. We  
think it would offer several advantages.  

We will share expenses of entrance fees in  
art fairs as well as a central location at  
which to display our work between shows and  
fairs. If several people share a booth the  
fee gets sliced several ways. And the  
booths cost less, too.  

We will share the work as well—making,  
setting up, and running the booths, taking  
turns so that no one will have to be there  
two or three full days and evenings at a  
stretch. Thus we save lots of energy.  
Another advantage is getting our work pub-  
licized, not easy when you work alone.  

But we need more artists! We need all  
kinds of art—pottery, painting, drawing,  
sculpture, jewelry, ceramics, macramé,  
weaving, crochet, and so on.  

FIRST ART FAIR—August 15-17.  

We already have an art fair lined up, the  
Southview Square Art Fair in West Saint  
Paul on August 15-17. If you're interested  
in showing your work with us, call Kathy  
Sarafolean at Feminist Formations (tel. no.  
721-5546).  

Since Feminist Formations is the center  
for the cooperative, and will therefore  
inherit a certain amount of mail handling,  
paperwork, phone calling, etc., in setting  
up art fairs, meetings, and so on, we feel  
that they should receive a percentage of  
profits. How much is a decision that the  
coop should make together.  

Those people who participate in the coming  
art fair, as well as those who call in to  
show an interest in the coop will be noti-  
fied of the next meeting date.  

What's Happening  
continued from page 6  

BATTER UP (NOT PANCAKES!!)  

National Little League Baseball, Inc., has  
yielded to public pressure calling for an  
end to the group's "boys only" rule...  
the New Jersey courts had already ruled that  
girls could not be barred from Little League  
teams and suits to end sex discrimination by  
the organization had been filed in more than  
a dozen other cities following protests and  
demonstrations by children, parents, and  
women's organizations across the country.  

*The Spokeswoman, a monthly newsletter,  
is available for $7 per year ($12 for insti-  
tutions). Address is 5464 South Shore Drive  
Chicago, Illinois 60615.