Happy Hooking  
Prostitution Two Views  

Diana L. Antolik  

When two authors approach any subject, be it brushing teeth or doing wash; to solving  
world economic problems or the evolution of a species there are bound to be differences.  
Differences of style, viewpoint, and understanding of the subject matter the author is  

to get across.  

This is an accepted fact in writing. If not there wouldn't be so many books in exist-  
ence today. But when both of the authors are women dealing with the same subject, in this  
case prostitution, one of them is most likely to come out of the acceptance duel with a  

black eye.  

Hollander  

Xaviera! How well such a strange name  
is remembered! And how most of us remem-  
ber the first book Ms. Hollander brought  
into being, The Happy Hooker.  

"Xaviera! Her continuing adventures..."  
"The Girl Who's Gone Wrong--And Loves It  
-~-Is Back!" Xaviera Hollander is back  
with another scorcher, is only because of  
the electric pink cover and title Xaviera  
(Warner Paperback Library, 428 pp. $1.50)  

"As in The Happy Hooker I've written in  
the first person as though I am talking to  
the reader as a friend; a personal inti-  
mate conversation," Hollander states in a  
blurb on the back of her book. It is an  
intimate conversation, but I have the feel-  
ing that the most intimate thing that passes  
between the two of us is my money.  

The dealings in  
prostitution that  
Hollander writes  
about is a life  
style that is very  
easy, relaxed, and  
very profitable.  

There is no real  

reference to drugs,  

except in passing,  

pimps, "underworld  

dealings", or the  

real hassles with  

the police or the legal systems.  

these omissions which gives the book an un-  
realistic fantasy-like glow. For with all  
the fun and games logic tells anyone that  
there should be a little rain falling some-  
where.  

The tone of the book is light and there  
are many incidents where, (since this is a  
personal story it is all quite possible)  
the people and interactions do not follow  
any sequence. The only help the reader has  
in solving her "what-is-really-happening"  
bafflement is an Editor's note that states:  
"The material in this book is not being  
presented in any specific chronological  
order. Some of the things occurred at the  
same time. Such is the style of Ms. Hol-  
lander's life." And such, also is the style  
of her writing. Disjointed to a point of  
distraction.  

The book takes life, women, relation-  
ships, and men with a grain of salt. There  
is not even the slightest indication that  
any of it is real. There is no substance  
to any person besides Hollander herself.  
So one can begin to wonder about the val-  
idity of the book by the second chapter.  

If joking prostitution and pink covers  
and shocking come-ons are sellable to  
the public then Xaviera will sky-rocket.  

Millett  

"I also found that the knowledge of an-  
other's experience places vast moral re-  
sponsibility upon you, since the very  
knowledge of another if deep and authentic  
constitutes great obligations.”  

"...So that the experience of all women  
everywhere becomes, in a sense, our com-  
munal property, a heritage we bestow upon  
each other, the knowledge of what it has  
meant to be female a woman in this man's  
world."  

With these two passages as with the rest  
of the introductions in Kate Millett's  
The Prostitution Papers: A Candid Dialogue  
(Avon Books, 160 pp. $1.25) are laid the  
basic groundwork for what I feel is one  
of the most honest works on prostitution  
to be written in a long time, if ever.  
The book is divided  
into four sections  
with a different  
woman speaking in  
each.  

Though the variat-  
ions presented by  
each woman is dif-  
ferent because of  
the diverse in-  
volvement there is  
a very strong under-  
current that affirms  
that for each woman the basic script remains  
the same while the sets and specific dia-  
logue changes.  

Unlike most books that deal with "touchy"  
areas Millett does not hide what either  
herself; Liz Schneider, a lawyer; or "M" and  
"J", two former prostitutes have to say be-  
hind some high-fown academic rhetoric of  
charts and figures. But instead deals with  
the women involved and their reactions at  

a personal level.  

Millett serves as a buffer, sounding board  
and reporter. Even though this is "her" book  
she keeps her personal insights and comments  
well out of the way of what the story of  
the other woman is. Her reporting is of  
a recognizable style, editing down the  
“uh's" until the written language is similar  
to what was actually spoken.  

And what is spoken by all women is grim.  
Yes, at one time in the lives of both "J"  
and "M" there was a time when selling your-  
self was not all that bad, as they both state  
it was even slightly rosy for a time. But  
it all changes into the "underground" of  
drugs, police and total alienation from al-  
most every part of a somewhat normal daily  
existence.