STAR? FEMINISM HAS NO STARS!

Two Letters Respond to  
Minnesota Feminist Article  

IDEALS OF FEMINISM DIE  

Dear Sisters:  

I read with interest the article "Pro-active  
Women--Minnesota Feminists Born" in the  
August issue. As an active member of Minn-  
esota Feminists (formerly University of  
Minnesota Women's Liberation) who is also  

in the Young Socialist Alliance, I feel I  
must counter certain biases presented.  

The spokesperson for Minnesota Feminists  
stated Minnesota Feminists was formed be-  
cause "there were the negative feelings of  
the group (Women's Liberation) being a YSA  
front, a clique that was meeting the needs  
of only four or five women." There were  
several allegations in the article that Wom-  
en's Liberation was not responsive to the  
needs of women. A brief review of last  
year's activities is needed:  

University of Minnesota Women's Libera-  
tion won the fight with the University  
Health Service, winning pap smears and preg-  
nancy tests at no extra charge, abortion re-  
ferrals and counseling, an ombudsperson, and  
in-service staff training to make health  
service employees more sensitive to women  
and the need to treat us in a non-sexist,  
non-patronizing manner.  

We continued our work with women's stud-  
ies--an idea that originated in our group  
and grew into the existing women's studies  
program.  

We picketed two public hospitals which  
refused to give women abortions.  

We sent speakers to high schools, college  
classrooms and community groups.  

We sponsored "The New Feminism Conference:  
Cultural, Political and Educational Impli-  
cations", which involved almost 30 pro-fem-  
ale groups in the city--10 of which directly  
participated in planning meetings, along  
with individuals from high schools and the  
community. Over 300 people attended the  
conference.  

We sponsored a women's fair and film fes-  
tival with over 100 people attending.  

We presented various educationals through-  
out the year.  

Now, just whose needs were not being met?  
Certainly, Women's Liberation was responsive  
to the needs of campus and community women  
by leading struggles for better health care,  
better education and abortion rights.  

To say "the number of women's needs being  
met were almost nil" implies a serious dis-  
agreement on what the needs of women are.  
The "needs" of women can only  
be interpreted, in light of the article, to  
mean the individual needs of women in deal-  

ing with personal problems that arise from  
living in a sexist society. Individual  
needs are important--no one wishes to deny  
that. Women's Liberation has always made  
attempts to include consciousness-raising in  
the organization--some were successful, oth-  
ers were not.  

C-R and self-awareness groups are important  
factors in developing an understanding of  
our oppression, but they must not become  
isolated from activity--activity which also  
leads one's consciousness to higher levels.  
No woman, no matter how high her conscious-  
ness, or how deep her self-awareness, is  
free in a sexist society. Society's insti-  
tutions, be they religious, judicial, legis-  
lative, educational, medical or commercial,  
discriminate against women and promote the  
myth of our inferiority. To attack women  
(such as women in the YSA) who focus most  
of their energy on the broad, societal iss-  
ues that face us, is to lack perspective of  
the scope of the feminist struggle. Our  
fight goes beyond the level of individual  
solutions of coping in a sexist society: A  
tremendous amount of power must be generated  
to make society meet the needs of over one-  
half of its members.  

This is the basic issue of disagreement:  

How do we best build the women's movement?  
Is it by C-R and self-awareness groups or by  
organizing women around the issues that aff-  
ect our lives. Certainly, women who support  
the former are sincere in their beliefs, but  
I believe history will prove the latter stra-  
tegy correct--as it has in other struggles  
of the oppressed, such as the suffragist move  
ment.  

It is absurd to think that women who want to  
build a powerful women's movement would dis-  
courage anyone who is interested in belong-  
ing to a feminist organization and anyone  
who wants to develop organizational skills--  
skills that are vital in building a movement.  
Every woman is desperately needed to be a  
leader.  

Anyone who has taken on organizational re-  
sponsibility will understand problems org-  
anizers have: getting people to share re-  
sponsibility, to follow through with their  
commitments and to actively participate in  
the boring day-to-day survival responsibil-  
ities. People who have had such experiences  
will recognize the fallacy in the argument  
that organizers won't reach out to new  
people and won't teach new people skills--  
be they making leaflets or spending evenings  
on the phone raising money to writing press  
releases and holding news conferences. I  
was not born with any of these skills. I  
learned them from "older" members in Women's  
Liberation who were eager to develop new,  
continued on page 5 :