Wry songs.

The bankers and the diplomats are going  
in the Army,  

It seemed too bad to keep them from the  
wars they love to plan,  

We're all of us contented that they'll  
fight a dandy war,  

They don't need propaganda, they know  
what they're fighting for.  

They'll march away with dignity and in  
the best of form,  

And we'll just keep the laddies here to  
keep the lassies warm.  

Malvina does not intend that her songs  
carry messages. "I sing what people have  
formulated anyway. I address myself to  
those who agree with me or are in a fringe  
limbo."  

Since many of her concerts are benefit  
performances for causes such as the women's  
and peace movements, the Ellsberg defense,  
and the American Indian Movement, her  
audience is naturally selected for her en-  
lightened and engaging point of view.  

Malvina's interest in women's issues is  
long-standing, as evidenced by her equivocal  
"We Don't Need the Men" written in 1958.  
The chorus chortles:  

We don't need the men, We don't need the  
men,  

We don't need to have them around, except  
for now and then.  

They can come to see us when we need to  
move the piano,  

Otherwise they can stay at home and read  
about the White Sox.  

(Cont’d)  

Fifteen years ago, Malvina considered this  
song a tongue-in-cheek exercise; the raucous  
enthusiasm it produced at her concert sug-  
gests that today the song carries more ser-  
ious implications.  

With a little less good humor, "No Room"  
recognizes the rise of world hunger and over-  
population:  

No room! No room! No room!  

Holy is the fetus,  

But babies once born are simply human,  

And if they die in the streets of  
Calcutta  

No one will notice but their ma,  

And ain't that just like a woman.  

The wider the grin, it seems, the deeper  
the bite.  

I seldom meet people who are satisfied  
with their lives, and it surprised me to so  
easily recognize a contented person when I  
saw her. Malvina Reynolds truly likes her  
life, and with good reason. She lives by  
her talents and her convictions, supporting  
herself by doing what she likes best on her  
own terms.  

Malvina Reynolds works without an agent.  

If you are interested in having a concert  
with her, write her at 2027 Parker St.,  
Berkeley, Cal. 94704, or call (415) 843-2365  

Blind Justice  

Local Style  

When I moved to Minneapolis last year I  
was surprised and gratified to see a public  
feminist display not far from my door. A  

larger than lifesize statue of a woman tak-  
ing notes prominently sat on the lawn of the  
Metropolitan School of Law a few blocks away  
from my apartment. "What a way to advertise  
for female law students," I cheerfully  
thought to myself, and if the door of the  
building had been open, I would have gone in  
to compliment the school on its ingenuity  
and enlightened politics.  

That locked door saved us all some embar-  
rassment. Only days later, I read in the  
morning paper that the statue was a throw-  
back to the fairly recent days when the  
building had housed a school for medical  
secretaries. Since that educational enter-  
prise had failed, the same founder was now  

attempting to establish the law school. Once  
the building had been relabeled, the statue  
was naturally considered inappropriate.  
Sculptural alteration was scheduled and soon  
came in the form of a black painted blind-  
fold and a pair of ironwork scales. Presto,  
and we viewed that great feminine character  
Blind Justice. So what if she was hunched  
over a desk and who cared that the notebook  
was a misplaced prop? At least she couldn't  
be mistaken for a prototypical law student.  
The school never got off the ground, and  
a "Space Available" sign eventually appeared  
at the statue's base. The fate of the sta-  
tue has not been announced, but her proven  
versatility will no doubt guarantee her a  
long, if somewhat curious, life.  

Susan Cushman