Malvina Reynolds is a songwriter with an  
active conscience and a perpetual overabun-  
dance of material. "I have to fight off sub-  
jects," she says. "People are always sug-  
gesting them to me. ‘Have you written any-  
thing about the Aswan Dam?' It bugs me;  
they don't know anything about songwriting."  

When I met Malvina at the Walker Art Cen-  
ter last month, she had just given in to the  
urge to write about Watergate. Having re-  
sisted the issue for months because "you  
can't satirize the satire," she had suddenly  
been taken by the phrase, “meet me at the  
Watergate." Soon she was singing the new  
song over the telephone to Walter Cronkite,  
and a few days later, appeared with it on  
the CBS Evening News.  

As with the Watergate song, "Songwriting  
happens when it happens." Most often, she  
is struck by something she sees or hears and  
the song forms on the spot.  

"I can't write sitting down quietly in a  
room. Usually I'm moving, riding in a car  
or on a bus."  

The 72-year-old resident of Berkeley,  
California, spends most of her time song-  
writing and performing. She has been at it  
for 30 years, after discovering that her doc-  
torate in literature was helpful when solving  
crossword puzzles, but not when looking for  
jobs.  

"I never could get a job teaching. Nobody  
told me why, but I have my own ideas on the  
matter."  

Malvina's songwriting began when she "fell  
in with people like Pete Seeger, Earl Robin-  
son, and Woody Guthrie who were interested in  
our folk heritage."  

"They brought in powerful music, understa-  
ted musically and lyrically. I got a guitar,  
learned a few chords and that's all I know  
now."  

At first Malvina's work was performed by  
others - Seeger, Judy Collins, Joan Baez,  
Harry Belafonte - which accounts for our  
close familiarity with her songs but not her  
name.  

She comments, "Other singers kept doing my  
popular songs over and over. I had other  
good songs no one knew about. So I decided  
to do it myself.  

"I am not a great singer by any means. But  
nobody minds. If I had a better voice, I  
would have gone in a different direction,  
not as good a direction. I would have shown  
off my voice."  

Malvina Reynolds Sings  
for People who Agree  

An Interview  

By Susan  
Cushman  

Instead, Malvina has become an irresistible  
social and political critic whose beliefs are  
so tunefully presented that one can't help  
but hum along.  

Malvina frequently denies that her own  
songs are folk songs, because one person  
can't write an instant tradition. Rather,  
she says she writes what sounds like folk  
songs.  

Folk songs have a durability which sur-  
vives countless renditions, and perhaps Mal-  
vina's songs sound folkish because you never  
really get tired of them. Before I attended  
her concert at the Walker, I was sure that  
my capacity for “Little Boxes" had been fil-  
led years ago. But Malvina knew better than  
I what effect the well-known words and tune  
could have on an audience.  

The fun is in the knowing  

The song was flawlessly funny, mostly be-  
cause of the exact fit between the knowing  
delivery and the equally knowing reception.  
Most of us had grown up with this song,  
singing it at our concerts, around our camp-  
fires, in our avant-garde church services,  
and unanimously confirming its complaint.  

As Malvina sang it, I realized that was one  
agreement we never quite outgrew; ten years  
later and we still didn't like those houses,  
much less, their way of life:  

Little boxes on the hillside,  

Little boxes made of ticky-tacky,  
Little boxes on the hillside,  

Little boxes all the same;  

There's a green one and a pink one  

And a blue one and a yellow one  

And they're all made out of ticky-tacky  
And they all look just the same.  

Speaking before the concert, Malvina men-  
tioned that a breakfast cereal manufacturer  
had once approached her requesting permission  
to use "Little Boxes" in a commercial. She  
refused.  

Most of Malvina's work has a laugh in it  
which surfaces in more or less painful ways.  
She comments that her songs are "largely  
satire. Something can't be funny unless it  
has bite in it that hurts, that matters.”  

One of my favorites is "We Hate To See  
Them Go," a wry tune describing a dream  
about sending "the gentlemen of distinction  
in the Army."  

(continued on page 5)