continued from page 20  
Q: So in other words, the price you would  
have paid by not doing it would have been  
worse.  

A: I would have committed suicide. I would  
have cut my throat. And I would have wished  
the throat was a little bigger so I could  

cut it more.  

Q: What role does anger as a catalyst play  
in your work?  

A:  
I feel in retrospect that anger was very im-  
portant in my development. I used anger for  
my unfolding to the place I am. Yes. I  
don't dismiss it. I also think—now don't  
say that I said I was a drunkard—but I used  
alcohol in a medical way. Because when I  
was psychically so fatigued I found that I  
would never dismiss what liquor did for me.  

Now I don't say that I was alcoholic, but I  
think that it helped me. It was like if I  
was in a high spot and I wanted to really  
jump out of the window, then you land on a  
rope and then you don't touch bottom. Well,  
alcohol was able to do that for me. You see  
there were not as many pills, or I didn't  
know about them. Now we know in recent years  
about chemistry. Say people that go off.  
They give them things and they find it’s an  
imbalance in chemistry in the body.  

Maybe when you think and work as I did—I  
depleted the body. Now I would probably go  
to a doctor and get a shot. Or I would go  
to a doctor that would give me these things  
that would quiet me. But at that time I  
don't think it existed and so I did it an-  
other way, maybe a more primitive way.  

Q: If you were angry about something, would  
that help you to work or drive you to work?  

A: I think it did. You see your glands are  
very stimulated and you're in a pitch where,  
yes, you have to work it off. Some people,  
like in the country, would probably chop  
wood in order to relax. But I did it my way  
which included a great deal of physical  
labor. No one has said it to my knowledge,  
but I maintain that there's great intellect  
in physical labor. I'm sure that I learned  
a great deal out of physical labor in my  
work. I would not dismiss it.  

In our times in sculpture we can make a  
little drawing or a little cardboard ma-  
quette and then it is blown up in a foundry.  
Now, I do my work myself to a great degree  
because I like it and I identify with it.  
It's very living for me; I live with it.  

And having studied modern dance, when I move  
with it the rhythms and all of that plays a  
very important part in my consciousness.  
That for me is living.  

Q: Do you still dance at all?  

A: Oh, yes, yes. I do the whole works.  

Q: How do you get into your work? What sort  
of process do you go through?  

A: Every time I approach a project I shy  
away like a horse, because it is a new  
thing. You've lived another day. Even  
from one minute to another, we're changing.  
If you sit here 24 hours a day or a life-  
time, every second there is a change.  

Night doesn't come in a minute and dawn  
doesn't come in a minute. It's gradual.  
Through the day it's moving a little bit.  
You don't see it, it's so slow to our eye.  

Our consciousness is the same. Let me say  
that I finished something and sat down to  
have lunch. I went through a whole thing of  
lunch, picking up the cup, the fork and so  
forth. There's great activity. By the time  
I come back (to work) I'm already an hour  
older. And already, I'm not quite the same.  
People never think about that—they miss,  
they jump, they don't think.  

And say, you, or whoever; I've had a dozen  
television and radio and newspaper inter-  
views here. Do you think I'm the same per-  
son that left New York? Don’t you think  
that that's already a world of experience  

in a few days? If you think of the phil-  
osophical things, the creative things, going  
to the museums and seeing things and being  
here. You could write ten volumes on what  
I've done here just by coming.  

So when I come to the work again I'm always  
I, but I've added to the consciousness.  
Every minute you get a little older so you  
touch it a little differently. And anyway,  
don't the books promise us that the compen-  
sation for old age is wisdom? You see?  
So, you don't get old in a minute and you  
don't get wisdom in a minute.  

A WOMAN’S MIND  

Q: You've said that your works are defin-  
itely the product of a feminine mind and  

that there's a difference between a man's  
mentality and a woman's mentality and the  

way a man's works and the way a woman's  
works. How does your work reflect that diff-  
erence, that woman's mind?  

A:  
Well, first, let me say that there are  
women,  
there are artists, that will not acc-  
cept this. But I only know one thing: I'm  
a woman. I'm not a man. I have all the or-  
gans that belong to the female sex and I've  
executed them from that point of view.  

Look, a man and a woman get together. The  
very position...or two people get together.  
Say I was standing up and facing you this  
way. You'd be looking here and I'd be look-  
ing there. Already we have a different per-  
spective. And it cannot be the same perspec-  

tive because of our whole makeup.  

And if you happen to like being a female,  
and if you're attractive and you get the  
attention you want and you've had a ball on  
that level, then you want to retain that fem-  
ininity. It's only, well, people that have  
not been successful somehow being female  
that want to switch and vice-versa. But I'm  
not going into the sex problem at this mo-  
ment. I rather like all the exposure of sex  
because I think we were educated so badly.  

Now, another thing, before I finish. For in-  
stance, I'm a great-grandmother and I'm not  
going to change because I've lived with this  
so long. But why should we be self-conscious  
of certain parts of our bodies? Why can't  
we claim our bodies? But we don't, I don't.  
With all my awareness and all my promiscuity,  
there's still something I don't claim. And  

I resent it in myself. It's too late for me  
to encompass it. But I would like to see  
people accept themselves from head to toe and  
also the aura around them.  

We'll come back to the femininity. I know  
that men will not hammer as I hammer. I  
know they have machinery. You see they were  
born that way. That's the way. The men were  
the carpenters and the men were the engineers.  

continued on page 22