BY MARY ANN JUNI (Women's Counseling Service) & CHRIS ANDERSEN (Seneca Falls)

Veneral Disease is one of the most serious
health problems facing the American people.
Gonorrhea, one type of veneral disease now
rages as a pandemic: an epidemic which
strikes everywhere in all geographic loca-
tions, economic classes, sexes, and races.
One out of every 100 Americans has the dis-
ease; the only illness which strikes more
often is the common cold.

The disease is especially disastrous for
women. Most often we aren't aware that we
have it; our bodies may show us no symptoms,
and there is no fully reliable means for
diagnosing the disease in us. When allowed
to spread unchecked through our bodies the
disease can infect our tubes, bladder, and
rectum, eventually causing arthritis, de-
stroying our eyesight, and interfering with
our ability to conceive, carry, or deliver
healthy babies.

Obviously Gonorrhea did not develop to
"pandemic" proportions overnight; the seri-
ousness of the problem has not only recent-
ly been discovered by those in authority,
nor is gonorrhea so mysterious or as diffi-
cult to treat as the more "glamorous" dis-
eases like cancer or heart disease. Yet
almost no resources have been expended by
the government or the private health indus-
try to do anything about this problem which
plagues our people.

To probe all the possible reasons for
that situation would take at least another
column. One obvious reason is that there
isn't much money to be made in the simple
but massive VD testing and treatment or VD
research needed to solve this "people's pro-
blem." But another major—though more sub-
tle—factor has to do with the "unhealthy"
sexist attitudes promoted in our society.

We are prevented from getting information
which accurately describes the symptoms of
VD without passing moral judgment—espe-
cially if we are young. Because the disease
is related to our sexuality, we are made to
feel embarrassed and ashamed of seeking tes-
ting or treatment.

It makes sense that we should be discour-
aged from seeking help, since there is hard-
ly any help provided—particularly if we
are reluctant or can't afford to see our pri-
vate physician.

The VD crisis cannot be solved or similar
crises avoided until drastic overhauls are
made in the way health care is controlled
and delivered. Meanwhile, the purpose of
this article is to spread some vital infor-
mation about gonorrhea—how we get it, what
it does to our bodies, how we can prevent it
and how it can be cured, where to go in the
Twin Cities for help and what kind of care
we must expect and demand from these ser-
vices.

In other words, it's a survival tactic.

How it is contracted

Gonorrhea is contracted only through sex-
ual contact. It is spread by a bacteria
called gonococcus, which is extremely sensi-
tive to changes in temperature. The optimum
climate for the bacteria is the genitals or
an environment similar in moistness and temp-
erature, like the urethra or cervix. The
gonocci work their way into the body through
the genital passages and can be spread to
others at all stages of the infection.

Symptoms

Women infected with gonorrhea often have
no visible symptoms until the disease is
fairly well advanced. Early symptoms a wo-
man may or may not have are a slight yel-
low-green vaginal discharge coupled with
vaginal burning and itching, and/or pain or
burning with urination. It is important for
us to understand that most women infected
with gonorrhea do not have these symptoms,
and those who do can easily attribute them
to normal vaginal discharge or slight vagin-
al or bladder infections. Oftentimes, not
until the infection has worked its way into
the fallopian tubes, which causes serious
abdominal pain, will a woman suspect gonor-
rhea.

Later symptoms or results of well advanced
gonorrhea in women include: sterility, arth-
ritis, blindness, infected tubes, bladder,
and rectum. Gonorrhea can also be transmit-
ted to a baby during birth through contact
with the birth canal. It usually causes
blindness in babies.

With men, the situation is somewhat dif-
ferent. Early symptoms are reliable de-
termining factors, and it is rare that a man
infected with the disease has no early symp-
toms. Within a few days of initial infec-
tion, men notice a pus discharge from their
penis and a burning sensation while urinat-
ing. Symptoms occurring as the infection ad-
vances include sore, swollen testicles, an
infected bladder, infected seminal vesicles.
Still later in the well-advanced stages the
effects are sterility, arthritis, blindness,
and eventually death.

As a result, the symptoms in men are dis-
turbing enough for him to seek medical at-
tention, but in most cases a woman remains
ignorant of her infection until she is
alerted by an infected male with whom she
has recently had sexual intercourse, traced
by a public health service casefinder as a
named sex contact, or her own infection has
spread causing sufficient pain to prompt her
to see a doctor.

Diagnosis and detection

There are two types of tests used to de-
tect gonorrhea—the gram stain and the cul-
ture—neither of which are 100% reliable for
women. The gram stain is the least reliable.
It involves taking a smear of vaginal dis-
charge for women and urethral discharge for
men, placing it on a slide, staining it with
dye, and examining it under a microscope for
gonorrhea germs. This test is 99% reliable
for men. It is highly unreliable for women,
(although it is still the only test used in
many places) and should not be trusted with-