Gold Flower saw her husband was puzzled by his father’s attitude and wanted to  
be alone with him. Discreetly, she left them together and went to her room to spin.  

Her mind began to churn with curiosity. What could those two men be talking about?  
The father will tell the husband he is dissatisfied with me, she thought. Feeling she  
had to be ready for any eventuality, she crept back to the kitchen and pressed her  
ear close to the door. She felt no shame in this act—none at all. Her thoughts were  
those of a strategist planning a battle. Her heart beat violently, for it was about her  
that the two men were talking.  

“It’s lucky you’ve come back,” the father-in-law was saying. “Now you can take  
your revenge. Your wife has turned bad since the coming of the 8th Route Army.  
She is always outside the home, neglects our own home, pays no attention to me or  
my daughter.”  

“Tell me everything you know about my wife,” her husband’s voice came to  
Gold Flower harshly through the doorway. “I have enough ability to face her. I  
can beat her to death. If not to death, I’ll tear off two layers of skin.”  

Gold Flower straightened up. Her cheeks were unnaturally flushed, but she was  
smiling. “Your time has come,” she whispered. “You've fallen into my trap. You  
just try your business on me. If you touch one of my fingers, I'll give it to you ten  
thousand times!”  

She bent down and listened again.  

The old man was talking. “I have a lot of things to tell you. Before the 8th Route  
Army came, she worked hard for our family. Now everything is changed. Take  
this so-called overturning movement. Do you understand what it means for a woman  
to turn over? I’ll tell you. It means women become wild, careless, do anything they  
like. Women’s Association! Have you ever heard of such a thing?”  

“It’s strange for her,” Gold Flower’s husband said thoughtfully. “She’s so brave  
now. Very strange. Never mind. Leave her to me.”  

“But you don’t know,” said the old man. “They bound me, scolded me before a lot of  
women.”  

Gold Flower exploded with an inner rage. “You poor old man!” she hissed the  
words at the half-open door. “So you've told this to your son. Now a son and  
your offspring shall dance in front of our women.”  

It was almost dark outside now. Gold Flower saw Dark Jade, head of the  
Women’s Association, walk into the courtyard and she went to meet her.  

“Father and son are talking in there,” she said. “You go in and see what you can  
find out.”  

Dark Jade went in and greeted Gold Flower’s husband. “You’ve been away so  
long,” she said. “You married such a beautiful wife. How could you be so cruel  
as to stay away?”  

“Since I've been gone,” said Chang, “my wife has become worse and neglected  
my father and sister. I must teach her a lesson.”  

“This is not the past,” said Dark Jade. “Things are different now than when you  
were here. It is forbidden to say anything like that now.”  

“Can women really turn over?” Gold Flower’s husband sneered. “I don’t believe  
it.”  

Dark Jade fell silent, then spoke in a thoughtful manner. “Take care of yourself  
when the time comes. Don’t say then that we were not first polite to you.”  

She rejoined Gold Flower in the courtyard. “He makes me so angry,” she said.  
Suddenly, her manner changed and she looked thoughtfully at Gold Flower. “If  
he is beaten, would you not be sorry?” she asked.  

“What do you mean?” said Gold Flower. “I had already made up my mind to  
inform the association when you walked in. You think up your way to struggle and  
I'll think up my own way. His hatred of one woman has now become the hatred  
of all women as a whole. Sorry? Not at all. I think he should be beaten to death.”  

“All right,” said Dark Jade. “But before the actual struggle, we must hold a  
meeting where you can stand up and speak your bitterness. In that way we can  
arouse the hatred of the masses.”  

Gold Flower agreed.  

That evening her husband came to her room and sat on the edge of the kang  
beside her. Gold Flower felt herself quivering with hatred, but she managed to  
appear calm, and waited in silence for her husband to make the first move.  

“Have you been faithful and correct while I was away?” he asked.  

Gold Flower spoke belligerently. “If you think I have been unfaithful, try and  
get evidence. Produce my lover, and I'll confess.”  

Her husband smiled. “There is no need to say who is your lover.” Abruptly his  
voice became harsh. “You already have a living thing inside you. You called me  
back because you want to make me believe that child in your body is mine.”  

Gold Flower stood up. “What a rotten man you are. You think to cheat me this  
way. But you can’t deceive me anymore. You say there’s something living in my  
stomach. All right then, we won’t sleep together. Let us see what happens then.”  
She broke off, choking. Tears of pure anger came to her eyes. Through a kind of  
mist, she saw a knife lying on the table. She reached out and picked it up. Her hus-  
band drew back in fright. Laughing harshly, she held the knife out to him.  
“Cut  
“If you don’t believe me, cut me open.” She thrust the knife at his face.  
“Open my stomach and see what’s there.”  
Her husband flushed and looked at the knife uneasily.  
“But what is the use of your turning over?” he asked lamely.  

“It is necessary. For five years you have treated me badly. Do you think I  
deserve bad treatment? In the past, you could do with me as you liked, but now  
you can do no harm to me ... none at all. ...”  

Her husband sneered. “Are you really so brave?”  

“Yes, really. But it’s not only me. There were two parents in addition to me.”  

“If you think it is incorrect for men and women to go to a meeting together,  
then let us go outside right now and discuss it in front of the masses. You will try  
to restrain my liberty, try to prevent me from turning over, but you cannot succeed.  
Here there are only two people. Only us two. Come, let’s see how brave you are.  
Do you dare? Here is the knife. You will tear two layers of skin from my body.  
Now there are only the two of us. Come on! If you dare!”  

Gold Flower was on her feet yelling. “Come on!” she said. “Come on!”  

“No,” he said. “I won’t beat you to death. I will just break your arms and legs  
and keep you alive, but make you useless. Then you can’t go to your meetings.  
On your broken legs, you won’t even be able to crawl.”  

“Gold Flower glowered at her husband with reddened eyes. “You dirty beast, a  
pig!”  

Gold Flower was filled with a ticking rage. Then swiftly, without so much as a word to any  
member of the association, she came to see the head of the Women’s Association.  

She quickly related what had happened the night before in her bedroom.  

“It’s up to you to call the masses to settle my problem,” she said. “Today is the  
day for me to turn over. My whole life depends on this meeting. I shall fight hard  
myself, but my sisters must help me struggle against my husband.”  

“Put your heart at rest,” said Dark Jade. “We shall solve this question. All the  
women united in one body shall be as one sister.”  

Gold Flower stammered her thanks.  
“Remember, sister,” Dark Jade said, putting her hand on Gold Flower’s arm,  
“there are times in your life when you’ve got to be hard. You cannot be soft with  
him, for the next time he will ruin you completely. You must carry the thing  
through to the end.”  

“I can be very hard with my husband,” Gold Flower assured her.  

“In that case,” said Dark Jade, “we must make a plan. First, we shall send our  
cadres to your husband and try to persuade him to be frank. If he is not frank, we  
shall drag him by ropes to the meeting.”  

Within the hour, fifteen women started for Gold Flower’s home, led by Dark  
Jade. Gold Flower’s husband met them in the courtyard. “Why are you here, com-  
rade cadres?” he asked. His tone was polite.  

“This is a new society,” Dark Jade greeted him abruptly and without any pre-  
liminaries. “You must tell the truth of how you have treated our sister. If you do  
not, you may taste our fists.”  

Chang smiled. His face and manner were courteous and serene. “Has my wife  
said something about me?” he asked. What he said was perfectly smooth and friendly,  
but Gold Flower could see his eyes flickering with animosity.  

“It is true, your wife has spoken of you,” said Dark Jade. “But your evil doings  
have also been uncovered by our special investigators. The past was the day of man.  
But now we have our day given us by Comrade Mao and the Communist Party.  
Speak out or we will bind you up.”  

A slow color rose in Chang’s cheeks. He stood there with lips tight and eyes black  
with contempt. “Do what you like,” he shrugged. “I don’t care. What can a Women’s  
Association do?”  

Dark Jade turned to the other women. “Get a rope,” she said.  

The women stirred. One of them brought a grass rope. She moved to bind up  
Chang. He drew back. “Get away!” he said. Dark Jade and another girl rushed at  
him and slapped his face.  

Dark Jade’s voice had a hard edge. “If you dare move, we shall beat you to  
death on the spot.” Gold Flower’s story will be continued in future issues.