“Understand and forgive....understand fur-coated wo-
men and children without shoes....understand Hitler and
the Bank of England and the behavior of Cinderella’s sis-
ters. Preach acceptance to wives and tolerance to hus-
bands....Nothing in this world is perfect: to protest takes
the strength needed for survival. Grit your teeth, endure.
Understand, forgive, accept, in the light of your own
death, your own inevitable corruption. What is there to
want that’s reasonable to want? How can wanting be
reasonable when soon you'll be dead? Await that day
with composure and dignity, that is all you can do.
Oh, mother, what you taught me!”

If you're teetering on the brink of man-
hatred and don't want to be pushed over the
edge, don't read this book. If you've already
learned that awareness of and bitterness toward
misogyny is a vital first step in our struggle,
read to renew your convictions. And if you
still believe that “oppression” is too strong a
term to describe the condition of women in our
society--then go out and buy Female Friends.
Oliver will convince you that you're wrong.

Oliver may be the most villainous character
you'll ever encounter in fiction. "His" women
are less oppressed than they are enslaved. Yet
contrary to most, this villain is not extra-
ordinarily evil. His villainy is instead the
everyday kind. He is a cold-blooded user and
abuser of women: so villainous, yet so unexcep-
tional. You meet him every day, in the office
or at school. In fact, you may even be married
to him--like Chloe.

The awakening voice of protest quoted above
is that of Chloe. But how long and wretched is
the path to that state of awareness! While
years wasted away, self-effacement mellowed
into habit, as Chloe acquiesced in her enslave-
ment to her husband Oliver.

It pains her that Oliver sleeps with Fran-
coise, but she does not protest. Jealousy is a
dispicable and immature emotion. Oliver says so.
It tires her to rise at six to bake rolls for
his breakfast. But according to science, women

FEMALE FRIENDS

By Fay Weldon.
311 pp. New York:
St. Martin’s Press.
$7.95.

need less sleep than men. Oliver told her. And
she weeps when he calls her lazy or sulky, rest-
less or yackety. But men don't make women un-
happy; women make themselves unhappy. Just ask
Oliver.

Chloe long since grew accustomed to serving
Oliver. When they married, she dropped out of
school to care for him better, and studied typ-
ing so she could transcribe his essays. Working
as a salesclerk, she turned down a promotion to
assistant manager; it would have prevented her
from having Oliver's tea ready when he arrived
at home. When he requested the comfort of her
presence in the house while he finished his
novel, she asked for a three-month leave of
absence and lost her job.

So now, lucky girl, she doesn't have to
work. Oliver envies women, all "free to roam
the streets and buy hats while husbands work
their fingers to the bone.” If he savages her
with words, she shouldn't mind. "After all, he
earns the money. The least she can do is cope
with his temperament.”

Chloe's “female friends," Marjorie and Grace,
tell her to leave Oliver. Divorce him, and save
yourself, they say. But Marjorie and Grace are
interfering bitches, and their counsel is gossip
and mischief. At least, that's what Oliver says.
And even in her love for them, Chloe admits she
has had to be "understanding and forgiving my
friends, my female friends, as long as I can
remember.”

When her vision clears, Chloe glimpses the
pattern that underlies her life and the lives of
her female friends. And it is that pattern that
author Fay Weldon wants her readers to perceive
and to learn from. “Understand and forgive"--
that advice has its time and its place. But wo-
men have understood and forgiven themselves into
a state of enervation. Weldon knows that anger
has the power to energize. And she's written a
book that will leave many women grappling with
their chains.

--Cyndy Klinksiek

The Department of Health, Education and Welfare
(HEW) is, at best, a fair-weather friend of women
and the oppressed minorities. No sooner does the
economic going get tough than HEW retreats from
its support to affirmative action hiring programs.

A recent memorandum from HEW explains that
the federal government's affirmative-action require-
ments for college faculty hiring "must not operate
to restrict consideration to minorities and women
only." The memorandum further warns that job
requirements must not "be waived or lowered in
order to attract women and minority candidates."

To read the memo one would think that colleges
and universities have hired nothing but women
and Blacks over the past few years and it was
now time to give the white men a break. That's
hardly the case.

"Statistics from the American Council on Edu-
cation show that in 1969, 2.2 percent of college
and university faculty positions were held by
Blacks, and 19.1 percent were held by women,”
reports Tom Wicker in the New York Times. "By
1973... those percentages had grown scarcely
at all—to 2.9 percent for Blacks, and to 20 percent
for women. White males are plainly not being
excluded — much less removed — from faculties, nor
do the percentages of Blacks and women yet sug-
gest that the effects of discrimination against them
have been overcome."

Other statistics show that of the men on college
and university faculties in the academic year 1972-
73, 30.3 percent were full professors, and another
25.1 percent were associate professors. Only 11

Setback for affirmative action

By Linda Jenness of The Militant

percent of women were professors, and only 21
percent associate professors.

Foes of affirmative action are, of course, de-
lighted with the HEW memorandum. Writing in
the AFL-CIO News, John Roche congratulates
Representative James O'Hara (D-Mich.) for his
role in changing HEW's position. "For quite a
while," he writes, "the opponents of reverse dis-
crimination [this term for affirmative action] felt
like voices crying in the wilderness. The Dept of
HEW seemed above the law, and its affirmative
action enforcers, power-drunk, went wandering
around the nation threatening administrations that
did not present the proper demographic profile."

Albert Shanker, racist demagogue of the Ameri-
can Federation of Teachers, calls the new directive
a "heartening action.” And even more “heartening”
for Shanker was the decision made by the New
York State Commission on Human Rights, which
ruled recently that a Puerto Rican woman hired
as an acting principal must be replaced with a
white man "born on the U.S. mainland.” Why?
Because, in the commission's opinion, the com-
munity school board members had voted on "an
ethnic basis" and had discriminated against the
white male because he was born “on the U.S.
mainland.”

The new HEW memorandum represents another
attack on the gains made by women and Blacks
through the affirmative-action programs of the
past few years. It will encourage reactionaries
like Shanker to try to roll these gains back even
further.

briefly...

IT FIGURES--Kremlin bureau-
crats are weighing the idea

of holding an international
women's year in the USSR in
1975. A commission was esta-
blished to study the idea.
The chairperson of the commis-
sion, reported TASS, is a man.

WHITE MALE CHAUVINIST PIG OF
THE WEEK--Singer Vicki Carr, a
Chicana, performed at a White
House state dinner. Afterward
she invited the Fords to her
home for a Mexican dinner, ask-
ing Mr. Ford, "What is your
favorite Mexican dish?" The
president responded, "You.”

ONWARD AND UPWARD--Women working
full time in 1974 earned
only 61% of the average weekly
income taken home by men, ac-
cording to a recent report by
the U.S. Department of Labor's
Bureau of Labor Statistics.
The earnings gap between women
and men has thus remained vir-
tually unchanged since 1967.