Chances

Another point that policewomen make is  
that forethought is in itself a safety  
measure. "A woman who never thought about  
being mugged or raped would be in great  
trouble if it happened. If a woman just one  
time thinks, "What if a man attacked me?”  
she'd be much safer. Just so she has some-  
thing to fall back on.

"If you've thought about it before, your  
thought will flash into your mind. If you  
haven't thought about it before, nothing  
will come to mind and you'll do nothing or  
you'll panic."

Once a woman is unavoidably in a danger-  
ous situation, she can often escape if she  
stays calm. Attackers usually have the  
edge because they take their victims by  
surprise. But many criminals underestimate  
female resources and can be surprised in  
turn quite easily.

With an unarmed attacker, the best method  
is probably to fight back immediately, mak-  
ing as much noise as possible. Since most  
men don't expect women to struggle seriously  
and women in danger are usually quite  
strong, the chances of escaping are reason-  
ably good.

A woman confronted by an armed assailant is  
better off pretending to comply with him un-  
til a chance for escape opens up. The im-  
portant thing is to remain calm enough to  
seize whatever opportunities are offered.

"Lady Beware" describes these situations  
and many others, following the "what if" for-  
mat suggested by one psychologist.

Handbooks on safety can be distasteful,  
because they can make it seem as if genuine  
safety is only for fanatics who are willing  
to devote their lives to it. "Lady Beware"  
recognizes that safety is a desirable  
condition of life, but not the whole point  
of it. Arnold presents a range of  
preventative measures so that a reader  
can choose the ones that suit her. For  
instance, he starts out a chapter on hitch-  
hiking by saying women should never do it,  
and then proceeds to discuss women thumbing  
it, on the assumption that many nevertheless  
will. This kind of realism makes the book  
palatable.

We can't avoid taking chances in our daily  
lives and probably don't want to. But we  
should have a pretty fair idea of what  
chances we do take and how to handle the  
consequences. A book like "Lady Beware"  
can help.

Battles Won

“I met but few of the stars while I was in  
Hollywood. In New York I had met Mr. Charles  
Chaplin and Miss Greta Garbo, the latter a  
being who is, physically, of the lily tribe,  
but with a human heart and mind.

But I did meet Miss Marilyn Monroe.

In private life she was not in the least  
what her calumniators would have wished her  
to be. She was very quiet, had great natur-  
al dignity (I cannot imagine anyone who  
knew her trying to take a liberty with her),  
and was extremely intelligent. She was also  
exceedingly sensitive.

What will-power she must have needed in or-  
der to remain the human being she was, after  
the cruelty with which, in the past, she was  
treated! That is over now, and she is ac-  
cepted as the fine artist that she was. But  
that cruelty was completely odious. It  
arose partly, I think, from the envy of peo-  
ple who are devoid of beauty, and partly  
from the heartless stupidity of those who  
have never known a great and terrifying pov-  
erty. There are people, also, who cannot  
believe that beauty and gaiety are a part of  
goodness...

Immediately on my arrival in Hollywood, a  
certain American magazine with a huge cir-  
culation asked me to write for them...But  
still more important to them was that Miss  

since it was obvious that we were born to  
hate each other, would do so at first sight,  
and that our subsequent insults to each  
other would cause a commotion when reported.  
They never made a greater mistake.

That afternoon she wore a green dress and,  
with her yellow hair, looked like a daffo-  
dil. We talked mainly, as far as I remem-  
ber, about Rudolph Steiner, whose works she  
had just been reading...

In repose her face was at moments strange-  
ly, prophetically tragic, like the face of  
a beautiful ghost - a little spring-ghost,  
an innocent fertility-daemon, the vegetation  
spirit that was Ophelia.”

~ from Edith Sitwell's autobiography  
“Taken Care Of."

PEOPLE’S:  
COMPANY

1534 EAST LAKE

NATURAL FOODS

BREAD

GRANOLA