| Maybe you're thinking of joining the Gold Flower
staff and you aren't sure what work is involved. Below
is a rundown of our meetings and work possibilities.
See if you can help us in some way.

MEETINGS:

We usually have a Sunday morning general meeting
early each month (announced in each issue). At this
meeting we discuss the last issue and general staff
business, then set plans for dates and content of the
next issue.

Lately we've been following up this general meet-
ing with a copy meeting a week or ten days later, at
which those of us who have written articles share them
with others on the staff. We are hoping that discus-
sion of our paper's content will help bring the staff
closer together and produce a more unified paper.

Typing is done on a special typewriter; each arti-
cle writer types up her copy in a standard form.

Layout meetings have varied greatly over the past
few months. At times all of us have taken part in the
final rush to lay out the copy. Lately a special crew
has organized the layout and divided up the work among
themselves.

Mailout meeting is a gathering at which people add-
ress and bundle a few hundred GOLD FLOWERS before taking
them to the post office.

DUTIES:

But that isn't the whole story. Here is a list of
jobs involved in producing the paper. These jobs are
divided among the staff members.

1. Finances: Receiving and paying bills, handling the
checking account, etc.

2. Mail & Billing: Reading the GOLD FLOWER mail and
answering it; accumulating advertising and copy to be
printed; distributing information; billing accounts.

3. Ads: WE NEED SOMEONE to solicit advertising from lo-
cal businesses!

4. Layout: The huge job of laying out the paper! Need
several people for this.

5. Supplies: Watching for needed materials and purchas-
ing them for staff use.

6. Distribution: We all do regular runs at bookstores,
coops, etc. where we leave new issues and pick up
money for ones sold during the month.

7. Printer: Taking the paper to the printer and re-
ceiving, bundling, and mailing issues.

8. Writing: Writing up news, feature, ad copy, etc.
Keeping the subscription file up to date.

Contact us if you'd like to try it!

Sue Plaster

The next general staff meeting will be on March 9 at
7:00 p.m. at Jeanette's. Call 374-4456 for address.

THE LITTLE PRICK

Don't Come My
closer now

feminist You’ll

media. Interested: Contact Gina or
or Bill at 622-7595.

the people's print
Matt at 468-0877.

MESSAGES FROM GOLD FLOWER:

Rainbow Distribution collective is seeking volunteers
from the entire metropolitan area to help us distribute

MAJORITY REPORT is a feminist newspaper published in
New York City. The January 25, 1975 edition is a special
issue on the E.R.A. and its enemies. It contains many in-
teresting articles, particularly those which analyze the
opposition to the amendment. If you'd like to get a copy,
send 25¢ to:

MAJORITY REPORT

74 Grove Street

New York, New York 10014

FAAR, Feminist Alliance Against Rape, publishes the
FAAR Newsletter on a bi-monthly basis. The FAAR Newslet-
ter features analysis of issues related to rape, plus news
of anti-rape projects, current legislation, book reviews,
etc. A one-year subscription to the Newsletter is avail-
able for $5.00 ($10.00 for institutions). Send your sub-
scription request to:
Feminist Alliance Against Rape
Box 21033
Washington, D.C. 20009

The Journal of American Folklore announces the pub-
lication of a special issue titled WOMEN AND FOLKLORE,
available for $3.00 from:
Periodicals Dept.
University of Texas Press
P.O. Box 7819
Austin, TX 78712

The Women's Studies Program at Indiana University
will sponsor a midwest regional conference April 4, 5, 6-48
in Bloomington, Indiana. The tentative format will include
informal workshops on beginning a WoSt program, discus-
sions of curriculum content and process, and panel discus-
sions of academic papers. Faculty and students are in-
vited to participate in panels and workshops and to sub-
mit papers (send an abstract to the coordinator). The
coordinator is Ellen Dwyer, Women's Studies Program,
Memorial 219X, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47401.

Women unite in song! Read Sing Out! - The Folk Song
Magazine. Anti-imperialist, women's, traditional peo-
ples’ music from around the world. Write for a flyer de-
scribing our back issues on women's music and watch our
future issues for more "womansong". - Back issues $1 each.
Subscriptions $6/yr, $10/2 yrs., Sing Out! Dept. O,
106 W. 28th St., NYC 10001

TOPICS FOR YOUR GROUP:

What is the status of women and how did it come
to be? 

How are minority women's needs different from those of
other women? Common issues and goals can unite the
movements.

What are the unique problems of the contemporary
family and looks at current issues?

LIFE - Life is a precious time. What do you do with it?
Teach the turning point in your life, when you seek
to be not attached to your family? Is the answer in
employment or volunteerism or all at various stages?

WOMEN AND MONEY - A discussion of credit, insurance, retirement
and other financial planning topics.

What is the evolution of legal rights for women in the
history of this country? Where do you stand on issues
for credit, pensions, and inheritance? What do you do in case of

AWARENESS AND ASSERTIVENESS - How to develop an attitude of
self-worth and identity. This course deals with the questions:
Who am I? What do I want? and How am I going to get it? (four 2-hour
sessions)

INTO WHAT? - For women who want to get into the workforce.
This presentation offers group support and techniques.

For more intensive preparation, four 2-hour sessions.

Woman Consultants Inc.

869 Osceola Av., St. Paul, MN 55105