GOLD FLOWER

Gold Flower, the only feminist newspaper of  
its size and scope in this area, is faced  
with possible extinction. (The mortality  
rate for small newspapers is 99%. Gold Flower  
has been publishing since September, 1971--we  
think that says something about its popularity  
and about the staff that began and continued  
it!) It's the economic crunch--a crunch  
caused by the male-directed lunacy owning and  
operating the world's resources. Women make  
up the largest impoverished group in the world--  
and we hate to ask you for money. Yet we feel  
if women are to improve their economic status  
we dare not lose our newspaper, which is a  
vital link between women.

Any link is vital--for it is the isolation of  
women from one another that keeps them sub-  

jected to and economically dependent on men,  

very handy for the male power trip.

We want not only to keep printing, but to ex-  
pand our paper to include women's news from  
everywhere, more women writers, letters from  
our readers, a calendar page, book lists,  
coming courses for women, and so on. We need  
to know what women are doing, what their ser-  
vices are, where they are, who they are, and  
keep in touch--there's strength in that:  
(There were very good reasons why slave  
owners made educating their slaves illegal--  
it would have meant slaves in touch with one  
another, a real threat to their oppressors.)

We are working on widening our circulation.  
Do you know of a place where you would like  
to see Gold Flower for sale? Let them know,  
and let us know--we'll try to get it sold  
there. One of our biggest problems is selling  
through suburban stores--do you suppose they  
consider us a threat? We'd appreciate your  
showing your copy of Gold Flower to a suburban  
woman, since the men who run businesses  
there don't want to give them access to it  
(again, men telling women what's good for  
them, not letting women have a chance to make  
up their own minds about what they want!).  
Those isolated women who have seen Gold  
Flower have been excited and very receptive.  
Maybe your friend will subscribe to it and  
show her friends.

We are working on getting more advertisers,  
which is really the financial blood of a  
newspaper (See “It Pays to Advertise in  

Gold Flower"). We need both feature ads and  
classified ads.

We welcome new women to work on the paper.  
Your only credentials are that you be female,  
have a commitment to further women's rights,  
and some energy to donate to the paper. We  
are a collective; there are no bosses and no  
underlings--and the beauty of it is that it  
works. We are paid in the satisfaction of  
our work and of knowing some really fine  
people.

Don't  
feel yours is too little. Pile up those  
"too littles" and you have a good deal. So  
please send what you can and help us keep  
publishing. It will be greatly appreciated!

And we are asking for contributions.

Yours in Sisterhood,

the Gold Flower staff.

IT PAYS TO ADVERTISE IN  
GOLD FLOWER

Why? Well, our circulation is increasing  
right along, and we're continuing to push  
it. Also, our ads are reaching the people  
most likely to patronize those whom we  
advertise. We'd like to carry your ad,  
whether it's a feature ad or a classified  
ad.  
Our prices are most reasonable. The rates  
are as follows:  
Feature ads: $3.00 per column inch (that's  
1 x 3 actual inches).

$4.00 per column inch (4" x 11  
actual inches).

You may design your own ads. Or you may  
have someone on our staff do the artwork--if  
you wish. If you design your own, be sure to  
use the size as you want it to appear in the  
paper, and use white paper and black ink or  
no. 2 or darker pencil.

Classified ads:  
One line (about 7 words),  
Two lines (about 14 words),  
Three lines (about 21 words),  
Four lines, $1.50.

Rates are really CHEAP!  
50¢.  
$1.50.  
$1.25.

Make checks payable to Gold Flower and mail  
to P. O. Box 8341, Lake Street Station,  
Minneapolis, 55408.

GOLD FLOWER’S OWN SPEAKER’S BUREAU

Well, why not? We've got a newspaper, and we  
may as well talk about it. If you think your  
women’s group or your students would like to  
hear about what we're doing, how we do it, and  
why, we'd love to send one of our people to  
speak. We can tell about putting a newspaper on  
a poverty-stricken, shoe-string budget, and how  
we manage as a collective, without the hierarchy  
of boss and underlings. We can talk about why  
we think a women’s newspaper is essential, and  
the problems of getting that newspaper to  
women — often it is stopped dead by the men who  
run the establishments whereby we distribute  
Gold Flower. We can discuss feminist views, as  
we come in contact with so many through copy  
and through one another. We can talk about  
writing for a small, advocacy press, and so on.  
Budgeting, philosophy, practical problems of  
getting the newspaper ready for the printer —you  
name it. Call us if you want a speaker. Proceeds  
will be split between the speaker and Gold  
Flower’s financing. Phone 374-4486 or 722-8710.