patriarchy, male dominance must be  
maintained, at any cost. The traditional  
"Missionary position," still the only legally  
acceptable position in some states, provides  
a striking example. The man lies on top of  
the woman, placing himself literally in the  
superior position and in control of the sex  
act, making it difficult for her to discover  
her own sexuality and, hence, perpetuating  
the notion of female frigidity.  

Female pleasure or satisfaction is not  
intrinsic in the coital act. Too often it  
is founded in pleasing the man. Isn't that  
why he chose her? His romantic love, if it  
does not disguise the injustice of her social  
position, at least makes it palliative.  

Joan Baez referred to these same politics in  
the Resistance when she said: "Girls say  
'yes' to the boys who say 'no'." Women are  
dependent upon men to win them social status  
and to determine the way they are viewed by  
the world. Survival for a woman, within the  
power structure, is to please, and hence to  
be chosen by a man. He is the conqueror;  
she, the conquered.  

The woman who does not play sex according  
to the rules, who is not conquerable, is  
dealt forceful or violent treatment. Consider  
the verbal abuse women receive. Women  
who are not ladies (the societal ideal:  
virgins or lawful wives) are bitches, whores,  
sluts, pigs, loose, easy; women who are not  
willing on the spot are uptight, frigid,  
cold, square. Consider the act of rape.  
Rape is a form of violence involving the per-  
sonal humiliation of the victim. Whether  
the male supremacist commits the act in fact  
or fantasy, he participates in and perpet-  
uates the prowess myth of rape. The man who  
verbalizes, "She makes me so mad I want to  
fuck her to death," is as guilty as the man  
who penetrates against a woman's will. In  
this category, I include husbands and lovers.  

Kinsey, Ruth Herschberger, and, more  
recently, Masters and Johnson, have challeng-  
ed the aforementioned sexual myths and misin-  
formation with reason and substantive clini-  
cal data. Nonetheless, the liberating po-  
tential of authentic sexual behavior cannot  
be realized as long as politics, i.e., domi-  
nance-subordinance behavior, characterize  
male-female relationships, as long as a  
male-dominated society insists on keeping  
women down. As Germaine Greer points out,  
for example:  

It is not...beyond the scope of...  
theorists to argue that all the women  
tested by Masters and Johnson were  
infantile products of improper condi-  
tioning, and that the fact that all  
orgasms in their samples were clitoral  
does not disprove that vaginal orgasms  
ever existed, could exist, or ought  

to exist....Facts are irrelevant to  
what is basically a value system.  

I believe the challenge to the sexual  
status quo must come from women. To ensure  
physical and psychic survival, we must  
demand new definitions of masculine and  
feminine that do not require dominance of  
one sex over the other, or better yet, do  
away with such antiquated notions completely.  
We, as women, must first get at the roots of  
our own oppression. As we develop self-  
determining, healthy self-concepts and sexual  
expectations, men will change in response.  

References  

1. Millett, Kate, Sexual Politics (Double-  
day, New York, 1970), p. 23.  

2. Arendt, Hannah, "Speculations on Vio-  
lence," The New York Review of Books,  
February 27, 1969, cited by Kate Millett,  
Sexual Politics.  

Ebing, J. Krafft, Psychopathia Sexualis  
(London, 1893), p. 13, cited by Germaine  
Greer, The Female Eunuch (McGraw Hill,  
New York, 1971).  

Hayes, Albert H., M.D., Physiology of  
Women (Boston: Peabody Medical Insti-  
tute, 1869), p. 226, cited by Michael  
Gordon, "From Procreation to Recreation:  
Changes in Sexual Ideology, 1830-1940,"  
presented at 1970 meeting of the  
American Sociological Association,  
Washington, D.C.  

Freud, Sigmund, cited by Drs. Eberhard  
and Phyllis Kronhausen, The Sexually  
Responsive Woman (Ballantine Books, New  
York, 1964), pp. 22-23.  

Marnor, Judd, cited by Eberhard and  
Kronhausen, pp. 31-32.  

Lydon, Susan, "The Politics of Orgasm,"  
Sisterhood Is Powerful, (ed.) Robin  
Morgan (Random House, New York, 1970),  
p. 20.  

Eberhard and Kronhausen, p. 62.  

Tbhid.:, p. 28.  

Herschberger, Ruth, Adam's Rib (Harper  
and Row, New York, 1948), p. 46.  

Greer, Germaine, The Female Eunuch, pp.  
88-89.  

This concludes the series of articles re-  
printed from the booklet, "How To Have Inter-  
course...Without Getting Screwed.”  

POLITICS