peer: EE OT OO  
EE ER Ie OOM —  

Feminist Historian “Stumbles  
Over Women” in History  

by MARY HASTINGS  

Scott read diaries of Southern women and  
discovered truths lying behind many Ante-  
Bellum Southern myths about women and  
slavery. She noted that Southern women bore  
no resemblance to the Scarlett O'Hara proto-  
type. Rather, they were shrewd plantation  
supervisors who shouldered the responsibili-  
ty for such “indelicate” tasks as yearly  
hog-killing.  

Feminist pressures are changing people's  
behavior, but a Southern feminist histori-  
an doubts that "people's assumptions (about  
women) have changed."  

Talking on "Feminism and History," Anne  
Firor Scott inaugurated a series of five  
evening lectures at 8 p.m. January 15 in  
Murphy Hall Auditorium on the University of  
Minnesota campus.  

Scott embarked on her feminist study  
some 20 years before women's studies were  
fashionable. She was a new kind of scholar  
who brought new insights into the record.  

The evening series is part of an Ameri-  
can Studies course called "The Effects of  
Feminism on American Intellectual Life."  

"My emotional involvement in this work  
kept me going," she explained. She learned  
that "just because something isn't in the  
books doesn't mean it didn't happen."  
"I am now learning to study the lives of  
obscure people," she said. “Women in Amer-  
ica have lived, to a great degree, in pri-  
vate, so there are many private records  
people must use to find out about women."  

Prof. Elsa Green, coordinator of the  
course, introduced Scott to approximately  
275 persons. Scott is Senior Fellow at the  
Johns Hopkins Institute of Southern History  
and a specialist in the history of southern  
women.  

In assessing the effect of feminism on  
history, Scott noted that although "femin-  
ist tactics" have affected the atmosphere  
in American intellectual institutions, the  
proportion of women in them hasn't changed  
"since the agitation began."  

In the early 1960s, Scott continued,  
"feminism--long latent--again burst on the  
scene."  

She added that we are only half-way  
through the task of redefining the social  
history of America.  

Today a "considerable number" of young  
women have elected to become historians to  
find out more about themselves and "these  
women have begun to redefine the whole fo-  
cus of historical inquiry."  

"What we don't study reveals as much  
about a culture as what we do," Scott de-  
clared. And American historians--largely  
upper-middle class, white Protestant males--  
haven't studied women until the last few  
years.  

She added that the most striking aspect  
of this new group of women scholars is  
their "extraordinary cooperation with one  
another--this cooperation makes knowledge  
grow faster."  

Scott, a native Georgian, attended Har-  
vard University in the early 1940s and en-  
countered a "pervasive anti-Southernism."  
In reaction to this bias, she determined to  
write her thesis on Southern Progressives.  
And as she perused the records of the South  
since 1890, she "kept stumbling over women"--  
women who were effective leaders and organ-  
izers of such causes as child labor laws.  

Following Scott's lecture the audience  
engaged her in a half-hour question and  
answer period.  

Prof. Mary Turpie, head of the American  
Studies Program, was also at the podium.  

"I was puzzled at first because I hadn't  
encountered women much in my graduate stud-  
ies. Male historians simply hadn't noticed  
women."  

The next evening be January  
31 at 8 p.m. in Murphy Hall Auditorium.  
Carroll Smith Rosenberg, assistant profess-  
or of history and psychiatry at the Univ-  
ersity of Pennsylvania, will discuss the  
history of psychiatric thought.  

Her curiosity aroused, Scott set about  
discovering why Southern women had been so  
intent on remaining "invisible and ladylike"  
while being "quite revolutionary."  

The evening lectures are free and open  
to the public.  

WE CAN USE DONATIONS OF OR  
INFORMATION ON HOW TO GET:  
rugs, bulletin boards, file  
cabinet, lamps.  

JOb and  
Feb. 256  

Play--"Clara's Old Man"*  
Jan. 30-Feb. 4, TWThFSS at  
3:30 p.m., Saturday evening  
8:00. Four one-act plays,  
$1.75, Shevlin Arena, Univ-  
ersity of Minnesota.  
*Clara's Old Man turns out  
to be a woman; a sad, seri-  
ous play about two gay,  
black women.  

in institutions onions  
treat-  

cial handicap, April 1  
monogamy, April 8  
religion.