4

Psycho-Historian -

b]

History’s Muse Reveals 19th
Century Women’s Rebellions

BY MARY HASTINGS

The liberation of Clio, muse of history,
and Sigmund Freud has loosened the grasp of
male chauvinism on the study of history and
psychiatry.

Carroll Rosenberg, psychiatrist and historian,
traced the roots of women's rebellion
against male control to Victorian America in
the second lecture of the "Feminism in American
Intellectual Life" series.

Rosenberg, a "psycho-historian" specializing
in 19th century American history,
addressed approximately 150 persons at 8 p.m.
January 31 in the University of Minnesota's
Murphy Hall Auditorium.

She is on the staff of the University of
Pennsylvania.

Rosenberg conceded that she began her
studies as a general social historian, not a
feminist.

But then she "came across the Women's
Moral Reform Society of New York". In the
activities of this Society, Rosenberg found
repudiation of the "male slant" on history
and psychiatry.

Rosenberg declared that the "strength and
tenacity of sexual roles in society" has far-
ranging effects on history and psychoanalytic
theories.

She admitted that this was a "rash" concept
in the academic world but the power recumbent
in the Women's Moral Reform Society made her
re-evaluate the male point of view in history.

"Historians have traditionally viewed the
Women's Moral Reform Society as amusing,
Quixotic or neurotic," she noted.

But the organization fulfilled a number
of female needs in the 19th century--a period
of major change in women's roles, when
they were moving to urban areas and beginning
to seek roles outside their homes and
families.

The Reform Society was an outgrowth of
the 19th century's philanthropic, religious
movement, which "showed a deep-seated anger
toward men".

The Society offered women an exclusively
female group, which demonstrated female
solidarity. It provided a newspaper for
communication among women and allowed them to
"save male sinners", thus giving them an
opportunity to control male behavior.

By the 1840s and 1850s, the Society had
chapters in most states of the Union.

Carroll Rosenberg

With Clio freed from the strictures of
male history, Rosenberg dealt with the liberation
of Sigmund Freud and the violence done to women
by the 19th century concept of acceptable
female behavior.

Freud's model for the libido was a male
model, Rosenberg said. "Although his first
and most important patients were women, he
based his theories on his own insights rather
than on those of his female patients."
Because of Freud's concepts, for three-quarters
of a century women have been viewed as
variants from a male model.

"They have been characterized by passivity,
masochism, narcissism and envy," Rosenberg
added. "Only through child-bearing and
rearing could women be fulfilled."

Today, psychiatrists are starting to ask
new questions, largely because of the Women's
Movement," she continued.

One of the most important new questions
being asked centers on the question of hysteria
as female role socialization in 19th