KNOCK ‘EM OUT DRAG ‘EM OUT ETHIC DYING

home. Lucy Cutler embroidered a special  
birth dress for the occasion and consulted  
Mrs. Kirschbaum frequently during her preg-  
nancy. When labor began, Mrs. Kirschbaum  
went to the Cutler home to attend the birth.  

"She was like a wedding attendant who  
arranges the bride's hair," says Ms. Cutler.  
"In my own home I was free to yell without  
disturbing anyone or getting medication  
against my will. It felt good to yell.  
Kirschbaum asked me if I wanted gas. I said  
no and that was it."  

Was she afraid of the dangers of home  
deliveries?  

"If you die in a hospital, it's OK," says  
Ms. Cutler. "But if you cough at home you're  
taking a risk! I'd feel guiltier if I went  
to a hospital and something went wrong."  

Lucy Cutler doesn't have much faith in the  
family-centered maternity care being offered  
by hospitals in the area. "To me that means  
when the nurses and staff have nothing else  
to do they will attend to my needs," she  
says.  

When General Hospital was asking public  
feedback while planning the new maternity  
wing, Cutler submitted a plan that reflects  
her professional background in wildlife  
management.  

Her plans consider the instinctual de-  
sires of women in labor, patterned after  
the universal behavior of animals in labor.  

Her facility would have as little to do  
with illness as possible. It would have  
lamps and double beds and be similar to a  
motel where "you could kick off your shoes  
and close the door-- a place where you could  
come with your chosen companions, your own  
blankets and other nesting equipment and  
stake out your territorial claim." Cutler  
says a woman in labor who knows what is  
going on should be the final authority re-  
garding her care during childbirth.  

Private room at Hennepin General  

Margaret Hewitt, a nurse-midwife at  
Hennepin County General Hospital, agrees.  
She informs us that there is now one room  
at General where patients can labor, deliv-  
er and recover and return home soon after  
birth.  

"This is a pilot thing to see if this is  
what women really want. But how many come  
to General to have their children?" says  
Ms. Hewitt who delivers about one baby a  
week herself.  

If women make use of this alternative,  
there are ten other private rooms that  
could be used this way.  

"If we found this was an up and coming  
thing we would have them available too,"  
says Ms. Hewitt.  

Hewitt sees no medical support for home  
births. "I would prefer that couples att-  
empting home births do it alone rather  
than depend on untrained attendants," she  
says. "At the first sign of trouble, the  
couple would be more likely to seek medical  
help."  

Ms. Hewitt sees benefits in women's re-  
newed participation in their birth exper-  
iences. "In the last 70 years, birth has  
been taken over by men and the benefits of  

that system have run out," she says. "The  
highest reproductive act for the male  
is orgasm. Childbirth is women's highest."  

"Doctors say I will take over and de-  
liver you of your child. I will give you  
knowledge, be technical advisor and inter-  
vene for your safety," she continues.  

"But men cannot understand women's sex-  
uality any more than women can understand  
the nature of man's."  

Another energetic woman making changes  

in the local childbirth experience is  

Sharon Rising at the University of Minnesota  
School of Nursing.  

Her plan for a master's degree program in  
nurse-midwifery became a reality this fall.  
Ninety women applied for entrance into the  
two-year program. Six full-time and ten  
part-time students have begun training.  

This is not granny midwifery but an  
extension of the nursing function with the  
backup of modern medical expertise and fac-  
ilities in case of emergency. The training  
will emphasize the comfort and emotional  
needs of pregnant women through a contin-  
uous woman-to-woman relationship.  

Rising has been working on plans for a  
separate child-bearing, child-rearing, fam-  
ily planning clinic. It would be an altern-  
ative to existing family care, providing a  
place for home-centered childbirth and t  
training for nurse-midwives. It could also  
be the base for a group midwifery practice,  
in which women would have one midwife for  
primary care but know them all in case her  
primary midwife was unable to attend her  
birth.  

Other health care professionals, ped-  
iatricians and child psychologists are in-  
terested in Rising's clinic, but until fund-  
ing is available, it will remain a plan.  
Funding is particularly difficult, says  
Rising, because this community is consider-  
ed to have good existing health care facil-  
ities. It requires active lobbying on the  
part of consumers to support alternatives.  

And pressure from consumers brings al-  
ternatives into existence. When Sharon Ri-  
sing completed her training at Yale less  
than five years ago, there were few places  
where she could practice her profession. Be-  
cause of women's interest in woman-to-  
woman childbirth care, hospitals are now  
looking for nurse-midwives and private ob-  
stetrical practices are wanting to include  
midwifery in the services they offer pati-  
ents.  

But it will be vital to the establish-  
ment of midwifery as an alternative for mid-  
wives to be accepted as colleagues, not sub-  
ordinates on these staffs, Rising warns.  

Renewed interest in midwifery parallels  
the women's movement of the past few years.  
The mystical role of the male doctor do  
diminishes as the woman-to-woman relation-  
ships grow stronger. But change will be  
necessary from inside the medical commun-  
ity.  

The image of the midwife as a crafty,  
backwoods woman operating in crude con-  
ditions still hangs on. But according to  
Sharon Rising, this is the reverse of what  
it should be. The trained nurse-midwife