WOMEN  
BEHIND BARS*

The entire body of this section of GF has been re-  
printed from an excellent booklet called  
WOMEN BEHIND BARS  
which was produced by a collective named  
RESOURCES FOR COMMUNITY CHANGE.  
This is only a small portion of the booklet, and  
our readers are encouraged to contact RCC for their  
* own copy. RCC publishes booklets on specific issues  
where they see a need for a compilation of organiz-  
ing resources and strategies. Contact them at  
P.O. Box 21066  

Washington DC, 20009 Price, $1.75 each.  

The following is excerpted from “Anarcho-Marxist  
Criminology" by David Greenberg.  

The way America operates brings into existence  
people who cannot function under the rules it has set  
up. So we get draft resistance, drugs, theft, rape,  
murder, riots. Under the impact of military defeat a-  
broad and increasingly militant opposition at home,  
the contradictions are becoming more severe and more  
obvious. At this juncture it is incumbent upon the  
ruling class to put a stop to the trouble. Prisons  
play an important role in that effort.  

We have long been made aware that imprisonment  
generates passivity, inability to make decisions, ex-  
acerbates sexual problems, disrupts family life and  
generates deep hostility toward guards, toward all of  
society, and often towards the prisoner her/himself.  

In addition, educational and vocational training pro-  
grams, when offered at all, are designed to keep in-  
mates at the bottom of the economic ladder. And pri-  
sons propagandize them to accept their low status: on  
the wall of the dining room in the penitentiary at  
Terre Haute, Indiana, is an inscription: "Whatsoever  
is brought upon thee take cheerfully and be patient  
when thou art changed to a low estate for gold is  
tried in the fire and acceptable man in the furnace of  
adversity." Ecclesiasticus 2: 3-4.  

The destructiveness of the prison system thus  
serves an extremely important social function. Its  
purpose is to incapacitate the criminal, to render  
her/him impotent in opposing the system even while vir-  
tually guaranteeing her/his future criminality. Prisons  

try to teach inmates, among other things, that "you  
can't win", that you can only get slapped down if you  

oppose the system, that instead of uniting with others  
to effect change, you should look out for yourself and  
not worry about anyone else (not exactly a novel idea  
in American culture). The effort isn't always success-  
ful; from time to time, hunger strikes or work strikes  
manage to bring inmates together in opposition to pri-  
son policies, at least temporarily.  

Imprisonment is part and parcel of a class society:  
the contradictions we saw as responsible for criminal  
behavior (i.e. law violations) are all reflections of  
this one basic aspect of our society. Our rulers need  
prisons—not to accomplish their stated goals of de-  
terrence or rehabilitation, but precisely because the  
manner in which prisons fail in accomplishing those  
goals makes them an essential institution in the per-  
petuation of the status quo. Those of us who see as  
our political task the building of a political move-  
ment for radical changes in the way America functions,  
changes in its economic and political institutions in-  
volving the elimination of class as a feature of our  
social life, and all that follows from that, naturally  
raise as part of our program the demand that prisons  
should be abolished. This demand is obviously one that  
cannot be realized within the context of our present  
society. The call to abolish prisons is therefore also  
a call to abolish societies that build and maintain  

prisons, and to build instead a new society, a soci-  
ety in which prisons will be superfluous because the  
contradictions responsible for "criminality" will have  
disappeared.  

INSIDE VIEW  

The following has been condensed from three sep-  
arate interviews with women ex-cons. Marilyn Isabel  
was incarcerated at Dwight Correctional Institute in  
Illinois from January 1969 to June 1974. Ila Mason  
spent one year at the Women's House of Detention on  
Riker's Island in New York City and was released in  
November 1972; she also did time in a county jail in  
Georgia. Joanne Johnson was incarcerated from 1961 to  
January 1975 at the California Institute for Women  
in Frontera.  

SPECIAL PROBLEMS of WOMEN PRISONERS  

Marilyn: The special problems of women prisoners  
are, strangely enough, the same problems of women ev-  
erywhere. I see the women's movement as centered a-  
round prisons because that is a typical manifestation  
of the social phenomena that have been going on for  
women for a long, long time. If they just took a good  
look at the prisons, they would see themselves all  
over again. The only difference between them and the  
women doing time is that they have freedom of move-  
ment. One of the things that I'm greatly concerned  
about is the way that the state feels that women have  
no worth. They don't invest in rehabilitation programs  
like vocational and educational programs because they  
feel that all women are going to do is go out and get  
married and have babies and they wouldn't use any of  
the things that they were taught. Plus there's a  
great deal of sex exploitation in female institutions  
by male employees and by male inmates. Because soci-  
ety considers a woman a sexual object, she does not  
have a legal complaint as far as they're concerned if  
she says she's been molested by an employee.  

Programs—I did some work as the director of ed-  
ucation's secretary at Dwight. And I quit because I  
filed two thousand and one federal programs going on  
in men's institutions and with each one of them I filed!  
I got angrier. They had training programs in electron-  
ics, they had medical assistant programs, they had work  
release programs geared so far above what we had that  
it looked ridiculous.  

continued on -p.41