16

LADIES & FEAR

| A NEW PLAY BY CIRCLE THE WITCH

We can't go back for inspiration because
the house has been torn down (for a parking
lot). But we remember that sunny summer day
on the porch when we decided that one thing
women have in common is "fear". The explo-
ration of those fears led us to our new play,
"Lady In The Corner".

The play has been eight months in the
writing during which we've discovered the
intimate connection between the things in-
side and outside of us that cause fear. And
they are many and varied. The opening scene
in "Lady In The Corner" shows women's fears

in a work situation - a factory in this
case. Later scenes depict the vulnerable
position of women in a family system and
the fearful questions that arise. We use
the dynamics of change between a mother and
two daughters to explore the possibilities
of growth for these characters. And for
all of us.

“Lady In The Corner" will open January
24th at 2104 Stevens Ave. So. (Women's
Institute for Social Change), Mpls. and will
run Fridays and Saturdays at 8 p.m. until
March 1st with special matinees at 2 p.m.,
Sundays, February 9th and 16th. Donation
is $2.00 ($2.50 - opening weekend - benefit
for the Twin Cities Women's Union). Because
of the smallness of the space, the first
100 people only can be seated. Advance
tickets will be sold for January 24th and
25th. For more information call 729-6200.

A SHORT HERSTORY OF CIRCLE
OF THE WITCH: A COLLECTIVE
FEMINIST THEATER

In the fall of 1973 four women began
weekly workshops in South Minneapolis to
explore theatre, feminism and political
perspectives--and to see how the three
mix. By October we were meeting three times
a week, had a name, and began the process of
becoming a collective and a women's theatre.
A women's theatre that would love, support,
challenge, criticize, and share changing
ideas and a growing feminist consciousness
with each other and with our community. That
task, of course, is only beginning.

Our first original play, “Sexpot Follies",
a satirical revue on women's conditioning
in a sexist society opened to a packed house
March 8th (International Women's Day) at the
New Riverside Cafe. Since then we've toured
locally and throughout the state (even to
Fargo, N.D.) and performed in food co-ops,
prisons, ballrooms, auditoriums, chapels,
hockey rinks - you name it.

In addition to being flexible as to
where we perform, we also try to be flexi-
ble in our theatre. We don't want
to be isolated from the community and the
rest of the world. Although we consider
ourselves professional, we're not totally
self-supporting. Many of us work part time
outside the theatre in day care centers, as
waitresses, typists, etc. Also, the theatre
is a workgroup of the Twin Cities Women's
Union, an autonomous women's liberation or-
ganization involved in a variety of projects
with women in the community.

We hold regular workshops for women to
share our skills and experiences. Our re-
hearsals are open and discussion groups with
the audience after our performances supply
us with suggestions and criticisms on how to
make our work clearer and stronger and also
give people a chance to express their opin-
ions. We are continuously growing and
changing and feel our plays and our theatre
should be too.

Recently the Women's Union received a
letter of support from the North Vietnam
Women's Union, and it made us all feel the
spirit of international sisterhood. Women
are getting together - growing stronger.

In our plays, we want to show the power of
women - the pride and the love.

Sandra Pappas
for Circle Of The Witch

DEVLIN con’t. from page 1

And to Bernadette, the end to that fight is
a “socialist millennium." "Socialism is the
only solution to the Irish problem--to the
problems of the world. The people who own
and control the world don't care about being
reasonable and sane, but holding on to what
they've got."

"They're not going to give it up--we'll have
to take it off them."

The British have effectively "conned" the
Northern Irish--Protestant and Catholic--
into believing their basic conflict is re-
ligious. "But it is not," she insisted.

And she cautioned Americans to heed Ireland's
fate--"ours is an international struggle,"
she promised.

Before she left, Bernadette asked for money
to feed the Northern Irish interned without
trial. She pledged the money would be used
for food, not guns, and I found myself drop-
ping my last $2 into a collection canister.

On the way back across the bridge, I thought
about my experience and why Bernadette had
touched me. I strongly believe her political
beliefs are insufficient to solve the prob-
lems of power-mongering, whether by radicals
or establishment. And I wish she would use
her talents to help the beleaguered women of
her country. But I admire her courage, and,
surprisingly, felt a strong ethnic bond to
her. (Generations of Anglo-Irish family life
have left their mark.)

I had relearned that familiar lesson--there
are no easy answers.

If I spent my life in those streets, saw the
ones I loved dragged through them, what
course would I take?