YVONNE...

The Yvonne Wanrow Legal Defense Committee  
(Goldflower August, 1975) is asking that you  
either write your own letter to the Governor of  
the state of Washington, sending a copy to the  
Defense Committee, or use the following example  
letter. Sign it, stamp it, and get it in the  
mail as soon as possible.  

Yvonne is poor, has no income, and her family  
needs her. She cannot win her freedom alone.  

With a new trial, Yvonne's financial needs are  
greatly intensified. Donations can be sent to:  

Yvonne Wanrow's Legal Defense Fund  
Seattle First National Bank  

North Spokane Branch  

Account #82172-115  

Spokane, Washington 99207  

Letters of support and copies of the letters  
to the Governor can be sent to:  

Yvonne Wanrow's Indian Legal Defense Committee  
P.O. Box 49  
Inchelium, Washington 99138  

SAMPLE LETTER  

Honorable Daniel J. Evans  

Governor of the State of Washington  
Capitol Building  

Olympia, Washington 98501  

Dear Governor Evans:  

I, the undersigned, have been following the case of  
Ms. Yvonne Wanrow,  

a 31-year-old mother of three children and member  

of the Colville Indian Tribe who was found guilty  

of second-degree murder and first-degree assault.  

I am aware that the man Ms. Wanrow is accused of  
killing was known to the police as a child molester;  
he had also infected a seven-year-old girl with a  
venereal disease and physically attacked Ms.  
Wanrow's son (9).  

I understand that her guilty verdict was reversed  
on August 6, 1975 and that she has been granted a  
new trial. I also understand that the prosecution  
may appeal the reversal.  

Social injustice against mothers and children,  
as in Ms. Wanrow's case, must be stopped.  

A man in your position, Governor Evans, can lead  
the way to a truly democratic society and we ask  
your immediate attention and consideration in the  
case pending against Ms. Wanrow.  

I am asking for an immediate dismissal of the  
charges against Ms. Yvonne Wanrow.  

Very truly yours,  

signature  
street address  
city, state, zip code  

A Beat Of  
The Drum  
For You,  
My Friend  

©1973 by Yvonne Wanrow - Colville Tribe  

FBI INTRUSION AGAIN  
SAMEERA EER REL EE NCL MRR IED BORE LTE E ITS ROTI ME UE CSTE  

Harassment at Rosebud Reservation  

Early in the morning of September 5, about 80 FBI men  
descended on the Rosebud, South Dakota Reservation  
homes of AIM spiritual director Leonard Crow Dog and  
AIM supporter Al Running.  

They roused the sleeping households by shouting, "This  
is the FBI, come out with your hands up," as four heli-  
copters landed. Entering the houses, they shook  
sleeping children awake and lined up everyone against  
the wall. Leonard Crow Dog, who was not dressed, was  
not allowed to put on his clothes.  

Charged with assault with a deadly weapon were: Leonard  
Crow Dog, Gerald Millard, Owen Young Jr., Al Running,  
Frank Running. Bond on each was set at $5000. Charged  
with "possession of a weapon with an altered serial  
number" was Annie Mae Aquash, bond $5000. Charged with  
"convicted felon in possession of a weapon" was Darryl  
Butler, no bond set. All were taken to the jail at  
Pierre, South Dakota, about 150 miles away.  

The alleged incident leading to the assault charge  
occurred at 3 a.m. Sept. 3, when two drunken "goons",  
McCloskey and Beck, were run off the Crow Dog home-  
stead. The FBI remained for several hours, searching  
the place. Eventually they confiscated over 100 items  
of property, including such dangerous weapons as a set  
of nail clippers, a tampon, and a piece of string. A  
Rapid City FBI spokesman told the press that the  
arrests were for possession of "weapons and explosives”  
which is not true. WKLD/OC attorneys and Mary Crow Dog  
are in Pierre, working to win release for the 7 victims.  
The FBI remains on the Rosebud Reservation, a previously  
quiet and peaceful place.  

from AIM release