WOMANEWS

National News from The Spokeswoman, May 15, 1975  
(Available at 1957 E. 73rd St., Chicago, Ill. 60649,  
$9.00 yr., ind., $16 yr., inst.)

RETRIBUTIVE JUSTICE !!

The New York State Supreme Court has ruled that a  
woman who put her husband through law school is en-  
titled to similar support for her professional ambi-  
tions--even though the couple is now divorced. Ac-  
cording to a New York Times report, acting justice  
Bentley Kassel ruled that attorney Charles Morgan  
must pay his former wife $200/week in alimony and  
child support so that she would have "an equal oppor-  
tunity for development and fulfillment by completing  
her medical school training, although capable of  
being self-supporting as a secretary.” Ms. Morgan  
gave up her pre-med studies to finance her husband's  
education by taking a secretarial job; the couple  
separated shortly after he finished law school.

(My, doesn't that have a familiar ring? Isn't it a  
delicious thought to think of every woman who has  
found herself in a situation similar to Ms. Morgan's  
doing the same thing? Instead of trips to the  
Bermuda Islands or the Bahamas, husbands would turn  
around and put their wives through school. Sigh.)

ERA--?

Final ratification of the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA)  
in 1975 became an impossibility when the South Caro-  
lina House voted 46-43 on March 26 to table the  
Amendment. With four more states needed for ratifica-  
tion, only three will still consider ERA this year--  
Florida, Missouri and North Carolina. Meanwhile, the  
latest Gallup Poll on ERA found that 58% of respond-  
ents favored ratification, 24% were opposed, and 18%  
had no opinion.*

*(GF ed. note: Minnesota just barely missed rescinding  
its ratification of ERA this legislative session by a  
vote of 33-33! Thanks to the untiring efforts of Florian  
Chmielewski--what do you suppose he finds threatening  
about ERA?--and get this; he tried to tack on a rescind-  
ing amendment to the Bicycle Registration Bill. How  
desperate can you get? And sneaky. Really sneaky.)

ABORTION

Right-to-lifers lost their first attempt to challenge  
women's constitutional right to abortion in this ses-  
sion of Congress. A skeptical and procedurally-minded  
Senate voted 54-36 on April 10 to reject an amendment pro-  
posed by Dewey F. Bartlett (R-Okla) which would have  
barred the use of federal funds to pay for or "encour-  
age" abortions except where necessary to save the life  
of the mother. Bartlett's far-reaching amendment was  
tacked on to S.66--the Nurse Training and Health Reve-  
nue Sharing and Health Services Acts--following the  
pattern set in previous congressional attempts to re-  
strict abortion by amending unrelated, but high prior-  
ity, legislation and bypassing traditional committee  
procedures, debate and votes of record.

The setback suffered by right-to-lifers in the defeat  
of the Bartlett Amendment is significant, but not de-  
cisive. The issue is sure to come up again this ses-  
sion in both houses of Congress. (Be sure, therefore,  
to write and let your Congressperson know how you feel)

and FORCED STERILIZATION

S.66 as a whole passed the Senate by a wide margin.  
The legislation--which provides funds for a variety of  
programs including nurse training, family planning,  
community mental health and neighborhood health cen-  
ters--was vetoed by President Ford in December, and  
funding for these programs officially expired last  
June. (The House is working on a revised health ser-  
vices bill and the chance to override a second veto  
appears good.) The Senate version of the bill in-  
cludes an amendment (adopted unanimously) prohibiting  
government officials from coercing welfare recipients  
into abortion or sterilization as a condition of re-  
ceiving continued benefits. The Department of Health,  

Education, and Welfare (HEW) has thus far failed to  
come up with revised guidelines on sterilization that  
are acceptable to the federal court which last year  
ordered the Department to provide stronger safeguards  
against abuses. In the meantime, the American Civil  
Liberties Union (ACLU) and others have charged wide-  
spread current abuse of HEW's original regulations on  
sterilization--saying that many hospitals and medical  
personnel are unaware of, or unwilling to adhere to,  
the government guidelines.*

*(GF ed. note: It is no accident that anti-abortion  
forces wish to force mandatory motherhood on white  
women, but at the same time there are forced steriliza-  
tions being done on Native American and Third World  
women--divide and conquer is The Man's most efficient  
tactic; separate women on these issues, which are in  
reality two issues, both vital to women, and at the  
same time produce lots of white babies and poor babies  
for armies and large, cheap labor pools while, at the  
same time, effecting genocide. Very clever. But we  

need to be more wary than the Devil!)

LAW USED AS DIVISIVE TOOL

The Union Women's Alliance to Gain Equality (Union  
WAGE) reports that the battle to save protective labor  
laws for California workers is still going strong--in  
the legislature and in the courts. Since 1971, Union  
WAGE has been spearheading a campaign against anti-  
labor forces trying to wipe out the state's protective  
laws (the most extensive in the nation) through the  

use of equal rights legislation. Union WAGE's position  
--which is supported by 1973 Equal Employment Opportu-  
nity Commission (EEOC) guidelines--has been that dis-  
criminatory protective legislation should be extended  
to men rather than abolished for both sexes. A bill  
which would have accomplished this passed the Califor-  
nia legislature in 1972, but was vetoed by Governor  
Reagan. Instead, in 1973, Reagan signed a bill which  
extended the jurisdiction of the state Industrial  
Welfare Commission (IWC) to men. Union WAGE believes  
that the intention of the California legislature was  
the extension of protective laws to men; in 1974, how-  
ever, the IWC issued an entirely new set of regulations  
which effectively wiped out previous protections: pre-  
mium overtime pay was not required until after ten  
(rather than eight) hours of work per day; rest per-  
iods were eliminated, working meal periods allowed,  

and restrictions on the number of work hours per week  
removed. In May, 1974, the state AFL-CIO took the IWC to  
court on procedural grounds. The AFL-CIO won--and the  
IWC must now hold public hearings and produce a whole  
new set of wage orders.*

*(GF ed. note: Protective laws have been used to hold  
women in low paying positions--weight restrictions,  
hour restrictions, etc. When women began fighting  
these, saying that all employees should be protected  
against poor working conditions, and protective laws  
not be based on sex, but on ability, companies used  
the tactic of removing protective laws altogether so  
that women employees could either be forced to take a  
job requiring too heavy weight-lifting or face firing.  
Also, they must take overtime they may not want. Thus  
many women feel women's rights movements within a  
company work to their disadvantage. They blame the  
wrong people--the women's "libbers"--and so the  
company strikes a victory. Again, divide and conquer.  
The culprit is, of course, management. Rather than  

assign jobs and overtime on the basis of choice and  
ability, they force all to one set of requirements.)

EEOC and SENIORITY

The major government agency charged with ending em-  
ployment discrimination based on sex is in the midst  
of a crisis. The U.S. Equal Opportunity Commission  
(EEOC) is currently facing a backlog of more than  
100,000 unresolved cases. Its top positions of  
chairman and general counsel are vacant, and the  
agency itself is increasingly caught in the cross  
fire between employers looking for a reprieve on af-  
firmative action in the recession and civil rights  
groups charging the Commission with failure to meet  
its obligations to enforce the law.

news

ait:

ri i rgnettl