WY  
Xe  
KE  

WOMEN'S  

The Twin Cities Women's Union is moving  
strong into its third year of organizing.  
Our membership is increasing and we've had  
many new projects this fall. We want  
to do a better job of communicating with  
women in the Twin Cities, both to inform  
them of feminist political activity and  
to encourage them to join us. Towards  
this end, we will be doing a column in each  
issue of Goldflower.  

Twin Cities Women's Union (TCWU) defines  
itself as a socialist-feminist organization.  
This means that we look to socialism as a  
necessary pre-condition for achieving our  
basic rights to meaningful work, respect,  
equality, and participation in the decision-  
making processes. As feminists, we under-  
stand our oppression as women and place a  
priority on fighting for our own needs and  
rights. Our principles state a commitment  
to fight imperialism and racism and recog-  
nize their interconnectedness with sexism,  
to work collectively, and to build a culture  
which reflects our political values while  
respecting our individual differences.  

United around these basic themes, we find  
it necessary to create smaller work groups  
and task forces. This way, we accommodate  
individual interests and abilities and pro-  
vide room for more personal contact. Pre-  
sently, we have ten workgroups and chapters:  
The Women's School; the Circle of the Witch,  
a collective feminist theatre; the Twin  
Cities Women's Graphics Collective; Elizabeth  
Blackwell Women's Health Center; a  
Socialist-Feminist study group; a Newsletter  
Collective; the Welfare Task Force and the  
Third World Task Force. We are also organ-  
izing a new group which will provide an  
orientation for women new to the Union.  

If you are interested in knowing more  
about the Union, please call 729-6200 and  
speak with Jane or Fluffy who are staffing  
the office. Our address is 2953 Bloomington  
Avenue South, 55407—stop by and visit the  
office or, if you'd like to receive our news-  
letter, Still Ain't Satisfied, please send  

$3.00 to that address. Our office hours  
are Monday 9:30-6:00, Wed. 9:30-7:00, Thurs.  
12:00-7:00, and Sat. 9:30-4:00.  

Although we don't have a definite Jan-  
uary schedule set up yet, the following  
projects are in the works:  

THE WOMEN'S SCHOOL is planning its win-  
ter session which will probably start in  
February. This fall, we offered 24 classes  
and registered about 150 women. If you'd  
like to receive a School brochure, just call  
the office. Or, MORE IMPORTANTLY, if you're  
interested in convening a class, please con-  
tact us very soon. We pay a small stipend  

to women who initiate courses and you need  
not be an "expert" or consider yourself a  
teacher. The School is a place to meet with  
other women who share your interests and to  
develop your skills and ideas together. We  
have had many requests for courses in auto  

Mechanics, Historical Society Classes  
The History & Art of American Quilting  
by Anne Bonner 9:30 and 12 noon  
Jan. 8, 15, 22, 29  
Livingston-Griggs House  
432 Summit, St. Paul  
reg. $20 — call 227-1343  

THE TWIN CITIES  

Bonnie Yackel, Jackie Gohdes,  
Jeanette Sullivan,  

UNION  

mechanics, home repair, carpentry and photo-  

graphy so please let us know if you would be  
able to help other women in these areas.  

The School workgroup invites interested wo-  
men to join us in helping to organize and  
publicize the School. We're also looking  
for artists and people interested in doing  
publicity.  

We are planning ORIENTATION SESSIONS for  
women who haven't worked with the Union be-  
fore. Tentatively, we're thinking of four  
meetings which would involve personal intro-  
duction, discussions and readings about fem-  
inism, socialist-feminism, and the activi-  
ties of the Union and how to participate in  
them. The idea of this class is to make  
sure that new women have a chance to know  
a few people in the organization more close-  
ly so that they can enter into the activiti-  
es of the group with some personal support  
and understanding. Please call us if you'd  
be interested in participating in an orien-  
tation this winter.  

If you'd like to  
PARTICIPATE in a PERSON-  
AL SUPPORT GROUP or  
a STUDY GROUP, please  
call the office and we'll try to connect  

you with the people who are in these groups  
or who have expressed interest in starting  
them.  

We're very anxious to have more women  
participate in our Welfare and Third World  
Task Forces. We are studying Welfare as a  
function of the U.S. economy and planning  

to learn more about local welfare policy.  
We're working with other welfare groups  

and planning a series of educationals and  

a leaflet which will be designed to edu-  
cate people about the welfare system, their  
rights to welfare, and to combat public pre-  
judice against welfare recipients. The  
Third World group is studying women's con-  
dition and their participation in liber-  
ation movements in Africa, South America,  
the Mid-East, Indo-China and in Third World  
communities in the United States.  

On January 24 and 25 at 8:00 p.m., The  
Circle of the Witch Theatre will open their  
new play, Lady in the Corner, at the Chrys-  
alis House, 2104 Stevens Ave. S., Minne-  
apolis. The $1.50 tickets will be sold in  
advance. This opening performance is a  
fund-raiser for the Union and the Theatre.  

On January 5 at 1:00 p.m. at Newman Cen-  
ter, 1691 University Ave. S.F., the Union  
is sponsoring a Rape Educational which will  
be presented by Carla Howrey, member of the  
NOW State Task Force on Rape. We will  
charge $.50 per person and donate the money  
to that group.  

NOTE: The attitudes expressed in Gold  
Flower by individual contributors do not  
necessarily reflect those of the collective  
staff members.  

STAFF THIS ISSUE  

Pam, Sharon Burton,  

Coco Weber, Peggy  

Masterman, Mickey Connor, Barbara Meyer,  
Kitty Duda, Shirley Heier, Char Masterman.