MAKE A PRETTY JACOB

NRE ES OE ECE CEE tL COT AEE fe iti

ores

Bill nestled Jacob's head under his chin.  
"Okay, Tiger. Sorry," he said.

On the beach they covered themselves with  
sand. Bill closed his eyes and whispered,  
"This is nice." Jacob did the same, echoing  
"This is nice." He peeked at Bill periodically  
and closed his eyes again until Bill  
finally rose to leave. Jacob jumped up and  
slipped his hand into Bill's. He looked  
like Bill's miniature, his shoulders drooping  
a bit, his hips thrust slightly forward.  
They ambled lazily, in no hurry to return  
to the cabin.

That night Jacob's velvety fingers on  
Linda's arm awakened her. "Mommy, I'm  
hot."

She clasped his hand and ran her fingers  
over his cheek. "My God, you are hot!"  
she cried. "Come on, baby," she said and  
lifted him into her arms. She laid him on  
the bed next to Bill, who peered into the  
darkness and asked foggily, "What's wrong?"

Linda tried to control the edge on her  
voice. "He's probably burned to a crisp.  
You know he burns easily." She flicked on  
a small light, shot from the bedroom, and  
returned a moment later with a thermometer.  
It registered Jacob's temperature at 103°.

Jacob watched Linda through listless, red-  
rimmed eyes for a sign of his well-being.  
She bit her lower lip and pinched her brows  
tightly together as she laid cold cloths  
to his forehead and arms. She gave him  
cold water and aspirin that were hard to  
swallow. She carried him to his room and  
rocked him, cradling him snugly and hum-  
ming softly.

She felt Jacob's hot breath on her neck  
when he whispered, "Sing Jacob's song,  
Mommy."

Linda smiled, hugging him closer. Her  
voice intoned the words she'd given the  
song when Jacob was an infant. She'd used  
it often to lullaby him to sleep. Jacob  
smiled wistfully as she finished--"  
...Daddy's love and Mommy's love, make a  
pretty Jacob."

Linda laid him on his bed and drew a  
sheet over him, tucking it around his shoul-  
ders. She promised he'd feel much better  
by morning and returned to her room.

But Jacob floated in a burning abyss for  
three days. Whenever he surfaced he felt  
his bed enclosing his heated body and saw  
the ceiling recede and become small and  
distorted. Strange high sounds rang in  
his ears and mixed with voices. The voices  
drifted elusively, shouting fragments  
through filters that made them fuzzy and  
far away. They rose and fell, growing in  
intensity, sharpening their edges, cutting  
through the waves of mist that washed over  
Jacob's mind--A damned lie!--Is it? You  
used to--always bitching!--shut up! shut  
up! You'll disturb Jacob--look who's talk-  
ing--if you cared--then leave!--all right,  
I will! 

A deafening roar drew a curtain of sil-  
ence over the voices. The abrasive heat  
that had tightened Jacob's skin over aching  
bones receded, leaving him suspended in a  
numb void.

When he emerged he peered into a wrink-  
led, kindly face. The stranger greeted  
Jacob with a smile. He placed a stethoscope  
on Jacob's chest and appeared to be sleep-  
ing. Then he looked at Jacob and moved his  
lips silently. He frowned slightly and  
moved his lips again. Jacob stared at  
the man hovering over him.

Linda's drawn face appeared on top of  
the man's shoulder. She said voiceless  
things he could not understand.

Jacob slid in and out of sleep while the  
sun made its slow journey behind drawn  
shades. The room was semi-dark when Bill's  
face appeared over him. He wore a look  
much like Linda's, and he, too, moved his  
mouth mutely. Jacob frowned and stared at  
his father.

Each day Jacob sat up in his bed for long-  
er periods. He watched silent gray and  
black figures move across the television  
screen, or lethargically moved wooden puz-  
zle pieces into their slots. He turned  
pages of colorful characters with meaning-  
less black letters next to them. He watched  
his parents' faces for some explanation,  

but could only read confusion and pain.

Had he done something wrong? He watched  
them watching him, and wondered what he  
should do, for their anxious, expectant  
faces told him that he had not done some-  
thing they expected from him. He watched  
them watch each other, their lips moving  
inaudibly, their faces etched with looks  
Jacob attached to the voices he vaguely  
remembered.

Linda began taking him outside on warm  
days. Sometimes she would push him on his  
swing. Sometimes he built awkward squares  
in the sand. And sometimes he dragged his  

finger through flattened sand, tracing two  

tall stick figures with their oversized  
circle-hands stuck to the smaller ones of  
the short figure between them.

One day Linda found him by a clump of  
wild flowers. She knelt down in front of  
him, about to reach out to touch his arm.  
She drew back, stifling a cry with her hand.  
Jacob's fingers methodically tore at the  
legs, the feelers, the wings, of a large  
monarch. His expressionless face rippled  
before Linda's eyes as she heard his mono-  
tone words, the first he'd uttered since his  
illness--"…Daddy's love and Mommy's  
love, make a pretty Jacob."

Copyright 1974