Women Behind Bars.-- — From p. 3

Ila: The whole business of women being incarcerated—it's kind of a hands-off policy that works more psychologically and mentally. They use brute force to keep men in jail. With women, they use a bunch of other different things like differences in the kinds of things they sell in commissary, selling make-up, allowing women to have a beauty parlor, to get her hair fixed, this kind of thing. Most of the jobs that are available are cleaning. There's also stuff like sewing and beauty culture. It's a very heavy thing in terms of food preparation. All of these things that are supposedly so-called women's duties—they use these as a means of distracting women from understanding the fact that they are in jail.

They also try to establish through the guards and the women very much of a motherly or sisterly relationship which is usually not present in a men's jail. That cuts down on the number of transgressions because then it’s like you're transgressing against that person instead of breaking a rule. And then they can sit there and say "I'm so disappointed in you, I'm so hurt that you did this." Also, to a certain degree, there are more favors done for women than in the men's institution. Favors like the ability to get passes to go to different areas of the building. They'll bring women make-up, junk like that. All of this in an effort to keep any kind of rebellion, any kind of contradiction down to a bare minimum.

PROBLEMS of 3rd World WOMEN PRISONERS

Joanne: Third world women suffer much more in the prison because of job discrimination. This is the case with the board procedures; this is the case with disciplinary procedures. Third world women will stay in lock-up longer; they'll be written up more arbitrarily; they'll usually do longer time on parole, more time inside—just the shitty end of the stick.

Marilyn: One of the things that really frightened me when I was incarcerated is the way they demand all Third World people to conform to White culture, White value system. In particular, one of the things that really frightened me was the way they demand Latinos to speak English, refuse to let them send out mail in Spanish or read mail in Spanish. They don’t sit down and try to explain to them why certain rules are what they are.

SPECIAL OPPRESSION of GAY PRISONERS

Marilyn: I am angry about the way gays are treated. I had my parole denied because I am gay. I saw another woman be denied the things that she qualified for because she was gay. The oppression of gays in places like Dwight is really, really fantastic. Even the most so-called "humane" frown on homosexuality and they've got it in the back of their heads that “they force those women to do that kind of stuff.” And the reality is that there is no force involved, no rape involved.

DID YOU HAVE ANY CONTACT WITH BEHAVIOR MODIFICATION IN PRISON?

Joanne: The Management Cottage at CIW was about 40 women, who were completely segregated from the rest of the people. They ate early in the morning before the rest of the people. They were housed and lived in this one unit, which had different acoustics and plastic windows instead of glass and grouping six hours a day. You couldn’t get a goddamn thing if you didn't do what they wanted.

The women who got put in this unit were always dissenters. They like to say it was people who couldn't get along with others, but it was people they didn't want to be in a position to be out talking and organizing. Although there were some who were halfway psychotic. It was an abnormal atmosphere.

humiliation, dehumanization tactics; to page 12

WHAT TYPES of WOMEN END UP IN PRISON?

Ila: Mostly what I've found is two types of women: it's those who really need money, who are in a very bad economic condition; and then there are those who do not necessarily need the money but want the money. But most of the women are just in for hustling, just whatever they can do to make some money. And really that, basically, is the crime that they commit: the fact that they really need the money and they can't do it legitimately for one reason or another, which may be a lack of education, a lack of motivation—could just be a lack of job availability. I really think that that's gonna be escalated a whole lot with the economy. Just the lack of people having jobs is gonna drive people to feel, "Well, maybe I'll just take it." That's gonna bring a lot more people to court who are used to working, people who would never have any thought of stealing anything. And maybe that just might change the whole way that the courts have to deal with people who will be coming before the bench. It may not change the way the court would approach me, ‘cause I think their attitude about me or sisters like me would always be the same; we don't know any better. But maybe to a great degree it would soften up some of their procedures in terms of dealing with criminals, supposed criminals.

It is very hard being handicapped in a place like this. Here in CIW I was once put in solitary with not even a shift, not even panties, no water in the cell, no toilet, just a hole in the floor with a pipe... just a stone floor and my bare skin. I was sixty-five years old at the time, seventy-one now. I was in there for three weeks’ lockup over crackers. Just because I had a few illegal crackers that were given to me by a kitchen girl in my room.—Louise Bezie, deaf inmate at California Institution for Women, quoted in Women in Prison.

WHAT ARE THE WORST ASPECTS of the PRISON SYSTEM?

Joanne: The indeterminate law. It's supposed to be a very, very progressive thing, but actually it's an albatross around the people's neck in California. Anyone who's sentenced to one of the prisons in California is sentenced by a judge to the time prescribed by law. And then after that, the release power and the amount of time inside and time one does outside on parole is given over into the hands of what people consider experts in human behavior. This is the Board of Trustees in the women's case, and of course the men have the Adult Authority. The Board has the power of life and death over a person's life between the minimum and the maximum terms. And they even have a very slick way of taking a person over their maximum sentence which is what happened to me—I had a six months to ten years sentence for receiving stolen property but I ended up doing 14 years on it.