10

Wherever women's liberation is spoken of or
written about, the tonic of "Women and the
People's Republic of China" is raised. It
is a common notion that life is signifi-
cantly better for Chinese sisters since the
Cultural Revolution of 1966.

Revolutionary criticism during the Cultural
Revolution brought about such Maoist econo-
mic-class changes in agriculture which
prompted other changes in education, poli-
tics, child care, employment and therefore
in the status of women.

The theoretical direction of Women's Libera-
tion is, not surprisingly, strongly guided
by Mao Tse-tung thought. Always action-
oriented, he has stated:

Times have changed, and today men and

women are equal. Whatever men com-

rades can accomplish, women comrades

can too.

This slogan is used for overcoming obstacles
in conservative thought. For example, in
1958, four women citizens of Changtsu Island
(Liaoning Province) wanted to become fisher-
women. There was some opposition, since
women had traditionally stayed home. The
above quote from the writings of Mao was
instrumental in charting a revolutionary
course. It may be difficult for Westerners
to believe that the example given is not
just some kind of public relations propaganda
piece, but in China, everyone follows Maoist
thought. An old peasant woman, who had suf-
fered much in old China, Yang Mun-kun, says:
To my last breath I will follow Mao.
As long as my eyes are good, I will read
Mao. As long as I can hear I will listen
to the directives of Mao.

4/4

Women and men do not constitute separate
classes. One's economic-social class deter-
mines thoughts and feelings and not one's
sexual status. It follows that advances in
social organization must be advances of the
total class through struggle and the resolu-
tion of contradictions among the people.
Chairman Mao has said:

Elderly woman, Peking

Genuine equality between men and women
can be realized only in the process of
Socialist transformation of society as
a whole.

Practical effects of an economic-social
class approach to women's freedom are notice-
able in employment chiefly, but also in the
family, health care for women, education for
women, and of course women's political life.
The book New Women in New China is a collec-

WOMEN

tion of articles written by women with eman-
cipated jobs that contribute to the building
of socialism. Types of employment include:
agriculture, revolutionary cadre, doctor,
fisherwoman, airplane pilot, oil extractor,
factory worker, electricity technician, and

Boat-building on the Sing Sing Production Brigade, Shanghai

bridge builder. Statistics for each profes-
sion are not given, but it is clear that each
woman chosen to tell her story for publica-
tion is a model for the emulation of other
work units. In addition, ninety percent of
the women work.

EMPLOYMENT

As with the rest of communist education, slo-
gans are used in the area of women's employ-
ment to further the feminist cause. An early
idea put forth to begin the organization of
women for collective production was "Speak
Bitterness" meetings. At these meetings,
women would tell of the harsh conditions they
had endured in the old society. These meet-
ings sound similar to the many "rap sessions"
popular in our U.S. movement, except that in
many cases in the United States, a Marxist-
Leninist perspective does not underpin the
discussion. Names chosen for production units
are motivational in nature, such as the March
8 fishing boats. March 8 refers to a 1924
rally held for women's rights in Canton.
Another example is the nickname "Little Iron
Woman" for Chana Tsai-feng, an oil extractor.
She heroically saved an oil well which had
stopped functioning because of a faulty
heater; in the process, she was alternately
splashed with hot water and steam or frozen
in the winter wind. The growth in women's
employment, then, has been constant since
liberation save for a period in 1962. Three
hard economic years preceded the drop in
employment however (1959-1961). Reactionary
political forces led by Liu Shao-chi gained
organizational strength during this economic
hardship, blaming Mao's policies. Women's
employment suffered from Liu's policies as
well as the general lean situation.

It is not only unemployment, but economic
and political policy which affects women's
liberation.

WOMEN HOLD UP HALF THE SKY

11

IN CHINA

masses, and the revolutionary army. The base
level is largely controlled by women and per-
forms such services as managing schools,

factories, public welfare, and health centers.
In the country, there are fewer women in res-
ponsibilities at the commune level.
In China and the United States, the situation is more

HEALTH CARE
dramatic. The passage to life:

P: is similar in China to
was written by a social worker and is in
Province. She at B (30-56) post-natal care
can wrest control of the oppressive con-
solidation of the society. Very inexpensive for
women workers.
The division between men and women is extended to various
States. I read that for preventive health
was the women-Win ghei bm si d venereal disease
seizing control. The big difference
idea led to a lot of change in China is its decent-
among husband, wife, and other way, and it can be different neighborhoods,
other than family life, fewer time health workers.

in another parallel
impedes the liberation of women. Slippers
the victim rather than the old feudal ideology. By
‘re-education’ rather than education and re-education in the broad
sense in China. Women (and men)

FAMILY

Within the new style family, there are
differences between the thrust of the

Margery Wolf has a strong opinion. She wrote in her
Marriage Law. What most women consider basic rights, i.e. the
choice of marriage partners, monogamy, one is "Cee stab eat
ing oe tcl paige Piet midal school (comparable to our high schools
and colleges) students go to the
peasant women's sexual education under the old society, and
1952 at least, they have chosen for further education.
the new family ways. Of course, they linger on sometimes and
become pockets of their own liberation.
China. The:
that birth
country that
of children per family
is often explained as an attempt
even though his importance has been
family fortune has been at stake.
the last word on women
ual revolution, as
no existence in
it is meant to be!

There has been speculation that the new re-
education program is centrally concerned
with women's liberation. If so, I'm sure
the international women's community will be
treated to new theoretical philosophy and
increased motivation from abroad. Mao is
beginning to study the world-wide interest
in women's rights and the problems women
have encountered are a subject for serious
study within the country.

Politics showing
successful in the
the larger number
rural areas is
to have a son,
an heir to
away with. One

The triumph of Maoist thought has positively
and significantly altered Chinese women's
lives. Women in the United States can study
Chinese women as a model and an international
inspiration. There are differences between
the two countries that demand a different
approach, however. Woman-power organization
speculates that the large urban centers of the United States
Sexual modes emphasize the pose a different problem than the rural
sacrifice for socialist orientation of Chinese women. The greatest
difference in America is capitalist, while
Chinese people have won their rights for
that. These basic sustaining conditions are denied
the people is more important than so many American women who depend on the
fluctuations of the market to provide them
with food and shelter and who, although they
have won the vote, have very little political
power.

cal 3
into districts
into streets and those into lanes.
revolutionary committees
Party committee:
revolutionary committees
three-in-one combination.

“of the
the three elements are revolutionary cadres, revolutionary

bibliography on page 14