As Gloria Steinem pointed out during her  
recent Midwest visit, every woman is a poten-  
tial welfare case, often “just one man away  
from welfare."  

It is an unpleasant economic fact that few  
women can earn enough to support a family  
without financial aid, either from a man or  
from the state. And it is an unpleasant so-  
cial fact that women who are forced to obtain  
the latter form of aid are castigated in pop-  
ular stereotype as "welfare loafers" despite  
the lack of daycare centers and adequate jobs  
that would make employment possible for them.  

Public aid, usually in the form of Aid to  
Families with Dependent Children (AFDC), per-  
mits single mothers to devote themselves to  
child care, but women are stigmatized by re-  
ceipt of such aid. In light of a recent  
University of Minnesota study which proved  
stereotypes of the "welfare mother" to be  
without foundation, GOLD FLOWER interviewed  
three such mothers who described their lives  
on AFDC; their names have been changed in  
the following story to protect their privacy.  

The UM study of 100 randomly selected AFDC  
mothers in Hennepin County revealed that one-  
third of welfare mothers are employed at  
least part-time, and that 80 percent desire  
to work despite the difficulties employment  
would present. Only one recipient in 20 has  
never been married, while three-quarters  
have been married only once. Most welfare  
mothers are white; few have received aid for  
more than three years. The three mothers to  
whom we spoke provide a representative cross-  
section of these women.  

Rhonda is in her early twenties. The mo-  
ther of two pre-school children, she works  
part-time at a day care center. She enjoys  
her job but worries over the children, es-  
pecially her son who demands daily reassur-  
ances of her affection.  

Annie, a 33-year-old former social worker,  
has an infant daughter. Her four older chil-  
dren live with her former husband, but Annie  
sees them frequently. She is active in com-  
munity affairs and is anxious to return to  
work when her child is older.  

Three of Sally's children live at home; her  
oldest son lives in California. Poor health  
has prevented her from working for two years  
but recent surgery, she hopes, has corrected  
her ailments. She too is eager to return to  
work; in her 40 years she has held jobs ran-  
ging from domestic worker to secretary.  

To Rhonda, who separated from her husband  
recently, finances pose the biggest problem.  
"I get $125 for rent, for a two-bedroom fur-  
nished apartment, $60 for food stamps--that  
means about $105 worth of food for the month  
--and about $6 for phone," she says.  

"Of course we get medical and dental care,  
too. But there's no allowance for a damage  
deposit on an apartment, or for deposit or  
installation of a phone. So many people  
that you run into don't understand how much  
-or how little--money we really get.  

"I'm getting bitter," she admits. "It's  
really more hassle to work than sit at home."  

Because of her part-time job, she must pay  
babysitting and carfare costs out of her al-  
ready pinched budget. She estimates that  
she has "about $10 a month" left after she  
pays her family's basic living expenses.  

"I don't even have enough to buy baby as-  
pirin," she sighs.  

Her parents, she says, live far away and  
"don't have money themselves to help." They  
feel that she “shouldn't be living off the  
state, that the kids' father should support  
them." Rhonda's husband is an unemployed  
craftsman.  

Rhonda maintains that she has faced dis-  

Hope, Money Equally Scarce  
For Women on Welfare  
BY PAT MONAGHAN  

crimination because of her financial status.  
"I've called up apartments where they wouldn't  
rent to me because I'm on AFDC. One  
landlady even told me not to report her,”  
she exclaims. "And the neighbors are often  
unsympathetic--they always seem to know if  
you're on AFDC or not.  

"So many people think we're lazy, that we  
don't want anything else," Rhonda says. "I  
have talked to so many welfare mothers, and  
I know this is untrue. Or landlords will  
say, the ‘last AFDC mother I had here was no  
good--the attitude is, you're all alike so  
why give you a chance."  

She worries about her children and how  
their financial plight will affect them.  

"I'm torn between my children and working.  
I really love my job. I feel useful and  
feel I'm helping the city--but every morning  

my son asks me, ‘You are coming home, aren't  
you mom?!"

Rhonda's eyes fill as she speaks of her  
son's uncertainty.  

"I understand what the name ‘welfare moth-  
er' means and what you go through. I try my  
best to help people to change their mind,"  
Rhonda says.  

Annie is wryly amused at her current situa-  
tion. "I worked with AFDC mothers for  
years," she recalls. "I was doing group  
work with AFDC mothers in 1958."  

She and her second husband separated while  
she was pregnant; when a promised social  
work position did not materialize, she ap-  
plied for AFDC aid.  

She complains that welfare workers are of-  
ten unfeeling or unkind towards their  
clients. "Before my baby was born, I asked  
for a crib. The worker said I would have to  
wait four months, and 'til then, just use a  
big cardboard box.'” Fortunately, a crib was  
donated.  

Annie feels that she is equipped to cope  
with most of her problems. “But I'm educa-  
ted, I've worked for years, I should be able  
to cope with people," she says. "I don't  
know how women without such resources can  
cope with the situation."  

Sally, a middle-aged black mother, lacks  
Annie's education but has successfully dealt  
with her plight. "I hate it, I hate being  
on it (AFDC)," she says. "It can be a good  
thing when you need it, so I really don't  
want to put it down. But I want to go back  
to work as soon as I am able."  

Health problems have handicapped Sally for  

(continued on page 15)