16

ANN HIGGINS

ENDORSEMENTS  
DFL

Minnesota UAW-CAP Council

Minnesota Americans for Democratic Action

parliamentary endorsements for Ann Higgins

pd. for by the Ann Higgins Volunteer Committee.  
Rep. Phyllis Kahn, Chair. 4144 Aldrich Ave. So.

IN CONCERT

Jeanne Mackey  
and  
Mary Trevor

—  
—

X: One of the biggest things to happen  
to the U.C. women's community this year  
is the teaming up of Jeanne Mackey and Mary Trevor.”  
Hf Ou 8

songs of struggle and celebration... folk... women's... anti-capitalist...  
“eer samen nrtmmeeinernntener tne see naman Ni

: Fey October 11, 9:00 PM.

* Fustury Wate CucveaAc Aers Catrer,  
+724 E. 28th St.  

#2.00

+ SPONSORED BY THE TWIN CITIES WOMEN'S UNION +

a home of our own?

The house at 2104 Stevens - a house that is like home  
to the Women's Community - may be lost to us. In an  
attempt to stay there, Chrysalis Collective met and  

discussed various alternatives. The following motion  
was passed. Now Chrysalis needs our support.

The motion was made that: Chrysalis have the support  
of the women's community for Chrysalis to buy the house  
at 2104 Stevens Avenue South, Chrysalis being legally  
and financially responsible, keeping commitment to LRC  
and Full Cycle Restaurant to occupy space in this house  

for programs and office space when possible. This will  
be deemed a “holding action" in preparation for a coa-  
lition of women who would in the future form a new cor-  
poration which would look for, purchase, maintain and  
assume legal and financial responsibility for a women's  
space for the women's community. The House Committee  
will be re-instituted, made up of representatives from  
Chrysalis, LRC, Full Cycle and women unaffiliated with  
organizations who would serve to ensure support and ac-  
countability for all involved. Support meaning commit-  
ment to energy required and financial support, defining  
space needs and preparation for forming the nucleus for  
the new corporation.

—  
HALLOWEEN DANCE - Chrysalis will have a Halloween dance  

Child care available. No mood altering  
substances allowed or sought.  

with space being open as it presently is to other groups  
and open house on Friday, October 31, 8-12 p.m. $1.50 per  
adult; come as a single, couple or family. Men and chil-  

for Library Board  

for cnenstemenssfeo neon e nO MOA  

3  
4  
+  

=  

55109.

“THE WORLD IS  
STRANGE AND CURIOUS"

AT:  
Funky Critters  
TROPICS & House PLANTS  
A&-6837  
232 So. Snelling  

MACALESTER  

y-«  

WOMEN’S LEARNING CENTER  

The Environmental Learning Center in Isabella,  
Minnesota is offering some new weekend workshops  
this year designed specifically for women. Each  
one will focus on a particular outdoor activity  
taking advantage of the unique wilderness environ-  
ment of northern Minnesota during all the seasons.  
Each outdoor activity will be combined with a  
special activity or topic of importance in women's  
lives today. Women who seldom get outside, don't  
do much physical activity, and don't take time to  
play or go off on their own will find here an  
opportunity to do all these, and share the experi-  
ences with other women. Leaders for each work-  
shop are all women with extensive experience teach-  
ing or leading groups in their particular field.

On October 10-12 rock climbing is the focus,  
complemented by movement and dance. On January  
30-February 1 winter camping is the focus ac-  
companied by assertiveness training. On March  
12-14 dog sledding will be combined with sense  
perception. And on May 7-9 canoeing will be  
integrated with an exploration of sexuality.

Each workshop at the ELC starts at 5:00  
Friday with supper and ends after lunch on Sun-  

day. The cost is $33.50 for student adults and  
$38.50 for non-student adults, which includes  
leadership fees and equipment. There will also  

be two workshops on cross-country skiing for women--  
January 9-11 and March 19-21. These cost $33.50  

for anyone. Write Sandy Jensen for more information  
or a registration form:

ELC  
Box 191A  
Isabella, Minnesota  

(218/293-4345) For car pool information in the  
Twin Cities call Karen Branan 724-0681.