°  
Competition Sickness” Pervades - - - -  
Legal Education  
Will Women Humanize  
by Jane Prohaska  

Rumor has it that the following exchange  
took place at that most prestigious center  
of legal education, Harvard Law School:  

Professor: Miss Smith, will you please  
state the holding of the case assigned  
for today?  

Woman Student: I would prefer to be called  
"Ms." from now on.  

Professor: Miss Smith, I will call you  
damn broads anything I choose, if I  
choose to call on you at all.  

Whether or not this accurately represents  
the status of women at Harvard Law, I cannot  
say. If such were representative of the  
University of Minnesota where I am a first  
year law student, making the usual indict-  
ments of sex discrimination would be all too  
easy. However, the situation here is a com-  
plex one due to certain concessions already  
made by the University law school, due to  
the women law students themselves, and most  
of all, due to the structure of legal educa-  
tion and the legal profession itself.  

First of all, it is important to realize  
being a first year law student - male  
or female - is an overwhelming situation.  

My first reaction when asked if I would be  
interested in writing about women and law  
school was that I couldn't possibly find  
time. After all, my first final exams are  
only ten weeks away. The object of law  
school, as I view it, is to keep you so busy  
studying and so confused about the materials  
you are studying that you have no time at  
all to reflect on the situation thrust upon  
you. For not only was I too busy to write  
this article, but I didn't have the proper  
perspective. I am merely a confused first  
year student and don't yet understand the  
workings of the legal field. This evalua-  
tion of law school as it relates to women is  
highly prejudicial, as is any individual's  
critique of an institution with which they  
are not fully satisfied, but I do not be-  
lieve that makes it invalid.  

Not Blatant  

I have never been faced with a situation  
such as the Harvard anecdote. In fact, I  
have not run across blatant institutional  
discrimination at the law school at all. The  
admissions committee has made fairly impres-  
sive moves with women comprising 20% of my  
class, or about 50 of 250 students. This  
is remarkable only when considering that  
in the third year class of the same size  
there are less than 20 women.  

Since all of my classes consist of first  
year students, women do not seem out of  
place. They are not noticeable; they belong  
as much as any other student. Women are not  
singled out for abuse or neglect during  
class discussions, as I have been told they  
had in the past.  

It is assumed in law school that all stu-  
dents have only surnames and this uniform  
policy has led to some confusion for pro-  
fessors who wonder how to refer to women.  

Law School?  

Most have resorted to "Miss" despite the  
fact that a large number are married. One  
professor went to great pains to explain  
to us that he really would like to call us  
"Ms." but the other was so ingrained that  
he used it unconsciously. He sincerely  
apologized if anyone was offended. As a  
sort of compromise he merely points at vol-  
unteers and says "Ma'am?" There have been  
no confrontations so the name remains uncon-  
tested.  

There are still problems. There is only  
one woman on the teaching faculty, although  
attempts are being made to secure one or two  
more for next year. The problem, as explained  
by one faculty member, is that competent  
women law professors are in such demand that  
they are hard to come by. Using competent  
women lawyers on a part-time basis has not  
been an alternative I've heard under discus-  
sion.  

In the area of placement, there is a great  
deal to be done. Interviewing firms don't  
ask men if they intend to have a family.  

Nor do they tell them that in front of a  
jury with a majority of women, their case  
won't stand a chance, especially if they are  
attractive. But the placement office is  
working with women to find out what their  
major complaints are so that these can be  
collectively expressed to interviewers to  
help further their enlightenment.  

“I Wouldn’t Want to Marry One”  
The social atmosphere in the law school is  
a somewhat different situation. Academically,  
women are well-respected by male stu-  
dents, or perhaps feared because they do  
better percentage-wise than their male  
counterparts. One male second year student  
was particularly pleased with me because  
upon exchanging law board scores - a con-  
stant pastime many law students engage in  
to reassure themselves that they are more  
intelligent than the next - he "finally dis-