16

A Very Serious Woman

A Book Review

October 21

Eddie Hebert's (D-La.) bill today was on
pensions for men in the armed services. "I'm
not going to fight you, Eddie," I said.

"You're not?" he said, startled. "What's
got into you, Bella baby?"

"You can have your pensions, Eddie, but no
money for any other military stuff."

"Khrushchev would be happy to hear you say
that."

"Listen, Eddie, I knew you were a devil,
but I didn't know you were that much of a
devil that you could communicate with the
dead."

"Huh?"

"Khrushchev is dead!"

"I mean that other fellow with the 'K'
then."

"Who? Kosygin?"
"Yeah - that's it."

- Jean Wolcott

BY SUSAN CUSHMAN

Whether in or out of the public eye, women
are seldom classed as acceptably interesting
and intelligent people. Either they are seen
as ordinary women, which disqualifies them,
or they are considered to be "characters,"
which plops them into a different, less ver-
satile category. Whichever way they are
identified, they are rarely accorded simple
respect. If women are respected at all, it
is in a confused, qualified way.

When Bella Abzug was elected to the House
of Representatives in 1970, there was never
any doubt in the minds of the press, her con-
stituents, or her new colleagues, that she
was a full-fledged character. Their question
was whether she was anything else, and Bella?
Ms. Abzug Goes to Washington (Saturday Review
Press, 26.95) is the answer.

Abzug begins this diary of her first year
in Congress by flatly stating, "I've been
described as a tough and noisy woman, a
prizefighter, and man-hater, you name it....
There are those who say I'm impatient, impe-
tuous, uppity, rude, profane, brash, and
overbearing....But whatever I am, I am a very
serious woman."

She spent the rest of her term trying to
prove that energy, personality and femaleness
do not add up to frivolity. Now, thanks to
the fortunate outcome of a reelection jeo-
pardized by an unfortunate redistricting,
Abzug is preparing to give the 93rd Congress
its due dose of her undiluted politics.

In the spring of 1971 to extend the draft:
"This is the first time we've had an oppor-
tunity to vote on the war - or even discuss
withdrawal as an issue."

Abzug's antidote to House inertia was the
almost forgotten "resolution of inquiry,"
which must be acted on within seven working
days. She first used this obscure procedure
to request release of the Pentagon Papers,
and her strategic lead has been followed by
several other activist representatives.

This book is not the work of an artist or
theoretician, and many a demanding feminist
will be disappointed by her discussions of
the child care bill (passed by the House and
Senate, but squashed by Nixon's veto) and of
the Equal Rights Amendment. Abzug's views
are heartening and her anecdotes revealing,
but by themselves, they do not provide a sat-
isfying account of the politicking that went
on during the voting on these issues.

The Author Is No Ghost

But for the most part, Bella: attains a
diary's primary objective; it tells what a
period of time was like for one person. Be-
cause this particular person happens to be
a public figure, she is not necessarily ob-
liged to make her diary a sweeping overview
of public affairs. Her main responsibility
is to tell honestly about her part in these
affairs, and this Abzug does undeniably well.

Her account has escaped the usual doctor-
ing and ghostly writing so common in politi-
cal autobiographies. Many of her daily en-
tries begin with exclamations such as "I'm
really exhausted," or "All day I was very up-
tight..." Abzug does not pretend that she
spent most of her time in victorious debate
on the House floor. She was running from
meeting to meeting only to find them both
adjourned for lack of a quorum, she was
halfheartedly trying to erase a campaign
debt, she was fighting off impossible demands
on her time.

Abzug wisely relinquished her opportunity
to popularize herself as a national politi-
cal figure; journalists around the country
have already done that and she knows it. She
merely explains what she has seen, done, won,
lost or wanted. "What the Associated Press
doesn't understand is that I'm not here to
fight about my hats."

What Is A Womanly Committee?

The first major battle her diary chronicles
is her fight for a seat on the Armed Services
Committee. Her chances were slight, since
she was undermining the seniority system and
the unquestioned tradition of appointing
semi-scarce congresswomen to "womanly" com-
mittees such as Education and Labor. When
she received her appointment to the Govern-
ment Operations Committee, Abzug learned that
the way of all politicians is promise....and
then compromise. All politicians, that is,
except Abzug.

Bella! tells with breathless immediacy
("It's atrocious") how the House, through
the machinations of various wheels and deals,
spends most of its time and votes avoiding
the issues. Hence the jubilation of anti-
war, liberal congressmen when the House voted