The function of the Feminist Studio Workshop  
is to help women realize their potential as  
creative human beings. In order to do this,  
women must learn to connect with, to draw upon  
and validate their own experience. Through  
study and work women become conscious of their  
historical position as women and to understand  
the range of choices available in this decade.  

Well--I made you take time to  
look at what I saw and when  

you took time to really no-  
tice my flower you hung all  

your own associations with  
flowers on my flower and you  
write about my flowers as if  

I think and see what you  

think and see of the flower-- —  

and I don't. ; Ye /  

Not only is the workshop committed to the  
talent of each woman, but we ask each woman to  
extend herself into the community, and to  
commit her energy to changing those values  
that oppress women. We are exploring ways to  
make social change through the work we do. In  
order to encourage a society which is sensitive  
and responsive to the needs and contributions  
of women, the boundaries that have previously  
existed between art-related professions must  
merge. This results in an array of expressive  
choices previously unavailable and encourages  
a new kind of female creator, one who forms  

a self-definition more consistent with her own  
needs than the restricting professional defi-  
nitions of artist, designer, historian, critic,  
as those professions exist in male-dominated  
institutions. It is the intention of the  
Feminist Studio Workshop to develop artists,  
designers, art historians, critics and educa-  
tors who can translate their experience in the  
Workshop into viable alternative professional  
choices. We invite women in all the art-  
related fields to enter the Workshop and use  
our structure to create new choices for them-  
selves and other women.  

Behind us lies the patriarchal  
system; the private house,  
with its nullity, its immoral-  
ity, its hypocrisy, its ser-  
vility. Before us lies the  
public world, the profession-  
al system, with its posses-  
siveness, its jealousy, its  
pugnacity, its greed...  
The question we put to you  

is how can we enter the pro-  
fessions and yet remain  
civilized human beings...  

Wa  

Degree programs are available in art, art his-  
tory, design and feminist art education,  
through the International Community College.  
The two-year program can constitute either the  
‘last two years of undergraduate study or can  
be adapted to a two-year master's program de-  
pending on the level of the individual woman's  
development. The one-year Critique Program is  
available as an accelerated master's program  
for those women with or without a bachelor's  
degree who have demonstrated a high level of  
consciousness and achievement. Degree pro-  

grams, which cost considerably more than the  
tuition of the Feminist Studio Workshop, can  
be financed through time payment plans and  
loans which can be arranged through the Inter-  
national Community College.  

When a woman artist positively  
identifies herself to us  
through her work, she commits  

a courageous and daring act  

of self-exposure, because her  
contribution has neither spo-  

ken to nor been understood by  
the mainstream of the culture  
and the content of her art  
has been bypassed by inter-  

pretations which could reveal  
it. Thus a woman's saying,  
"I am, I know myself, and I  
feel a fundamental optimism--  
a grasp upon my own survival  
as a model for human survi-  
val," is saying something  
which challenges the prevail-  
ing worldview.  

To apply to the Feminist Studio Workshop,  
please prepare a statement which includes the  

following information: name, address, tele-  
phone number, educational background (institutions  

and degrees). Then indicate which of our  
programs is appropriate for you--First year,  
Second year, Critique--whether you are inter-  
ested in a degree program and if so, which one,  
B.A. or M.A. Then write a short description  
of what kind of work you are doing now, what  
experiences have caused you to want to be  
involved in the Feminist Studio Workshop and  
any other information which would allow us to  
know you, your needs, and expectations.  

Send your statement and examples of your work  
in slide or other appropriate form to the  
Feminist Studio Workshop, Woman's Building,  
743 South Grandview, Los Angeles, CA 90057.