MORE REVOLUTION continued from page 5

UNIVERSITY OF MINNESOTA WOMEN'S CENTER: The  
Center is under the auspices of the Office for  
Student Affairs. The Center offers educational,  
personal and career counseling with referral to  
specific agencies. A course, "Lifestyles of  
Educated American Women", is offered through  
the Center. It also arranges academic credit  
for student projects centered on women. The  
Women's Center houses a large resource  
collection, newspaper clipping and bibliography  
files, and it acts as a clearing house for  
discrimination complaints. The Center encourages  
volunteers and all its services are open to men.  
The Women's Center operates throughout the summer.  
Call: 373-3850, 8 to 4:30 p.m., Monday through  
Friday, or write:

306 Walter Library  
University of Minnesota  
Minneapolis, Minn. 55455  

ELIZABETH BLACKWELL WOMEN'S HEALTH CENTER:  
This group has a special emphasis on health  
care and self-help. The group offers peer  
counseling and can also refer to feminist  
counselors. A patient advocacy and physician  
referral group is in the formation stage.  
Elizabeth Blackwell will hold open houses June  
5, 12, 19 and 26 at 7:30 p.m. The next general  
meeting convenes at 8 p.m., June 6.  

Call: 335-2669, or write:

2000 South 5th St.  
Minneapolis, Minn.  

Interested individuals are encouraged to  
attend.  

WOMEN'S FILM COLLECTIVE: This group is comprised  
of 30 women from various professions, such as  
teaching, art, and media with skills in those  
areas. They have banded together to create a  
new image of women through the use of video,  
slides and 8 and 16 mm film. The Collective  
meets once a month on Saturdays  

at 1:30 p.m., at Experimental College, 1507  
University Ave. S.E., Minneapolis. (The next  
meeting will be June 7.) The Collective has  
films and slides for rent. For rental information  
call: Carol Winther, 644-1470.  

The Collective phone number: 473-2373  
Address: 3555 Hamilton Ave.  
Deephaven 55391  

MINNESOTA GAY WOMEN'S ALLIANCE: This group was  
formerly the gay professional women's group.  
The group offers a full calendar of social  
activities and programs throughout the summer.  
Special interest groups are forming to bring  
campers together with other campers. Among  

the group's special programs will be small  
group discussions on alcoholic problems, gay  
relationships and a sexuality film.  

Call: Vicki at 789-1187 for specific information.  

LESBIAN ACTIVISTS: An independent political  
group that will work independently of "straight  
dominated feminist groups and of male-dominated  
gay groups". The Activists are helping to  
organize the women's half of Gay Pride Week  

(June 28-30). Any interested women should  
attend the Activists’ meetings at 5:30 p.m.  
Wednesdays at the Lesbian Resource Center, 710  
W. 24th St., Minneapolis.  

(Up-to-date information was not available on  
the following groups at publication time.)  

NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR WOMEN (NOW): This  
is one of the largest and oldest women's  
groups in the country. The Minneapolis group  
was very active in implementing a discrimination  
suit against General Mills. For information  
about NOW's summer schedule and future projects  
call: 920-4802 or write:

4566 So. Cedar Lake Rd.  
Minneapolis, Minn.  

(Information on dues will also be available  
at the above address.)  

TWIN CITIES WOMEN POETS: This group of women  
poets meets regularly for poetry readings and  
has been active in publishing ventures and  

in readings throughout the Twin Cities.  
Interested women should check next month's  
"Gold Flower" for current information on the  
group.  

The list of groups published in these pages  
is not exhaustive. Any group not mentioned  
should write "Gold Flower", P.O. Box 8341,  
Lake St. Station, Minneapolis 55408, and we  
will include information in subsequent issues.  
Hopefully, this compendium will be helpful to  
neophyte and experienced feminists, and to  
any woman needing medical, legal, welfare or  
employment aid or the emotional and psychological  
powers of sisterhood.  

“Gold Flower" Staff Members are: Jan Jirak,  
Shirley Heyer, Susan Cushman, Margaret  
Hastings, Mary Hastings, Char Masterman, Pat  
Monaghan, Sue Plaster, Mary Ellen Shaw, Jean-  
nette Sullivan, Merry Urbia, Sandra Holtkamp,  
Kate Ligare, Coco Weber, Peggy Masterman, and  
Valleda.  

Ss BOs Onewnn_~