"FREE Voice Comments

Article contributed by Paula Giese, Margaret
McMahon, Kathy Sikes, Pat Louis, Chick Hale,
and Joyce Garie.

Joyce Guerrero, a 28-year-old Pottawatomi
Indian from Topeka, Kansas, is the only person
in the country sentenced to serve time in jail
for a crime connected with the 1972 Indian take-
over of the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) in
Washington, D.C.

An active member of the American Indian Move-
ment, Ms. Guerrero was sentenced to six months
in jail and two years' probation after a brief
trial before Topeka federal judge George Templar.
She was charged and convicted of receiving and
concealing property stolen from the looted BIA
building. The property was not found in her
possession.

Joyce was convicted in Kansas City, Kansas
federal court of willfully missing one of the
hearings preliminary to her Topeka trial. At
her sentencing hearing on April 12, she was sen-
tenced to three more months in prison and 21
months' probation for being a day late for her
omnibus hearing.

In their own way, both of Ms. Guerrero's trials
offer insight into the inherent injustices of
the American legal system. She had two trials
by all white juries, no Indians, no Chicanos
or blacks who can understand what minority
oppression is. Also, the wiretap issue is
brought up with references to anonymous phone
calls, and phone calls consistently called
conversations; both are infringements on per-
sonal liberty, and were brought up during both
trials.

At her Topeka trial, she was convicted of re-
ceiving, concealing, and retaining stolen BIA
property—two calculators, one carousel pro-
jector, and a dictating machine. Yet none of
these was found in her possession. She was con-
victed on the testimony of David Alejos, who
said Ms. Guerrero had helped him move the stolen
goods from Angela Miranda's basement to another
location. Some stolen BIA goods were found in
Alejos' possession, yet he was not charged.

During the trial of May 21-22, 1973, an expert
was brought in to testify as to the condition of
the BIA building after the Indian occupation.
Ms. Guerrero was in the YMCA building taking
care of Indian children who had accompanied
their parents on the Trail of Broken Treaties.

In addition, the prosecutor repeatedly refer-
red to the Wounded Knee occupation, which took
place after her alleged crime. (She never took
part in the Wounded Knee occupation; her in-
volvement consisted of gathering blankets,
food, and first aid supplies in Kansas.)

Yet Judge Templar referred to Wounded Knee at
her first sentencing hearing. "This thing of
destroying government property and taking pos-
session of it, and destroying records, and des-
troying things that cannot be replaced, running
off at the sound of guns to Wounded Knee, the
court cannot be mellow under the circumstances.
I think this is a very serious crime. The
court cannot tolerate it.”

When Scott Jarvis, Ms. Guerrero's attorney,
protested, the judge continued, "Well, you
know, people go out and start destroying pro-
perty that belongs to all of us thinking that
this is the way to make the government buckle
down. It has been happening all over the
country. The next thing that will happen,
they'll be burning my house down, expressing
protest."

On March 26-27, Joyce Guerrero was tried in
Kansas City, Kansas, in front of Judge Earl O'Connor for
missing the omnibus hearing preliminary to her
Topeka trial. (An omnibus hearing is to let

the judge know about how much time to set aside
for the trial.) The prosecutor, Glen Kelly,
presented evidence that Ms. Guerrero had been
free on restricted travel bond when the hearing
was supposed to have been held, and proved she
was not in the courtroom. Her attorney, Michael
Lerner, presented testimony that she was in Rapid
City, South Dakota, the weekend before the omni-
bus hearing.

When she saw she was going to be delayed in
South Dakota due to a delay in receiving wired
money and snowy roads, she called Kansas City
repeatedly to let her lawyer know she might be
forced to miss the hearing. She arrived twenty-
four hours late.

At one point, the prosecution produced as evidence
a telephone message the FBI stole from Jarvis's
office to show that Ms. Guerrero was in South
Dakota the day before the omnibus hearing. The
bond confined her to Kansas and the Kansas City,
Missouri area. The jury deliberated less than
half an hour and returned a verdict of guilty.

At her sentencing on April 12, Judge O'Connor said
he had to level jail and probation time on Joyce
because if he didn't, the bonding system would be
put in jeopardy.

When her appeals failed this summer, and she
was ordered to begin serving her sentences, she
went underground. A bench warrant was issued
for her arrest, and local police harassed family
and friends. On December 3, she turned herself
in. "I just panicked," she said, "I am not a
criminal, I am not a dangerous person. I am only
one Indian woman who looks to better times for my
people. Today I am not here as an admission of
guilt, but as an admission that I cannot fight
the system.”

Continued on page 3

[Text continues here]"