THEY SAY THAT’S  
WHY WE'RE HERE by CHARLOTTE MASTERMAN  

We're sitting in a circle, the eight of us,  
so we can all see and hear each other. The  
brochure about consciousness raising groups  
told us people feel more like talking in a cir-  
cle; it's more intimate. But tonight, like  
always, anxious thrills shoot up my arms, and I  
don't feel any more like spilling what's inside  
me than I did last week or the week before.  
Shiela sits across from me, her eyes blankly  
staring through me. I don't think she'll say a  
thing tonight, either.  

Janet looks like she'll catapult right out of  
her chair if she doesn't talk. So she tells us  
what's hurting her. Her old man left her for  
another woman, she tells us. It blew her mind,  
and she got involved with a man. Now her kids  
despise her. But they still adore the old man.  
She thinks it's unfair. What hurts her most is  
when they call her slut and whore. The others  
try to comfort her with realities that exist  
for them, but not for Janet's kids.  

Maddening jitters begin to creep inside my  
skin when everything goes quiet. I think maybe  
I've had too much coffee today, but I know it's  
not the coffee. Janet's hurt starts mine up,  
and I want to talk and I don't. What's  
broiling under the surface scares the hell out  
of me. But Jennifer saves me having to decide  
if now's the time.  

I watch her as she speaks, and I wonder if  
she wouldn't be kind of pretty without her  
mouth all pinched together like it has a draw-  
string pulled through it. Her feelings spurt  
out like pop-gun fire. Her family's angry with  
her. Says she should snap out of whatever ails  
her, they're tired of her whining after app-  
reciation. Says they'd appreciate her more if  
she didn't constantly remind them. But I won-  
der about that. I wonder if they don't want  
her to shut up so they won't feel guilty. I  
wonder who's screwed up, her or them?  

Gracie pipes up in her wire thin voice, "He  
says I need help." She's always saying that,  
but she keeps the rest a secret. My jitters  
are going crazy now. My hair feels like it's  
crawling and I smooth it down hard with my  
palm. I look at Shiela staring at nothing, and  
I wonder where she is.  

I wonder, too, when we're going to get be-  
yond gut-spilling and start helping each other  
somehow. Maybe that's it. Maybe we don't know  
how. Or maybe all the poison has to come out  
first.  

Mellanie's voice booms out with its usual  
energy. She's different from the rest of us,  
not what you'd consider feminine. She's very  
tall and moves like a willow whip, graceful  
and all--but she's got a vibrance that makes  
her look aggressive even when she's sitting  
still. I don't think anyone will ever beat  
her down for long.  

She's always been open, right from our first  
meeting. Listening, I wonder with a secret  
smile what tonight's revelation will bring.  

She tops off last week's episode by telling us  
about several suicide attempts. You may think,  
Aha! So they did get to her. But I'm not so  
sure. I wonder if that was Mellanie's way of  
saying, Okay, if there's no place for me and my  
way, screw all of you! She sighs and wears a  
wry smile, "Damned near made it last time, but  
my goddamned neighbor found me. I could have  
killed her."  

I envision Mellanie stretched out white and  
dead, her brown eyes lusterless, glaring, and  
something knifes at my insides. I wonder if I  
should tear back the thin tissue that covers  
the burning thing in my gut. I open my mouth,  
but the words won't come. Nobody notices be-  
cause Doris lets loose with a story of how she  
went berserk one day. She even gets me laugh-  
ing. I can picture sweet, docile Doris, who's  
too timid to ask for the salt at supper, hurt-  
ling everything in sight at this guy she's liv-  
ing with, a huge man with lead fists, and him  
peering stupidly at her. "He slapped me around  
afterward, but it was worth it," she relished,  
throwing her head back, cackling and slapping  
her knees, "oh, man was it worth it!" Her  
eyes widen and she leans forward, like the  
most important part is coming. “He was scared—  
scared—I could see it in his eyes, you know?  
And that . . . " she chuckles in between her  
words, ". . . that makes me .. . double over  
and I can hardly talk now she's laughing so hard,  
even madder. He told me... oh, my stomach . . . someone make me  
stop:" . By now everyone is giggling loud and  
hard. Doris is holding her stomach, doubled up  
in her chair. When the laughing eases into  
softer, sighing spurts, Gracie chimes in with,  
"He says I need help." And everyone is sudd-  
enly quiet, like when you snap off a radio, and  
no one laughs at what Gracie says because she  
looks so forlorn.  

Silence creeps in through my pores and pushes  
out ‘til I think my skin will burst into a  
million fragments. A warning roars through my  
brain, but I ignore it because it's too late—  
I hear a stranger's hollow voice and I realize  
it's mine ". . . in a commune .. . with lots  
of 'liberated' people—the men were at liberty  
to make all the rules and fight the important  
battles of society with their rhetoric while  
the women were at liberty to do all the shit  
work. Oh, it was equally divided between us."  
Everyone laughs. "At first we were like pio-  
neers, you know, making a new utopian society  
and all that, and we didn't complain 'cause our  
mission was so important. But after awhile,  
there were things that stuck out so you couldn't  
ignore them." My taut skin has little  
spasms, then relaxes a little, while I get my  
bearings. "We were privileged to gaze up into  

continued on page 11  

Seems like she'd just soom—  

laugh, which makes him," she can hardly  
told me I was...