BY SUSAN CUSHMAN

Simone de Beauvoir is a writer of defini-
tive works. When she breaks subject ground,
as she did with The Second Sex in 1949, she
does not stop excavation until a firm histor-
ical foundation has been made, nor building
until the structure of the present is sound.

While her books have been hailed as pion-
eer studies, her singular genius is choosing
subjects that are long overdue for a wide-
ranging, sensible analysis. She is not
ahead of her time; rather, she reminds her
contemporaries of the serious lags and lapses
in their understanding of the world.

Her latest book, The Coming of Age (Putnam,
$10.00, 585 pages) puts capital letters on
Old Age just as surely as her earlier mas-
terpiece did on Woman. With an organiza-
tional scope that encompasses science, an-
thropology, history, and the arts, in fact,
most of the basic avenues of knowledge, de
Beauvoir discusses old age as if it has
never been mentioned before....and it
scarcely has been.

Aging is a universal process which is
largely disguised or ignored. For all its
awesome implications, death itself is more
comprehensible to most individuals than the
prospect of an inevitable decline in their
mental and physical powers down into decre-
pitude. The elderly so often live in pover-
ty, ridicule, and lonely misery because
those with youth and power refuse any iden-
tification with their frightening condition.

In de Beauvoir's existentialist vocabulary
old people are the Other, the not-me, and
they are subjected to the traditional neg-
lect and cruelty that the "thems" of society
have always experienced.

Women have belonged to the ranks of "them"
all their lives, so their slide into old age
seldom assumes the catastrophic dimensions
of the male decline. A woman's reduction is

gradual, and her losses are spread through-
out her life: the passing of beauty, depar-
ture of children, menopause, the death of a
husband.

Before she had gone very far in her re-
search, de Beauvoir realized that aging is
considered a man's problem. "As a personal
experience, old age is as much a woman's
concern as a man's - even more so, indeed,
since women live longer. But when there is
speculation upon the subject, it is consider-
ed primarily in terms of men. In the first
place because it is they who express them-
selves in laws, books and legends, but even
more because the struggle for power concerns
only the stronger sex...

"In public life women's status is always
the same - that of perpetual minors. The
masculine state, on the contrary, changes
with the passage of time."

The Coming of Age is a disconcerting book,
particularly when it is being read for re-
view in a feminist newspaper. Could a long-
standing ally really be saying that men de-
serve center stage in yet another sphere of
life, that women are, once again, as always,
of secondary importance? Not quite. The si-
milarities between her present endeavor and
The Second Sex are not simply ones of
approach and ambitiousness.

What she is calling for in both books is a
change in supposedly “natural” conditions of
life. If women and the aged of both sexes
are confined to powerless, sad existences,
de Beauvoir wants us to understand where
biological destiny stops and social and his-
torical forces begin. To folks who say,
"That's life," she answers, "Then we will
change it."

But she does not arrive at this conclusion
until her readers are ready to come with her.
For all her versatility, de Beauvoir does
not write polemics. The Coming of Age is an imposing, objec-
tive undertaking that follows the trail of
old age down through the centuries. It ends
at the doorsteps of admired, mostly male in-

The Worst of All Vices

15

Do you know the
worst of all vices?

It is being over
fifty-five. .
— Turgenev

dividuals who have managed to establish hon-
ored residences in historical annals. But
however much men like Churchill, Tolstoy,
Freud, and Einstein may have accomplished in
their youth and middle age, they seldom re-
tained their powers or personalities once
they acknowledged the intrusion of age upon
their lives. A few, like Michelangelo, pos-
sessed a genius that stayed with them until
death, yet they lost all pleasure in their
still great feats.

The only women discussed with any detail
are Lou Andreas-Salomé, a novelist and fol-
lower of Freud, Sophia Tolstoy, and Juliette
Drouet, the lifelong mistress of Victor
Hugo. Sophia and Juliette are cited as
cases of elderly female jealousy, women tor-
mented by their men's sexual and mental in-
fidelities. Lou's "twilight" years were
happier. She became a psychotherapist at
sixty, and it was not until she neared her
deathbed that she asked that unanswerable,
debilitating question: "All my life I have
done nothing but work. And really, when
you come to think of it, why?"

De Beauvoir tirelessly piles up evidence
which testifies to the bleakness of old age
through diary excerpts, sociological data,
and personal and historical accounts. What
emerges, surprisingly, from all this infor-
mation is the minor place physical illness
or incapacity holds in the catalogue of
elderly evils.

Much of the pain old people endure is im-
posed on them from without in the forms of
abrupt retirement, neglectful children, so-
cial isolation, and confining poverty. Feel-
ings of despair are often products of their
own minds which have been conditioned to be-
lieve that the aged are tiresome, useless,
and ugly.

Too often, old age is viewed as a dis-
abling disease, just as menstruation was in
earlier times. Samuel Johnson once commen-
ted, "There is a wicked inclination in most
people to suppose an old man decayed in his
intellects. If a young man or middle-aged
man, when leaving a company, does not recol-
lect where he laid his hat, it is nothing;
but if the same inattention is discovered in
an old man, people will shrug up their shoul-
ders and say, ‘His memory is going.'"

The fatal power of suggestion is not just
a saying; it works, especially when it comes
from all sides, when it results from a life-
time's indoctrination. Old age is a normal
condition whose leading characteristics are,
paradoxically and inescapably, well-estab-
lished abnormalities. Sound familiar,
feminists?

As long as we live in societies whose cur-
rencies are negotiable power and marketable
sameness, those who cannot compete on these
crudely laid grounds will suffer - the old,
the young, women, Third World people...the
"unusual." Simone de Beauvoir, now 64 years
old, has written a book that should convince
us to reconsider our rates of human exchange
and denial.