4

“there's a certain thing that happens when you do a

concert that's very exciting. I get off on a good
concert. I mean, I get more pleasure from that than
I get from almost anything I can think of, except

a couple of things. It's about on a line with good
sex and really close relationships with friends.

It's very high. I couldn't go through all the agony
of all that traveling if it wasn't that great. You
know, it wouldn't be worth it.’

Judy Collins . Crawdaddy ... October 1972

there isn't much to say about Judy Collins that
anyone who's interested doesn't know already. Being
at one of her concerts tells the whole story. Those
of us who have been know; to those who haven't I can
only say go for heaven's sake the next time she's in
town. You will probably never spend a couple of
bucks on an evening that will be more enjoyable than
the live experience of her music. The only thing
that was a drag was paying $6 to sit in the 9th row
by the door because that's sort of big business es-
tablishment prices which deprive a lot of people from
a really nice experience. Joan Baez has the right

idea in minimizing the ticket prices at her concerts.
Why haven't other biggies taken the hint? Anyway, I

guess one must consider the entertainer. And then
one must consider the entertained. (hopefully) And
it could be put another way in these shriveled times:
sometimes it is relevant to consider the stars and
fans. I was of the latter malady for what I realize
as too many years. Oh yeah, Judy and me, we go way
back. Of course, she ‘doesn't know that but that an-
onymity is necessary for my fan identity. Annie with
her photo-genic memory remembers just when it was
that she and Peter and I trucked through the snow
for the first live J.C. experience. Something like
a 63 or 64 winter. Smack in the middle of the days
when you could tell just how hip someone was by the
way they pronounced Dylan. (die-lan?) (Zimmerman,
who's he?) Those were the Philly and Newport folk
festival years when the Beatles still knew their
place and cynicism was just an edge not a way of
life. And in talking about the days of folk, one
fails unless one mentions the Club 47 in Cambridge,
Mass. where supposedly it all began. Out here in
the north-mid-west, I don't suppose that means much
(except this IS Zimmerman-country). But the 47 was
where folk was at and Judy Collins as well as Tom
Rush, Judy Henske, Joan Baez, Phil Ochs, Barbara
Dane, the Chambers Brothers as well as innumerable
others served their time as true folk-heroes, until

its demise several years ago because of lack of funds.

But the 47's memory looms fondly on. Yes, it was
there that N & I waited for hours in the drizzlings
to get first row seats to ensure the nurturing of
our compulsive habit of visually devouring J.C. to
bits. Of course, there are different levels of de-
vouring and absorption. As I found out later, N.
was plugging into the sexual fantasy trip a bit
more than I (if only in its acknowledgement) which is
only to say that she was somewhere between gazing at
and cruising J.C. (the demarcation zones of which
position have always been rather nebulous) and I
was just at the intent gaze stage. For myself, who
was born a bit too late to know instinctively about
ancient and virtually lost arts such as cruising
(old dykes and 40's lesbians ought to give classes
in that fine art of visual massage), the mere sugg-

gestion that my affection (affliction?) for J.C. might
border on anything but the spiritual was unheard of.

So back to the drizzlings...
It got so that the waiting line in the worst of
weather became some kind of perverse endurance test
for true fans and we, the faithful, got to know and
expect each other.

Sometimes I wonder what has happened to us. Crazy
Evelyn must be through with Boston University by
now. And Carolyn Berkowitz—whose husband's canteen
truck I drove for two weeks one summer in Chelsea...
Last time I talked with her she said as far as

music lately, she'd really gotten into Sergio Mendes
Brazil 66 and I guess it was never really the same
after that summer I lost her license at Newport which
I had borrowed to drink beer and had been afraid to
tell her but some guy found it and mailed it back to
her and she said I should have told her and I knew
she was right. We never really talked after that.
And there were the kids who always gave Judy red
lollipops.

I sort of sensed the imposition on her (J.C.) then,
always having that frenzied 10 minutes of clawing
fans, demanding her answers and signatures, to

look forward to after each concert. But we forged on
undaunted: jogging in a half-crazed New Year's Eve
train to be there for her first Carnegie Hall con-
cert; literally scrounging the East Coast for her
shows for several years. The first time it occurred
to me that possibly some stars might feel their fans
as more of burdens than gifts was upon hearing
Albatross, one of her songs, in which there are the
lines: you must barter your life, to make sure

you are living, and the crowds that have come, you
give them the colours and the wind and the bells and
the dreams.

That was probably early '68 and already the marked
decline in star value had begun. Someone said some-
thing about how when your own life becomes important
enough, the need to foster star images vanishes and
from then on I caught her concerts when I could —
averaging about one a year. Somewhere between those
steadfast vigils at the Club 47 to barely catching
that immodest concert last week in St. Paul, 7 years
later, the world has become less small and star and
fan trips have opted out for more humane pursuits
(?) and let me say that we deserve it.

chorus from a New Gong, obo, _— grandmothers hewae....

the secret gardens of the heart
will they stay young forever

I see you shining in the night
in the ice and snow of winter

I went to my grandmother's funeral in Seattle and
drove by the house she used to live in. I saw the
house on the corner and was stunned—it's so little...
there's nothing.

It's a dumb little house on the corner in Seattle, but
in my head it's the most lush, florid, vivid, sen-
sual, pleasurable, complicated, marvelous place in
the world. In my memory, in my imagination.

And I realized as we went by that nobody knows that

‘
Se G.C... Crawdaddy... October '72)
velleda-- --