ov
>

| HAVE A SLANTED VAGINA

JOYCE YU PARLIAMENT

"Hi! Are you Japanese? Where are you from?"
"No. I'm Chinese and from Minneapolis."

"Chinese, huh? I could never tell the difference.
I was in Japan during the occupation.”

"Oh."

"From Minneapolis? Your parents came over?"

"I've been here all my life."

"Gee, I could tell. You don't speak with an accent."

"Neither do you."

If you are Asian American, you've experienced this
conversation in stores, classrooms, on the bus or
streets too many times. It says that you don't
belong here. You must explain to any stranger why
and how you came to be here.

Minority women must deal with racism and sexism.
For Asian American women, there is gross ignorance
about their bi-cultural society. Asian American
identity is this blending of two cultures. We are
Americans with Asian heritage. The Asian culture
we inherit is more than chop suey and karate.
Filial piety and a strong family are basic elements
of Chinese society and continue to be stressed
by Chinese Americans. The Asian value system both
complements American values and isolates one,
especially girls during adolescence.

"I was discouraged from participating in any activity
which would take me out of the safe circle of my
family... The irony of the educational process (which
Asian American values stress) is that it separates
Chinese Americans from their parents and introduces

contradictions into our families." (From Asian Women,
"Oppression and Survival," Lai Jen.) It is an adapta-
tion to America which many of us thought was unique to

our individual families until the Asian American
movement gathered our experiences together.

From ASIAN WOMEN, U C Berkeley

Asian American women are confronted with a three-
fold discrimination pattern. Firstly, they are
subject to the stereotypes directed at Asians.
Secondly, they are Japanese American, Chinese
American, Filipino American, and Korean American
and subject to the bias, prejudices, and discrimi-
nation reserved for women of each ethnic group.

The stereotypes are positive and negative depending
largely upon the favor or disfavor their particular
ethnic group is experiencing, (see Asian American
and Public Higher Education in California, Robert
Yoshioka.) We are faced with the expectations of
American women and Asian women. "...Chinese
American, the hyphen is like the tightrope I walk...
I draw from both cultures, and yet I am part of
neither." (From Roots: An Asian American Reader,
Wing Tek Lum.)

to be yellow is to be foreign

Unlike the false hopes of past generations of Asian
Americans, we are no longer sojourners. "We are
here" because this is our home. But, the differences
between white America and its third world cultures
should not be denied. People ask why I'm taking
Chinese language -- they cannot see, or my assimila-
tion has denied me my Asian identity. The leftist
political movement ironically, consistently fails
to include Asian Americans as minority groups. To

be yellow is to be foreign.

The issues the Asian American communities face are
surprisingly similar to local Twin City struggles
for neighborhood control and affirmative action. In
California, the Nihomachi community fights high-rise
development pushing out Japanese Americans and white
families. Confucius Plaza construction in New York's
Chinatown saw mounted police confronting Chinese
grandmothers (with many others) demanding affirmative
action.

Asian American historical societies are seeking our
people's history of the Chinatowns, railroads,
settling of the Wild West, professionals... Community
centers serving the Issei (first generation Japanese
Americans), elderly family-less men (as a result of

the Chinese Exclusion Act) and youth are being started

in Chicago, San Francisco, and Los Angeles.

kamikaze, confucius say, ah so

Racism for Asians hits us in subtle ways. "Kamikaze",
"Confucius Say", "Ah, so" remind Asian Americans that
their heritage is considered a joke. It is the
mocking and ignorance of Asian culture from phony
Chinese characters on laundry bags to "Kung Fu" on
television. Regardless of your politics, you respond
to my slanted eyes by asking me "where are the best
Chinese or Japanese restaurants." Of course, every
Asian American knows that it does not make any
difference; number one, chow mein, egg foo yung, egg
roll is the same everywhere. "Oh, I love San
Francisco. There was delicious, cheap Chinese food."

———