nal

LETTERS:

BELL SHAFTS  
WOMEN INSTALLERS  

Dear Friends:

In the summer of 1974, a group of women were  
hired as installers and cable splicers to  
fulfill Mountain Bell's 1974 Affirmative  
Action goals. One week after '74 ended, we  
were all given typing tests, taken “out of the  

field" and put to work as clerks and operators at a  
$25 week cut in pay. We were not offered the choice  
of remaining in craft jobs at the same cut in pay, or  
receiving transfers to other Bell companies.  

In March, we were all laid off, along with other  
craft women who were not affected by the force adjust-  
ment in January, despite the fact that Mountain Bell  
was granted a $28 million rate hike in January and in  
March had applied for another $40 million rate hike  
(in the guise of “emergency rate relief to prevent  
layoffs").  

We feel that women are being forced to bear a dis-  
proportionate economic burden. Although the force  
adjustments and the layoffs were done by seniority,  
since women were not hired into craft positions be-  
fore 1973, we feel that the seniority system, when  
applied to our situation, perpetuates past discrimina-  
tion.  

We are not asking that men with more seniority be  
laid off while we continue working. We are saying  
that the Company, not women, should pay for Mountain  
Bell's discriminatory hiring and recruitment policies.  

We have filed charges of discrimination with the EEOC  
and are raising money for litigation fees. Contribu-  
tions are tax deductible and should be made payable to  
Women Installers' Legal Defense and Education Fund/  
Better Jobs for Women, 1545 Tremont Place, Denver,  
Colorado 80202.  

Sincerely, Suzanne Lacy  

PICTURE “SENSATIONAL”?  

Hello,  

Reacting to your April issue, I must say I did not  
find the use of a sensational cover photo or your  
paragraph of comment on people's possible reactions  
to the photo a good way to communicate your point. I  
have talked with about a dozen men and women about it.  
None has felt it was a useful approach.  

As for myself, I continually write about victims--  
people getting trampled in one way or another every  
day of their lives. I am very hesitant to emphasize  
the total devastation caused by oppressive institu-  
tions and people since to do so can be totally dis-  
heartening and give the impression that ordinary  
people are, in fact, helpless and pathetic.  

Another thing I try to do is talk with people who have  
been trampled to get their perspective on what's hap-  
pening and how an intolerable situation can be resol-  
ved. And I try to emphasize support among people  
rather than isolation.  

The accusation you make of the media, that they often  
print sensational pictures of victims, is certainly  
well grounded. I feel the media looks for victims  
since, apparently, people like to read about them.  
But I cannot see where your use of sensational photos  
differs. You did not supply any information about  
the woman pictured on the cover or what the circum-  
stances of the situation were or why her death could  
not be prevented in the particular situation. Perhaps  
it is necessary to dramatize the harmful effects of  

something at a time when no one is really conscious  
of what's going on. But do you think there prevails  
still a high level of ignorance about the dangers of  
back-alley abortions among your readers? I do not  
think so.  

Regards,  

Al Wroblewski, Editor  

Minnesota Leader  

Editor's note: Editor Wroblewski's comments on our  
April GF cover are appreciated and we agree that  
ordinary people can be exploited very easily by both  
institutions and individuals in our society.  

We also believe that knowledge and awareness are the  
best defenses people can employ against any type of  
exploitation. Often we become so buried in the rou-  

tine of daily living that we forget that we don't  

have to be helpless and pathetic in the face of op-  
pression. Many times it takes a real jolt to make us  
see the things that should be most obvious.  

Thus we at GF feel we were justified in using the  
April cover photo. Should Mr. Wroblewski recheck the  
cover he would find that less than a quarter inch  
away from the photo the cause of death from criminal  
abortion and the source of the picture is provided.  

Only by making people aware of the large number of  
back alley abortions still taking place, especially  
among the poor, can we hope to prevent the occurrence  
of situations similar to the picture. Although the  
Supreme Court ruling gave us the legal right to safe  
abortions, it did not make them readily available to  
all women. Approximately 27% of hospitals over the  
nation provide abortion services, and these are al-  
most exclusively in metropolitan areas.  

The April cover also states that over a million  
women who lack funds and contacts seek criminal  
abortions or resort to self-induced abortions each  
year. As long as we are dealing with an issue affect-  
ing over a million women and their families yearly we  
contend that there is, indeed, a high level of ignor-  
ance regarding abortions and will continue to work  
for change in abortion policies and laws--at least  
nineteen states have unconstitutional prohibitive laws  
that deny women access to safe abortions.  

In response to the statement about support and isola-  
tion: one of GF's primary goals is to contribute to  
support of women. We find a particular need for this  
kind of support as women have been the most isolated,  
repressed majority in history.  

FREE EMPLOYMENT COUNSELING SERVICES FOR WOMEN--WOW  

WOW is an information and referral service for women  
in the metropolitan area who are:  
seeking employment  
exploring training  
considering continuing education.  

WOW offers:  

* pre-employment counseling one-to-one and in groups  

* information about available employment and training  
opportunities  

* career resource library  

* support groups  

* workshops  

* referrals for testing, job placement, CETA programs  
including classroom training, on-the-job training,  
public service or work experience employment.  

WOW is funded as a free service to women by a special  
grant through the Comprehensive Employment Training  
Act of 1973 (CETA), and opens June 2. Call for an  
appointment or drop in at 905 Parkway Drive, Maple-  
wood, Minnesota 55106, Tel: 774-6038. Hours are  
8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.