14  
“= BOOK LIST  

(From the Spokeswoman)  

Women and Mental Health: A Bibliograph  
1970-73, edited by Phyllis Ceder—  
(National Institute of Mental Health, 1974.  
Available from the Government Printing  
Office as DHEW publication no. (ADM)75-142.  
No price given.) There are 810 references  
to behavioral science literature and audio-  
visual resources providing information on  
the "social, economic, and psychological  
pressures on women," showing "the diversity  
of, or lack of, expert opinion on female  
psychological and socio-cultural processes."  
A valuable tool for health professionals  
and community action groups.  

—  

=  

The Male Machine, by Marc Feigen Fasteau.  
(New York, McGraw-Hill, 1974. Hard cover,  
$7.95). Are men capable of deep friend-  
ships? Why do men always have to "win"?  
The "masculine mystique" is the other side  
of the sexist coin, and Fasteau argues that  
it destroys men as surely as men destroy  
women. Fasteau speaks as one middle-class  
man to another, but the arguments are intel-  
ligent, thorough and forceful: a good book  
for a man--or a man-centered woman--on the  
brink of new consciousness.  

Women in Struggle for Liberation. (World  
Student Christian Federation, Box 187 Dayton  
View Station, Dayton, Ohio 45406. $1.50.)  

A collection of articles from many sources  
and countries which analyze and describe  
the involvement of women everywhere in the  
struggle for liberation. Writings from  
feminists in Italy, Peru, Iran, Japan--even  
Guinea and Cape Verde--bring home the truly  
international character of the movement.  
Well worth the price.  

Does Socialism Liberate Women, by Hilda  
Scott. (Boston, Beacon Press, 1974. Hard  
cover, $7.95). There is no easy answer to  
this question, but Scott's discussion makes  
interesting reading; experiences from  
Eastern Europe suggest that the problems  

of women in industrial society are persis-  
tent and difficult, and can be dealt with  
only by careful, long-range planning.  

Women of Vietnam, by Arlene Fisen Bergman.  
Illustrated by Jane Norling. (San Francisco,  
People's Press, 1974. Paper, $2.65.) The  
voices of Vietnamese women telling a hopeful  
and courageous story of bitter experience and  
changes in the making. Collectively produced,  
filled with photos and graphics, carefully  
edited--impressive and exciting.  

America and the Crisis of World Capitalism,  
by Joyce Kolko. (Boston, Beacon Press,  
1974, Hardcover, $7.95)... If the world eco-  
nomy is the great shadow over equality, then  
certainly women need to understand the dynam-  
ics of the economic system. This book deals  
comprehensively and incisively with the eco-  
nomic situation from the Korean war to the  
current crisis; a grim and compelling history  
of vital importance to anyone working for  
social change. Joyce Kolko writes simply and  
clearly about a subject she knows well, with-  
out trying to popularize it.  

A Working Woman's Guide to her Job Rights,  
Women's Bureau, U.S. Dept. of Labor, Wash.  
D.C, 20210, (Paper, $1.00). Handy format,  
brief and clear discussions of current laws  
relating to a woman's job hunting, working  
and retirement. The pension section is out-  
dated, but there is a list of state and  
federal agencies which can offer additional  
information.  

A Woman's Journey, sculpture by Marjorie  
Michaels, words by Virginia Olsen Baron,  
photography by Carole Lowenstein. (New York,  
Alfred A. Knopf, 1974. Paper, $3.95).  
Michaels' sculpture has an earthly vitality  
that completely overshadows the slight  
Lowenstein's photography and overall design  
make this a beautiful little book.  

Something I've Been Meaning to Tell You,  
thirteen stories by Alice Munro. (New York,  
McGraw-Hill, 1974. Hardcover, $6.95). These  
are beautiful stories about ordinary lives;  
here are people of every age, sex, and condi-  
tion opening their eyes with ruefulness and  
wit to the nature of their connections with  
other people. Munro's art is deceptively  
simple--her materials are concrete and  
prosaic situations brilliantly transformed  

by the vision of characters who are not,  
themselves, either very brilliant or willing  

to see. The tension between what they know  
and what we know is delicately maintained  
in this fine, exciting book.  

Lavender Press, P.O. Box 60206, 1974. Paper,  
$1.50). Very soft, elusive, unstructured  
poems about the subjective perceptions of  
personal relations by Claudia Scott. (Chicago,  

= WORD OF MOUTH  

by Jackie Ghodes  

Perhaps you've seen the posters around town with  
the message “Word of Mouth ~ 341-4065" followed by  
a list of available skills ranging from caning, car-  
pentry and choreography to party chef, plumbing, and  
stained glass work.  

Word of Mouth began about three months ago. Its  
founders, Becca Gross and Peg Johnson, chose to use  
their skills and interests in the field of interior  
design as a more satisfying alternative to office  
work. Ms. Gross has a degree in interior design and  
Ms. Johnson has had some course work as well as prac-  
tical experience in the fields of design, painting  
and paperhanging.  

According to Ms. Johnson, the group of friends which  
made up the original talent and labor pool soon grew  
to include "other people we met as we worked.” With  
the addition of varied craftspeople Ms. Johnson says,  
"The business has taken its own direction, instead  
of being just a vehicle for our own work.” The com-  
pany does not act as a contractor, nor an employment  
agency for freelance artisans, as workers do their  
own estimating and billing. However, needs for  
services of all kinds are brought together with the ap-  
propriately skilled people by Word of Mouth, for the  
most reasonable price possible.  

In accord with Ms. Johnson's statement, "The more  
control of the simple mechanics of life that people  

have, the better off they are", is the willingness  

of Word of Mouth people to teach others how to “do it  
themselves". For example, in return for an hourly  
rate, a client could get initial instruction and  
assistance in beginning a project such as paperhanging.  
(There still aren't a lot of women working as  
plumbers and electricians), Johnson and Gross cer-  
tainly believe in women's abilities to physically  
maintain and repair everyday objects around the home.  
To strengthen women's self-reliance in such matters,  
the Word of Mouth people will be teaching a "fix-it"  
class for the next session of the Twin Cities Wom-  
en's Union School. Registration for the class is  
Feb. 23, as described elsewhere in this issue.  

Although Word of Mouth is not exclusively women-staffed,