Dunwoody

(continued from page 2)  
Pam said that the administration has been generally okay, except that one day "I got a pep talk from the President--how I was their guinea pig," Pam said. "Their guinea pig! That really irritated me, after the shit to get into their school, I was their guinea pig--as if an experiment to see if women could make it."

Because of all this, Pam is actively recruiting women to enroll at Dunwoody, because "I can't change things by myself." She would like to see some women enrolled for courses starting next September, but programs get filled up early and women interested should get applications in right away. Programs offered include printing, electricity, electronics, auto body, highway surveying, auto mechanics, baking, and refrigeration among others.

"I figure," Pam said, "it will get better when other women come. So I want to actively recruit women to come to Dunwoody and other schools like it."

Pat Schaeffer came to Dunwoody because "if I come down here, I have a job for sure."

She graduated from St. Mary's Catholic High School, which is a boarding school in New England, N.D., last spring and spent most of the summer looking for work.

She finally went to Dickinson, N.D., about 30/40 miles west of New England and slightly larger in population (20,900 compared with 6,000), to see what she could find there. She also has a sister in Dickinson, who works for an automotive company as a bookkeeper.

“Bookkeeping's just not my bag," she said. She wanted to work in a bakery doing cake decorating and was offered a job at a baking company in Dickinson if she took the course at Dunwoody. Her prospective employer had received his training at Dunwoody and recommended the course to her.

Pat applied last November and was accepted for the January course. She is not taking the full baking course, but just the one month in which the class concentrates on cake decorating.

"I decorate all the time--so when the other guys are in class studying baking formulas and so on, I decorate," she said.

Pat's comments about women's liberation were “ick." She does not feel any particular discrimination at the school.

She was somewhat apprehensive at first, she said, "after I read all those pamphlets describing the school --men, men, men. All those pictures of men and no women.

“And when I received the housing lists and checked them out they said they had only kept boys and hadn't heard of any women ever going there."

"It's a little different," Pat said, referring to the baking course. "That's something a girl would do. I was surprised to see all those men. I never could figure it out, how those men could do that delicate work. You should see those big guys down there."

Asked what she would have done if she had been denied admittance to Dunwoody, Pat said she probably would have "gone ahead...just like you. But I don't go in for women's liberation. I think a woman should be a woman.”

"She knows her place and I don’t."

We welcome news stories, poetry, photography, personal and political commentaries by and for women. Contact us at P.O. Box 8341, La

is published monthly.

a twin cities newspaper for women

"She said she doesn't get a hard time at school. That's because she acts as women are expected to act, quote, ‘behaves as a woman is supposed to behave'. She knows her place and I don't, because I don't think I have a place any more than they have a place," Pam Spence said.

Pam hopes to open her own garage someday, because "Being a mechanic is relevant to women's issues. Women get robbed at garages and humiliated because of their ignorance of mechanical things. Garages and mechanics don't humiliate men, even men who know just as little.

"What I would like to do is set up a service station run by women mechanics to take care of women's cars and to operate as a training place. Women need cars to get to jobs. Everyone who drives should know minimum maintenance."

In addition to her experiences at Dunwoody, Pam has been married and divorced, after working to put her husband through college. After her husband graduated, she started college, but didn't find it relevant.

"I also had to pay for all the groceries," Pam said. "I had to pay for my own way. I had a job and was going to school. We had just bought a house and paid for remodeling out of my G.I. Bill. He was thinking of charging me room and board because we weren't getting along too well.

"He wanted me to conform to a lot of roles which are common to married women. And I couldn't do it. It didn't seem very meaningful. So we both decided that I couldn't be in a marriage situation. We didn't have any children and I was free to make the choice."

Pat Schaeffer graduated from high school. She is one woman among six brothers and a sister. After failing to find a job the summer after graduation, she spent the next few months at home taking care of her younger brothers.

Her parents don't mind her coming to Minneapolis and going to school. "Just so long as I don't get married, they're happy," she said.

Pat is looking forward to going back to Dickinson, N.D., where she will be an apprentice for about a year. She expects to earn $115 a week, "something like that" to start, and more in the future, particularly when she replaces the bakery owner when he goes on vacations, since he is the only one now who does cake decorating.