BEING HAPPY  
IS REVOLUTIONARY  

by Jan Jirak  

MN a A ER PR RE  

Caravan Dance Collective has no director,  
the dancers do the administrative work them-  
selves, and teachers have been heard to say,  

"This is a collective. I can make mistakes."  
If this does not sound like a typical dance  
studio to you, you're right. It was formed  
precisely to avoid the hassles of “typical  
dance studios."  

For many Caravan members, it was a case of  
the art institution turning artists away from  
art. Sue Halloran, for example, had studied  
dance for many years, but stopped dancing be-  
cause of the competitiveness in traditional  
dance establishments. "Every time I got out on  
the dance floor, I felt tight and rigid," and  
finally developed ulcerative colitis. After  
teaching school for a short time, she found  
Caravan, and is now dancing, teaching dance,  
and choreographing again.  

"We don't try to make our bodies conform to  
some rigid standard," says Lois Weeks, who  
teaches belly dancing and body awareness. She  
feels that dance should explore the possibili-  
ties of the body.  

The dancers represent a wide variety of  
training and experience, ranging from Linda  
Shapiro who studied all technique with no im-  
provisation; to Halloran who studied only im-  
provisation. Their interests range from modern  
dance to East Indian dance to Afro-Jazz.  

Caravan says it is  
the community and schools." Usually this takes  
the form of dance classes held in their studio  
at 330 N. Prior in St. Paul and taught by mem-  
bers of the collective. But the collective al-  
so teaches classes to groups in the community.  
Usually these experiences add to the dancers'  
perceptions of dance. For example, Halloran  
and Dena taught a class at the Women's School.  
They found that almost all the women disliked  
some part of their bodies. They studied the  
movement of the bodies in different situations.  
They assumed aggressive and passive roles and  
found that roles affected how they moved.  

In Lois Weeks' body awareness class, stu-  

dents paired off to do relaxation exercises  

with each other. Weeks said the women were  

"What makes a bully?” from "Dancing Playground"  

very unwilling to touch each other, giggled,  
wouldn't concentrate. As Dena says, "You have  
to open yourself to be touched." Women are not  
trained for that in this society.  

Dance for children is a major focus at Cara-  
van. The major work the collective performed  
last year was "Dancing Playground.”  

"Balloon Dance" from "Dancing Playground"  

explores every aspect of a playground from the  
physical objects ("Seesaw", "Merry-Go-Round")  

dedicated to dance in the group dynamics ("What makes a bully?" and  

"Mr. Temptation"). Its purpose is to "explore  
space, time and energy (the three elements of  
dance), relationships between dance and language,  
dance and mathematics, and the related skills of  
reading, writing, and computing."  

Some of the teachers also teach dance classes  
in elementary schools, exploring these same  
elements of movement. Elementary school teach-  
ers are often amazed at the concentration the  
children display in their approach to dance.  

Artistic commitment is intrinsically politi-  
cal for women. As women who take classes at  
Caravan become more committed to it, this be-  
comes a source of strife with their husbands.  
Diane Mostek recalls that it was OK with her  
husband for her to be dancing as long as it was  
a hobby, but when it became a commitment, he was  
opposed to it.  

Linda Shapiro sees the problem from a differ-  
ent angle. She finds that it is very important  
to her to be self-supporting. Now that she has  
stopped teaching and is dancing full-time, she  
wants to make Caravan a "going thing." "I don't  
want this to be my little plaything that he lets  
me do because it makes me happy."  

Several Caravan women are interested in ex-  
ploring the relationship between dance and their  
personal politics. They think, for one thing,  
that many of society's problems would be solved  
if people felt freer with their bodies. In  
other words, if you're not uptight about your  
body, you're less likely to be uptight about  
other things. They believe that a person who  
is “uncentered"—physically, emotionally, spir-  
itually—can be dangerous if in a position of  
power; and that there are a lot of uncentered  
people in power.  

"Anyway," said one member, "dance makes you  
happy—and being happy is revolutionary."