14

Don’t Be Intimidated Feb. 22

Warnings and Strategy for Political Caucus

By Betty Hawthorne

Introduction

Precinct caucuses are the grass-roots of
politics. It's really some of your neigh-
bors getting together. The atmosphere
should not be looking for trouble. But we
have included some of the problems you might
find. Be as friendly as possible. You will
be working with these people in the future.

In planning the best thing to do in a pol-
itical caucus, two main streams of thought
always crop up.

One believes that the primary goal is to
win every position with a slate of 'good'
candidates. The other believes that the
goal is to affect the program (platform) and
that candidates are incidental to this ef-
fort.

Mine is the second position, which, as it
happens, is also generally a minority view-
point. However, both factions can, and
should, work together to achieve the common
goal of changing intolerable conditions.

How to achieve changes within the caucus

First, and obvious. Learn the rules,
Robert's. Leaflets with a summary of the
most used 'motions,' their meaning, and
their order of importance are available.
Take one with you. It's very useful when
you get excited or forget.

You should know the rules, not only to be
able to use them, but to be able to under-
stand what other people are using them for.
But, remember, the rules are not as impor-
tant as what you have to say. They're just
an aid. Speak up, and don't be afraid of
breaking the rules.

Second. Know the party structure. In the
DFL, only the caucuses may conduct official
Party business. You will be attending a
precinct caucus, the smallest political unit.

However, unofficial Party organizations
also exist. (These are now Legislative Dis-
trict organizations.) People who belong to
them may try to intimidate you by implying
that your opinions are not really as valu-
able as those of people who regularly par-
ticipate in the District organizations.

Whether they like the name or not, this
behavior is "machine-politicking." Fight it.

Third (or first). Prepare your program
(or slate). Have it written out—legibly—
to distribute. If people can read it, it
will help them to understand it, and to be
able to discuss it with you. (Few caucuses
will exceed 30 people.)

Strategy

1) Plan ahead. Have as many people pre-
pared in advance as possible; then, when you
get to the caucus, you can all talk it up.

2) The caucus. The first order of busi-
ness should be the Rules. The most impor-
tant Rule for both 'platform' and 'slate'
people is a Rule that requires candidates to
1) state their positions and 2) answer ques-
tions from the rest of the caucus. This will
not be a Rule in the written list given to
you. Amend the Rules to include it. (See
point #5.)

3) The second order of business will be the
election of caucus officers and the nomina-
tion of precinct delegates. Caucus officers
are merely used to expedite business; don't
worry about them unless you are going to be
super-organized before the caucus. Precinct
delegates are the people who will determine
all party policy above the precinct level.
This is a vital position.

4) Voting. There is a new voting tech-
nique in the DFL this year. Probably a lot
of time will be spent on explaining this new
procedure. Try to understand it. But, the
effect of the explaining will be to use up
time which should be spent on Resolutions
(which amount to Party policy). Be adamant
on your right to a lot of time for Resolu-
tions.

5) Candidates. Probably candidates will
just run. Even if they do give little
speeches they will be really innocuous.
Question them thoroughly on where they stand
on your program. Put your questions in the
form of specific statements, which they must
answer with a straight “yes" or "no." Keep
pushing when you get a wishy-washy answer.

6) Preliminaries at the Caucus. If your
caucus does not launch immediately into busi-
ness, mill around. Talk up your program.
TALK TO STRANGERS, ESPECIALLY SISTERS. Get
a little support going before the meeting.
Find out who has slates and what kind of
conditions you can work with. Support each
other.

Remember

A good discussion is probably the most
valuable and most rewarding part of a caucus.
This is the only chance they have to seri-
ously discuss politics and to learn.

national women’s political caucus (reprinted from December 1971 off our backs)

Thesis
A Women's Liberation Movement

Antithesis
Political Power in Electoral Politics

Synthesis
The National Women's Political Caucus

Some dialectic. Ever since the coming
out party of the National Women's Political
Caucus this summer I've had nightmares of
political mutants—Betty Friedan's head on
Mayor Richard Daley's torso—Hubert Humphrey's
face under Gloria Steinem's hair and sunglasses.

- The most reliable gossip available on
the Caucus says that there was a lot of elbow-
ing to get there first with the public announce-
ment of a national coalition aiming to put
women in 53% of the elected offices in the
nation. Betty Friedan, who in many ways got
there before anybody when she published "The
Feminine Mystique" in 1963 wanted credit for

and of course some control of the potentially
powerful force of a feminist voting bloc.
She was partially deflected from her goal
by Congresswoman Bella Abzug and others who
feared Friedan would sell out on issues in
order to suck in a wider range of women.
Friedan was being quoted everywhere as seeing
herself “understanding the suburban housewife
in the Midwest." This past humid July with
everybody privately claiming to be mother,
a birth rite was held for the Caucus at the
Statler Hilton here in Washington, D.C.
There were 300 women there from 26 states,
including two of us from off our backs. We
went wanting to believe in something besides
air conditioning. After hassling over the
$20 they wanted to collect from us as press
and the sheet we had to sign agreeing to res-

(continued on page 15)