continued from page 1

GIRL SCOUTS OF AMERICA: This very tra-
ditional organization will begin counsel-
ing its leaders in “non-traditional” app-
roaches to sex roles this fall. Although
there are unfortunate aspects to this
organization, it might be worthwhile to
check into these counseling groups in the
fall. Call: 338-0721.

MPLS. PUBLIC SCHOOLS: Every parent must
investigate her or his child's school to
discover possible non-sexist recreational
activities. (It is the writer's opinion
that the schools are not completely sin-
cere in their stated commitment to affirm-
ative action and non-sexist education.)
Call Carol Freeman, 335-8841 for further
information.

"Lois Milbauer, pre-school instructor for
South Suburban, purchases most of her in-
structional material from the Emma Willard
Task Force on Equal Education and Learning
Book Store, endorsed by N.O.W.

"The University Branch YWCA was funded
last year to study the issue of sexism.
University of Minnesota students visited
the nursery school and played association
games with the children to determine what
areas sexist attitudes are strong and to
encourage non-sexism. The students would
mention a specific task, like ironing,
and ask the kids who can iron. If the
children indicated that this task was
specifically for moms, a discussion would
ensue.

"Non-sexist education is a relatively
new concept in YWCA programming but its
importance has been realized and we hope
to incorporate this type of training in
parent education classes as well as in
pre-school classes sometime this fall."

--Candy Medd
Director of Communications

Specific Y activities for pre-schoolers
include:

PLAYCARE, Ruth Hawkins Center, 5801
James Ave. North, Tuesday through Friday,
9 a.m. to 3 p.m., $1 per day includes
lunch, breakfast and a snack. This pro-
gram is subsidized by Welfare. Children all day, love, I have been breathing you
can be entered at any time throughout the like rare oxygen:
year. Call 522-6559. from a dangerous cave.
this darkness makes me watchful;
NURSERY SCHOOL, Urban Center, Monday
through Friday, mornings or afternoons,
fall, winter and spring. The nursery
school will begin September 16 in a temp-
orary location, Trinity Lutheran Church.
Children can enter at any time during the
term. Call 374-2765.

PRE-SCHOOL, Suburban South Center, Tues-
days and Thursdays, 1 to 3 p.m., ages 3 to
5; fees vary. Call 881-2636. see, the birds are hypnotized
by the promise of its shadows,
Y-KIDS DAY CAMP, Suburban South Center,
9:30 to 2:30 three days a week. LaCompte
Green Park. $25 for two weeks, does not
include lunch; children should bring a
bag lunch. Scholarships are available in
cases of financial need. Call North
Center: 535-1713 or South Center 881-2636
for registration information. lying here, afraid, a thin grief
blows through my heart.

ethna mcKiernan