by Efeanor Vincent

Louise Nevelson has been a working artist  
for 53 years. For three decades, although  
she produced work in a variety of media, she  
never made a sale. During those years she  
was ignored and sometimes treated with out-  
right hostility by what she calls the “art  
Mafia."

Now art critics are calling her the greatest  
living American sculptor. Despite her hard  
won fame and wealth, Nevelson remains a warm,  
gracious person. There is no pretense about  
her. She speaks openly about her commitment  
to feminism on a global and personal scale.

Nevelson has faced many difficult situations  
in her life, but her marriage and her aff-  
iliation with the Sidney Janis Gallery rank  
in her mind as the most destructive.

She was the first woman and the first Amer-  
ican sculptor ever shown by New York's pres-  
tigious Janis Gallery in the early sixties.  
She constructed three huge walls to be shown  
by Janis. The show was well received, but  
none of the pieces were sold. In debt to  
Janis for $20,000, she had to sell her  
studio-home in order to raise the money.

In the meantime, Janis held her works as  
collateral.

She succeeded in ransoming the wooden hos-  
tages, but the experience took a tremen-  
dous mental and physical toll. Years earl-  
ier she had been able to claim her total  
being by breaking up her marriage to con-  
centrate fully on her art.

The capacity to free herself from domination  
has played a crucial role in developing her  
individual and artistic consciousness. She  
and her work become stronger and more beau-  
tiful with age.

QUESTIONS and ANSWERS

Q: How have you escaped or redefined the role  
society creates for women?

A: For thousands of years, way back in the  
Bible, men controlled the universe. We speak  
about—and I do too, I forget and speak  
about—he, the he. God is he and right from  
God down and before God there was he. So  
naturally where there's the greater power  
you're going to have the rest subservient to  
it.

But I think some people are born with a feel-  
ing of independence; that they belong to them-  
selves. And then there's a conflict, because  
if you belong to yourself when you step out  
over the threshold into the so-called world,  
you're hit back. You're smacked this way,  
you're smacked that way, because you're not  
in the dominant position.

At this point, there are women in the high-  
est positions. They're given their jobs by  
men; say, even politically. Now you know I  
can't stand that president—that isn't it.  
But the president has given positions to wo-  
men. Of course those women he selected are  
worshipers of him. They support him. So  
those women, whom we would expect to be em-  
ancipated and help humanity just turn right  
around and are slaves again. In principle,  
if you are a lowly slave or a high-class  
slave, you're still in the process of being  
a slave. You see?

I think in our time, through awareness, the  
schools and education things are changing.  
No matter whether you accept or reject the  

conventional education, it does something.

It opens. I don't say it opens all areas,  
but it does enlighten you somewhere. So why  
would anyone expect women that go to our best  
schools to go into the kitchen and be satis-  
fied? It's utterly ridiculous.

If you are trained and you're equipped to be  
a great opera star, you're not going to give  
that up, because you like to sing and work  
at it and that's your life. You're not go-  
ing in the kitchen. So we have many more  
trained women and the sum total of the pool-  
ing of the consciousness of the awareness of  
all these things—not only in America, but  
the world over—causes them to awaken. I  
don't think it's easy, but there are some  
good heads that are battling and I'm very  
optimistic that it will change. It's grow-  
ing into it, it's bound to.

Now we had women's suffrage, we had other  
things, but never was there a group that saw  
it through. And even now there's a bit of a  
lull from a few years back. But it's es-  
tablished and we can all look forward to it  
being part of our way of life.

Don't forget that when there's a master and  
a slave, the master is also enslaved. So  
men will never be emancipated until they  
accept that every human being is a human be-  
ing and not be caught in just one part of  

the body.

Q: But you were not saying these things, but  
at least thinking them many, many years ago.

A: Well, I took them.  
I didn't think them. I had to take them for  
what I wanted to do. I knew I was gifted.  
Now you see we're taught to be modest and to  
be ladylike. Well, that's deadly. And es-  
pecially if you have this thing that I wanted  
so badly. And not only that, that's the way  
I wanted to live. And I didn't want to be  
hemmed in by anybody. I don't think the  
world's that big. So I just had to break, if  
you call it traditions, but I didn't even con-  
sider them. I just did.

I didn't say them and

Q: Was the price you paid to break out worth  
it?

A: I needed to claim my total being. That  
means time, thought, you know, it means that I  
wanted to be in control of myself. So that  
I'd be free to live my life as I could under-  
stand it.

Q: Well, you paid some kind of price for that.

A: Of course, you pay, but you see, darling,  
if you don't do that you pay a price that's  
probably more. I was married, I was  
getting abscesses and boils. The blood  

boils just like on a stove and you get these  
things. I got sciatica and I was crippled.

I left, I was miserable, and I went to Eur-  
ope to study and just crossing the ocean and  
having the lid taken off my head, they dis-  
appeared. But what would have happened if  

I was confined?

Now, when I say confined, it was a time of  
affluence and nice surroundings. So, there's  
something about us, that demands what we are.  
And it doesn't really matter so much our  
surroundings in a case like that, an extreme  
case. Because I knew my capacity I was itching  
all over because I was bottled up.

continued on page 21