G

JUDY CHICAGO:
artist and feminist

by Mary Lee George-Geisser

Judy Chicago is associated with the Feminist Stu-
dio Workshop in Los Angeles. She was in St. Paul for
the month of January to participate in a Feminist Art
Workshop sponsored by St. Catherine's College. In
conjunction with the Workshop, Chicago's work was
shown in St. Catherine's art gallery. Her exhibit is
titled "Metamorphosis." Two lectures a week were
open to the public.

The first of these was a gallery talk at which
Chicago talked about her work. The gallery was over-
flowing. Though the audience squeezed together as
tightly as possible, there still wasn't room for
everyone who wanted to hear her. Judy Chicago is as
exciting to listen to as her art is to look at. She
combines the visual and the verbal in a delightful
way.

The subject of the work on display is either
women who were unable to fulfill themselves or herself
and her own feelings or a combination of both. One
series of drawings about women is titled "Compressed
Women Who Yearned to Be Butterflies." The butterfly
motif is a prominent one in Chicago's work. Her most
recent work, done with china paint on porcelain, she
calls "Butterfly Goddesses and Other Specimens." 
These are exquisitely beautiful discs three inches in
diameter mounted on velvet. Chicago turned to china
painting as her medium because she was unable to get
the delicate translucent quality she wanted with
another medium.

Chicago discussed the field of china painting in
this country and noted that at present, it is almost
totally dominated by women. It somewhat resembles
the old guild system with women learning the tech-
niques from other artists. How to obtain some of the
effects are well-kept trade secrets. Though Chicago
took classes from these women who have kept the art
of china painting alive, many of the effects she has
produced had to be learned by trial and error.

In her porcelains, the image of vagina and butter-
fly merge. Chicago commented: "The female artist's
obsession with vaginas represents her attempt to get
in touch with who she is." She feels that women ar-
tists can make their female experience work for them
rather than against them. That her perspective is
female and feminist is illustrated by the title of
one of the porcelains: "Fecundity as an Image of Cre-
ativity (or the female artist producing ideas in the
form of eggs)." Her image of the butterfly as god-
dess envisions one "who can fly and be free, who can
lift us and inspire us."

Writing is an integral part of her art. She
either writes on or around her work. She explained
that she uses writing in order to bring the viewer
closer to the work, to hold the viewer's attention for
a longer period of time and to explain her imagery
more fully to the viewer. Chicago expressed some
inner conflict in accepting the idea that she is both
a writer and an artist. When one of her colleagues
told her: "You write as well as you paint," she felt
that somehow she should paint better than she writes.

Anyone interested in feminist art and/or educa-
tion should read the book.

In the catalogue prepared for the exhibit, Arlene
Raven writes: "The Artist (Chicago) has written as a
diarist about her personal thoughts, feelings and ex-
periences. This style of private writing for public
reading has emerged more prominently along with the
relaxation of a distanced approach to artistic activi-
ty and has been used extensively by artists and cri-
tics alike. The narration of personal history is also
at the very heart of the women's movement: One woman's
act of declaring the real conditions under which she
lives has allowed all women to recognize their commu-
nality and to change their lives."

Chicago calls one of her groupings "Rejection
Quintet." In it she writes and draws about five ex-
periences in her life in which she felt rejected.

One male viewer was overheard commenting: "No one
could feel that rejected." Try being a woman in a
patriarchal society, Mister. However, the Rejection
Quintet does show a progression. The first drawing
asks: “How does it feel to be rejected? It's like
having your flower split open." The fifth one,

which she calls "Rejection Breakthrough Drawing"
concludes “It's like opening your flower and no longer
being afraid it will be rejected.”

Chicago noted that females have always been spec-
tators to male art, but that males have not had the
opportunity to be spectators to female art. She felt
that offering this opportunity to males could help
enrich the sensitivity of both males and females.

One of the problems she's been struggling with is how
to universalize from a female base. "The problem wo-
men are facing is how to develop ourselves so we can
have input into human content."

While discussing art produced by men, even that
which feminists might judge to be sexist in viewpoint,
Chicago commented: "It's perfectly O.K. as long as it
only takes up half the space in the museum."

Chicago talked about the terror she felt in try-
ing to be herself. “We are struggling through accept-
ing values we don't believe in. I had to throw out
everything that did not fit in with my own impulses."

In answer to a question by a woman who asked how
to get through that difficult period when you are get-
ting no positive feedback from those around you be-
cause you are refusing to accept culturally imposed
values which don't fit you, Judy Chicago said that her
association with other women in the women's movement
had been a great source of support for her in getting
to the point where she felt comfortable saying: "I'm
going to work out of what is important to me.” In
discussing how to get to this point, she said: "Strug-
gling with men is non-action. Action is acting on your
own behalf."

She concluded the gallery talk with the assertion:
"We have to shape the world in our own image."

Chicago's second lecture dealt with Feminist Art
Education and included a talk and slide presentation
by Sheila Root, a Minneapolis woman who had been en-
rolled as an art student at the University of Minneso-
ta. After hearing Judy Chicago speak at the univer-
sity, Sheila decided to go to Los Angeles to enroll in
the Feminist Studio Workshop where Chicago was teach-
ing. Sheila Root told of the students' reactions to
the innovative feminist program originated by Chicago
and her colleagues. Continued on page 3