* SHAKOPEE, here we go

Tanya—a lovely four-year-old visiting her mother at
the prison. She will stay the weekend. Then she
must leave. I feel the wrench her mother and she
must feel when they kiss goodbye; I see my own kids
receding into the distance, becoming Tanya's mother for
a moment. But not really. I can go home.

I learn that there have been many escapes lately, and
that restrictions are tighter. The other prisoners
must suffer. It's kind of like keeping all the kids
after school when one goofs off. Our prisons, so say
some of our staunchest citizens, are nothing more
than country clubs. So? Why, then, do some escape,
knowing they will automatically get another year?

On racism. A black prisoner became pregnant while
in prison. Obviously not in accord with the rules.
She is taken off her vocational training. A white
woman gets pregnant. She continues her train-

ing as usual.

A white woman is denied a visitor. The visitor is a
black man. The man who turned him away, without a
satisfactory explanation, or any explanation at all,
is white. The administration is "sorry" and will try
to see that it doesn't happen again. But it happens
all the time, continues to happen.

"Career Education." The women are, of course, trained
so that they can make a good living when they get out.
They must put in at least 365 hours in food service
before they get into a training program. Then, they
may have the choice of sewing, or better yet, key
punch. The women work a full week at the prison at
25¢ an hour.

If she is on level IV or V (the two highest levels of
the behavior modification plan), the prisoner may take courses
from Antioch, Augsburg, or any other college that is
willing to come to the prison with courses. She may
also take vocational training, for instance, auto
mechanics. But there's a catch. Such training does
not prepare her for a job—any “refined” training
must be obtained off grounds. Thus, the women on
levels I, II, and III are limited to what they can
learn.

So if you can learn to play the ultimate feminine,
you'll stay on level IV or V (unless you're a known
lesbian, in which case you stay at level III). But
if you're not good at the con game, keep that apron
handy, honey.

A prisoner can be dropped a level if she has an un-
excused absence from work. The procedure for obtaining
an excused absence is fraught with red tape.
She must report it to the staff member on duty; then
to the nurse, who may not be there, in which case
she reports it when the nurse visits again; thence
to the doctor when she makes her scheduled visit.
Days have passed. Forget one step, and it's back a
whole level.

Which brings us to medical care. If a prisoner
wishes to see a doctor or dentist other than those
the prison provides, she does so at her own expense.
One prisoner recently paid $60 for a social worker

to drive her to Minneapolis to see a doctor. The
women desperately need custody volunteers who will
bring them to the cities for medical attention. (If
you are interested, call Mary Kressin at 339-1615.)
Custody volunteers are always needed, for they pro-
vide a vital link to the outside—shopping trips,
recreational outings, and so on.

Because of the rash of escapes, the women cannot be
in the classrooms unless a teacher is there, which
cuts down on their education time by about three
fourths.

Bureaucracies are filled with strange twists. Prior
to now, every woman who entered the prison had to
take the chemical dependency treatment program even
if she was not chemically dependent. Now, the funds
have been cut off for that program, and there are
women at the prison who need counseling for drug
dependency.

At present, there are two AA groups that come to the
prison. Often, one has to shop around, so to speak,
for the group that best fits one's needs. But that
is on the outside. If one of the groups that comes
to the prison doesn't fit a woman's needs, she is out
of luck.

The recently formed Prisoner's Union, always a threat
in terms of group cohesiveness and self-direction, is
on shaky ground. For some time the representative
was only allowed one-to-one visits. I am told that
the prison is opening up to the Union again. It may
have something to do with pressure being brought by
the area NOW women, who have formed a task force, the
Criminal Justice Committee. Several of the prisoners
are members of NOW, and hope to open the Wednesday
night meetings of prisoners up to that group, as well
as to the Women's Union, to Gold Flower, and other
interested groups.

Before I left the prison that day I made a list of
the women's needs, which people on the outside, with
a little energy and a small amount of time, can fill
(see box).

WHAT THE SHAKOPEE WOMEN NEED: *

--URGENT: custody volunteers to take women outside
the prison for medical treatment.**

--CLASSES: people to come in and teach; poetry, medi-
tation, women's awareness, art, self-hypnosis, etc.
--CLOTHES: new or used, for the boutique.
--CHILDREN'S FURNITURE: cribs, toys, chairs.
--RECREATION; ENTERTAINMENT: there's never enough.
--VISITORS: some of the women you might visit are
Samantha Xanthes, Margaret Reynolds, Eva Diamond,
Candy Brown, Spanky (Lois) Witke, Druscilla Sabo.
--PEN PALS: address to Box 7, Shakopee, MN 55379;
Violet Cardwell, Fern Erickson, Marianne Lewis,
Cookie Bell (include postage).

"The Reflector," the women's booklet with prison
news, may be obtained by writing the editor, Sam
Xanthes, Box 7, Shakopee, MN 55379.

*The Twin Cities Women's Union is presently coordi-
nating volunteer work for the prison. Contact Vicki
Modest, Doris Colville, or Libby White: 729-6200.

The ride home was gray, clouded over with anger and
frustration, and a conviction I have long harbored.
The sick lust for profit—which requires masses of
exploited people, unpaid, poorly paid—this is the
sickness that drives the desperate to hustle, rob,
deal, steal, that motivates the have-nots to imitate
the haves, to want passionately the status attached
to those plush settings advertised by the profit-
seekers. My mind turned to the real country-club
prison in Allentown, Pa, where the few corporate
criminals who are convicted are sent. And to the
super-rich who never see the inside of a prison, the
real criminals. If we put them out of business, our
prisons would be emptied of their victims.