Sally Hughes Makes Student  
Government ‘Women’s Work’  

I've grown accustomed to positing all my  
hopes for female equality and a humane soc-  
iety in terms of a very distant future.  
Indeed, I've grown rather sour on occasion  
when I concede that only the dust of my sis-  
ters and I will witness a feminist/human  
millennium.  

But in the midst of my latest pessimism, I  
met Sally Hughes, who is a living measure of  
the progress women have made in the past 10  
years.  

She is a freshman at Metropolitan Commun-  
ity College, its first female Student Senate  
President and a leader of a late-February  
student protest against poor facilities and  
an unresponsive administration.  

Breach of the Peace  

In that protest, Sally was arrested for  
"breach of the peace" and "placing injurious  
materials in the streets."  

My interest was piqued at the outset—un-  
accustomed as I am to newspaper photos of  
young women being hauled off by police as  
leaders of protests. And upon reading the  
"Minneapolis Tribune's" account of the dem-  
onstration, so much remained unsaid that I  
phoned Sally for an interview.  

She readily agreed and a day later I  
arrived at Metropolitan's Memorial Hall,  
a building whose WPA drabness has been only  
slightly relieved by neo-psychedelic wall  
colors.  

I presented myself at the basement-level  
Student Senate office, expecting to find one  
or two students at their leisure. But I  
walked into a working organization's office.  

Seven or eight men and women were gathered  
around a desk and I caught conversational  
tailings: "...I told him we'd completed  
that..." "I've set up a meeting with them  
on Monday..." "The parking lot's been  
taken care of...."  

In another corner of the room two young  
women removed scarves and gloves and attend-  
ed to an infant.  

I realized I had encountered people ser-  
iously involved in their work and, conscious  
of my interruption, asked for Sally Hughes.  

"She's right there..." indicating the wo-  
man holding the baby.  

She gave the child to her sister and led  
me to the quietest corner of the office.  

Sally is tall and sturdily slender, her  
long, ash-brown hair hangs straight. She  
speaks directly and naturally.  

"There has been a real communication ga-  
p between the administration and students,"  

by Mary Hastings  

she said, explaining the basis of last  
month's protest.  

To dramatize their plight, 30 to 40 stu-  
dents gathered in front of the college be-  
fore dawn on February 1.  

Sally and the other demonstrators handed  
out informational leaflets and dragged sev-  
eral of the cafeteria's uncomfortable-look-  
ing table-stool units onto the walks to  
illustrate their claims of poor facilities.  

Police arrived shortly after the demonstra-  
tion began. "At first they were directing  
traffic out of the area," Sally explained.  

“Swooped Up”  

But when the tables and stools appeared, a  
struggle ensued.  

"We had a lot more participation once  
the police came," Sally said. Evidently the  
police recognized her as a central figure  
in the demonstration.  

"I heard them yell, 'Get her.' It was  
really strange the way they swooped me up."  

and Arrested  

She was the only student arrested. She  
has retained an attorney to defend her and,  

at this writing, is scheduled to appear in  
court.  

However, Sally said she understood that  
Metropolitan's president, Howard Bergstrom,  
would negotiate with the District Attorney  
to drop charges against her. Bergstrom will  

continued on next page