“Beat down conservatives,” cried the voice again.

“Down with conservatives,” echoed the crowd.

Now that Gold Flower’s father-in-law had confessed his “sins,” the meeting was over. But first someone was sent for a guarantor who stood up before all the women and promised:

“If Old Man Chang treats his daughter-in-law badly again, I shall bring him to you.”

When Gold Flower’s father-in-law had gone, a group of the younger women gathered around to congratulate her.

“My turning over is all due to you,” she told them. “I know now that you are powerful. I know, too, that the 8th Route Army has done something for me.”

That night when she went home, her father-in-law was so ashamed he could not hold up his head.

“Was this overturning movement your doing?” he asked.

“No, it was not my doing,” Gold Flower said. She was still cautious.

“I know you are telling the truth,” he said. “There are sister groups in the village which investigate the bad treatment of women,” said Gold Flower. “They know everything.”

He looked at his daughter-in-law in fright. Gold Flower smiled to herself.

Although so short a time had elapsed, the Gold Flower who had previously submitted to every kind of evil treatment in her home was a very different girl from the Gold Flower who went about the village after the “reform” of her father-in-law. Every manner of shaking off “Papa” showed it. No longer did she keep her head bowed down and speak only when spoken to. She did not assume, as a matter of course, that her father-in-law was right in everything he said or did, but now argued out any question that displeased her. She ate the same things as did the rest of the family and when her father-in-law took a piece of cloth from a box and said, “Make some clothes for yourself,” she began to develop a new pride in her appearance. Because she had always been kept indoors, she made a point of going out at all times of day. And she could throw out her chest, hold her head high and look at Gold Flower, who had never imagined that such freedoms could exist for women, had the sense to see that every woman in the village must be as free as herself before the “struggle” against man’s domination could be fully won and the victory guaranteed. Therefore when she was elected head of a group of ten women, she became very zealous in investigating “bad” mothers-in-law and “backward” husbands. All the sly tricks that she had learned to avoid her husband’s anger, she now summoned as her aid in the battle against oppressive parents. “Does your daughter-in-law treat you well?” she would say to a woman. “Does she obey your orders?” And the unsuspecting woman would answer: “You know how bad things have become since the 8th Route Army came here. My daughter-in-law goes out when she pleases. You have eyes; you can see.” Pretending sympathy, Gold Flower would bid the woman goodbye. Then she would hide under a window, all the antennae of her suspicions spreading out to catch word of a family quarrel. Then, having collected her evidence, she would pounce on the hapless mother-in-law and haul her before a “reform” meeting.

In the year 1947, Chiang Kai-shek’s offensive pressed hard on North China, and Gold Flower was afraid that the 8th Route Army might be defeated and her new freedoms wiped out with the stroke of a sword. The exhortations of the Communist Party to increase farm production fell on her ears like a clarion call. She went about urging women to work in the fields. “We have turned over now and have equality,” she would argue. “That means that women do work and don’t have to depend on men.” Not all the women in the village were convinced. “If we work in the fields,” they said, “what shall happen to our work at home? Does turning over mean we shall be worked to death?” “That’s wrong,” answered Gold Flower. “If we do not work, the fields will produce little; there will be no grain for soldiers at the front. Then we shall be threatened to death by Chiang Kai-shek’s army and lose all we have gained. And again we will have to depend on our husbands.” The women could not stand up against her arguments.

But there were other considerations. Husbands did not want their women to go into the fields. Gold Flower called on the belle of the village, a girl named White Purity, who agreed to come out and work. “You are too beautiful to work in the fields,” her husband said. “What can you do when someone drags you away through the corn?” White Purity laughed. “Yes, I am beautiful,” she said. “But does that mean that I must stay indoors all my life like a bird in a cage? This is a new society; it is not like the old days. If anyone dares to attack me in the fields I will call our Women’s Association to beat him to death.” Reluctantly her husband consented, but when he found his income increased by the labor of his wife, he was very pleased. One night he remarked to his wife: “If I ever have to leave home, you can support my whole family.” White Purity had been waiting for such a remark. “Yes,” she said, “I can support our family now, so you can go off and join the 8th Route Army. You are young and you ought to be ashamed not to be fighting the reactionaries.” Perceiving that he had fallen into a trap, the husband refused to go. White Purity would not sleep with him. He threatened to beat her; she threatened him with the Women’s Association. Then she said she would kill herself unless he joined the army. Outmaneuvered, the husband at last mounted a donkey and went off to fight Chiang Kai-shek.

Working among the women of her village, Gold Flower discovered new meanings in life. What pleased her most of all was to aid boys and girls to marry freely. Harvest time found her in the fields, wandering among the village boys, trying to match them up with girls of her acquaintance. “Why don’t you find yourself a lover?” she would say to a farmer boy. “You are alone and she would probably make clothes for you.” “But where can I find such a girl?” the boy would ask. “I'll find her for you,” Gold Flower would answer. She arranged meetings in the homes of friends. For it was still impossible for boys and girls to meet openly before their parents. These meetings were stilted, formal and very serious. In them, conversations like the following took place:

Boy: What kind of a lover do you want?  
Girl: Someone like you.

Boy: I have a feeling we will make a very good couple. But what about your parents, will they agree?

Girl: We have a new society. The old society will never return. I can threaten them with my Women’s Association. If they don’t agree, I can pretend to commit suicide. But what about you?

Boy: For me, it’s easy. If my family won’t agree to my marrying freely, I will threaten to leave home.

Gradually, by such methods, fighting tradition, flouting custom, outmaneuvering parents, the youth of the village won new liberties for themselves. However, girls and boys, set free from the past, found they could not shake everything off all at once. Sexual freedom was practically unknown. A period of three or four months during which couples carefully examined each other usually preceded most marriages. During this period, boys and girls did not make love; they neither kissed, necked, petted nor walked alone on the streets together. Less sex freedom existed than in the United States. There were none of those tremendously challenging ideas that were introduced and then discarded by the Russian Revolution.

With freedom of marriage, a new type of wedding ceremony was introduced into the villages. No longer did the bride’s father have to go to the usurer to hire a sedan chair; instead he sent his daughter off to her husband’s village on a donkey. Because the old prohibition against marriage within the village had broken down, many girls never left home at all, but married neighbor boys.

Such weddings usually took place in the open fields under a reed shelter and anyone could come. Dressed in cotton suits and millet hats, with colored ribbons around their waists, the bride and groom, instead of kowtowing to the ancestral tablets, as in the past, merely bowed to each other. In more modern marriages, a master of ceremonies made a speech in which he declared: “Now Miss Wang…” Then the Prover of the Wedding announced: “This is not a buy-and-sell marriage. It is democratic and desired by both sides and is recognized by the government.” The introducer of the couple who was not a paid mediator, as in the past, would then tell how he brought the boy and girl together. Finally, the crowd would shout for the bride and groom to tell their love story. Generally, most were too shy to say anything except, “We are marrying of our own free will.” Concluding the marriage, the groom would bow to the three wedding officials and shake the hand of his wife. Couples never kissed in public.

Gold Flower watched all these changes in her village with a sense of triumph. But her mood of exaltation, begotten of personal victory and a sense of public service performed, did not last longer than a few months. For what did all her efforts amount to if she were still tied to a man whom she loathed? Not until she settled affairs with her own husband did Gold Flower think she would be really free.

Suddenly she decided to lure him back home.

When Gold Flower first took part in the Women’s Association, her father-in-law said to her: “I have no way to deal with you, but just wait till my son comes back home; he will beat you.”

At that time, she had answered: “I do not care. We have our powerful Women’s Association and we can fight against any kind of enemy.”

She now decided to put this theory to the test. Without informing her father-in-law, she went to a cousin and asked him to write a letter to her husband which she dictated. With infinite guile, she couched her letter in terms sweeter than she had ever used before, ending up with the words: “I miss you. The quicker you come back, the better.”

She returned to the farm, working hard in the fields, beating, shouting at, jerking the mouth of the mule, hoeing the land, turning over the manure and all the time thinking, brooding, plotting. If her husband were no better, she decided, she would struggle against him in a meeting and reform his character. Deep down inside her, however, a passionate desire for revenge was stirring, and she kept it buried only by throwing herself into her work.

Twenty days later, her husband, Chang, showed up at her gate. His face was aglow with pleasure. “As soon as I received your letter,” he said, “I rushed back home.” Gold Flower smiled at her husband, but she could not say if she was glad that he had returned or not. Then as she saw those old, hated features closer at hand, she knew.

She did not like him. Maybe he had changed, but she did not think so. Even as she smiled at him, a bitter feeling was gathering in her stomach. She felt that something desperate was going to happen. Further than that her imagination could not take her.

She led him to the kitchen and set the kettle on to boil. Her father-in-law came back from the fields and crouched beside his son, a sullen expression on his face.