Midwifery Frees Women From

By Heit Kemper.

A quiet revolution in maternity care is
taking place in the Twin Cities.

Pregnancy and childbirth are functions of
normal, healthy women, but until recently,
illness-oriented care has been given to the
99.9 percent of women who give birth to
their children in hospitals. Obstetricians
and nurses agree that 90 percent of births
are normal and could be safely attended by
trained midwives in a more comfortable set-
ting.

Now that advances in medical technology
have made a safe birth experience almost a
foregone conclusion, people are now turning
their attention to making childbirth exper-
ience emotionally satisfying as well.

This revolution is quiet for several rea-
sons. There is a real need for caution while
developing alternative childbirth methods
that are necessarily dependent on the estab-
lished medical community for back-up assist-
ance in case of emergency. With the lowest
birth rate in recent years, an alternative
style of childbirth is seen as a threat to
the general practitioner and obstetrician's
bread and butter.

But what is bread and butter to the ob-
stetrician is meat and drink to the midwife,
according to a local pioneer in family-cen-
tered childbirth.

Control and Choice in Childbirth

This is also a revolution—manned by
consumers demanding control and choice in
what can be a most interesting, joyous phys-
ical experience.

Changes in childbirth are being influ-
enced from outside as well as inside the med-
ical professions. Private groups like the
Childbirth Education Association have grown
at a spectacular rate. And this has happen-
ed at a time when the birth rate in the
Twin Cities has dropped from 134 births per
1,000 in 1960 to 20 births per 1,000 in 1968
(the last available figure).

Last year the Childbirth Education Assoc-
iation (CEA) trained more than 1,300 couples
in prepared childbirth techniques. The CEA
now has more applications than it can hand-
le.

Men are re-entering the ceremony of birth
to be with their women in the delivery room.
A few years ago, this was unheard of and e-
ven prohibited by hospital regulations.

Less than ten years ago, a man in California
chained himself to his wife so they could

experience their child's birth together. The
hospital attempted legal action against him.

Women can have babies in a variety of
ways. Ether and forceps were an advance
that had women being delivered of their
children, rather than actively taking part.
You can still have a "knock 'em out, drag
'em out" delivery or you can be temporarily
paralyzed by spinal anesthetics or be eased
by gases to inhale. There are anesthetics
(per-cervical block) that can numb the uter-
us for a short period of time and provide
a helpful rest during labor. Breathing ex-
ercises and learning how to ride with con-
tractions rather than fighting against them
can ease a labor considerably.

Childbirth’s “Chains”

With knowledge of the variety available
to them, couples are choosing obstetrical
care according to their own personal phil-
osophies, even if it means shopping around
for the right doctor or midwife. And you can
be sure that patients taking their bus-
iness elsewhere will have an effect on the
kind of care offered in the future.

Changes in childbirth style have been
happening faster than the medical profession
or individuals can keep track of. One ma-
jor change is the demise of the traditional
granny midwife and the rise of a new pro-
fessional—the nurse-midwife.

Granny midwifery (rhymes with sniffery)
in Minnesota is not far behind us. Mrs.
Ebba Kirschbaum, the last midwife licensed
by the Minnesota Medical Board of Examiners,
retired last year after aiding the birth of
almost 1,700 children. Her retirement also
brought an end to home deliveries, at least
for the time being.

Lucy Cutler was one of the last women
Mrs. Kirschbaum attended. Ms. Cutler has
experienced both hospital and home deliver-
ies and is vocal about the differences. She

had her first child in a hospital.

"Hospitals are geared to curing the prob-
lems they cause," says Ms. Cutler. She and
her husband, Bruce, figure they spent $70
per hour for a doctor to endanger two lives
and ignore their wishes.

Ms. Cutler says her obstetrician's manner
was deceptive. They had discussed her wishes
for no anesthetic or restraints during del-
ivery (women are routinely strapped down
for delivery in modern hospitals).

"He seemed to go along with my ideas,
he didn't disagree with me. He was very
relaxed and casual, which I liked," she
continues.

Her confidence was shaken when she asked
for advice on labor and delivery during an
office visit near the end of her pregnancy.
Her doctor told her not to worry, that it
was too early to discuss it. She went into
labor the next week.

During her labor, Ms. Cutler was given a
"routine anesthetic" despite her protesta-
tions—a spinal block (which deadens feel-
ing from the waist down, interfering with
the control women had up to that point).

Her legs were restrained in stirrups against
her wishes.

When her child was born, she thought it
was someone else's child crying—she did not
feel the birth she had so happily antic-
ipated.

"It was worse than a rape," she says.
"At least with a rape you have many other
opportunities to have a positive experience.
But you don't have too many chances to ex-
perience birth."

Angered by their experiences with hospi-
tal delivery, the Cutlers sought out Ebba
Kirschbaum to deliver their next child at

conned on next