THE TWIN CITIES

WOMEN'S

One of the liveliest and most tangible results
of the modern Women's Movement has been the insist-
ence on more conscious and more responsive means of
educating women. Feminists question the validity
of the history and literature which makes no mention
of women's contributions or sensibilities. They note
their own absence from the scientific and mechani-
cal fields and blame the schools for fostering and
enforcing sex stereotypes of knowledge. In addition
to the subject matter actually taught or not taught,
women criticize the whole social environment of
public schools and colleges which promote competi-
tion for grades and scholarships but actively in-
doctrinate women to view competition and achieve-
ment as unfeminine. The only competition which
the ideology of the schools permits is that which
exists between women for beauty queen titles or
dates. Women might “pick up” degrees in teaching
or nursing or go to secretarial school. Many wo-
men, too poor or too timid, don't go at all after
high school.

Despite this distance from or active distaste
for the whole business of schooling, the idea of
learning a skill or discussing a book is still
appealing. Human curiosity can survive years of
dullness and still assert itself. Some women
learn to fix their cars, write poems, grow voluptuous
plants or re-wire a toaster. But these accomplish-
ments are often isolated and depend upon an initiative
which will bring the woman to the local adult edu-
cation center, vocational school or "how-to" sec-
tion of the library.

The Women's School, a project of the Twin
Cities’ Women's Union, offers courses for women
to share what they've learned and build the unity
and social consciousness which they need to sus-
tain themselves and promote change. The Women's
School is described as a woman-centered, community-
controlled collective. This means that the classes
are convened by women and only women participate
in the learning. Our exclusion of men is both a
personal and political statement. We recognize
the need of women to organize autonomously, both

UNION

to avoid intimidation and competition, and to de-
velop a woman's culture which pays particular at-
tention to the contributions of women to politics
and art. The School is also an attempt to respond
to the needs of the community. Members of the
Women's School workgroup try to communicate with
as many community groups and individual women as
possible to find out what their interests and
abilities are. Responding to this information,
we compile the courses listed in the School bro-
chure. The School is a collective made up of
seven members who meet once a week to discuss
class ideas, find convenors, hold orientation and
registration sessions, produce the Women's School
catalogue and take care of the publicity required
to inform local women of the School's schedule.
The School is the major political commitment for
the women who work on the workgroup--we're help-
ing to build a female culture which is politically
conscious and potentially revolutionary. Thus, we
see it as education for change and encourage all
convenors to infuse their classes with the social-
ist and feminist consciousness which was the moti-
vation for the creation of the Women's School. For
women who are immediately curious about political
feminism we offer courses in history and political
theory. Our tasks, then, are to keep the School
going from session to session trying to improve the
quality of courses and increase the offerings, to
coordinate our activities with other educational
and political groups, and to reach out to and or-
ganize women.

The next session of the School will be its sixth.
Our growth since last spring has been phenomenal in
spite of the limits of volunteerism. Last session,
we charged $10 for each class ($5 for an additional
class and $2 for one-shot presentations) and be-
gan to develop a more responsible structure. With
the aid of a small, one-month grant, we hope to better
publicize the School, enroll more women (we had about
125 women finishing classes last fall), and pay one
part-time coordinator so that we can offer course
sessions on a more frequent and regular basis.

For information call:
Women's Union - 729-6200

—— WOMEN’S EQUITY ACTION LEAGUE

AAAAAA ™ JACKIE GOHDES

The Women's Equity Action League was founded in
1968 in Cleveland, Ohio, by a group of women lawyers,
psychologists and educators with the philosophy that
real social change would come through working within
the political system and the courts. By educating,
influencing legislation, instituting court action and
pressing for full enforcement of existing laws to
achieve equality in education and employment, WEAL
seeks to bring about a society which offers equal op-
portunities for personal fulfillment to all.

Convened in 1971, Minnesota WEAL has filed sex
discrimination complaints against educational organi-
zations resulting in individual settlements by Augs-
burg College for discriminatory hiring and promotional
policies for academic faculty and investigations by
HEW and EEOC of 31 Twin Cities area school districts
for unfair employment practices in senior high school
administrations and social studies departments. Three
weeks after the administrators' complaint was filed, a
woman was appointed principal of one of the high
schools in question, increasing to three the number
of women per 183 administrative positions.

Currently, local WEAL studies include employment
practices of broadcasting media and affirmative action
programs of business and industry. Minnesota WEAL
recommends class action suits as most effective for
voicing grievances but continues to lend support and
credence to women who prefer to file individual com-
plaints.

Twin Cities WEAL membership includes lawyers, psy-
chologists, students, professors, businesswomen and
tradespersons. New members are always welcomed as
WEAL seeks to widen the scope and talents of a member-
ship dedicated to the achievement of equal rights.
Regular meetings are held the first Wednesday of each
month at Hope University Lutheran Church, 601 13th
Avenue S.E. Minneapolis, beginning at 7:30 p.m.

February's agenda includes an update on WEAL
endorsed legal cases and a report on new Veterans
Preference legislation. Exciting ideas and interest-
ing people are staples of WEAL meetings; come and join
us in working toward realistic goals through direct
action.