SARA SAYS

SARA SAYS

SARA SAYS

Whoever wrote this pamphlet is perpetrating
the feminine myth. What does it mean to
“do it like a woman?" One of the bad as-
pects of femininity, as defined by this pam-
phlet and most of our culture, is to use
our sex to get what we want--in this case
to dress neatly, to have an immaculate
hairdo, to be efficient and smile like a
machine. Is it necessary to dress and act
like this to get and keep a job? Is it
necessary to emotionally relate to the men
in the office on a sublimated sexual level
to maintain a happy working atmosphere? Is
there much difference between this and the
more obvious tweak in the boob or nip in
the bud that other women receive on their
jobs (waitresses, stewardesses, tour
guides...)? Both women and men are workers
and the jobs they do should not depend upon
their sexual identity. Relating to your-
self purely as a sexual object is self-
destructive.

Women are not by nature sensitive, sympa-
thetic, warm-blooded creatures. Rich women
can afford to be all of these things.

Since they don't have to worry about eco-
nomic things, they have the time to develop
these aspects of human nature. Most working
women also develop these qualities since
society says that it is their duty. Most
men never feel the need to develop sensi-
tivity, understanding, or compassion, be-
cause they rely on the women around them
and on female employees to handle this as-
pect of life. Men don't feel they have to
or can develop sensitivity to other people
since it would shatter their image of being
cold, clipped, and calculating. The so-
called feminine qualities are actually
human qualities which can and must be de-
veloped by all.

Pretending to take a customer's complaints
seriously while at the same time not ever
giving our reactions to the problem means
we're once again falling into our unthinking
role as women. Our role as women working
for bosses is to say exactly what the bosses
want us to say, but to do it in a sexual
way. We can get it across because we're
women (expected to think like a woman...
that is, sexual), whereas our bosses can't,
because they supposedly can't use that
tactic except in a domineering and
aggressive way.

Women get fired because they don't fit in.
This is a form of fascism. Being too honest

SARA SAYS

SARA SAYS

can get us fired. So, too, can doing our
jobs too well; or breaking the unwritten
rules of society (women thinking, making
suggestions to men, etc.). This is usually
what is meant when “personnel problems"
occur. Why are bosses always unaware of
these things--until notified by their
secretaries? And why do they accept this
system of dealing with people within their
offices? Is it because they are too
busy to be human? And while they are too
busy, secretaries are expected to smooth
over such problems, rather than to deal
with them. When things get too tough to
handle, then we can go running to our
bosses for help. What does this say about
the intelligence and ability of women?

Men have responsibility. Therefore, they
have the right to have temper tantrums when
they occur. Women "don't have responsibili-
ty." Therefore, we don't have the right to
have temper tantrums. Women never get an-
gry. If we do, our tempers are looked upon
as being petty and cute.

There is no need to tolerate any man who
gripes about his responsibilities since he
made it that way. No man need take total
responsibility for any situation since there
are women and other men around to share the
load.

Women do make decisions, both at home and
at work (unlike most men who have only one
area of decision-making--on the job). If
women do make decisions, then why are we
expected to not show our anger when things
go wrong? We are not superhuman and
neither are men. So, when things go wrong,
let's sit down, talk, analyze, and com-
municate--not cover up for one another.

‘Yt that's how they feel about
me here, I'm going to quit...
Personnel problems can be anticipated
by a perceptive secretary. Growing
friction between staff members may go
unnoticed by your boss—and explode
unpleasantly before he’s even aware
of it. If you see trouble coming, you
may be able to help smooth it over
yourself. If it’s too hot for you to
handle, the sooner your boss is aware
of it the better.

Oh, and be forgiving. In these
days when everyone stands on his
rights, demands satisfaction, resents
interference, there’s such a need for
tolerance and forbearance. When your
employer is tired, moody,
snappish—don’t take his
brusque remarks personally.
Would your temper stay sweet
if you had his decisions to
make, his responsibilities to
bear? Forget, forgive.