21

PORT ON NEW CREDIT RULES

In the April 25 Federal Register, the Board of Gover-
nors of the Federal Reserve System published proposed
rules for enforcing the Equal Credit Opportunity Act,
which goes into effect on October 28 of this year.
These rules would ban many credit practices which the
Board has cited as discriminatory.

(Most federal laws are enforced through regulations
written by a regulatory agency. These regulations
are first published in the Federal Register as pro-
posed rules. Following this, there is a period dur-
ing which interested persons or groups may make
written comments. After reviewing the written com-
ments, the agency promulgates final regulations.
These final regulations go into effect on the date
published in the Federal Register.)

Hearings on the credit proposals will begin on May

28 in Washington. Interested persons or groups may
send written comments before June 30 to the Secretary,
Board of Governors, Federal Reserve System, Washington
D.C. 20551.

Some of the rules would require creditors to:

--Apply the same policy to both sexes where a new
application is required upon change in marital
status. This is aimed at the practice that many
creditors have of requiring widows and divorcees
to reapply for credit and not requiring the same of
widowers or divorced men.

--Consider alimony or child support payments like any
other income when these payments are likely to con-
tinue in the future or where there is some written
or court order.

--Open separate accounts for married couples who re-
quest them. (The creditor must inform them that in
some cases they may have to pay a higher finance
charge because of this.)

--Offer credit in any legal name that the applicant
requests.

--Consider all of the income of an applicant or an ap-
plicant's spouse without regard to sex or marital
status. This is aimed at the practice of discount-
ing all or part of the wife's salary when a couple
applies for mortgage credit.

STRANGE AND CURIOUS

--Use only information about the person who applies
for credit when that person applies as an indivi-
dual.

--Retain records for at least two years after the
date of final action.

--Furnish a written statement giving the reasons why
credit was denied or terminated to those who
request it.

--By October 28, 1976, when the law will have been in
effect for one year, accounts used by both spouses
would have to be kept in both names. This is ex-

- pected to solve some of the problems that married
or divorced women have maintaining a credit his-
tory, because all of the accounts have been in
their husbands' names.

The law will be enforced administratively through the
Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Trade Commission
and 11 other Federal agencies dealing with credit or
credit institutions. There is also a civil remedy
which provides for up to $10,000 in punitive damages
for documented cases of discrimination.

Copies of the proposed regulations may be obtained
from the Secretary of Governors or copied from the
April 25 Federal Register available at the Minneapo-
lis Public Library.

from Cong. Donald Fraser

Editors note: Thanks to Donald Fraser for keeping
us consistently informed about legislation important
to women. With regard to this set of rules, accord-
ing to Nancy Polikoff (Center for Women Policy
Studies), the new rules have these weaknesses:

--The regulations do not address credit issues invol-
ving couples of the same sex or unmarried couples.

--They do not outlaw discrimination against part-time
workers. A disproportionate number of women make
up this sector of the labor force.

--The biggest failure of the law is that no reporting
is required of creditors. Access to records is only
possible after litigation has been initiated.

Readers are urged to write with comments.

Sisterhood Is Blooming—
Springtime Will Never Be the Same

Want Ads

EDITOR: 6-mo. yearly position for regional

magazine. For application infor-
mation, write: David Peters, PREVIEW,
Minnesota Public Radio, 400 Sibley St.,
St. Paul, MN. 55101.

Experienced nurse's aide wanted to assist mid-age
couple. Husband disabled. Full time days, live in
or out, Kenwood area home. Call Kathy, 374-4371.

AT
Finny Critters
TROPICAL PLANTS

ACROSS FROM MACALESTER

Wanted: Woman to share furnished 2 bedroom dbl. bglo.
with a chem-free, non-smoking, coffee and music-loving
feminist who's easy-going when erratic schedule per-
mits time at home. Pleasant location near lake and
park, on bus route. $105 includes utilities and laundry
facilities. Available immediately. Call Jackie, 724-8036.