it  
4  

-Heyer  

Women With Men %  

es “pu Diic>  
eee of Minneapor  
t  

Will  

4  

j Do not marry a girl who is extravagant, who during  

‘ courtship expects you to spend your money lavishly on  

her, who gives you no reason to believe that, after  

L marriage, she would help you to save, or to make the  
“® least sacrifice for you or for your mutual benefit.  

Should you have a good position, or have well-to-do  

parents, satisfy yourself during courtship that the girl  

‘i thinks more of you than of your money. What her motive  

4 is will be easy to discover; for if she expects you to  

{ purchase expensive gifts for her, then she evidently  

j thinks more of such gifts than of you. After marriage  

§ she might turn you down and sue you for most of  

your income by way of alimony.  

The girl should not marry a young man who is sel-  
fish, who is spoiled by his parents, who has no ambition  
and insufficient moral courage to try to make anything  
of himself.  

Do not think of marrying one who does not regard  
marriage as a very sacred state of life, who would prefer  
to be a society belle than a mother.  

Do not contract a hasty marriage before knowing  
the background of the girl whom you court, before know-  
ing her parents, her ideals, her tastes, her willingness to  
cooperate with you, both in a spiritual and a material  
way.  

Do not mistake fascination for love, because the  
former may have nothing in common with the latter.  
You have often heard that “beauty is only skin deep.”  
Therefore, beauty should be subordinated to character,  
and you cannot learn one’s character in a brief time.  
Therefore, there can be no such thing as “love at first  
sight.” You should take ample time to study her char-  
acter, her disposition, her inclinations and she should  
try to discover your characteristics as well. One out of  
every five divorces takes place within the first year of  
marriage which is proof that the two young people did  
not sufficiently understand each other before they vowed  
loyalty for life.  

Never even begin to keep company with a widow.  
Leave her to the widower. And, of course, never give  
the least encouragement to the divorcee who asks you  

. Oe  
Explanations Which  

Convince  

Study Sham Lrory Week  
By JEN.  

=  

A cesaies Soy -  

Some Marriage Don’ts  

for a date. You are not allowed to marry him or her  
before God. Surely you should not be willing even to  
run the risk of marrying one whose first marriage was  
a failure.  

Do not marry the man or the woman who has not a  
high regard for virtue, because you can be sure that,  
after marriage, you will be suspicious and jealous of  
him or her. That is the lesson of history and the lesson  
of common sense. Holy Scripture makes it very clear  
that Almighty God will not bless a marriage which was  
not preceded by a clean courtship.  

Do not form your ideas of marriage by the pre-  
vailing American opinion, because it is absolutely wrong.  
Marriage is held less sacred in the United States than in  
any country in the world; and the scores of sex books  
and sexy story magazines, which circulate in the United  
States, are barred even from pagan countries. Marriage  
is a Sacrament for you whether you wish it to be or  
not, and people do not prepare for the reception of Sac-  
raments by a sinful life, nor receive them in a state of  
sin. If they do, they are sure to get into trouble: “God  
is not mocked.”  

Early in courtship try to find out whether your  
girl can cook. You might have had several meals at  
her home, but they were likely cooked by her mother—  
and you are not marrying her mother. You will not  

‘likely be able to afford a servant to do your cooking, and  

even if you were, good servants are hard to get today.  

If the girl you court would rather have a date or go  
to a movie, to a dance, to a refreshment parlor, than to  
attend church services during a Novena, during Forty  
Hours, during Lent, or on some important feast, then  
she is not likely to be a prayerful wife and mother after  
marriage. If you would have God bless your marriage,  
give Him the first and not the last place during the time  
you are keeping company.  

“Common sense” on the part of both parties is a  
prerequisite for happiness. You might call it level-  
headedness. This common sense is needed for the man-  
agement of the home, for the following of a budget, for  
the proper rearing of children, and even to do the right  
thing in social life.