IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

NETWORK - could make THE BOND

On November 17, a meeting of local Mpls. and  
St. Paul women was called at the Women's Institute  
for Social Change, for the planning of Network.

For six months, Suzan Moore-Miles, Sue Levy,  
Mary Lee Geiser, Sarah Lampland, Mary Jane Twohy,  
Gale McNamara, and Karen Starr have been meeting to  
discuss such questions as: How can we promote unity  
in the Twin Cities women's movement? How can we  
communicate with each other with the least amount of  
time and frustration? How can we build the kind of  
trust that will make what we communicate useful to  
each other?

So the meeting was called to bring together  
women to share ideas about what Network should be,  
and how to accomplish those goals.

The daylong conference began with a general  
meeting. People were introduced to the idea of Net-  
work and to each other. Most women represented at  
least one organization, though many were unaffili-  
ated.

We then broke up into four groups outlined by  
the facilitators. They were, Services for Women,  
Political Overview, Women in the Arts and miscela-  
neous. The following are summaries made by each of  
the work groups.

SOCIAL SERVICES

All known women's services were identified ac-  
cording to the kind of service, i.e. counseling, ad-  
vocacy, etc. Also identified was the need for addi-  
tional services--for example, women's athletic facil-  
ities, additional crisis housing, support groups for  
women in business. Other needs mentioned were for  
a telephone service, calendar, and newsletter for  
up-to-date information. It was mentioned that per-  
haps an existing phone service could be tied into the  
Network.

A strong interest was expressed in having a  
listing of women professionals in a variety of fields.  
Another need is information about competent health  
professionals, especially Ob-Gyn and mental health.

It was apparent that many of us were not aware  
of all of our resources. One of the conclusions is  
that there is no adequate, accurate, or up-to-date  
directory of services, nor is there in existence any  
other way of communicating this information. These  
are urgent needs:

POLITICAL

We spent a great deal of time discussing how to  
handle divergent opinions. Two major approaches were  
suggested: Invite the factions which disagree to air  
their opinions; Recognize that some issues are per-  
haps too contradictory to appeal to the same audience.  
Regarding the pro-abortion and anti-abortion forces  
among women, people advocated both methods of hand-  
ling the controversy.

The definition of political: Can be any issue  
of public interest. Some of us strongly emphasized  
political as related to women political candidates,  
etc. A strong recommendation that the Network con-  
sider an Alinsky model to become a multi-issue organ-  
ization came from Mary Williams of Women's Institute  
for Social Change. The discussion which followed  
raised the question of whether the Network should  
raise issues or be a facilitator of issues raised by  
members.

ARTS

The existing organizations were identified.

The women wanted to see an effective exchange of re-  
sources. Their resources could be made accessible  
to other women's groups and would thus benefit the  
entire women's community. Women need to find other  
women with like interests to form support groups.  
Wanted is access to a coalition of other women art-  
ists to influence the art establishment. Exchanging  
information was felt to be the overwhelming need.  
Also a need for a calendar was expressed.

Those who participate in the group wish to meet  
again as a definitive group.

MISCELLANEOUS

Women who felt that their needs were not met by  
the other three groups met in the miscellaneous  
group. One distinct group emerging from this was  
the women in business who intend to form a support  
group in the future. We dealt primarily with prac-  
tical questions dealing with the formation of the  
Network. There was a unanimous agreement that some  
paid staff should be made available. Everyone was  
enthusiastic about the organizations getting to-  
gether to exchange information and support for each  
other. The business women in particular saw the  
Network as a source of listing their skills so they  
could be reached by women clients.

From the small group efforts, and a large group  
brainstorming session, a long list of goals and  
methods evolved, which in itself denotes the urgency  
of our need for Network.

GOALS:

to find what services exist and to keep information  
current

to establish three levels of communication: among  
ourselves as individuals; to unaffiliated women and  
the public; between women's groups

to help enforce the present laws

to reinforce women in the job market

to keep in front of the public the idea that there  
are women's groups

to keep money in women's projects

to provide a central registry of professionals

to establish a system to validate the quality of  
services listed as "women's services” esp. services  
listed by network

to set up a clearinghouse for funders

to get publicity out - getting information to every-  
body

to identify women with skills and what those skills  
are

to research for duplication of services

to act as a crisis referral emergency service  
(knowing groups which have service in emergency)

to reach out to high school, junior high and senior  
high women

to put women in touch with women with the same  
specific needs to develop terms, definitions,  
categories into which services can be put.

METHODS

Get a listing under "Women's Pages"

Put together a newsletter, use other newsletters in  
existence

Put out a calendar with information of events: i.e.  
films, meetings (Publication in such papers as:  
Goldflower, The Woman)

Phone to facilitate dissemination of information  
Master list to be available to all groups

Office with phone number

Plug into existing service, coordinate with existing  
services

Use the calendar once a week provided by Dispatch,  
Tribune

Regarding the network conference: need someone to  
meet media people, guide their coverage, answer  
questions. (All events)

Telephone service: have a phone with cassettes:  
each group has an explanatory tape which can be  
changed periodically. Cross referencing by topic  
was suggested. Tapes in a second language and a  
calendar tape were suggested.

Suggestion: telephone number spells a familiar word.  
Use Woman's Advocacy phone as a beginning.

The Woman - this is a newspaper in St. Paul which  
could publish names of women interested in starting  
a business.

Goldflower - would also be useful for the calendar  
publication.

At this time task force groups are meeting and  
beginning work. Commitments of time and money are  
needed to make Network succeed. Three full-time  
facilitators are tentatively being discussed. Phones  
are needed, a space may be needed, and media costs  
money. Also, old office equipment would be a wel-  
come replacement to the card table that sits in the  
Network office, alone! Thanks to the Women's  
Center Chrysalis, an office has been donated at least  
for the time being.

For information or input call 871-0118, Monday  
through Friday 9-5. Or write, or drop in at  
Chrysalis-Network office, 2104 Stevens Ave. So.  

Mpls 55404