music-

Meg's Music: I Know You Know by Jackie Gohdes

Olivia Records, a national non-profit women's recording company, has recently released their first album, Meg Christian's "I Know You Know," and it's a dandy!

Christian's formal (classical) music education shows in the high quality of musicianship demonstrated in this album. The solid songwriting (most of it is Meg's own) and skillful handling of melody, rhythms, and instrumentation lets the listener catch the mood of each cut almost unconsciously.

A bit of Meg's southern accent comes through now and then along with a lot of genuineness. Maybe that’s honest singing? Meg's voice occasionally veers toward harshness when she stresses a musical point.

I find it more pleasant when she just lets the voice flow naturally, which seems to happen so easily. Her range is not expansive, nor her style bombastic, so she wisely programs mid-range ballads which better display the husky quality she handles so deftly.

It's impossible to pick favorites, so I'll mention each song briefly. “Hello Hooray let the show begin" is a nice intro to the record. As she sings of beginning and taking hold of a new lifestyle, one hears the growth happening as the single guitar takes on fuller harmonies and gains support from piano and bass.

“Joanna” is an easy flowing tune that sticks in the mind. It has rhythms of a stepping feeling, a trying to communicate with a friend who's on "another level." Christian uses the technique of bringing the accompaniment back to her single guitar and finally uses only her voice to enforce the idea of a personal conversation.

"The Hive" is a buzzy Jimmy Webb number and the only male contribution to the entire process of the album. It hits the mark as it jabs at unthinking conformity to society's expectations re: the white wedding and proper marriage. The synthesizer, frenetic guitar strum and the way Meg uses the dynamics and modulations of her voice to make one hear the ideas of the song, combine to create a "pop" art song.

"Valentine Song," arranged for voice, classical guitar, cello and bass, is a truly lovely melody. The chorus-verse structure retains interest with a just right kind of ending.

"Scars" is like a lute song, with an appropriately old feeling for a song about "old scars, ancient loneliness and ancient pain." The strings weave unobtrusively in and out of the tapestry of Meg's fine guitar playing.

I feel tension in the beat of “Song to Mama," a fast-paced song of a daughter's questionings of a mother's understanding. Unspoken communications cross the generations, each respectful of the other's way of living and loving, as Mama's wisdom is acknowledged with, "I know you know." The music sets the scene for the lyric, but also imposes some of Mama's limits with resultant repetition in the melody.

"Goodbye Joanna" is the weakest of the lot melodically, but Christian's typically sparse arrangement around her central guitar broadens out this rancorless tribute to a love affair that is over.

"Morning Song" is a gorgeous arrangement of a delicate-to-lush melody with superb piano by Margie Adam, a so-right soprano sax and Meg's ever delightful guitar and warm voice illustrating love mellowing into a comfortable, homey life.

"Ode to a Gym Teacher" is the only live cut on the album and definitely the most lively! Meg's introductory remarks are almost as much fun as the music and make one wish to be a part of her audience. This "folksy" verse and chorus tribute to a strong woman will surely become as much a classic of its genre as any woman-identified song yet written.

"Freest Fancy/Kemp's Jig” is a thoughtful combination of music to music as well as both to words. And Meg has saved the flashiest guitar playing for last! It's another sticks-in-your-head melody over an extended classical accompaniment.

There is much fine music here that commends itself to all women, but especially to those for whom women are of most importance. If the Amazon Bookstore's sold out already, the folks there would be happy to spin the album for you as they take your special order for this special album.

Quotes from Rita Mae Brown at Midwest Gay Pride Conference, Iowa City, Iowa, April 12, 1975

It's silly to pick up a gun when the other side has all the guns.

On movement togetherness-- Men don't build support systems; they build armies.

On men-- Men will have to reclaim the woman within themselves as a positive factor so a man will be able to look at me and not see "the other," but just another “self" among selves.

On perfection-- A “purity analysis" gets nothing done; we as people and organizations aren't perfect.

On in-fighting-- Let us save our hostility for he who really deserves it.

a plea for July calendar info

Time and energy are at a premium for all of us. We don't want to miss any events because of communication gaps, but sometimes we may not be able to contact each women's group individually. If you would like your meetings, special events, and activities included on the Gold Flower - Women's Network calendar, please assume the responsibility of calling such information to: Amazon Bookstore, 374-5507, noon to 8:00 p.m., or Jackie at 724-8036.