spat oe ae oe

veterinary medicine

_ A Funeral

It was the first funeral I had ever been
to in my life. People I have known have
died before, but no one this close, and so
I took a day off work to go to her funeral
and to try and work into my system the fact
of her death. She was only 33. The thing
about death is, you can't take it piece by
piece and absorb it gradually. It has to

be swallowed whole. I have never seen a
dead person before either, so the shock of
the open casket was hard for me. I hadn't

really cried about her death yet, but when
the man in a grey suit carefully closed the
lid over her face, I did cry. And as I
looked around I saw many old friends, men
and women, crying. The whole service was
full of moments like the closing of the cas-
ket -- triggering off sobs or muffled weep-
ing. The principal of my old school spoke
for the majority of the time, and he calmly
recalled events, characteristics, jokes
about her life in the school and in the
world. And there were moments during the
service when we laughed, too. Maybe this
was one of the finest tributes to Barbara --
we couldn't think about her without smiles
because she brought so much humor into our
lives.

When I think back on the funeral and the
hours I spent afterwards in the Junior High
where I had taught the year before, I am
struck by a new warmth and tenderness in the
experience which never existed so strongly
and openly before with those same people.
And when I narrow it down even further, I
think it had to do with the fact that men
cried openly, touched more and expressed

all ranges of emotion without self-conscious-
ness. Funerals and deaths appear to be the
only times men are given the freedom to cry
like this, to sob openly, to put their arms
around one another, or women, without feel-

WOMEN’S WORK BY KATHY FRANK

15

by Julie Landsman

ing uncomfortable.

When I went into the school, I also felt
a new kind of communication. Something en-
tirely new had happened to everyone there.
The same guys who often sat in the lounge
with sour expressions were softened and
open and hungering for talk, for descrip-
tions of how I felt when I heard the news,
for memories of times with Barb. And men
who had always been sensitive were concern-
ed about my present situation of loneliness,
in a job where I went through the day feel-
ing numb and sad, and no one else was exper-
iencing this with me. I found myself able
to tell my principal about a time when Barb-
ara had cried in the teachers' lounge. I
had never been able to talk of those things
with him before. I recalled Barb and my-
self sharing a similar astonishment at the
luck we had in marrying the men we did, and
the principal understood.

I walked out of the school sensing that
something very fine had been let loose in
everyone there. And I guess, the sight of
the tear-streaked faces of the men stays
with me most vividly. At the time there
were no behaviors assigned to men and women.
We held each other that day. We often
touched and we talked a lot. I hope it
does not take a funeral or a death to bring
about this kind of openness and freedom, but
that men and women can experience it simply
because it is the richest and fullest way
to learn about ourselves.

The next "Gold Flower" meeting will be
at 7:30 p.m. Monday, October 1, at 710 West

22nd St., Minneapolis.