Caveat Emptor:  
Problem of Women  

By Fay Terris Friedman  

Americans are given to overeating,  
overdrinking and overmedicating (over-  
drugging.) The problem of drugs in our  
society is an exceedingly complex one,  
involving questions of beneficial uses  
of drugs, overuse and misuse (abuse),  
physician's knowledge or ignorance of  
the possible ill effects of drugs and  
the individual’s idiosyncratic reactions  
to various chemicals.  

For women, this problem is compounded.  
The NIDA (National Institute for  
Drug Abuse) in 1978 reported that one  
to two million women have problems  
with prescription drugs. Women historically  
have been the big drug users. A hundred  
years ago, when opium was the "crutch"  
in medicine, women were the majority  
users. Today when pharmaceutical  
companies advertise, they use a picture  
of a distraught woman, either housewife  
or stressed working woman rather than  
a picture of a man. Whether or not this  
is a factor in more drugs, especially  
tranquillizers, being prescribed for  
women, or whether the ads are there  
because doctors believe that women are  
more anxiety-prone and are in need of  
a quick chemical fix, is not certain.  

Physicians seduced by the industrial  
helpmates have unwittingly been reduced  
to the status of handmaidens to the  
new high priests of our medical culture -  
pills. There is no doubt about it. Major  
and Minor tranquillizers, like Valium,  
are now overprescribed. We know that  
the so-called minor drugs can become  
addictive. According to Dr. Jere E.  
Goyan, the FDA (Federal Drug  
Administration) Commissioner, 1,550  
deaths in 1978 reported by hospital  
emergency rooms were due to tranquillizer  
misuse. He estimates that 50,000  
emergency room visits during that year  
were a result of one prescription drug -  
Valium.  

The fact is that tranquillizers are  
mentioned as the reason for hospital  
emergency room visits almost twice as  
often as the so-called hard drugs,  
e.g. heroin, cocaine, codeine, etc.  

Muriel Nellis, who has served on  
the Presidential Committee for Mental  
Health, has been interested in what  
she calls the "unadmitted problem"  
of about 12 million women who are  
hooked on drugs as a result of having  
first taken these drugs on doctor's  
prescription. What is even more  
shocking, according to Nellis, is  
that the largest percentage of drugs  
which are psychoactive have not been  
prescribed by psychiatrists, whose  
jurisdiction is behavior change,  
but by general practitioners, internists  
and obstetrician-gynecologists. Also,  
doctors prescribe more than twice the  
amount of drugs for women than for men,  
for the same psychological symptoms.  
Thus, 60% to 80% of mind-altering drugs  
were for female patients.  

Another great hazard is the effect  
of drugs on the fetuses of pregnant  
women. We have much evidence about  
the damage done to the offspring of  
women who drink, even moderately,  
during pregnancy and sometimes without  
knowledge they are pregnant. We  
simply do not know enough about the  
effects of other chemicals which are  

MAY 1985  

There  

PAGE 6 COMMON GROUND  

liberally prescribed and ingested.  
Drug companies reportedly spend  
three to four times as much on  
advertising, sales and promotion  
techniques as they do on research.  
The tragic results of the drugs  
thalidomide and DES (diethylstilbestrol)  
were discovered many years after their  
use by pregnant women because of  
inadequate research prior to the sale  
of these drugs.  

Another problem for women is treatment.  
First, the double standard of being  
hooked on drugs keeps many women from  
admitting that they have fallen from  
the pedestal of virtue and purity.  
Many women who need help thus do not  
seek help. A second problem is that  
health specialists and official regulators  
continue to focus on the male drug  
culture, in spite of the growing number  
of women who are becoming chemically  
dependent. As a result, help for women  
in distress is not as readily available  
as for men. In some cases the use of  
prescription drugs may be confounded  
by the use of alcohol and as Joseph  
Califano, who directed the 1982 inquiry  
into Drug Abuse and Alcoholism in New  
York State stated, "Research is clearly  
needed on the effects of women's  
involvement with many drugs and on  
what methods of treatment are appropriate.  

What can women do to offset this  
modern scourge of drug abuse? Here  
are a few suggestions:  

1) Remember, there is no drug,  
whether prescription or over-the-counter,  
that is without risk. FDA approval of  
a drug does not guarantee its safety  
to yourself or to your baby, if you  
are pregnant. "Safe" does not mean  
“free from harm or injury" but is a  
relative term based on FDA data. It  
implies an acceptable risk in view of  
the known benefits of the drug. Therefore:  

- Ask your doctor about possible  
risks, and about the amount of research  
that has been done, possible undesirable  
effects of the drug, and the effects of  
drug interactions and allergies. Don't  
take it for granted that the doctor  
will volunteer this information.  

- Read the package inserts on drugs  
and/or check with the pharmacist  
about interaction of drugs with food,  
beverages, other drugs. If these are  
unavailable, write your state senator  
or assemblyman to require that pharmacists  
provide consumers with this information.  

- Keep a record of drugs you and  
your family take. Save prescription  
labels, and keep a record of brand  
names, amount prescribed, number of  
times taken, etc., especially during  
pregnancy. Again, don't take it for  
granted your physician will take care  
of this problem. Also remember that  
the majority of drugs have never been  
evaluated for use in obstetrics.  

- If you have to use drugs, be knowledgeable  
about them -- consult the Physicians'  
Desk Reference at your pharmacy or  
local library about a specific drug  
or read about drug interactions generally  
in The People's Pharmacy, Pills That  
Don't Work, Women and the Crisis in  
Sex Hormones.  

2) Learn to recognize and handle  
stressful problems without the use  
of drugs. If you find that your  
present lifestyle is not conducive  
to good mental or physical health,  
change it. Learn ways to build self-esteem,  
to express anger effectively, to assert  
yourself and combat feelings of helplessness.  
There are local groups such as Womanfocus,  
which help you in building these skills.  

Be willing to take risks in  
changing conditions which seem to be  
counterproductive. Remember that  
the use of drugs can be far riskier  
than exploring options for a healthier life.  

3) Be good to yourself. Prevent  
stress by watching your health.  

Be sure you have a nutritious and well  
balanced diet, every day. Work off  
tension by a daily or at least three  
or four times weekly regimen of  
walking briskly, jogging, swimming,  
aerobic dancing or bicycling. Today,  
more than ever, there are facilities  
and activities for "working out."  

4) Have a network of friends and  
acquaintances with whom you share fun  
and interests (and sometimes problems.)  

5) If you have done all this and  
still find your life more stressful  
Don’t bottle up your worries or seek  
escape through self-destructive means,  
including drugs. Discuss your problems  
with a professional counselor, a  
sympathetic friend, a caring minister,  
rabbi or priest.  

H. L. Mencken wrote “There is a solution  
to every problem -- quick, simple, and --  
wrong." There are no "magical" solutions  
to the problems which life presents --  
and they certainly do not come in capsule  
form. You can help yourself mostly by acting  
responsibly and when necessary, enlisting  
the aid of those who can help.  

Fay T. Friedman, Ph. D. is an Associate  
Professor of Psychology at D'Youville  
College. She is currently teaching a  
course in the “Psychology of Alcohol  
and Drug Abuse."  

LOCAL RESOURCES WHICH CAN HELP WITH  
DRUG DEPENDENCE:  

Womanfocus, 43 Court St., Suite 622,  
Buffalo, N.Y. 14202. 842-1766  

Bry-Lyn Hospital, 1263 Delaware Ave.,  
Buffalo, NY 14209. 886-8200 ex.153  
Erie County Medical Center, 462 Grider,  
Buffalo, NY 898-3000  

Crisis Services, Counseling, 3258 Main  
St., Buffalo, NY 834-3131  

Bibliography  

Califano, Joseph A., Jr. The 1982  
Report on Drug Abuse and Alcoholism  
New York: Warner Books, 1982.  

Nellis, Muriel. The Female Fix.  
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1980.  
Goyan, Jere E. "O.D.'ing on Medicine"  
FDA Consumer, Feb. 1980.  

Womanfocus Newsletter.  
Winter/Spring 1985.