EDUCATION

A recent Supreme Court ruling which will not allow public school teachers to conduct remedial classes in parochial schools has aroused the opposition of the Reagan administration. In a speech delivered in Columbus, Education Secretary William J. Bennett pointed out that the decision will hinder the government's ability to help needy children.

He did assure those in attendance that his department will work with local authorities to find other means by which these services could be provided. Secretary Bennett stated that the administration will propose legislation in Congress to authorize a voucher system which would pay for remedial education. The thrust of Bennett's speech was an overall condemnation of “four decades of misguided court decisions" which have proven detrimental to both children and society.

NAIROBI

Environmental stress which much of the continent experiences. It is becoming clear that women are the key to survival of that continent; that equal participation in public decision-making must be supported in order to improve the bleak situation in sub-Saharan Africa.

Like much of the world, Africa is tethered by patriarchy and economic paternalism. However, women in Africa are organizing from the smallest villages upward to make changes in their lives. Eighty percent of the people in Africa live in rural areas, surviving by subsistence agriculture. Equality for women here means equal access to land ownership and credit for farming, for women are the farmers. Development issues include agriculture and food, adequate and safe water, family planning, education of children, the ability to earn cash, and the sheer drudgery of working 12 to 16 hours a day to ensure the survival of their families. Of course, armed conflict and civil oppression preclude most development and hit women and children the hardest.

Perhaps because women have been so long excluded from the public use of power in our societies, we have created alternative ways of surviving, alternative ways of thinking about ourselves and our societies. This notion is not mine, but I can relate it to the Decade for Women and the Nairobi conferences. One of the greatest results of ten years of study and work for women has been the generation of an alternative vision of what life on this planet must be like in order for humanity to survive. This vision begins with the elimination of social, political and economic inequity between women and men. This inequity serves as the model for other inequities and social oppression; these also must end. Cultural and social values in this vision emphasize cooperation and sharing, non-exploitative economic and legal relationships (both between people and nations), and true stewardship of the environment.

The women at FORUM ‘85 compared their visions and strategies for attaining them. It is exciting to convey to you that women all over this planet are not asking for equality, development and peace.

We are changing our own lives, thereby creating the conditions out of which these will arise.

I visited several community projects in rural areas outside of Nairobi. At one village which appeared quite poor, a woman who looked well over 70 came up to me, took my hand and spoke to me in Swahili. An English-speaking woman from the village said, "She said to you that when you go back to your country you should tell the women there that the women of Africa support them in their struggles."

Wendy Kellogg is a master's candidate in Urban Planning at SUNY Buffalo. She is currently writing her thesis on women's roles in developing countries and would welcome questions, answers and discussion related to FORUM '85 or any women's issues. Contact her at the Department of Environmental Design and Planning, School of Architecture, Hayes Hall, SUNY Buffalo.

NEWS NEWS NEWS

CIVIL RIGHTS

A coalition of religious groups, Capitol Hill conservatives and students under the leadership of the Moral Majority, and with the encouragement of the U.S. Department of Education, is seeking to push the politically sensitive issue of school prayer to the forefront in Congress. This campaign is geared to shifting the terms of the debate.

According to Gary Bauer, the newly confirmed Undersecretary of Education, who spoke to a student group ending an all-night vigil at the Capitol, the issue of school prayer "transcends being just an education issue: It's a civil rights issue." He compared today's students to Rosa Parks, the black woman whose refusal to move to the back of the bus signified the start of Southern civil rights protests.

He asserted that students have been told "to go to the back of the bus."

The ultimate goal of the lobbyists is passage of a constitutional amendment sponsored by Rep. Thomas Kindness, R-Ohio, and backed by President Reagan, allowing a moment of silent prayer in schools. The Kindness bill is presently the object of a discharge petition to get the bill out of the Judiciary Committee.

A more immediate decision is the passage of a bill sponsored by Sen. Jesse Helms, R.-N.C., which would give state and local governments the power to permit voluntary school prayer, Bible meetings and religious discussion clubs in public school buildings. It is scheduled for a September vote.

Data collected by the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company indicates that the cost of a hysterectomy is lowest in the South. Physicians in New York State averaged 19% above the national average for fees charged for this type of service.

SENECA FALLS

DIVORCE

No fault divorce, introduced more than ten years ago, has had a decidedly negative impact on the financial situation of divorced women. Studies have shown that one year after divorce, women's standard of living has decreased by 73% versus 42% for men.

In 1980, New York State divorce law implemented the concept of equitable distribution. The factual realities which resulted from this change, in New York as well as in other states, have led former supporters of this concept to demand a revision of this law which would provide for equal rather than equitable distribution.

The idea of equitable distribution was to provide women with a greater share of the family assets. The basis for this would be the value of the respective parties’ contribution to the marriage. However, it was found that judges ignored or undervalued the wife's contributions, often leaving the woman at best, with the house, child, no job and no real skills.

According to Frances Leonard, legal counsel for the Older Women's League of Oakland, CA, equitable distribution and no fault divorce coupled with discriminatory policies and a general lack of recognition for the role of the homemaker, has resulted in a poverty rate for women over 65 years old that is 60 percent higher than that of men of the same age. As a result of these inequities, government funds are needed and will continue to be needed to help and/or to support these aged and poor women.

Sarah Slavin of Buffalo, N.Y., has been elected president of the Seneca Falls National Women's Center and Educational Institute. Dr. Slavin is a member of the political science faculty, State University College at Buffalo, and received the Ph.D. degree from The George Washington University. Since mid-1984 she has served the Seneca Falls Center as vice-president for development. Previously, Slavin served as president of the Women's Caucus for Political Science (1979-1980) and as a member of the American Political Science Association Commission on the Status of Women in the Profession (1979-1981). She was a member of one of the earliest NOW chapters, in St. Louis, MO, chaired for four years NOW's National Committee to Promote Women's Studies (1972-1976), and was a defeated candidate for president of national NOW in 1975. She is a founding member of the National Women's Studies Association. Slavin is listed in the Who's Who of American Women and in the International Who's Who of Women. She is the author of an intellectual history of feminism in the U.S. (published in 1979) and of Women and the Politics of Constitutional Principles (1985); the co-author with Vern Bullough and Brenda Shelton of The Subordinate Sex, 2nd ed.; and the editor of Vol VIII of the Female Studies Series (1975) and of The Politics and Process of the Ratification of the Twenty-Seventh Amendment to the U.S. Constitution (1981). She has served since 1979 as managing editor of Women & Politics: A Quarterly Journal of Research and Policy Sources.

The Seneca Falls National Women's Center is a not-for-profit organization working to bring together individuals and groups committed to the advancement of women. It promotes and participates in the study of issues and problems related to women in the U.S. and abroad, seeking to further the intellectual, moral and physical well-being of women. In 1983, on the anniversary of the ratification of woman suffrage, the Center reissued a slightly revised edition of the Declaration of Sentiments and Resolutions, originally issued from the Wesleyan Church in Seneca Falls in 1848. Contained in the original document, among other things, was the first call for universal woman suffrage in the U.S. and also the clause that became the original proposal of an equal rights amendment to the U.S. Constitution. The call for an ERA also came forth in Seneca Falls, in 1923 by Alice Paul, president of the National Woman's Party. Organizing the first women's rights convention in Seneca Falls, from which issued the Declaration of Sentiments, were Lucretia Mott and Elizabeth Cady Stanton.

At the August 1985 meeting of the Seneca Falls National Women's Center, Judith A. Cartisano, Rochester, was elected vice president for development. Lucille Povero of Seneca Falls will serve as vice president for operation, and Sandy Silverwoman of Skaneateles, as vice president for communications. Terry Mansell of Seneca Falls was elected secretary; Barbara Gerber of Oswego is the Center's new treasurer. Also, Marilyn Bell, D'Youville College, is a member of the Center's Board of Directors, Joan Roberts, Syracuse University, was chosen chair of the national advisory council; Carol Bellamy became a new member of the council. Other members of the Center's national advisory council include: Alan Alda, Arlene Alda, Mona H. Bailey, Rosalynn Carter, Elizabeth Holtzman, Elizabeth Duncan Koontz, Linda Lavin, Joyce Miller, Marge Piercy, Helen Reddy and Jean Stapleton.

COMMON GROUND

CHILD SUPPORT

A vast majority of women who are raising children alone are frequently finding themselves in a demoralizing financial bind due to the ineffectiveness of current legislation designed to enforce collection of child support payments. Minority and less educated women lack an understanding of the legal system which, both at the State and Federal levels, requires a court order to enforce collection of monies due.

The Buffalo Law Journal, in its most recent issue, says that approximately only one half of the women raising children alone in the U.S. receive mandated or voluntary support from fathers. Blacks, Hispanics and women of low income and education comprise most of the other half.

This disparity simply serves to point out that unless a woman knows the system and how to use it, all the well-intentioned legislation in the world will not benefit her.

ABORTION

Abortion statistics recently released in a study by the Government's National Center for Health Statistics show that unmarried women account for 77% of all abortions, even though they make up 44% of women in their prime childbearing years. Two thirds were under 25. For white women, the tendency to have an abortion decreased as education increased. Black women, however, had the opposite trend. Those who continued beyond high school were more likely to have an abortion than those with less education.

INFANTICIDE

The director of the Population Research Center at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences has denied reports that female infanticide has led to a shortage of girls in China. Chinese officials have said that there are some isolated cases of parents killing baby girls in order to try for a son under China's current one child per couple policy, but that officials are working hard to eradicate this.

LETTER

Dear Common Ground,

I have always considered myself a law-abiding citizen, yet I have long harbored a desire to spray paint the infamous van of a South Buffalo man because the entire body graphically depicts men standing over nude women, who are on the ground and in chains.

This past July, a brief report in The Buffalo News of a rape pushed me to finally act on my fury over the degradation of women. The three-paragraph article (rape is never big news in Buffalo unless extreme violence or death occurs) reported your run-of-the-mill "women exist for men's pleasure and domination" variety of rape, with one exception. This fact was included: “The woman told police her attacker threatened her about reporting the crime, then walked away laughing." (underlining mine).

I seethed with anger and hatred. I cried for that rape victim, and I felt the same loathing for him that she must have. Even though only she heard his laughter, it rings in my ears too. I knew that he, that all rapists and potential rapists, should experience just a taste of the terror that their victims feel.

So I mailed him a threatening letter, anonymous and untraceable, of course. In it, I warned him to beware of how he acts around women in the future, because he is being watched. I want him to feel threatened, to wonder if someone is really watching him. I want him to begin to realize that women aren't powerless. And I want him to sweat a little.

I know my action probably won't produce a changed man who respects women. And I know that all you readers may not agree with my method. But I hope you agree with my rage, and my need to do something.

ANONYMOUS

SEPTEMBER 1985

PAGE 3