Letters

AN OPEN LETTER TO THE BUFFALO  
WOMEN'S COMMUNITY  

There has been a tradition of  
women's dances in Buffalo, and cur-  
rently many questions from women in  
the Buffalo area about the lack of  
recent women's dances. The Coalition  
has been meeting and discussing these  
issues and would like to share the  
results of these discussions with  
local women.  

First, a little her-story. A for-  
merly active women's organization in  
the community was "Sisters of Sappho",  
which among other things, sponsored  
women's dances. When this organiza-  
tion disbanded, in 1975-76, it helped  
to create the Women's Dance Rotation  
Coalition to carry on this tradition  
of dances. The Coalition was made up  
of women's groups in the community--  
none was an all-inclusive group, but  
each was willing to sponsor a dance  
or two a month, on a rotating basis.  
S.O.S. also supplied for the Coalition  
a stereo, amplifier and tape deck to  
be used on these occasions.  

Dances continued in a strong fash-  
ion for a number of years. However,  
in recent years, falling attendance  
and increased costs have become prob-  
lems. There has been a hiatus in  
these events as groups involved re-  
organized within themselves, and now  
there have again been recent meetings  

to discuss the status of the Coali-  

tion. The first question under dis-  
cussion was "is there still a need  
for these dances?" They were origin-  
ally started as an alternative to  

the women's bars--or to carry us  

there were no  
women's bars in the area--as well as  
to provide an opportunity for a regu-  
lar community wide coming together  
of women, both straight and lesbian.  
Perhaps the reason for falling atten-  
dance was that there are now a couple  
of good women's bars in the area, and  
a number of community events for  
women scheduled monthly.  

A number of other possible reasons  
were also discussed, however. Per-  
haps publicity was not wide enough to  
encourage younger women and those who  
had not traditionally attended to  
come. Perhaps these events had come  
to be seen as a profit making bene-  
fit for the individual group spon-  
soring the monthly event. (In real-  
ity, recent dances usually only broke  
even, if that, and have been provided  
as a service, not for profit.)  

The consensus was that it was  
worth another try, if only on a year's  
trial basis, with certain revisions.  

The Women's Dance Rotation Coali-  
tion has renamed itself the Women's  
Dance/Event Coalition, with the hope  
of sponsoring other community parti-  
cipation events during the year, such  
as coffeehouses. Events will be held  
3-4 times a year, instead of monthly.  
Tentatively scheduled times are:  
during the week of International  
Women's Day in March, in June (which  
will be the next upcoming event), in  
October, and a holiday dance for mid-  
December or February. The Dances/  
Events to be held will be women only.  
Although an event may be organized by  
a particular group of the Coalition,  
some or all of the rest of the groups  
may be called upon to staff the event  
and/or do publicity or other tasks.  
All groups involved will share any  
profit/loss resulting from the event,  
which will be listed in publicity as  
"sponsored by the Women's Dance/  
Event Coalition".  

Certain price increases from the  
traditional ones were dictated by  
increasing financial costs. Admission  

PAGE 4 COMMONGROUND. _ APRIL 1983 __  

will be $2.00 at the door, possibly  
higher for an event other than a  
dance if high additional costs are  
involved.  

The Coalition would also like to  
make women's organizations aware that  
their stereo/amplifier/tape deck  
system is available for free loan to  
any women-only event, the only stipu-  
lation being that it be returned  
promptly in good condition. Those  
interested in the loan of the system  
should contact EMMA Bookstore, 885-  
2285.  

We are enthusiastic about the  
opportunity to present these events  
as a service to the women's community.  
We do, however, remain concerned  
about the viability of this concept,  
as well as about the number of groups  
which have either disbanded or drop-  
ped out of the Coalition in recent  
years. If your organization is in-  
terested in participating and has not  
yet been in contact with us, please  
leave a message at EMMA, 885-2285,  
and we will get back to you with fur-  
ther information.  

We also remind the women's commun-  
ity that this system is under one  
year trial. If you want these events  
to continue, please show us by your  
participation and support.  

Sincerely,  
THE WOMEN'S DANCE/EVENT COALITION  

BEAUTIFUL LINES NO BOY  
CAN RESIST  

...the United States Senate, after  
flirting with the idea of raising the  
retirement age to 68, defeated the  
measure 84-12. Sen. Nancy Kasselbaum's  
proposal to speed up incentives for  
people to remain in the workforce  

was accepted, though. Each year that  

a person delays retirement between the  

ages of 65 to 72, they will now get  
an 8% credit per year.....  

...President Reagan, who has made tele-  
vision commercials promoting the Bible,  
is planning to turn 1983 into the  

Year of the Bible. According to  

a Buffalo News story by Max McCarthy,  
the "Reagan resolution declares that  
the Bible is the 'Word of God’ and  
asks Congress' approval in recognition  
of both the formative influence  

the Bible has been in our nation and our  

national need to study and apply the  
teachings of the Holy Scriptures."  
Many are outraged that the President  
would so clearly muddle the separation  
of church and state outlined in the  
Constitution.....  

...According to a UPI story, a Philip  
Morris employee, Earline Lind, has  
filed a 7 million dollar sex discrim-  
ination suit against her employer,  
charging that female managers are  
excluded from meetings, asked to  
perform menial tasks and segregated  
from other employees. (Remember  
ladies, this is the company that  
made “You've come a long way, baby"  
a slogan that sold more cigarettes.)  
(info from a news clipping submitted  
by Dawn Herman)  
...Said Mary Cunningham, a vice pres-  
ident for Jos. Seagram and Sons at  
the second annual Conference for  
Women, "I am convinced that women  

will not make their most important  
contribution by trying merely to imi-  
tate men..."  

Seriously, I wouldn't have  

believed a minute over  

thirty-two.