unions, but their needs were somewhat  
different from those of the men - and  
equally as important. Would the is-  
sues of unfair wages, promotions, hir-  
ing, sexism, discrimination and child  

care be addressed?  

In 1955, George Meany, then presi-  
dent of the AFL/CIO made a statement  
that "Persons unorganized because of  
discrimination of any kind were a  
threat to all of us." As long as  
there are people willing to work for  
low wages and in poor conditions, a  
struggle will exist. In 1960, 18% of  
the union membership was women. This  
percentage has not increased in pro-  
portion to the rising number of women  
entering the labor force. Lack of wo-  
men union members means their needs  
and issues may be overlooked. It wasn't  
until 1970 that Libbey Owens and her  
Union of Glass and Ceramic Workers of  
North America realized that only one  
in five plants in Toledo, Ohio hired  
women and this one plant hired women  
to work the less desirable and lower  
paying jobs. She thought that had a  
larger majority of women been a part of  
the union, this situation would have  
been remedied before 1970.  

In 1976, there was a push to get wo-  
men to join labor unions in large numb-  
ers. The importance of educating mem-  
bers and non-members became evident.  
Old myths that women were only working  
until they married, for pin money, were  
hard to organize and troublesome once  
organized needed to be disproved. The  
AFL/CIO again lobbied nationally and  
locally on behalf of women. Affirm-  
ative Action Programs contributed to  
more women joining unions and filling  
leadership positions which strengthen-  
ed their role in unions and the work-  
place. In 1983, there continues to be  
a big push to increase women membership  
in unions. This can be observed with  
the Local 1168 at Buffalo General Hosp-  
ital. Here, a predominantly women's  
local (less than 5% are men) is attemp-  
ting to become a part of Communication  
Workers of America Union which is a  
predominantly men's union. The maj-  
ority of nurses feel that their needs  
as women will not be overlooked once  
they have a union contract. This was  
demonstrated when seven hundred and  
fifty nurses out of eight hundred ag-  
reed to strike if the Nurses Bargaining  
Committee felt it necessary.  

The Labor Movement found that an ef-  
fective way to positively change the  
working situation was to organize peo-  
ple. Unions are attempts to make peo-  
ple more aware of their situation and  
of their rights as workers and as peo-  
ple. The value of working people is  
often taken for granted and their  
right to dignity and respect can be  
fogged. The unions found that their  
needs would be acknowledged only if  
the workers stopped their work and  
fought actively for what they wanted.  
Then they could hope to be taken ser-  
iously. This action often results in  
a strike or a turn-out.  

As early as the 1820's, women tea-  
ders began demanding women's rights in  
the same way unions demanded worker  
rights. Susan B. Anthony, who strug-  
gled not only for women's rights, but  
was also active in the New York State  
Teachers’ Association, was one such  
woman making demands for higher wages.  

Although the American Federation of  
Labor Union did not approve of women  
in industry, a woman organizer was ap-  
pointed to the union in 1892. Because  
of financial limitations, Mary Kenney's  
term lasted only a year and there was  
still less than 2% of the female work  
force organized. She concentrated on  
garment and laundry workers who were  
still powerless. Finally, beginning  
in 1909, the garment and laundry  
workers went on the first large scale  
strikes. These were called the Shirt-  
waist Strikes and were in New York and  
Philadelphia. 83 of the twenty to  
thirty thousand workers who partici-  
pated were women. These strikes were  
lengthy, bitter and violent. Much sup-  
port was offered by the Women's Trade  
Union League as well as the Socialist  

Party. Through a long struggle, a un-  
ion, the International Ladies Garment  
Workers’ Union was formed. Today it  

remains one of the top unions in number  
of women members. This union created a  
firm ground in acknowledging the need  
for organizing women. Some women  

went on from this struggle to become  
organizers of other union locals.  

In 1912, another massive strike was  
held by New England Textile Industries  
workers. In Lawrence, Mass., 23,000 to  
30,000 unskilled workers of at least 25  
nationalities, 50% of whom were women,  
took part. They won their demands after  
walking off the job when their wages  
were lowered. It was said that “the  
workers would rather starve fighting  
than starve working". The union tactic  
of mass picketing was used and there  
was a solidarity parade of women march-  
ing with banners reading, “We want  
bread and roses too!" The walkout at  
one mill spread to others and eventually  
their strength benefitted all workers.  

In 1925, the United Textile Workers  
began protesting wages and working con-  
ditions. Nothing was done by the union  
to mobilize the workers, a majority of  
whom were into resistant action.  
Finally, the United Front Committee of  
Textile Workers organized 4,000 work-  
ers to sit-down. The masses were or-  
ganized through singing, unity and a  
feeling of power. Recreation and  
childcare were organized right into  
the strike. Women and children stri-  
kers were often met with police vio-  
lence, but withstood it.  
The strike at Passaic ended without winning any  
agreement other than the company would  
try to re-employ as many workers as  
possible without discrimination. This  
can be considered a victory, too, be-  
cause other mills such as those in New  
Bedford and Fall River followed suit,  
turned out and won some of their de-  
mands. Turn-outs and strikes continued  
to be an effective method of organizing  
working women into unions.  

The late sixties brought with it not  
only an active women's movement, but  
also the belief that the organization  
of unions could be very positive for  
women. With this in mind, the workers  
of the publishing industry tried to  
organize into a union in 1970. It is  
one of the last professional industries  
whose workers are not unionized. Often  
it is women who are hired right out of  
college as ‘editorial assistants’ at  
low salaries and who are unable to be  
promoted upward.  

Another industry that is not organ-  
ized into unions is the office worker  
industry. Wages are low in these jobs  
and harassment is high. In Boston, in  
1973, office workers, through the use  
of organizing tactics such as news-  
letters, petitions, forums, demonstra-  
tions and picketing, forced major  
changes in pay, promotion and training.  
The AFL/CIO even established a local  
of office workers in Boston.  

Recently, the question of whether  
nurses, who are professionals, should  
organize into unions has been stirred  
up. The question arises in Buffalo  
as over seven hundred nurses walk off  
their jobs. The majority of nurses  
felt that their needs and demands were  
not being taken seriously. They did  
not want a strike to evolve, but would  
participate in one if the Bargaining  
Committee of nurses saw it necessary.  
Their struggle continues as negotiations  
are at a static point. Their struggle  
is not only as workers, but predomi-  
nantly as women.  

The work and struggle of unions re-  
mains visible with the International  
Ladies Garment Workers’ Union, the  
New England Textile Industry Union, the  
Autoworkers' struggle and the most  
recent Nurses United Local 1168 strike.  
It is through this visibility that wo-  
men's membership can be increased, and  
a larger number of working people can  
benefit and be protected. Perhaps  
automation has decreased a strike's  
success, but strikes can still be a  
rallying point from which to work.  

They are the tool of the powerless.  
This tool is being used by Buffalo  
General Hospital Local.  
“History may well demonstrate that the  
system of organizing, striking, educat-  
ing and lobbying under the combined  
leadership of workers and union leaders  
is really the only effective means of  
obtaining equality for the working  
woman."  

The history, issues and needs seem  
to be constantly recurring as people,  
as women, attempt to work in dignity.  

BIBLIOGRAPHY  

-Bornat, Joanna, “Home and Work, A New  
Context for Trade Union History",  
Radical America (Massachusetts' Alter-  
native Education Project, Inc., 1978)  

-Baxandall, Gordon, Reverby, America's  
Working Women (New York, Vintage Books,  
1976)  

-Cummings, Schuck, Women Organizing: An  
Anthology (New Jersey: The Scarecrow  
Press, 1979)  

-Foner, Women and the American Labor  
Movement (New York, The Free Press 1980)  
-Freeman, Women: A Feminist Perspective  
(California, Mayfield Publishing 1979)  
-Hiestand, etc., Interview on Buffalo  
General Hospital Nurses United (Buffalo,  
April 23, 1983)  

-Hole, Levine, Rebirth of Feminism (New  
York, Quadrangle Books, 1973)  
-Kenneally, Women and American Trade Un-  
ions (Vermont, Eden Press Women's  
Publications, Inc., 1978)  

-McCallister, Reweaving the Web of Life  
(Philadelphia, New Society Publishers,  
1982)  

-Mandle, Women and Social Change in  
America (New Jersey, Princeton Book  
Company, 1981)  

-Newland, The Sisterhood of Man (New  
York, Norton and Company, 1979)  
-Sayles, Strauss, The Local Union (New  
York, Harper and Brothers, 1953)  
-Starhawk, Dreaming the Dark (Boston,  
Beacon Press, 1982)  

NURSING AS A FEMINIST ISSUE  

Cassandra  

Cassandra - The Radical Feminist  
Nurses Network  

Radical/Feminist/Nurses? These  
are terms that have seldom been heard  
together, But as nurses begin to  
assert their rights as women and as  
health care professionals, they are  
beginning to be heard more often.  
Cassandra, a nation-wide network with  
its mailing base here in Western New  
York, has found 200 women in 37 states  
who agree that feminist issues and  
nursing issues have much in common.  
The members range in age from younger  
college students to grandmothers, and  
membership is still growing.  

This network began as a result of  
informal gatherings at the 1982  
American Nursing Association conven-  
tion in Washington D.C. On June 30th,  
as time ran out for the ratification  
of the Equal Rights Amendment, nurses  
gathered to lay the groundwork for  
this innovative group.  

The name Cassandra was taken  
from the title of an essay by Flor-  
ence Nightingale, subtitled, "An  
angry outcry against the forced idle-  
ness of Victorian women.” (The title,  
Cassandra, refers to the Greek myth  
of a woman given the gift of prophesy.  
In many versions of the myth, she is  
also cursed by never being believed,  
because of her refusal to comply with  
male desires.) The founding mothers  
of Cassandra state, "We are all  
acutely aware of the fact that nurs-  
ing's voice is not heard, and more  
basically that women's voices are  
not heard in this world." They hope  
to re-create the myth of Cassandra,  
and provide a vehicle to make their  
voices heard.  

Cassandra has some ambitious goals:  
- The establishment of a national net-  
work for women in nursing who embrace  
a feminist philosophy  
- The development of a strong voice  
through which feminist nurses can take  
public stands and be heard on issues  
related to health care  
- The sharing and passing of skills  
to ensure continued growth and strength  
- Preserving and passing on written  
materials on women and health, to  
provide access to our herstory  
- The support of nursing research em-  
ploying a feminist approach and ex-  
ploring new dimensions on women and  
health  

The founding mothers of Cassandra  
were tremendously excited by what  
they were helping to create. They  
had in mind not only these goals, but  
a whole new type of organization--  
one that had a non-hierarchical  
structure, without the divisiveness  
that has marked other organizations  
which have what they term, a “male”  
structure. No one person is in  
charge of Cassandra, but tasks rotate,  
and sharing skills, information and  
support is considered a priority.  
Occupational specialization or  
educational differences among nurses  
are not seen as factors which should  
separate nurses, but as things  
which should foster an integrated,  
"team approach" to health care.  

RADICAL FEMINISM  

-Why do they call themselves a  
“radical feminist" network? Radical  
was adopted because of its derivative  
meaning of getting to the root, the  
essence or origins. Traditionally,  
say local members, nursing has been  
perceived as nearly the antithesis  
of feminism. This perception was  
promoted both by nurses and those  
outside of the profession. The role  
of physician’s handmaiden to which women  
healers were relegated, made certain  

COMMON GROUND  

radical feminist nurses  

By Christine Van Veghten  

nurses did the bulk of the  
work with a minimum of voice in the  
work of healing. Nurses have only  
been able to work with the permission  
and support of physicians, and have  
been reluctant to rock the boat.  

Many feminists have seen the nurse  
as an exemplification of the subserv-  
ient role of women, a perpetuation  
or extension of the role of wife and  
mother. Cassandra members would like  
to replace this perception with ground-  
breaking changes in the way nurses  

see themselves, their profession and  
their relationship to the healthcare  
system.  

Many early leaders in nursing were  
activists: Margaret Sanger, Lillian  
Wald and Florence Nightingale are  
examples of independent women who  
have added much to the impact and  
status of nurses, and by extension,  
to women. The first president of the  
National Organization for Women was  
also a nurse.  

Women in Cassandra feel that an  
understanding of feminism will help  
nurses to get “out from under" their  
oppression, just as feminism has been  
a way to work on the oppression of  
women in society. Cassandra is  
also a way to network among feminist  
nurses, many of whom leave the pro-  
fession in frustration, because of  
their feelings of isolation and power-  
lessness. By ending this isolation,  
many may stay in nursing rather than  
burning out and leaving. Organizers  
say that Cassandra provides hope.  

They have received many letters from  
grateful nurses which say, in essence:  
"I never thought there would be anything  
like this in nursing. I couldn't go  

on in nursing anymore. I couldn't  

live with myself; but knowing about  
Cassandra might keep me going.”  

FEMINIST NURSES  

Union representatives of local  
nurses participating in the strike at  
Buffalo General and Deaconess Hos-  
pitals have firmly asserted that the  
strike and the issues being addressed  
by the union are feminist issues.  

At a recent meeting of Buffalo  
Cassandra, it was unanimously  
agreed to "support local 1168 nurses  
in their effort to obtain a strong  
contractual agreement, better working  
conditions and equitable treatment  
with the ultimate goal of improved  
health care for all."  

If you are interested in Cassandra  
receiving a copy of their newsletter,  
or more information, write Cassandra,  
P.O. Box 341, Williamsville, New York  
14221  

(This article was compiled from in-  
formation taken from Cassandra news-  
letters and conversation with local  
members. We thank them for their  
kind assistance.)  

JUNE 1983,  

PAGE 7