Review:

The Burning Bed

by Sharon Green

Even the most “unfeminist" of women must acknowledge that the Women's Movement has effected at least some positive changes. Indeed, as I watched “The Burning Bed” (a made-for-TV movie shown on NBC on October 8), my faith in women working to help other women was again strengthened. Such a movie on prime-time network TV could never have been possible without the massive consciousness-raising that has been promoted by women, many of whom are feminist, around the issue of battering during the past decade or so.

For those who did not see this film, starring Farrah Fawcett and Paul LeMat, it was based on the true story of Francine Hughes, a Michigan woman who suffered repeated and brutal violence for 12 years at the hands of her inordinately possessive husband, Mickey. She endured, despite the fact that he drank heavily and was often unemployed, and despite the fact that his abuse occurred in full view of friends, family and most importantly their three impressionable small children. She endured, despite the fact that her own creative energies and intelligence were completely stifled because of his insistence that she be home and available at all times. Finally, when her repeated pleas for help to her mother, in-laws and various authorities brought her no relief, and when she feared for her life, she took the law into her own hands and burned him to death.

MOVIE REVIEW:

THE NATURAL

THE NATURAL, based on the novel by Bernard Malamud, directed by Barry Levinson, screenplay by Roger Towne and Phil Dusenberry; starring Robert Redford, Glenn Close, Wilford Brimley, Richard Farnsworth, Kim Basinger, Barbara Hershey.

When I read The Natural last summer I couldn't imagine a film from this slightly off-the-wall story. The characters and themes seemed too unclear to sustain the attention of the movie-going public. Happily, the movie interjects a multi-faceted solidity to Malamud's basic wispy story of an innocent baseball player corrupted by greed and injustice. The movie uses the game of baseball as a symbol of life, most probably of life in America. I am compelled to digress for a moment and explain this grand, poetic game which I have always dearly loved.

Even though the roots of baseball are English, its various elements are very American. To be a good baseball player takes all the things we Americans value most about ourselves: instinct, ingenuity, daring, cunning and brashness. Although a player must have a certain amount of athletic skill and that elusive “good eye” or acute depth perception to succeed in baseball, large size, great intelligence and financial status are of little significance. That statement is not meant to be taken pejoratively, but to indicate that in baseball more than in any other team sport, almost anyone has a chance to make it; i.e., players can come from any social background, can be smart or not so smart, big or little, graceful or klutzy, a farm kid who plays in cow pastures or a city kid who plays in the streets. If a person has the instinct and the "eye" he (or she in increasingly more instances) can be taken seriously as a player. Baseball can be mystical—the farthest limit of the playing field is infinity; it can be persnickety—it has more rules than any other sport in the world and like proverbial fussbudgets several umpires are in attendance to make sure these rules are adhered to; it is non-violent—the only thing hit is the ball. The game often displays heroics of a majestic nature: the leaping catch at the outfield wall; the 3rd baseman incredibly in the air, parallel to the ground, stabbing a sure line-drive; the facing and forcing out 27 batters in a row, creating the “perfect game." All of this makes a nobility of the successful player, but a nobility which cannot elevate the hero/player beyond the reach of the adoring masses. No ballplayer would dare offend or avoid the "kids"—and let's face it, all baseball players and fans of whatever chronological age are "kids." This becoming-a-child-again illusion is both the mystique and the tragic flaw of baseball, and symbolically of America too.

More about this later.

Okay, back to The Natural. The first time I saw the movie I liked it, but was concentrating so much on comparing the book to it that I felt confused, especially by the different endings. When I saw it the second time, I was thoroughly enchanted. Everything seemed to fall into place and I began to see the eloquent allegory between the story of this “natural” man (read innocent; read unspoiled; read traditionally American) who faces evil, is undone by it and is given a chance to redeem himself, and the game of baseball where a person can be a hero one day, a “goat” the next, and can come back to heroic status once again. Here is Roy Hobbs, a “natural” at baseball and an innocent farm kid who learned the game from his dad. Roy loves Iris, the girl next door, but before he marries her he goes to Chicago for a tryout with the Cubs. On the way he is seduced by the troubled Harriet Bird, a beautiful woman in black who shoots him then kills herself. Ashamed and with his natural "gift" in doubt because of his injury, Roy goes into hiding for a number of years. When he emerges and is chosen to play for the New York Knights team, he is in his late 30s. Unbeknownst to him, he is being used by the unscrupulous part-owner of the team who thinks Roy is a wash-out and will cause the team to lose the pennant, thereby securing full ownership of the team to this dishonest partner. However, Roy becomes a star.

The essence of the story is Roy's realization of his role in this scheme and his rebellion against it and against the part of himself which yearns to stay a child. Baseball is the perfect medium to show this because of the safe, heroic, dreamy-summer-day world of childhood which it evokes. Roy wants to be "the best there ever was" in the game and thinks that's all there is to life. His women cannot understand his insistence on playing, but for different reasons. Memo, his girlfriend, another “woman in black" figure, only wants material things and joins with the dishonest owner (the beleaguered manager of the Knights is the other owner) to pull Roy off his game and lose the pennant. She stands to gain monetarily if this happens. At this point Iris comes back into the picture and like a guardian angel/madonna/muse she inspires Roy to overcome a slump into which he has fallen. She tells Roy she has a 16-year-old son and although he might have figured in some distant corner of his mind that the boy is his, he doesn't acknowledge it openly. This is Redford at his best: one can see the struggle within Hobbs as he fights to stay a child and not succumb to the responsibilities inherent in his acceptance of Iris’ love and the son he's never met.

Quickly the world in all its wickedness starts to close in on Hobbs. He is bribed to lose the final game of the season which would cause the team to lose the pennant, and his old Harriet Bird-inflicted gunshot wound acts up so severely that he is told not to play ball again. Roy feels he cannot let his manager and team down and through his new responsibility as a father (Iris finally tells him) he stops running away into his old dream world, transcends his physical pain and wins the day for his team. Then he hangs up his spikes and goes back to the farm with Iris and their son.

At the end of the film, Roy says to Iris with great wistfulness, “God, I love baseball." He could just as easily have said, “God, I love being a boy and playing this idyllic game.” Baseball is childhood and no one idealizes childhood more than Americans. But, this “boy of summer" grows up, takes his dreams, his shame, his past mistakes, his glorious gift and goes home. Home to Roy Hobbs is Iris, fatherhood and baseball only on the farm. Roy has “put away childish things” and can love and respect Iris, an independent, capable woman, and find happiness.

I have my quibbles with The Natural: the women characters are more caricatures than full-blooded women (especially Harriet and Iris) and its theme can too easily be interpreted as merely a struggle between good and evil (the “saints” vs. the “sinners” routine), but I did say almost great, didn't I? Let's face it, sports fans, there are very few “perfect games.” This one is maybe a 2-hitter. Not bad—in any league!

COMMON GROUND NOVEMBER 1984 PAGE 4