Vol. 1 No. 10

Area Nurses

Support STRIKE

By Marilyn Patterson

While nurses at Buffalo General are
striking, nurses at other Buffalo hos-
pitals are working harder to accommo-
date increased patient loads.

They are also talking and thinking
about the strike in which their col-
leagues are engaged. It is an event

that seems to have left no nurses
unmoved.

Nurses at Children's Hospital
attended the support rally early last
month and are passing out Nurses United
buttons to staff.

Nurses at the Veterans Administra-
tion Medical Center have collected
money to send to the striking nurses.

Nurses from Roswell Park Memorial
Institute, located across the street
from BGH, have sent donuts and coffee to
picketing nurses and have gone over
when they are off duty to let the
picketers know of their support.

"We can all picture ourselves right

“out there," Mary Ann Long, a nurse,
said.

Although Roswell nurses are
covered by state law which prohibits
strikes, they are members of a profes-
sional federation and "I think for the
most part, the nurses at Roswell are
supportive," Ms. Long said.

Dolores Walters, an instructor in
licensed practical nursing courses
meeting throughout the city, said
"Most of the girls I talked to are
all for (the strike). I have an op-
portunity to work in hospitals all
over the city." She said support in
most hospitals is strong and vocal.
She noted, however, that she has
heard concern in some of the area's
private Catholic hospitals about the
propriety of professionals going on
strike.

A nurse at one of the Catholic
hospitals, who preferred not to be
named and stated she speaks only for
herself, said she feels “basically
(striking) is not a thing that nurses
should be doing and I'm anti-union,
but I sympathize in that I think the
situation has to be difficult for that
many nurses to go on strike. I don't
think nurses are the kind of people
who just go on strike for wages.
Working conditions aren't easy. I
think some of those things are more
important than salaries."

Two common themes ran through the
comments of nurses from Buffalo hospi-
tals interviewed last month: a feel-
ing that the public is unaware of what
nurses really do and a feeling of anger
at the response of the BGH administra-
tion to the nurses' contract demands.

“The nurses wouldn't have had to go
on strike if (the administration) was
negotiating," said Erie County Medical
Center nurse Chris Wojtowicz. "This
is a large mistake. They are doing
tremendous damage to their prestige.
Going and hiding in a suite is not
going to solve anything. At first I
*Turn to page 2

W.N.Y. Women’s Newsjournal

Self Protection: Using Your Head to

Protect Your Body

By Chris Dietz

As "Take Back The Night" marches
across the country have demonstrated,
rape and the fear of rape are power-
ful tools for women's subjugation.
What woman has not felt uneasy when
walking alone late at night, knowing
that to many men she would be consi-
dered a "target" for physical and
sexual assault? Knowing as well
that police and judges would agree
that, if she was out alone without
male protection, she was “asking for
it"? Regardless of the ways we
choose to behave, we have all been
subtly or not so subtly taught that
we don't have the right to go where
we want, whenever we want--that
that right is reserved for men alone.
Learning to protect ourselves from
assault, both physically and emotion-
ally, can be an important step to
reclaiming the streets for ourselves.

And yet, to be constantly aware
of the threat of rape is frightening
and depressing. For many women,
this painful awareness of our danger
is repressed--we deny our fears, or,
in some cases, deny our vulnerability.
We believe we are "rape-proof", that
it can't happen to us, that if we
allow ourselves to think about the
possibility of attack we will become
paralyzed by our fears. This kind
of thinking, or non-thinking, is
dangerous in two ways. First, it
is a denial of reality. Rape re-
search consistently shows that all
women are vulnerable simply by
virtue of being female--age, physi-
cal appearance, race, social class
are not significantly related to our
chances of being raped. One in
three women will be raped in her
lifetime. Secondly, and more impor-
tantly, evidence suggests that the
best way to avoid rape is not to deny
it, but to prepare to deal with it
assertively in the event it becomes
a reality. Recognizing that we are
in danger is difficult, but once
this painful reality is faced we
can work on developing the habits
and attitudes that make rape less
likely or less devastating. It is
the woman who has never thought
about the fact that she could be
raped, who has never imagined how
she would behave in an attack situ-
ation, who is most liable to be
taken by surprise and least capable
of protecting herself.

Others are aware of the dangers
of rape and prepare to handle them
by learning physical self-defense
techniques. While these play an
important role in self-protection,
there are also some dangers. One
is that a woman will learn self-
defense tactics and forget to prac-
tice them regularly, so that they
are not available to her when she
needs them. A more serious danger
is that she will come to rely exclu-
sively on physical self-defense, and
miss opportunities to avoid these

threatening situations altogether.

In 1976, a group of women lawyers
and judges in California, calling
themselves the Queen's Bench Founda-
tion, published research findings
that point to effective methods of
self-protection. Their research
consisted of interviews with con-
victed rapists, "sex offenders"
under treatment in hospitals and 112
victims of attempted or completed
rapes. What this study offered,
that was lacking in previous rape
research, was a description of the
process of rape. If there is a
predictable pattern of sexual assault
then women might be able to recog-
nize the danger signs and effectively
prevent threatening situations from
escalating into rapes. The Queen's
Bench study suggests that such a
pattern does exist.

The first major finding of the
study was nothing new: that factors
such as age, ethnicity, education or
lifestyle have little to do with
rape--all women are vulnerable. Situ-
ational factors, such as time, loca-
tion, the relationship between offen-
der and victim, or the behavior of
the victim prior to the assault, also
had little to do with the outcome.
There were, however, common patterns
of assault: most rapists planned to
rape someone that day and planned
their assaults. Most assailants
engaged in a selection process, and
often eliminated some women before
choosing a victim--a victim they
perceived to be available or vulner-
able, based on such evidence as
physical characteristics or body
language. In other words, it was not
the woman's behavior per se, but
rather the perception of the assail-
ant, that led to her being labelled
a potential victim. Women who appear
self-confident, assertive and sus-
picious may not be perceived by a
potential rapist as likely victims.

In more than half the cases re-
ported, both offenders and victims
reported that the attack was prece-
ded by a casual conversation, some-
times lasting longer than ten minutes
with a generally friendly and imper-
sonal tone. Most women responded in
a friendly, polite way; although many
felt uneasy, they tended to repress,
rationalize or disregard their uneas-
iness. Following this "warm-up"
period, many victims were taken by
the offender to another location
where, without further warning, the
actual attack began, usually with
physical force and verbal threat,
taking the victim by surprise. Vic-
tims reacted with fear of injury or
death, yet their thoughts focused on
survival and most resisted to some
degree. This resistance led with
almost equal frequency to ending the
rape, to angering the assailant, to
making him feel dominant, or to
scaring him. At this stage, violence
was intensified. A disturbing find-
ing was that resistance was related

Turn to page 3

~ COMMON GROUND |