INTERVIEW:

ALIX DOBKIN

By Brooke Bovard

Born in NYC in 1940 to progressive Jewish parents, Alix Dobkin has always been interested in music. As her musical influences grew from the Red Army Chorus and Woody Guthrie to include Broadway and MGM musicals, traditional folk music and Balkan singing, so too her political influences moved from Left to feminist. These two aspects of Alix's creativity and thought combined in 1973 to produce "Lavender Jane Loves Women," a cheerful, articulate musical affirmation of Lesbian love and consciousness. Since that time, in her two successive albums, "Living With Lesbians," and "XX Alix," her written work, including Alix Dobkin's Adventures in Women's Music (more than a songbook), and her visible commitment to women's culture, both in theory and practice, she has invited and enabled all women to grow and share with her.

I interviewed Alix by phone in mid-March, shortly before she left on a concert tour of the southeast. This is the conversation, but para-

BROOKE: How do you view your position as a women's culture "celebrity?"

ALIX: I'm very aware of the influence I've had on lesbian thought and ideas. I've been told I symbolize and set a style for lesbians, especially on the album “Living With Lesbians." It's hard for me to appreciate that but I understand it... I'm aware of and grateful that I have influence and I try to be careful—to be honest yet responsible. I feel ordinary and regular. I'm a peer.

I don't talk down. The ideas I discuss are ideas I've developed with other women; I reflect as much as initiate. These ideas are part of a lesbian community consciousness and evolution.

I'm aware of learning from mistakes. I'm not trying to present a finished "product." I think it's important for so-called "celebrities" to make mistakes because it permits everyone to make mistakes and grow.

BROOKE: Do you feel that women's music supports that? Or is there more of a hierarchy?

ALIX: In some ways that's true... I guess I want to go back—I want to define women's music as music by, for, and about women, which empowers women and is addressed to women. There have always been songs of empowerment, particularly in blues and folk music, not much in pop until recently, the new wave, all women's bands like the Go-Go's, Cindy Lauper's "The Girls Just Want to Have Fun," and of course the "girl groups" of Motown... Women’s music is not just stars bringing the message to the masses. Because of that, the influence is going both ways. Due to the Women's Movement, popular music permits a lot more strong women on stage, more women bonding with women. I think it’s very exciting.

As for the “Women's Music Industry," I think it's a lot more rigid now, difficult to break into, and I think that's a problem. But also there are more venues, festivals, communities supporting their own talent, and of course it's a fact that more women are making records now. It's not a straight-line development.

BROOKE: You've been associated with a lot of controversy around women-only space because of your woman-only policy in concert. Can you say something about that?

ALIX: We know that women-only space is essential to women's growth, identity and perspective, whether you choose or can arrange to be in it all the time or not. I am able to arrange to be only with lesbians, but I'm exceptional in that. Every woman needs women-only space from time to time—I think that idea has become more accepted now... women-only events have become an institution. When, years ago, women might have boycotted them, now they accept it and won't react with hostility. Now those women might stay away or they might try it—it's growing. I feel that I am the beneficiary of women's longing for women-only space.

BROOKE: Anything else?

ALIX: Just that I object to the terms "open" or “closed” to refer to mixed or women-only space. I feel more open when I'm in women-only space. Women who use those terms are talking from a male perspective—it is open to women. I've heard women-only called sexist, reverse discrimination... but sexism is a function of men over women and women-only is women empowering themselves. We're not getting together to gain control over men—that's not what women-only is about. Women-only is about empowering each other and ourselves.

BROOKE: You've been visible as a Jewish woman as well as a lesbian. How has that been empowering for you, and how has the women's community responded to the issue of anti-Semitism?

ALIX: To answer your last question first, I'd say that there has been a lot of resistance to recognizing anti-Semitism as a legitimate issue. But having said that, I think women and lesbians are exceptionally conscious, and, in my experience, take these issues farther than anybody else.

I'm talking about other issues [also]—accessibility, racism... There has been real progress, like on racism. Of course it's uneven, but I really have faith in lesbians, because it's in our own best interests. I'm very hopeful.

As to how it has empowered me, my line is that we need to take whatever we can use from our cultures without feeling we have to buy the whole package. We must take the best and discard what is not helpful to us.

We have a large pool of ethnic attributes, strengths and qualities available to the community and can contribute them to a women's culture without being absorbed, because lesbians are individuals... we're very individual.

The lesson of Jewish women is the lesson of survival. There has always been someone trying to wipe us out. Throughout history, great concentrated efforts have been made to eliminate Jews, so survival is an attribute—how to survive when people want to kill you. There's Jewish humor, a tradition of respect for and interest in other cultures, a tradition of intellectual and moral integrity and pursuit, and a sensitivity to oppression. This is not to say that all Jews reflect all of these positive qualities; there are of course, Jewish racists, etc., but there are strong traditions which support independent thought and humanistic ethics, and we can take from that.

BROOKE: How have your audiences changed in the last 10 years?

ALIX: They've changed... I usually take a poll at every concert, "How many of you have never seen me in concert before?" It averages that about one third haven't—that's a substantial number new to me. Women