COMMON GROUND

W.N.Y. Women’s Newsjournal

WOMEN’S DAY

International Women's Week 1984 in Western New York has come and gone, leaving us with reflections on a series of wide-ranging events. There was entertainment—the Women's Dance; Casselberry and Dupree with Mischief Mime at the Tralf; the exciting performance of the African American Cultural Center Dancers and Drummers, and the party at MC Compton's.

There was information on a wide variety of topics from the Planned Parenthood Open House to the panel discussion on battered women by the Leslie Anne Emick Defense Fund, to the diverse speakers at the March 3 rally at the YWCA residence.

And how do you classify a speaker like Wilma Scott Heide who entertained, informed, outraged and delighted the entire group of women who braved the weather to hear her?

Then there was the final event—a day of information, sharing, celebration and workshops at McKinley High School on March 10. More than 50 women's businesses and service groups presented themselves to the community. There was a panel discussion, workshops, potluck, films, and unique child care activities.

It is impossible to thank all the women and organizations who helped with the events of the week. There were those who did child care, baked, did promotional work, printed flyers, made numerous telephone calls, folded, stapled and mailed, and much more.

The I.W.D. Coalition, with representatives from EMMA, Common Ground, Cassandra, N.O.W., A.C.L.U., Y.W.C.A., Haven House, C.A.R.A.S.A., W.A.N.D., Women's Studies College and the Feminist Alliance thanks you all for this community effort.

One more thing—I.W.D. goes on. The planning for next year (our 15th celebration in Western New York!) begins with your feedback and criticism, both positive and negative, of this year's effort. Please let us know your opinions, your comments on any or all events of International Women's Week 1984 to help in our future planning. Write I.W.D., c/o EMMA, 168 Elmwood Ave., Buffalo 14201. Look for the final report of the I.W.D. 84 Coalition in an upcoming edition of Common Ground.

FEMINISTS CHALLENGE DEMOCRATS IN 1984

ANALYSIS/OPINION FEMINISTS CHALLENGE THE DEMOCRATS IN 1984

By Hope Hoetzer

Feminism, simply stated, is the belief that women are equal partners with men, and that women and men should have the same rights and responsibilities, benefits and opportunities available to them in society. Unlike Phyllis Schlafly, we are not separatists insisting on a dual standard. We come in all ethnicities, ages, geographies, economic levels, affiliations and marital statuses. We are your mothers, your sisters, your wives, your co-workers, and even your friends. In addition, many feminists are men who have realized that equal partnership ultimately means just what it says.

The phenomenon of feminism and the "gender gap" has been much discussed and debated. The 1980 Presidential race indicated women voted heavily against Ronald Reagan, but more significantly, women's approval of Reagan has been consistently about 10 points lower than that of men. This disapproval is issue-based and appears to transcend many of the traditional political factors used to analyze voter groups. Although it is impossible to project long-term results, there is no doubt these issues are compatible with the Democratic Party, and that feminists of all political affiliations will support candidates—male or female—who they feel are supportive of feminist goals.

The most universal rallying cry for feminists is, of course, the Equal Rights Amendment. Introduced by the Republican Party in 1923, it was summarily dumped when Reagan seized his party's helm, arguing for a “statute by statute" approach instead of a constitutional amendment. Even the most incredulous feminists had their worst fears confirmed when Reagan was unwilling to act on legislation that could have eliminated inequities in pension, insurance and wages, revealing his “statute by statute" approach as a sham. For many, Reagan's rejection of the amendment's simple 24 words—"Equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of sex"—is more than sufficient reason to oppose the President (and any other candidate asking for their votes). Reagan's antagonism to affirmative action and his clear intention to undermine the Civil Rights Commission are only two more examples of the President's refusal to guarantee equal opportunity to all citizens, including women.

"Rights" and "opportunities" may sound abstract, but in the marketplace they mean that women are still paid a mere 59¢ for every dollar paid to men, even though the average household now includes a working woman. It is not only a matter of women not necessarily being paid the same as men to do the same job, but also a question of comparable worth—that is equal pay for jobs requiring comparable skills and effort. "Women's pink collar" jobs pay less by definition than "male blue collar" jobs of equal value. In other words, a city librarian or a mayor's secretary is likely to be paid less than a water meter reader or maintenance carpenter. Reagan has ignored these very real inequities, and added insult to injury by trying to blame women for rising unemployment. Despite recent so-called "optimistic" statistics on unemployment, women are too aware of "last hired, first fired," of their smaller paychecks that punish the whole household, and of their small pension checks to feel they are better off than they were four years ago. Feminists neither accept Reagan’s new statistics nor his explanations for the old ones.

The statistics on feminist issues are sobering. Half of all women are concentrated in only 20 of the 440 job classifications listed by the Department of Labor. Almost 13 million women live in poverty and there are 2.5 million more poor women than three years ago. One in three female-headed households is poor compared to one in eighteen male-headed households. Nonetheless, Reagan budget cuts targeted Aid to Families with Dependent Children (98% of the recipients are women and children), closed 28% of the community health care centers, sliced Medicaid funding (61% of the recipients are women) and drastically reduced the Women, Infants and Children Program that provides health care and diet supplements to pregnant and nursing women and children under five, identified as nutritional risks. The results have been an increased and increasing feminization of poverty, a rise in infant death rates and an unmeasurable destruction of human lives. Add to this the subversion of educational equity regulations and the harsh reductions in federal child care monies, and it is clear that many women are being forced into a cycle of low-end or no jobs, with no means of training to break the vicious cycle, and no way to afford proper childcare if they work.  
continued page 3