COMMON GROUND

Vol. 1 No. 7

W.N.Y. Women’s Newsjournal

When She Was Six, The Russians Came

By Sophie Knab

When she was six, the Russians came.

There was confusion and bullets and
flames and the family had to flee into
the forest in a horse-drawn wagon.
All they had been able to rescue in-
cluded a large sack of potatoes, a
feather tick and her mother's dough
box. Their only cow was tied to the
back of the wagon. Frightened as she
was, her job was to comfort and hush
her three-month-old brother.

Her father, a Polish peasant, as
were his grandfathers before him, lost
everything in that first war. She grew
up in a one-room dwelling, parenting
her five younger siblings and working
in the fields alongside her mother.
When she was sixteen, she was fortunate
to get work at the church rectory. All
her earnings were confiscated by her
mother at the month's end to help sup-
port the family. Eventually, in a
rare show of assertion in getting
something for herself, she demanded and
obtained permission to apprentice her-
self to a seamstress. She then taught
her sisters all she knew.

As a fully-grown woman she was work-
ing in Krakow when, hearing a knock,
she opened the door to two SS men. She
vividly remembers the art and quality
of their brown shirts. They asked for
her name and when she responded, they
said, "You are to come with us." With-
out another word exchanged, she found
her coat and kerchief and followed them
to their vehicle. This arrest was the
beginning of a long, arduous twelve-
year exile in foreign countries that
culminated in her arrival in the U.S.
She never saw Poland again. Her crime
was being a citizen of an occupied
country. Another invader, this time
Germany, had rolled its tanks across
the soft, rolling plains for which Po-
land is named. Within a few days Poland
fell to enemy hands. She was given a
physical exam and when determined fit
to work, she and countless other able-
bodied Poles were herded into waiting
buses. The destination: Germany.

The goal: to work in Hitler's munition
factories.

It was in the labor camps that she
met my father. There, my oldest broth-
er was born. She was always hungry and
chronically worried about providing him
with nourishing milk. Very often she
would meet my father at the fence that
separated the male and female compounds.
He would throw over whatever he had
managed to steal or save from his own
meal. Often it wasn't more than a few
raw red beets or a slice of dark bread,
wrapped in a piece of cloth to keep the
food clean when it hit the ground.

When the war was finally over and
they were freed from their labors,
there was no place to go. My mother
did not want to return to Poland.

While there might be poverty and hard-
ship in Germany, it would be no com-
parison to the utter destitution that
she knew awaited them in Poland. She

had experienced that destitution once
before. The other alternative was to
stay in Germany, but my father absolute-
ly refused to work for a country that

had once been his captor. He would
not give it his strength and sweat
willingly.

While deciding what to do, she gave
birth to my second brother. The baby
was overly large and she was badly
torn. A public health nurse brought her
a sheet for the bed she slept in.

When they moved to France, I was already
born and she was pregnant with my young-
est brother. My father had found a job
in a textile mill about 20 miles out-
side of Paris.

Home was a converted Army barrack.
The floors of the three rooms were made
of concrete, there was no running water,
and only public latrines. The neighbors
were other "displaced persons” like
ourselves. She dug a garden and raised
vegetables. She started sewing shirts
from the fabric my father stole from
the textile mill. He had wrapped the
fabric around his waist and chest be-
neath his clothes. She traded her veg-
etables for sugar, milk or butter.
She began raising rabbits and geese.
She took in wash for single men.

Such was the condition of her life
when the news began circulating that
many of the neighbors were filing pap-
ers to emigrate to America. My mother
thought long and hard on this new de-
velopment. She looked around at her
present life and thought about the past.
Neither were much cause for joy. She
decided that the future must hold
something better, if not for her, then
at least for her children. My father
was somewhat dubious about such a major
undertaking; but the strength of my
mother's will and the lure of America

won out. We reached America in April
of 1954. My mother was forty-five
years old. She had four children

aged from nine to three. I was six,
the age of my mother when she had
eluded the Russians with her family.
It was a repetition of flight—

only this time there was no cow, no
wagon. All we had were the clothes on
our backs and in our bags.

There was a
saying that circulated among the very

small group of immigrant Poles in our town. Roughly
translated, it went something like:
"You wanted America? So work, god-
dammit!" And work she did. So much
so that my images of her all center on
her hands—kneading dough for noodles,
stirring Argo on the stove to starch
shirts and aprons, red and chapped
from hanging clothes in the cold, haul-
ing buckets of coal for the stove, her
fingers stained purple from picking
grapes, or black with dirt from weed-
ing around the tomatoes, or nimble
darning socks or turning a collar, or
gentle in smoothing hair away from our
faces or straightening rumpled cloth-
ing. She found that in many ways
life in America was not so different
from life in Poland. The difference was
that, unlike Poland where you worked
all your life just to subsist, in
America you could do better.

She had dreams, ambitious dreams and
all centered around her children. In
Poland, only the very well-to-do and
rich could go to school, no matter how
bright or how much a person longed to
study. Her father did not have the
required pig to offer as payment to
the school teacher in her small hamlet
for her to continue beyond the eighth
grade. Her lot in life after com-
pleting this basic education was to
take the family cow to pasture and
prevent the cow from trampling the
neighbors’ wheat. She often hid her-
self in shame and embarrassment when
she spied her peers returning from
school. This hurt was to last through-
out her lifetime, and she sought to
ease some of the pain vicariously
through her children. For me, as her
only daughter, she had special designs
because she understood, only too well,
the connection between education and
freedom for women. "Zozia," she'd say,
“What you know, nobody can take from
you—ever. Education is everything."
So she scrimped and saved, instill-
ing in me a mania for work and
saving, too, so that she might see

me an educated woman.

Initially she enrolled us in the
neighborhood parochial school taught
by nuns because we could communicate
with the nuns in Polish while learn-
ing the rudiments of "Look, Jane,
here comes Spot." We did our home-
work faithfully, copying words and
letters in black and white marble-
ized composition books. She stood
over us, looking at our work, trying
to garner what she could from our
studies—because there was no time
or opportunity to learn English on
her own. Later she was to transfer
us to public school where we could
have such things as music and gym
and literature.

At school or play we strove to be
"American." We Anglicized our names
and over the course of many years
we had all the outward trappings of
an American childhood—the bikes,
roller skates and paper routes. We
ate french fries and popsicles and
saw Walt Disney and Dean Martin and
Jerry Lewis movies. But at home we
were Polish, speaking Polish exclu-
sively because my mother demanded it,
and being raised in the Polish tradi-
tion, centering our lives around the
mysteries of the Church, and eating
herring and sauerkraut and milk soup.
And, most importantly, we listened
to our mother.

At age seventy-one, my mother still
talks about not having the opportunity
to go to school. She derives great
pleasure in the educated woman I have
become. Sometimes I weep for the
woman she might have become but for
lack of a pig.

©

Sophie Knab is a bi-lingual thera-
pist on Buffalo’s East Side in a
community clinic. She is working on
a book on Polish immigrant women and
is interested in the art and science
of oral history.