Natalie's Story:

Living With the AIDS Virus

Several years ago I was notified by a doctor who had
operated on me in 1984 that I might have received an
AIDS-infected blood transfusion. I went to his office for a
blood test and was notified later that day by phone that
the test was positive.

Until that point, AIDS was a disease that existed
elsewhere, in the big cities, among gays and IV drug
users. I was married, had three children, had never used
drugs and had lived in small New Hampshire towns for 15
years. I also believed that I was in excellent physical
condition and that if I were "infected" I would somehow
know it.

The day I took the blood test, I wrote in my journal, "I
feel as though I'm living in a nightmare. I feel physically
ill, actually facing thoughts of my own death — the very
thought of catching a deadly disease from such a fluke!"

For months I went back and forth between affirming
my own health and facing my fears of death. It was a year
in which there were almost daily news articles about the
disease and about society's response — doctors who
refused to treat AIDS patients, children barred from
school, job discrimination, etc. Much of what was written
increased my sense of fear of people finding out and, at the
time, made me long for contact with others in the same
situation. My fears increased as "experts" predicted a
greater likelihood of those infected becoming ill.

The most painful part of this for me was (and is) the
fear that I will not be around to see my children grow up.
At the same time, their optimism and ability to focus on
the present has helped me get through. When my pill
beeper sounds and my son launches into a rock rendition
of “Here she comes now, wants her AZT ..." I stop taking
myself so seriously.

Almost a year after finding out I was HIV positive, I
found a support group in New Hampshire. Until that
point, my support had come from sporadic meetings in
Boston. Without this illness, I probably would never have
met the men in the support groups. We were separated
by differences in gender, age, lifestyle, and sexual
preference, but I count them now among my most valued
friends. I have learned from them, cried with them, been
afraid with them, and perhaps most important, have felt
safe enough with them to be able to laugh at some of
this.

It was with the support of that group, my family, and a
few close friends that I first faced the physical symptoms
of the presence of the virus. I began having bruising and
bleeding episodes — the results of a blood platelet
disorder. This meant weekly visits to a hematologist in
Boston for eight months and finally required the surgical
removal of my spleen. My T-cell count dropped drastically
during this same period, so I began taking AZT after the
operation.

I am learning to deal with this “one day at a time." I
have made changes in my work schedule and diet and have
learned relaxation and visualization techniques. I continue
to go to support groups and seek out people who are
caring and understanding.

Even now as I write this, I am unable to use my real
name. My children are afraid of being teased or excluded.
They tell me that it is a common playground taunt to say,
"Get away from me ... I might catch AIDS.”

I believe that this can and will change. When we
realize that AIDS affects all of us, perhaps we can
dispense with labels and show greater compassion for each
other. I think the government also must respond to meet
the severity of the epidemic — with more research, more
funding, more anti-discrimination legislation. Along with
fighting a private battle for my own health, I want to
fight a more public battle to bring about the changes that
will help us all survive this.

Natalie  
Note: The Western New York AIDS Program sponsors
support groups for people who, like "Natalie," have been
tested HIV positive. Call 847-AIDS for more information.

The Nonexistent Woman

From page 1

It is important for all women to grasp the enormity of
that fact.

If women who want to complete their pregnancies
are at such an extreme risk, the danger to women who
face unwanted pregnancies is astronomically greater.
For the naive, just getting information about abortion
as an option is fraught with danger.

Phony “pregnancy crisis” clinics advertise free
services such as counseling and testing. In reality, they
offer only threats and harassment to already distraught
and victimized women — usually frightened teenagers.

The Real Stakes

You have to give credit where credit is due. The
leaders of the anti-choice movement are master
illusionists. Imagine 40 men — all calling themselves
reverends — storming a women's clinic and terrorizing
already distraught women while a spokesman outside
piously prattles about saving just one life and actually
compares the clinic to a Nazi concentration camp — a
comparison that only works if you can stay clear about
who is storming and who is being terrorized.

While they distract us with concern about the alleged
“rights” of the fetus, anti-choice groups are mounting a
major attack against religious freedom and women.
They use their own narrow definition of when a fetus
becomes a human being with a soul to nail women to
an ideological cross of Christian fanaticism while
mainstream Christians turn the other cheek. Indeed, if
mainstream Christians allow these fringe fanatics to
define Christianity, then this is what Christianity really
is in modern America.

In addition, anti-choice radicals have graphically
demonstrated their disregard for the religious rights of
others. Anti-choice groups clearly oppose far more than
reproductive rights. Non-Christian groups that fail to
see the threat to religious freedom are burying their
heads in the sand.

COMMENTARY

If women lose the right to control their own bodies,
we lose a major part of our personal freedom. It is a
giant step backwards that truly enslaves us at a
fundamental level because the right to control your own
body is a fundamental personal freedom not denied to
any other sector of our population — except criminals,
those who are insane, and possibly the elderly and
infirm.

The loss of the right to choose transfers a woman's
personal power to doctors, church leaders, legislators,
and judges — all predominantly men. It enhances
men's control and power over women (and by extension,
children) as property. It entraps women in increasingly
dependent relationships with men. It makes it easier to
force women into marriage and harder to free women
from abusive husbands.

Stripped to its bare bones, the issue at stake is not
abortion and the life of the fetus. The issue is the
personal power of women and the right of women to
make a truly profound decision by and for themselves.

Facing Facts

No amount of theological contortions can change the
simple fact that it is women who give birth. It is
women who must live with the consequences of
pregnancy and women who have the right to make the
decisions about their bodies and their lives. Neither the
biological fact nor the human right can be revoked by
man-made law.

PAGE 10 COMMON GROUND FEBRUARY 1989

SUNY & Childcare

by Yetta Kurland

Childcare has been an ongoing
problem for SUNY campuses across
the state. It is not so much a
problem for faculty and staff, who
are usually the first provided with
what childcare facilities there are
on campus. However, the
administration still refuses to
recognize the increasing number of
non-traditional students enrolling
in SUNY schools, and the need these
students have for childcare.

Many campuses don't have
childcare programs. Those that do
find themselves overbooked and
understaffed, with poor conditions
and little resources. There are a
number of reasons this is
happening.

First of all, staff for these
facilities are just not paid enough
to keep competent, qualified people
in these positions. This means
there is a low retention rate of
qualified staff, and a low
recruitment rate.  
Another problem is money. This
year SUNY was budgeted $1.2 million
for childcare, not nearly enough to
cover the renovation and operation
of the existing childcare
facilities, not to mention the
development of new facilities on
campuses without childcare.

Another problem this causes is
the accessibility for low-income
parents. Because the cost isn't
being met by SUNY, students are
being forced to foot the bill, with
childcare costs being as much as
$45 — $50 on some campuses.

The problem is even worse for
SUNY campuses because, unlike
community colleges, SUNY is not
subsidized by the community or
county, but must depend completely
on the State for its funding. Last
year a request for approximately $5
million was made for childcare, but
only $1.2 million was given.

It seems to be a problem the
administration is unwilling to
address because it demands a lot
of time and money for its planning
and programming. There have been,
however, many attempts by students
and student organizations to
convince the administration to
reevaluate its policy on childcare.
One problem students have focused
on is that there is no policy from
SUNY Central mandating any
childcare provisions for students
on any campus. The administration
seems to view childcare as a luxury
rather than a necessity for
non-traditional students, who,
without it, simply would not be
able to attend the University.
Students are now trying to build
a strong network, on a state level,
of childcare committees and boards,
on all 64 SUNY campuses, and to
build some lobbying strength within
the legislature in hopes of pushing
for mandatory childcare facilities
on all SUNY campuses. Also, the
Childcare Advisory Committee is
currently preparing a position
paper, assessing the situation and
making some recommendations for
improving the conditions. One
suggestion has been adopting the
national standards for childcare as
a requirement for facilities on
SUNY.