Common Ground will be producing  
our 4th annual issue on “Women and  
the Arts" in April 1986. We are  
looking for submissions in the  
areas of poetry, short fiction,  
artwork (black & white, high  
contrast), photography (black and  
white only), cartoons and humorous  
pieces.  

The deadline for submitting  
material is February 15, 1986.  
Be sure that a self-stamped, self-  
addressed envelope is enclosed, and  
that your name, address and  
telephone number is on each page.  
We are looking for work that par-  
ticularly reflects women's views  
of the world.  

We regret that we will not be  
able to offer cash prizes this  
year, but will offer in-kind  
awards, such as free advertising  
or subscriptions to those women  
whose work is used in this  
issue.  

“THE WOMEN'S DANCE SO  

a aes COALITION  

our TAWNY WOMEN'S DANCE f  

fe) Oks GUN ee  
IE EMIS eda  

TIRED OF Show +» Cold 7? Got THE Winter =  

A MIGHT OF TROPICAL Fun /  
WIGGLE Your Toes ww woAfemn  

CONTENTS  

1 Women Helping Women Awards  

2 Contents, Policy,  
Call for Material  

News  

Women Helping Women, con't  
Letters  

Metropolitan Community Church  
Potpourri: More Thoughts on  
women and Religion  

Women's Tarot  

For the New Year  

8 & % Calendar  

Daphne's Tree  

11 Getting Good Info  
Women and Smoking  

12 . Potpourri, con't  
Author faces Deportation  

Announcements  

Daphne's Tree con't  
Women's Religious Resources  
Potpourri, con't  

Ads, Resources, con't  

Back Page, Subscription Info  

Subscribe to  
Common Ground!  

PRESENTS  

Come To us + ESCAPE Rye cp  
spud,  
mM:  

y Bow ATION  

Hawi SHIRTS  

AGE 18 AND OVER. PLEASE OPTIMUM /  

PAGE 2 COMMON GROUND JANUARY 1986  

POLICY  

PHILOSOPHY - Common Ground is potentially, with  
help from Western New York women, a forum to  
celebrate the rich diversity of our community. We view  
the paper as a ribbon that may connect our com-  
monalities, our intersection points. We are inviting you  
to participate actively in the building of a support system  
for WNY women. We affirm our commitment to enhance  
the lives of women on physical, educational, spiritual,  
psychological, social and economic levels. We want to  
present, fair-mindedly, the issues that concern women,  
and information of value to women. We offer Common  
Ground as a place where women can display their art  
and personal literature, and re-view the tapestries of their  
experiences.  

EDITORIAL POLICY - Common Ground is especially  
looking for articles which address the needs and interests  
of local women.  

1. Common Ground is a publication of news, culture  
and dialogue from women’s perspectives.  

2. News, Opinion, Analysis and Commentary will  
each be clearly labeled as such.  

3. We are seeking to provide accurate, straightforward  
information of value to women.  

4. The collective will not intentionally print or sup-  
port materials or viewpoints which will harm women  
because of color, sexuality, religious or ethnic  
background, physical disability or economic situation.  

5. While opinions expressed in Common Ground are  
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the col-  
lective as a whole, we do accept responsibility for choos-  
ing what we print.  

SUBMISSIONS — We welcome articles, letters, infor-  
mation and announcements of interest to women.  
Graphics, cartoons, art and photography will be gratefully  
received. We especially invite women who do not  
usually have access to traditional media - women of col-  
or, differently abled, economically or educationally  
disadvantaged, and those for whom English is a second  
language - to write. Suggested length of letters: 250  
words. Letters must be signed to be printed. We will,  
however, respect your privacy and withhold your name  
if you request. Suggested length of articles, commentary,  
analysis: 500-750 words. Please type and double-space  
your work, 40 characters across. If you do not have ac-  
cess to a typewriter, please print clearly. In time we hope  
to have a typewriter, paper, etc., available for those who  
request it. Include a stamped, self-addressed envelope  
and work and home phone numbers. Because we want  
to hear your voices, if your piece needs to be edited for  
length or clarity, we will call you/ask you to do it. Keep  
copies of your work. We will try to notify you within  
three (3) weeks if we intend to use your work. If we print  
it, we will give you five (5) copies of the issue in which  
it appears. Artwork should be black and white copies  
only, and title/describe your work. We will copyright the  
entire issue, but the copyright on each piece reverts to  
the author/artist, that she may decide where her work  
is printed. Please request a style-sheet for further infor-  
mation and guidelines if you want to write.  

COMMON GROUND  
WNY Women’s Newsjournal  
P.O. Box 313  

Bidwell Station  

Buffalo, New York 14222  

New Phone Number: 881-4383  

(c) 1986 WNY Women’s Newsjournal  

ADVERTISEMENT POLICY AND RATES — See Adver-  
tisement Section.  

WOMEN WHO WORKED ON THIS ISSUE:  
BRIGITTE, JOYCE, ELEANOR, JULIE,  
BETH, BETH, CHRIS, ELIZABETH,  
CATHY, SHARON, SUSAN, LAURA,  
ADELINE, GERRI, JUDY, LINDA,  
PEGGY, CHARLENE, APRIL, HOPE,  
MARY, AND WANDA WYNEAU.