Perspectives

Women on the Final  
Frontier: Bonnie Dunbar  

by Joan Dickenson  

I wrote the story for a daily news-  
paper, and this time I want to write it again,  
want to tell the truth. Oh, my original story,  
with NASA was true as far as it went -- but sometimes  
telling half the truth is tantamount to  
lying, and that's what I did: I reported  
Dunbar's remarks, but not my reaction to  
them. Like Ms. magazine's January cover  
story about Dunbar’s colleague Sally  
Ride, who will be the first American wo-  
man in space, my story was essentially  
just public-relations puffery. Such  
uncritical reporting serves no one. If  
Ms., originally a radical journal, won't  
dig deeper, somebody has to...

One of 8 women and 70 men in NASA's  
pool, Dunbar, 33, will fly on  
the shuttle in 1984. She is an  
engineer, a “mission specialist" rath-  
er than a pilot. Fit and clear-eyed,  
she answers questions with style and  
composure, rattling off space-age jar-  
gon as if it were her native tongue.  
What drew her to the male-dominated  
field of space travel? “Space flight  
is something kids dream of," she says,  
"and I started as a kid too. By work-  
ing for a government agency, I felt I  
could contribute something to my coun-  
try, and I was attracted to the leading  
edge of technological revolution."  
Technological what? Technological  
advances, which help businesses and  
government communicate faster and  
the opposite. The services sold by  
NASA increase corporate profits; other-  
wise, no business would buy them. And  
profits don't fall from the sky. Rath-  
er, as more and more firms realize that  
factories in the Third World are not  
taxed or regulated as expensively as  
they are here, and that wages elsewhere  
are a fraction of American ones, it be-  
comes clear that their profits are, in  
a word, loot. Industry is the vehicle  
whereby real wealth -- land, minerals,  
water, labor -- that rightfully belongs  
to local, primarily dark-skinned people  
is changed into cash and transferred  
to western pockets.

The shirt I was so pleased to find  
for $7.95 was made by Taiwanese women  
working for pennies under appalling  
conditions. If satellites launched by  
NASA allow that shirtmaking company to  
consolidate the bookkeeping in all its  
Asian plants, it doesn't follow that  
wages will rise or working conditions  
improve. The saving will enhance  
profits, and profits alone.

Revolution occurs when life becomes  
intolerable for ordinary people, and  
the sexist/racist/classist imperialism  
of the U.S. is intolerable. The prob-  
lem is that most of the victims live  
elsewhere, and it is easier to depose a  
local dictator than to gang up on a far-  
away nation. Thus the more successful  
the space program is, the more nimble  
and able the U.S. will become -- and  
the harder it will be for its victims  
to launch a real revolution.

"Contribute to my country." Human-  
ity cannot benefit from xenophobic  
loyalty to Washington. When helping  
one’s country amounts to fighting others  
(in Dunbar's case, the Soviet Union), it  
is no more high-minded than rooting for  
the Buffalo Bills, and just as arbi-  
trary. Still, I wouldn't take issue  
with Dunbar's patriotism if, by "my  
country" she meant sharecroppers in  
Georgia, researchers in Rochester,  
welfare mothers in Harlem and Cuban im-  
migrants in Miami. But Dunbar's coun-  
try is clearly the industrial oligarchy  
that our government exists to serve.  
Anyone helping it is hurting its vic-  
tims, both within and outside U.S.  
borders.

Dunbar did mention the Third World.  
The space shuttle launches satellites  
at a fraction of the cost of sending  
them up via rocket. Dunbar says this  
has helped Indonesia, where all com-  
munication among 2,000 scattered islands  
is now by satellite. Does this mean  
NASA's aid goes impartially to both  
Sumatran peasants and Du Pont stockhold-  
ers? No. Until land and power are re-  
distributed, technology only taunts the  
powerless.

I asked Dunbar what the shuttle pro-  
ject can do about world hunger. "A  
lot," she said. "A farmer can't in-  
spect every row in a cornfield for dis-  
ease, but the changes in color and den-  
sity that we see from space can be  
early warnings of trouble. We can  
predict exactly what global yields will be.  
NASA's Agristars program is designed to  
study current cloud, temperature, soil,  
and rock patterns, and to distribute the  
information to farmers. (Dunbar admitt-  
ed that little information has actually  
been distributed yet.)

It sounds wonderful -- finally a handle on  
hunger, relief for all those big-bellied  
large-eyed children! -- until one thinks  
about it. Which farmers will use NASA's  
information? Not the Peruvian peasant  
who share-farms two rocky acres, nor  
even the 200-acre family farmer in Iowa  
or Provence. Information on this scale  
will be useful chiefly to corporate own-  
ers of huge tracts. If NASA makes it  
easier and cheaper for Del Monte to grow  
pineapple on Guatemalan land (which  
therefore cannot produce food for local  
people), who will benefit? Del Monte's  
stockholders, and possibly American  
shoppers -- but not the residents of  
Guatemala.

Dunbar's remarks about worldwide  
crop and weather patterns alarm me.  
Until now, the damage done by multi-  
national corporations to the earth and  
its inhabitants, enormous as it is, has  
been limited because no one could see  
the whole picture. Multinationals are  
noted for ignoring the environmental and  
human effects of their activities. As  
it gets easier to manipulate global re-  
sources for profit, might not the conse-  
quences surprise even the darkest doom-  
sayer? From space, the world's whole  
fish supply can be seen and tabulated.  
Seen...tabulated...and then what?  
Scooped up by the highest bidder? And  
when the oceans are empty, then what?

Question: What do the 8 women astro-  
nauts have in common?

Answer: We all have the same anato-  
my.  (Laughs.) I'm friends with a few,  
but I'm just as close to some of the  
men.

Q: Do you experience sex discrimi-  
nation?

A: Not inside NASA. Outsiders al-  
ways say, ‘You don't look like an astro-  
naut -- you're not big enough.'

Only in that NASA is interested  
in women's physiological response to  
the fluid shifts in space. The train-  
ing is the same for everybody.

Here Dunbar seems to be insisting  
that women can do everything men do,  
in precisely the same way. But the  
questions were not meant to imply that  
women are inferior. Of course we're not!  
Rather, I was hoping for a feminist  
analysis of the astronaut's life, an ac-  
knowledgement that women are not inferior  
but different -- and that studying the  
difference can teach us something. To  
say “the training is the same for every-  
body" is not only to dismiss the ques-  
tion with a formal lie (true, perhaps,  
in letter) but also to deny one's  
womanhood. I've seen such denial in  
other women who are outnumbered by men  
in their fields, and it bothers me --  
if only because it implies that sex  
discrimination is a myth.

My colleagues, obviously exceptional to start with,  
surmounted tremendous difficulties  
to get where they are. I applaud women  
who develop themselves to the height of  
fitness and strength, who try to be all  
they can possibly be. (One sees this  
same living-up-to-potential in Congress-  
women, athletes, and dedicated radicals.  
But I question the ideal all this energy  
serves. An instrument of corporate Amer-  
ica: is this "all a woman can be?"  
Should not the height of being include  
help for people who are barred by in-  
justice from even surviving, let alone  
reaching their potential? Shouldn't it  
at least include an awareness that only  
blind luck (and U.S. imperialism) allow  
a woman like Dunbar to attain her posi-  
tion, rather than, say, some illiterate  
peasant in Ecuador?

Already, Dunbar states proudly, NASA  
has sold the oil companies geological  
data that have helped them find oil in  
the Middle East. Already, the Pentagon  
is NASA's biggest customer. Space ex-  
ploration does have possibilities for  
good, but its potential for evil in the  
hands of Ronald Reagan (or Jimmy Carter),  
Exxon, and McDonnell-Douglas makes my  
blood run cold.

Another point. In 1980, Dunbar and  
17 others were chosen from 4,000 ap-  
plicants. What are NASA's criteria?  
Probably health, brains, and fitness;  
technical competence; education and  
honors; a strong but amenable person-  
ality; and, above all, conformity (it's  
probably called "stability" or "mental  
health"): in other words, mainstream,  
traditional thinking. Thus no known  
lesbian will ever make it, nor anyone  
who has ever flirted with socialism.  
Candidates must be able not only to  
spout the NASA line but also to be-  
lieve it (Dunbar seems to!); certainly  
no radical feminist need apply.

continued p. 20