The  
Collective Meets...

We all hope you'll be joining us  
at Shea's Buffalo for the Gemini  
Dance Theater's 10th Anniversary  
Celebration on March 28th!! Not  
only is this the modern dance event  
of the season, it is an event that  
will benefit C.G.

The event will feature Thea  
Barnes, a top-of-the-line dancer  
from the Martha Graham Dance Company  
and Kariamu Asante, a well-known  
local performer. Plus, of course,  
the members of the Gemini Dance  
Theater.

Several community groups will be  
aided by this gala event. Common  
Ground will be selling tickets, in  
exchange for a portion of the pro-  
ceeds, so clip and send the form  
enclosed in this issue to us, and  
also watch your mailbox for further  
information! We also will receive  
a percentage of all the program  
advertising we can generate, so if  
you've got a business you'd like  
advertised in the program (which  
will be distributed to a guaranteed  
full house of 3,000 at Shea's) con-  
tact Gerri at 881-5988.

This event is a blessing in dis-  
guise, folks. C.G. is ex-  
pecting a great response to C.G.  
Press's effort, purchase advertising  
space for your business or service  
in the paper. We do need help to  
keep this paper growing.

We want you to grow with us.  
We're always looking for contribu-  
tors, photographers, layout artists,  
posts, advertising sales folks,  
everyone and anyone who can give a  
couple of hours a month to a great  
women's news journal. There's a lot  
to do, to learn and lots of great  
women who are helping out--so join  
us! We'd love to see you!

Woman Was  
First Black Pilot

Bessie Coleman was the first Black  
woman to receive a pilot's license in the  
U.S. Because of discrimination in  
this country which prevented Blacks  
from learning to fly here, Ms. Coleman  
went to France where she earned her  
wings.

She returned to the U.S. and worked  
as a stunt flyer. She was killed  
in 1926 in an aircraft accident, but  
her example inspired other Blacks,  
both men and women, to pursue a  
career in aviation.

COMMON GROUND FEBRUARY 1984 PAGE TWO

CONTENTS

CARASA VS. N.F.T.A.  
POLICY

CONTENTS

THE COLLECTIVE MEETS  
NEWS

INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S WEEK INFO  
GEMINI DANCE THEATRE

LETTERS

POETRY  
EMMA IS

N.O.W. AWARDS DINNER

BOOK REVIEW:  
REENA AND OTHER STORIES

POETRY

BOOK REVIEW:

IN A DIFFERENT VOICE  
10 & 11 CALENDAR

12 POTPOURRI:  
THE PINKS AND THE BLUES

13 DAPHNE'S TREE

14 INVISIBLE BEGINNINGS

15 NEWS  
CONCERT REVIEW:  
VOICES OF WOMEN

16 ANNOUNCEMENTS  
17 WOMEN'S RESOURCE DIRECTORY  
18 & 19 ADVERTISEMENTS

20 BACK PAGE  
SUBSCRIPTION INFO

WOMEN WHO WORKED ON THIS ISSUE:

Diane, Laura, Susan, Esther, Bonnie,  
Heather, Maria, Sarah, Linda, Beth,  
Chris, Gerri, Karen, Barb, Kay, Cathy,  
Joan, Holly, Sharon, Peggy, Frigid,  
Bridget, Mouse, Diane, Cherin, Alice,  
Charlene, Jan, Pauline, Joyce and  
Wanda Wyneau.

Subscribe to  
Common Ground

POLICY

PHILOSOPHY — Common Ground is potentially, with  
help from Western New York women, a forum to  
celebrate the rich diversity of our community. We view  
the paper as a ribbon that may connect our  
commonalities, our intersection points. We are inviting  
you to participate actively in the building of a support  
system for WNY women. We affirm our commitment to  
enhance the lives of women on physical, educational,  
spiritual, psychological, social and economic levels. We  
want to present, fair-mindedly, the issues that concern  
women, and information of value to women. We offer  
Common Ground as a place where women can display  
their art and personal literature, and review the  
tapestries of their experiences.

EDITORIAL POLICY — Common Ground is especially  
looking for articles which address the needs and  
interests of local women.

1. Common Ground is a publication of news, culture  
and dialogue from women’s perspectives.

2. News, Opinion, Analysis and Commentary will each  
be clearly labeled as such.

3. We are seeking to provide accurate, straightforward  
information of value to women.

4. The collective will not intentionally print or support  
materials or viewpoints which will harm women  
because of color, sexuality, religious or ethnic  
background, physical disability or economic situation.

5. While opinions expressed in Common Ground are  
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the  
collective as a whole, we do accept responsibility for  
choosing what we print.

SUBMISSIONS — We welcome articles, letters,  
information and announcements of interest to women.  
Graphics, cartoons, art and photography will be  
gratefully received. We especially invite women who  
do not usually have access to traditional media —  
women of color, differently abled, economically or  
educationally disadvantaged, and those for whom  
English is a second language — to write. Suggested  
length of letters: 250 words. Letters must be signed to  
be printed. We will, however, respect your privacy and  
withhold your name if you request. Suggested length of  
articles, commentary, analysis: 500-750 words. Please  
type and double space your work, 40 characters across.  
If you do not have access to a typewriter, please print  
clearly. In time we hope to have a typewriter, paper,  
etc., available for those who request it. Include a  

* stamped, self-addressed envelope and work and home  

phone numbers. Because we want to hear your voices,  
if your piece needs to be edited for length or clarity, we  
will call you/ask you to do it. Keep copies of your work.  
We will try to notify you within three (3) weeks if we  
intend to use your work. If we print it, we will give you  
five (5) copies of the issue in which it appears. Artwork  
should be black and white copies only, and  
title/describe your work. We will copyright the entire  
issue, but the copyright on each piece reverts to the  
author/artist, so that she may decide where her work is  
printed. Please request a style sheet for further  
information and guidelines if you want to write.

COMMON GROUND  
Women’s Studies Academy  
Rockwell Hall  
Buffalo State College  
1300 Elmwood Avenue  
Buffalo, New York 14222  
(716) 688-7831

©1983 WNY Women's Newsjournal

ADVERTISEMENT POLICY AND RATES — See  
Advertisement Section.