THE ARTS

REVIEW

WOMEN OF IDEAS

BOOK REVIEW

WOMEN OF IDEAS: And What Men Have Done
to Them, by Dale Spender. Boston,
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1982. $9.95,
paperback. 586pp. ISBN 0-7100-9353-5.

Reviewed by Charlene Eldridge Wheeler

Who were Mary Astell, Frances Power
Cobbe, Emily Davies, Eliza Haywood,
Mary Pix, Elizabeth Robins and
Ernestine Rose? They were bold, coura-
geous, pioneering women who have been
abused and ridiculed as women and as
contributors to women's culture and all
but lost from our knowing. In her pro-
vocative and exciting book, WOMEN OF
IDEAS, Dale Spender brings alive these
women and many more as she lovingly,
energetically and painfully traces
through three hundred years of women's
ideas. She dramatically demonstrates
that for centuries women have been
challenging men and that men have used
punitive measures against them; that
for centuries women have been claiming
that the world looks very different
from the perspective of women. Spender
clearly demonstrates that far from
being unusual, women have for cen-
turies protested the socially
prescribed oppression of women. While
much of the information is historical
in focus, Spender has not approached
the writing of this book in a strictly
historical way. She notes that “As
women's resources are appropriated by
men then all I am prepared to 'supply'
is a positive portrayal of women - a
commodity not much in ‘demand' in a
patriarchal society." (p.15) Dale

Spender is a feminist scholar. She is
a writer and researcher in the fields
of language, education and feminist
history. She has taught women's stu-
dies courses and is editor of Women's
Studies International Forum, co-editor
of Learning to Lose (1980), editor of
Men's Studies Modified (1981). She is
also author of Man Made Language
(1980), Invisible Women (1982), There's
Always Been a Women's Movement This
Century (1983) and Feminist Theorists:
Three Centuries of Bay Women Thinkers
(1983). The jacket of WOMEN OF IDEAS
notes that she is “well trained in
male-oriented education which, she
suggests, is neither difficult nor
challenging, and is delighted to be
currently engaged in work of intellec-
tual rigor - on women."

In WOMEN OF IDEAS, Spender lovingly
re-establishes each of the women she
discusses as a creative intellectual,
while she examines each woman's contri-
bution to society. She traces the past
300 years of women's culture through
the works and words of over 150 women
as she examines how these women have
been devalued and erased by a society
that does not value women nor their
contributions. She begins with Aphra
Behn who lived from 1640 to 1680, a
notable writer whose disappearance has
been so complete that one biographer
was able to prove that she died four
days after she was born, thus could not
have written thirteen novels, numerous
plays and several collections of poems.
Focusing on major social issues,
Spender traces the work of women in the
labor movements, the peace movements
and suffrage movements of the late 19th
and early 20th centuries and examines
the choices, or lack thereof, that
women experienced because of their
opposition to the prevailing
patriarchal power structure.

Energetically, Spender shares her
humor, her satire and her advocacy of
women. Early in the book, she lists
various “objections” that are likely to
be leveled against her writing. She
considers each objection and either
sustains or overrules the objection
based on clearly, logically developed
rationale that comes from her advocacy
of women. Spender challenges basic

COMMON GROUND

PAGE 12

assumptions of the society in which we
live: “I want the intellectual and
creative resources of women to be
equally represented and valued in the
cultural meanings of society. I want
an end to the double standard that
would have men's problems as the social
problems and women's as ‘personal
deviancy’. I want an end to the divi-
sions of male authority and reason, and
female unreliability and emotion. I
want an end to men's activities being
revered as objective, as art, as
science, while women's are dismissed as
subjective, as accomplishment or
foolishness. I want an end to these
value judgments for the framework in
which they are made is a manifestation
of male consciousness in which women's
thinking/explaining/acting being is
denied." (p. 530)

Painfully, Spender documents the
erasure of the work and words of women
by men and by male-identified women.
Repeatedly we are shown how women have
been discredited and destroyed.
Spender is at her best when she looks
at the life of Christabel Pankhurst and
contrasts facts she has uncovered in
her research with "facts" presented in
a biography written by David Mitchell -
the only existing biography of this
great woman's life. Vividly, Spender
demonstrates how one vindictive and
vicious male obliterates the entire
relevance of one woman's life for all
of history. Spender's arguments are so
finely tuned and so well-developed,
that it is impossible to ignore what
she has to say. One feels rage, rage
at the men who have systematically eli-
minated these women from our knowing,
rage at our own duplicity in allowing
it to continue unchallenged.

Spender writes to the present
generation of feminists. WOMEN OF
IDEAS is a supreme example of the fem-
inist tenet “The personal is
political". As Spender became
increasingly aware that there has
always been a “women's movement" she
began to realize the depths of her own
ignorance of the women of our past. As
she discussed this knowledge with her
contemporaries, she, as did they, began
to realize that the position in which
we all find ourselves today - ignorant
of our woman's culture - is a political
statement of women's position in
society at large. Spender writes for
the woman who asks, “Why didn't I know
about all these women of the past...?"
Spender writes to the woman who wants
to know why women's contributions are
not acknowledged nor valued. Spender
writes to the woman who wants to know
how women's contributions are erased.
Spender writes for the woman who
questions if what we are doing today
will survive until tomorrow. Her
answer is painfully obvious: “We are
women - producing knowledge which is

often different from that produced by
men, in a society controlled by men.
If they like what we produce they will
appropriate it, if they can use what we
produce (even against us) they will
take it, if they do not want to know,
they will lose it." (p.9)

Spender writes well, her material
is well selected and well organized.
Her arguments are clear and logically
correct; her statements of fact
accurate. She consistently validates
her research by citing original sources
and documenting those sources meticu-
lously. Her writing style is con-
vincing, clear, concise and readable.
In addition to the wealth of material
contained in the pages of WOMEN OF
IDEAS, the material following the text
is especially useful. First, Spender
provides a chronological table which
begins with Aphra Behn (1640-1680) and
lists approximately 150 women who have
all contributed to the development of
women's cause and culture. This effec-
tively provides the reader with a
strong sense of the continuity of
women's thought, as well as a sense of
relevance to our own time. The
bibliography is impressive and effec-
tively destroys the myths that women
have no history and that there have
been no great women writers. Of speci-
fic interest is Spender's General
Index. In it she rejects the conven-
tional, male-defined “right" way of
indexing a book's contents, and instead
has re-conceptualized the categories as
they relate to women. It is a delight-
ful and refreshing approach to indexing
a book which contains so much material

“so wonderfully relevant to women.

WOMEN OF IDEAS is a landmark book.
Not only has Dale Spender restored to
us women from the past, she has docu-
mented their erasure, and graphically
illustrated how that erasure occurs.
She has not neglected the construction
of ideas for reversing the erasure, nor
for preventing its continuing
occurrence. Spender is aware that her
own work is not likely to be treated
any differently. She notes: “I have no
illusions: this book is not being
published because of the contribution
it will make to the history of ideas
(as many of the male authors are
evaluated) but because it is believed
that it will sell, and there's a
recession. Nothing has changed -
Fuller, Gilman, Eastman - they 'sold'

as well!" (p. 393) It is no small
irony that the hardbound copy of WOMEN
OF IDEAS has already been allowed to go
out of print and the paperback edition
is increasingly difficult to find.

WOMEN OF IDEAS: And What Men Have
Done to Them is available at EMMA: WNY
Women’s Resource and Cultural Center,
168 Elmwood, Buffalo, NY 14221. Phone:
885-2285.

BUFFALO

Saturday, April 23, Peopleart
hosted the first of Seven Arts
Buffalo presentations with an all-
woman evening of poetry, prose,
fiction and music, showcasing
their talent and original works.
The small but intimate space was
SRO, and no one could have walked
away disappointed by the quality
and variety of entertainment.

Kathy Moriarty opened the eve-
ning with a set about relationships.
Her strong, flexible voice fit well
with her slightly bluesy and folk
music. She did several new numbers
“hot off the kitchen table". Mor-
iarty is one of the most accomplished
and prolific local performers.

Paula Farkas read from work, some
stream-of-consciousness musings, and
very funny, wry and even absurd ob-
servations on life. Directions for
Mis-use, about spiteful ways of
using leftovers, had many in the
audience in stitches.

Cynthia Emmons, a science fiction
writer, read a very amusing short
story about having hope and believ-
ing in yourself called "Excerpts from
Chronicles of Lub-Glub the Slug".
Emmons fashioned a whole tale set in
a magical land with kings and castles
and enchanted forests.

Judith Geer, accompanied on re-
corder by Susan Besemer, read several
of her poems: "My Grandmother's
House", about waiting and about the
potential in things and situations;
"I Hadn't Realized" about getting
strong about relationships (espec-
ially at the end); and two poems
in a cycle she is writing about the
six wives of Henry VIII. The poems
for Anne Boleyn and Jane Seymour
were very moving, about strong women
who made life-and-death decisions
(their own deaths).

The second set was opened by Susan
Clements, and, as a special treat, she
brought her old singing partner, Ann
Pfohl on stage with her for a few
songs. Clements, with her smooth
voice and style, performed a Holly
Near tune, an original "Travelling
Song" and "Famous In Missouri" about
a woman who gives up everything
“for a man who lies". With Pfohl
she sang another folk tune, and a
very beautiful love song written
by Pfohl. They closed with "Over
the Rainbow", much to the audience's
delight.

Mary Margaret Guthrie read a
chilling short story "A Touch of
Old Times", she says was inspired
by Rod Serling. Her eerie story
had the audience paying very close
attention.

The final performer was Cynthia
Brown Dwyer. She read, with obvious
emotion, some of the poems inspired
by her captivity in Iran where she
was detained for treason during the
Iran Hostage Crisis. Some were
written in Iran, some since her re-
turn, and explore/explain the terror
and emotional toll that experience
cost her. The audience was very
affected by what she read.

Women/Arts/Buffalo is a great
showcase - but each of these women
deserved to have a whole evening set
aside for herself. Hopefully, this
exposure will encourage people to
seek out these performers/poets/
writers who have something very
valuable to offer.