SoS Journal Entry 12/18/78

by Bonnie Johnson

Yesterday I found out what it's like to be compelled to speak in Meeting. The first vocal ministry was about the TV show, “The Dating Game” and that we as people of faith have a responsibility to speak out against things we find offensive. Next Susan spoke about not accepting everything that is presented to us, especially if it is inferior, without protesting. That was when I had a slight uncomfortableness, a little sinking feeling, and the thought flashed through my mind that I might "want" to say something about keeping silent when there is something that needs to be said. Then Harold quoted Lincoln on good people sinning by their silence. And then I knew I would have to speak. My hands got clammy, my heart began to pound and I was more uncomfortable by the minute. I opened my mouth at least three times and couldn't say anything, and yet I knew that I must or I would have no peace. I tried to tell myself that it would go away, but I knew it wouldn't. Then I tried to tell myself that I had spoken to groups before and these were just people like me but that didn't help. I had reframed what I needed to say a dozen times and was afraid it wouldn't come out right, and finally I let go of that, opened my mouth, and said what I had to say: that another way we sin by our silence is to know what we fear, need and want in our relationships with others, and not to tell them because we are afraid they might leave us. That I had been struggling with that problem this week. That it had just become clear to me that the only way to take care of myself is to be absolutely honest about my fears and needs, expectations and desires in my intimate relationships.

After Meeting, Babs, Esther, Susan and I were talking about poetry, and Babs asked me if the poetry writing was anything like speaking in Meeting - the heart pounding, shaking, hands clammy, feeling forced kind of thing. I said yes, and she looked at me with such understanding that we both got tears in our eyes. And she said very gently that the only relief for that was to speak. I couldn't believe what had happened to me, and was still feeling very fragile. Happy, and at peace, but fragile and astonished and still trembling a little inside myself. I really feel good about that Meeting, especially Babs and Esther. I told them that my whole life had changed in the last year, and that I sometimes get a little scared about it, but mostly I feel that I am moving in the direction that I am supposed to and I'm content. That sense of being in the hands of the Gods.

The Fast Lane

Wondering

Who the next will be:
— Carole M. Martin Soldier

Begun during the They said.

And now

Where else could we make this kind of money? Besides,

It makes the streets safer—

A slide show of happy moments. Forgive the shadows.

of my Montage.

Far from home. For the young hedonist

People that I was then, unlike any I had ever known. Never grew boring.

An everchanging scene, the camaraderie,

The fondnesses,

The goodbyes.

The elegance of the coffee houses. High ceilings,

Magnificent crystal chandeliers, plush drapes

From Alabama to Georgia, to Maryland.

Peaceful flowing yards

Of red velvet

Merging into the carpeting. Special coffees

Poured from silver urns into fine china.

Tempting dessert carts just within reach.

Working in a secret place buried deep within the earth under a mountain.

In the darkness,

Far from the site,

The eerie red beam glowed from the tower atop its peak.

Leaving the mountain. Celebrations. On to Munich. Pasching, a cosmopolitan city of intrigue and exotic nightlife. Reminders of its Nazi past lay in the still present ruins of war.

More nights of revelry. Frenzied dancing, costumed people.

Beer and wine flowed freely into the night.

Days of work in Hitler's former headquarters. A long greystone building, elevators that ran continuously, never stopping.

With the dawn the town was stirring. I emerged from wherever.

Heavy with tiredness, walking slowly over the stone bridge over the green river past the ruins

Past the ancient buildings, thinking only of sleep.

Nights of fun charged with emotional electricity. A cabaret where a deep-voiced chanteuse sang melancholy war songs.

Where agile bodies clad in skintight black performed sensuous interpretive dance.

On the move again, speeding North on the Autobahn,

Then West to the Rhine,

PAGE 10 COMMON GROUND DECEMBER

On to Normandy. Passing the flat fields of France. Weekends at the lake.

Stopping for strong mudlike coffee to say goodbye to a friend I was leaving behind. A pink church in the village folk their long loaves ... ——— Alpine chalet.

THEATRE REVIEW:

Abingdon Square

Irene Fornés is a playwright of some note. An accomplished artist as well, her finely tuned sense of total art form comes together in her play ‘Abingdon Square,’ which she directed at Studio Arena Theatre.

The story line concerns an orphaned 15-year-old girl who marries an older man. As her life develops, fantasies collide with realities—leading to betrayal, anguish and death. Religious fervor is a strong factor right through the last scene, in which the characters pose reminiscent of a meta.

An artistic endeavor, beautifully done.

A sunny room that cozied into the cup drip by drip.

Heading South.

Past the black forests back to Munich.

The ocean trip

A hurricane. For eight days to share the good times.

Back to the States.

A madness because of her self-awareness and emotional strength or desolation.

THEATRE REVIEW: Intimate Exchange

by S.M. Beck

Changes are being presented at the theatre until December of the 1984 season.

The play, the piece, is shocking, poignant, and will have you thinking for days. The call 881-7668.

Buffeted by gigantic waves, never-ending.

Help! In the middle of the sea.

Sun and blue sky greeted us as we docked. The Port of New York. Another big city.

My self-indulgent pursuit of pleasure partially over.

Military life over.

Civilian life: never the same.

REVIEW: Edith Stein

by S.M. Beck

Imagine...as the lights go down, you settle back comfortably in your seat. The audience around you is hushed as the play begins. On a stark stage, a man with a briefcase is calling on a nun. From the first moment, it is obvious that this play is special.

‘Edith Stein’ by Arthur Giron broke all box office records in the history of Pittsburgh Public Theatre. Watching the play unfold at Rochester's GeVa Theatre, it is easily understandable. The play has tremendous power...and the inner conflicts of Stein as well as the turbulence of Nazi Germany are brilliantly presented.

Theresa McElwae did a stunning job in the portrayal of the Jewess during World War II who, in her search for inner peace, turns to Catholicism and the life of the convent. “Stein had strength, courage, and spirit. Along with many others of Hitler's victims, she died at Auschwitz. The Catholic Church is in the process of conferring sainthood upon her.

It is not a particularly religious play. It is more a story of conflict and strengths, growing in spirit and love, despite all odds, and shows the indomitable human spirit.

The cast was uniformly superb, with exceptional performances from each. It was the kind of play that stays with one for a long, long time. Another winner from GeVa.

We hope that ‘Edith Stein’ will be presented in the area again soon.

Home for the next eleven years.