NE 3 | S Pro-Choice Clergy Group Formed

Displaced Homemakers

Myrna F. Young met with Congressional staff in Washington, D.C. recently to discuss critical issues facing displaced homemakers. Vocational education and job training were at the top of the agenda during the talks.

Myrna F. Young, Executive Director of Everywoman Opportunity Center, Inc. in Western New York, was in Washington attending a meeting of the Board of Directors of the Displaced Homemakers Network in her capacity as National Board Member. The Network is a national organization which represents the interests of women who had been homemakers and now, through death, divorce, or disability of a spouse, must move into the paid labor market.

At its meeting, the Network's governing body called for more money to help displaced homemakers and single parents obtain needed vocational education and important support services such as child care. The Network also voiced their concerns that the nation's job training system needs to be made more accessible to displaced homemakers.

Meeting with staff members from key House and Senate Committees, Young and others asked for stronger provisions in the Carl Perkins Vocational Education Act of 1984, to give women better access to vocational education. Young said, "Displaced homemakers and single parents have benefited greatly from the special programs created for them with money from the Perkins Act. Here in Buffalo, New York, programs supported by these funds serve over 1,000 women every year. The special funds set aside for these women must not only be maintained, but increased."

Young also called for improvements in the Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA) to make it more accessible to displaced homemakers. "JTPA is the single largest source of job training assistance in America," Young said. "Yet, this important resource remains largely inaccessible to the women we serve. Now is the time to give displaced homemakers the opportunities they need to make it on their own with quality training for a job with a future." Young also voiced the concern that the federal minimum wage must be raised substantially if entry-level workers are to achieve economic self-sufficiency. According to Young, nearly two-thirds of all minimum-wage workers are women. "If these women are to be able to support themselves and their families, they must be guaranteed a fair day's pay for a fair day's work," said Young.

The Displaced Homemaker Program of Western New York is one of more than 1,000 local programs nationwide offering help to women making the transition from homemaker to breadwinner. For more information on local services, call 847-1120 or 847-8850.

The Buffalo News reported December 17 that a dozen local religious leaders have formed a chapter of the Religious Coalition for Abortion Rights. The group wants to "demonstrate that all clergy are not anti-abortion," said the Rev. Jack Allen of Pilgrim St. Luke's United Church of Christ.

The new coalition wants to let the public know that the Western New York Clergy Council on Rescues, a group of mostly fundamentalist preachers, does not represent the opinions of all clergy in this area. "I did not want Project Rescue to be the only voice," added the Rev. Cynthia Crowell of the North Presbyterian Church in Amherst. "We are pro-choice, and we want people to know."

In the wake of last month's targeted picketing of Jewish doctors in Amherst, Project Rescue imported Orthodox Rabbi Yehuda Levin from Brooklyn to endorse their viewpoint. He stated that abortion is forbidden under traditional Jewish law. Two local Rabbis who have joined the Religious Coalition for Abortion disagree. Rabbi Steven Mason of Temple Beth Am and Rabbi Douglas Kohn of Temple Beth Zion oppose Levin's views and support reproductive freedom.

Other group members include: Rev. Richard P. Poethig, Rev. Donald Armstrong, Rev. Beryl T. Choi, Rev. Robert Beck, Rev. Daniel Budd, Charles Digaudio, and Carolyn Jennings.

The first meeting of the Religious Coalition for Abortion Rights will be held 7:30 p.m., January 17 at the Westminster Presbyterian Church, 724 Delaware Avenue.

Area Campuses

Erie Community College

The E.C.C. Women's Center officially opened during the Fall Semester of 1988. It is the culmination of plans begun by a dedicated committee proposing a Women's Center in June 1981. At that time, plans included an external funding source, which the college was unable to secure to support a women's center; thus, the proposal lay fallow until a member of the E.C.C. Board of Trustees, Sharon West, rediscovered and reactivated the Women's Center plan. Encouraged by this revived interest, the work towards a Women's Center began anew, with E.C.C. professor Jimmie Canfield chairing the newly-reconstructed Women's Center Steering Committee as the Fall Semester, 1987, started. Today, the Women's Center of Erie Community College is a reality.

The Women's Center is a multi-program resource center for women students, faculty, and staff. It is located on the lower level at E.C.C.'s City Campus, Room G-01.

The Central Office is open weekdays from 9 am to 1 pm and the outer lounge/reception area is always open, providing brochures and other reading material free of charge.

The Women's Center provides educational activities, including workshops, rap sessions, and brown-bag seminars offering instruction, advice, and support on topics of vital concern to women. Some recent themes have been Women's Journals, Sexual Assault, and Women and Anger. Information and Referral Services can also be provided to help women make better use of services in and outside of the college, providing shortcuts to agencies that best meet women's needs.

The phone number is 842-2770.

COMMON GROUND PAGE 3