Female Suicide:

by Dr. B. Joyce Stephens

For the past four years I have  
been studying the social and psych-  
ological dynamics involved in suicide  
attempting by females. The focus  
on women was justified by the fact  
that suicide attempts are primarily  
made by females (two out of three).  
I have collected case histories of  
fifty women, ranging in age from  
eighteen to sixty-three, in western  
New York, who have made either sin-  
gle or multiple attempts at self-  
destruction.

The data include interviews with  
the women, their therapists, diaries,  
letters and written accounts by the  
subjects. Additionally, I attended  
weekly group meetings in which the  
women attempted to make sense out  
of their suicidal acts and provide  
support to each other.

My initial dissatisfaction with  
the prevailing theories of female  
suicide attempting, i.e., women who  
attempt suicide are emotionally  
immature, dependent personalities  
who make half-hearted gestures at  
self-destruction whose real function  
is to control and manipulate others,  
has increased severalfold. The  
suicide literature contains such  
terms as “pseudocide" and "parasui-  
cide" and one receives the impression  
that these botched jobs are another  
instance of female ineptitude and  
duplicity. I consider such "explan-  
ations" particularly unhelpful forms  
of name calling and have wanted to  
identify the patterns and types of  
relationships which are implicated  
in women's suicidal careers.

To acknowledge that suicidal  
women are immeshed in conflict-  
ridden relationships to which the  
suicide attempt is a partial response  
is insufficient; we must know the  
specific forms these conflicts take  
and their course over time. The  
image of hysterical females trying  
to scare their families and husbands  
into paying attention to them by  
swallowing bottles of tranquilizers  
is a misogynist stereotype rather  
than a scientific explanation. It  
is also a culturally promoted image  
which, like so many others, trivial-  
izes women and their behavior.

The general pattern that is  
emerging from my study is one of  
individuals whose social and psych-  
ological experiences have prepared  
them to be victims—victims of their  
parents, victims of their boyfriends  
and husbands, victims of society,  

a society in which to be female is  
to never know who you are. Their  
self-denigrating experiences begin  
early in life, continue in their  
adulthood, are relentless and self-  
perpetuating. Not surprisingly,  
they develop fragile egos barely  
able to withstand the constant  
assaults and multiple stresses they  
encounter.

For these women, their careers  
in self-destruction began early  
within family systems that genera-  

ted fear and unhappiness as a "nor-  
mal" condition of childhood. Many  
of them were physically and/or  
sexually abused by other family  
members, a quarter of them had  
alcoholic parents, none of them  
grew up in homes which they could  
describe as nurturing or loving.  
Their home environments provided  
fertile ground for the development  
of chronic feelings of inadequacy  
and futility. From these patholo-  
gical family systems they learned  
that relationships are full of  
hurt and betrayal.

They frequently told me that they  
are "bad" and wish to be “normal"  
(good). As children, they became  
convinced that they were different  
than other children. Even though  
they now understand at least in part  
that they were the victims of their  
parents, they hold on to the idea  
that they were in some way respon-  
sible for their families' troubles.  
Their desires to become "normal" are  
tragic echoes of childhoods charac-  
terized by disorganization and ne-  
glect. For them, the failures of  
their parents have remained real  
and potent forces in their slide  
into depression and eventually overt  
suicidal behaviors. As children,  

they were unloved, neglected, beaten,  

sexually abused, and made to feel  
worthless. They responded with  
feelings of rage, guilt, and despair.

During their adolescence, they  
adopted desperate strategies for  
psychological survival. Two quite  
different strategies were used but  
both failed ultimately to ward off  
the assaults on their self-esteem.  
One strategy—"Humble Pie"—was a  
retreat into passivity; exaggerated  
docility, and the submergence of  
one's own needs to the needs of  
others. Martyrs to their families,  
they carried the burden of guilt and  
continue to be unable to release  
themselves. Examples of this in-  
clude those women who blame themselves  
for their parents’ alcoholism and  
women who, even now, insist that their  
parents sexually abused their children  
because they "just needed love and  
understanding." The women who made  
use of this strategy were more likely  
to make several suicide attempts  
and to use more violent methods,  
e.g., knives.

The second group—"Cheap Thrills"—  
rebelled against the hateful  
environments they had grown up in  
and acted out in various ways their  
anger and despair. As adolescents,  
they became involved in a series of  
brief sexual liaisons, with teenage  
pregnancy as a frequent consequence,  
dumped drugs into their bodies, and  
generally made trouble for everyone.  
Unfortunately, their efforts to  
break out of the victim role failed  
as they did not generate self-esteem,  
but merely provided more victimizing  
experiences.

As adults, their relationships  
with others continue the pattern  
of emotional impoverishment and  
self-negation. Nowhere is this more  

COMMON GROUND

apparent than in their relationship  
with men. It is undeniable that  
they are involved in relationships  
which are unhappy, even pathological,  
in which the women continue to live  
out the role of victim. Their rela-  
tionships with husbands, boyfriends  
and lovers are a litany of abuse and  
emotional barrenness. They are  
beaten and brutalized (twenty-six  
percent were in battering relation-  
ships), suffer sexual betrayal, and  
are frequently abandoned by their  
spouses. Their adult relationships  
with men reinforce their pronounced  
feelings of worthlessness and hope-  
lessness.

The final stage, when they become  
overtly suicidal, is the culmination  
of all that has come before. As  
one woman expressed it: “All my  
life I've felt like nothing, nothing,  
just nothing." Her words are a sym-  
bol of the suicidal progress in  
women—women who have learned from  
their lives and their relationships  
that they are nothing, just nothing.

Finally, I do not see the suicide  
attempting behaviors of women de-  
creasing in the near future because  
I do not see the cultural forces  
which socialize women into victim  
roles undergoing either radical or  
rapid change. However, while it  
may not be possible to effect the  
far-reaching structural changes  
necessary to change this society  
into something other than a woman-  
hating society; it is possible for  
us to change ourselves. It is time  
we refused to be victims. It is  
time that we walked out on abusive  
relationships without looking back.  
It is time that we found out who we  
are.

References:

Stephens, B. Joyce. "Cheap Thrills  
and Humble Pie: The Adolescence of  
Female Suicide Attempters" Paper  
presented at the annual meeting of  
the American Association of Suicid-  
ology; Toronto, April, 1985.

Stephens, B. Joyce. "Suicidal Women  
and Their Relationships With Husbands,  
Boyfriends, and Lovers" SUICIDE  

AND LIFE-THREATENING BEHAVIOR: 15,  
1985, pp. 77-89.

Stephens, B. Joyce. "Suicidal Women  
and Their Relationships with Their  
Parents" OMEGA, JOURNAL OF DEATH  
AND DYING: forthcoming issue.

Dr. B. Joyce Stephens received an  
M.A. (Sociology) from the University  
of Hawaii and a Ph.D. (Sociology)  
from Wayne State University. She  
served in the Peace Corps for two  
years in Brazil with her husband.

She taught for three years at the  
University of Queensland in Australia.  
Currently she is an Associate Pro-  
fessor of Sociology at SUNY, Fredonia  
and lives near Lake Erie with her  
husband and Burmese cat.

SEPTEMBER 1985 PAGE 7