Review

“WHEN SHE SAYS NO”

by Sharon Przepasniak

For those of us desiring a respite  
from cabin fever these past cold weeks,  
some provocative made-for-TV movies  
have enabled us to temporarily forget  
the relatively insignificant state of  
our winter. ABC's "Something About  
Amelia," as most of us already know,  
openly and powerfully dealt with the  
crime of incest, and "The Sky's No  
Limit" (CBS) was a fictional account  
of the first American women astronauts.

However, "When She Says No" (Mon-  
day, January 30, ABC) was of particu-  
lar interest to all women (and  
especially feminists, I would think)  
because it not only dealt with the  
very urgent problem of rape, but this  
rape was also intertwined with  
several other issues that touch women's  
lives.

Rose Michaels, a 30-year-old  
college professor (played by Kath-  
leen Quinlan), was attending an  
out-of-town anthropological conven-  
tion. After a few glasses of wine at  
an evening party, Rose flirts with  
two other professors from her depart-  
ment (one of whom she has previously  
and secretly liked), and then soon  
invites a third colleague to join  
them in a walk.

Her usual rigid and professional  
demeanor; her flirting turns into a  
romp during which she rips her even-  
ing dress on a tree and then gets it  
wet in a nearby stream. The men,  

who by their facial expressions  
already seem to have sex on their  
minds, implore her to change into  
something dry! At the door of her  
hotel room, she at first asks them to  
wait outside, but when they cheerfully  
yet insistently prod, she relents and  
invites them in.

Only after she realizes what they  
all want does she feel real panic,  
fear and revulsion. One by one,  
they each have sex with her; she has  
never consented, and she seems power-  
less to prevent them.

For me, this movie not only promp-  
ted me to again consider the crime  
of rape, it also compelled me to come  
to grips with the meaning of flirta-  
tion. From an early age, we are  
taught, both directly and indirectly,  
that flirting is both an acceptable  
and an effective way to attract the  
attention of men. I am only a few  
years older than this character, and  
I, too, learned well the flirtatious  
techniques shown to me by such diverse  

PAGE 12 COMMON GROUND MARCH 1984

and dubious role models as Scarlett  
O'Hara, Gidget, Annette, Marilyn  
Monroe and even Barbie.

And this movie forces us to ask:  
Is flirting an automatic invitation  
to sex? Should women who are perhaps  
unable to become acquainted with men  
in other ways be punished because  
this is the only way that they were  
socialized to act around men?

Another important issue raised in  
this movie was female subservience  
to men. Divorced Rose Michaels lived  
with her father, a city bus driver,  
who embodied most of the stereotypical  
values and traits that we would expect  
from a middle-aged blue-collar male  
character.

He loved Rose and could relate to  
her as long as she remained faithful  
to her female role. She cooked for  
him, brought him beers during foot-  

ball games on TV, even took his shoes  
off when he came home from work.

But when she continued to pursue the  
rape charges, her father (who had  
earlier asked her in anger, "Why  
couldn't you stay married the way  
you're supposed to?") ordered her  

to move out of his house.

Professor Blankford, one of the  
three men who raped her, had years  
earlier been her thesis advisor and  
now was a superior in her department.  
So, not only did he have a dominant  
role in their professional lives,  
he was also characterized to appear  
commanding: he was 50-ish (clearly  
the oldest of the three men),  
bearded, spoke formally with an aloof  
British accent, and always referred  
to Rose as a "girl."

During the scenario described,  
Blankford was the one who actually  
initiated the rapes by ordering Rose  
to disrobe and then to "unbutton my  
shirt." Rose seemed unable to dis-  
obey; it was easy to recognize the  
clear parallel between her passivity  
with her father and her submission  
to these men. In her court testimony  
at the end of the movie, Rose her-  
self acknowledged, "All my life I've  
done what men have told me to...  

I've always been afraid. What would  
happen if I didn't obey?"

"When She Says No" also deals  
with the theme of friendship between  
women. This theme seems to have  
become a trend of sorts (which began  
in the 70s with such movies as Julia),  
perhaps because, as Jeff Simon of  
The Buffalo News recently observed,  
"...networks try to program as much  
as possible for women ages 18-49 [be-  
cause they are] the crucial demo-  

graphic group, the audience of choice  
for most advertisers."

Whatever the reason, women do need  
the friendship and support of other  
women just as much (if not more) than  
men need their buddies and pals. Rose  
Michaels seemed not to have such a  
female support system; this is most  
likely why she turned to her ex-hus-  
band when she felt the desire to  
talk to someone (a mistake, since  
she did not get the needed support).  
Her need for attention and compan-  
ionship was directed at men. Perhaps  

if she had had some close women friends,  

her need for attention and flattery  
would not have been so compelling.

When she first reports the rape,  
she meets a lawyer named Nora (played  
by Jane Alexander), who encourages  
her to press charges. And when Rose  
later has second thoughts about doing  
this, it is Nora who gives her the  
strength to continue. After leaving  
her father's house, Rose even goes  
to stay with Nora and her husband,  
where, incidentally, she experiences  
for the first time a household in  
which the wife is not the servant.

So without Nora's trust and friend-  
ship, Rose might well have given up  
the case early on.

The movie ends, with Rose's testi-  
mony in court and we never learn the  
outcome of the trial. This unresolved  
ending raised some pressing questions.  
Can a woman be faulted for not saying  
"No" vehemently enough, despite the  
fact that she was socialized to be  
feminine and passive? Does the look  
of terror on a woman's face, and  

the feelings of disgust in her heart,  
count for any less than a struggle  

or a scream for help?

Although some viewers (myself  
included) may have been disappointed  
with the ending, this movie certainly  
had much more substance and conse-  
quence than "The Most Beautiful Girl  
in the World" competition that ran  
opposite it on another channel.