The Collective Meets...

We had so much material for this  
issue of Common Ground, that we have  
chosen to present part of it in a four  
column format. Although the print is  
much smaller, we get an "extra page"  
of space for each four column page  
we do, allowing us to give you  
more to read without raising the cost  
of printing. We will probably re-  
adjust the print size over the summer  
to make it a little larger, but  
would also like your reactions to the  
four column pages. Do you find them  
attractive? Are they easy enough to  
read? Do you mind a compromise be-  
tween print size and more information?

The collective is seeking new mem-  

bers. June 26, at 2:00 p.m., in Rock-  
well Hall, second floor room 226,  

we will be having a new member meeting  
where you can come and check us out.  
Even if you are not a "joiner", there  
are ways you can learn and participate  
with us---we are always looking for  
fresh faces and energy, in any capacity  
you feel comfortable with. If you  

have always wanted to meet the folks  
who put this paper together, please  

come on the 26th. We'd love to see  
you there!

Common Ground would like to double  
the number of our subscribers by  
November. We have to increase our  
readership base, both to keep a cash  
flow during "dry" months, and to  
encourage businesses to advertise.  
Remember: mention CG when you do  
business with one of our advertisers.  
They like to know that their ad is  
working!

We are planning for our first  
birthday party in September [and for  
many more after that], and hope that  
you will give us encouragement by  
renewing your subscription, asking  
others to subscribe, asking your library  
to carry CG, asking your group or  
organization to subscribe, and by  
dropping us a line, giving us your  
criticism of the job we are doing.  
Without your direction we cannot claim  
to be a “reader-responsive" paper,  
and we want to be.

Common Ground is available at Hertel  
News, Emma, Talking Leaves, The Book  
Revue, Buffalo Book Store, Latin Gal-  
lery, SUCB Book Store, UB Book Store,  
Sunshine's Supermarket, Everything in  
Fabrics, WNY Peace Center, Planned  
Parenthood of Niagara County, Aquarian  
Book Store, Marrakesh, Screen Sister,  
Jenny's Beauty Shop, Southtown's Wo-  
men's Resource Center,

Are you a woman  
in business?  
Advertise with  
COMMON GROUND

PAGE 2 COMMON GROUND = JUNE 1983

June 1983

Area Nurses Support Strike  
Self Protection: Using your head  
to protect your body

Contents/Policy/Collective Meets  
News  
Nyu Li Tao: Way of Women's  
Strength  
Facts About Self Defense  
Self Defense Tips  
Practical Suggestions to Prevent  
or Avoid Attack  
Myths and Facts about Rape  
Nurses on Strike - Contract Issues  
Family on Strike  
Women and Unions  
Women and Unions cont'd  
Cassandra: Radical Feminist Nurses  
Institutionalized Abuse of the  
Elderly  
Woman Battering  
Battered Women Project: Advocacy  
and Intervention  
Calendar  
Book Review-- Getting Free: A Hand-  
book for Women in Abusive  
Relationships.  
"Alternative Woman"  
Woman Battering cont'd  
"Alternative Woman"  
Community Speak Out  
Agent Orange: A Woman's Issue  
Simple Gifts Needs You  
EMMA Is.../ Astrological Forecast  
Rights of Crime Victims  
Women's Resource Directory  
Gay Pride Fest Info  
Announcements  
Brother/Sister Abuse  
Ads:  
Ads  
Back page

Common Ground is looking for  
material for future issues, and we  
want to invite you and your friends  
to write, report events, cover news  
stories, conferences, review books  
and the arts etc. We are looking  
for informative articles and per-  
sonal points of view.

No specific ideas? Let us know,  
we might have something for you.

-September's topic: Education.  
Deadline for material Aug. 1.  
-October's topic: Volunteerism  
and Political Action  
Deadline for material Sept. 1.

Particular thanks this month go  
to Karen Kolkedy, who did extensive  
research for articles on “Women and  
Unions" and issues related to the  
Nurse's Strike.

“CONTENTS”

POLICY

PHILOSOPHY — Common Ground is potentially, with  
help from Western New York women, a forum: to  
celebrate the rich diversity of our community. We view  
the paper as a ribbon that may connect our  
commonalities, our intersection points. We are inviting  
you to participate actively in the building of a support  
system for WNY women. We affirm our commitment to  
enhance the lives of women on physical, educational,  
spiritual, psychological, social and economic levels. We  
want to present, fair-mindedly, the issues that concern  
women, and information of value to women. We offer  
Common Ground as a place where women can display  
their art and personal literature, and review the  
tapestries of their experiences.

EDITORIAL POLICY — Common Ground is especially  
looking for articles which address the needs and  
interests of local women.

1. Common Ground is a publication of news, culture  
and dialogue from women’s perspectives.

2. News, Opinion, Analysis and Commentary will each  
be clearly labeled as such.

3. We are seeking to provide accurate, straightforward  
information of value to women.

4. The collective will not intentionally print or support  
materials or viewpoints which will harm women  
because of color, sexuality, religious or ethnic  
background, physical disability or economic situation.

5. While opinions expressed in Common Ground are  
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the  
collective as a whole, we do accept responsibility for  
choosing what we print.

SUBMISSIONS — We welcome articles, letters,  
information and announcements of interest to women.  
Graphics, cartoons, art and photography will be  
gratefully received. We especially invite women who  
do not usually have access to traditional media —  
women of color, differently abled, economically or  
educationally disadvantaged, and those for whom  
English is a second language — to write. Suggested  
length of letters: 250 words. Letters must be signed to  
be printed. We will, however, respect your privacy and  
withhold your name if you request. Suggested length of  
articles, commentary, analysis: 500-750 words. Please  
type and double space your work, 40 characters across.  
If you do not have access to a typewriter, please print  
clearly. In time we hope to have a typewriter, paper,  
etc., available for those who request it. Include a  
stamped, self-addressed envelope and work and home  
phone numbers. Because we want to hear your voices,  
if your piece needs to be edited for length or clarity, we  
will call you/ask you to do it. Keep copies of your work.  
We will try to notify you within three (3) weeks if we  
intend to use your work. If we print it, we will give you  
five (5) copies of the issue in which it appears. Artwork  
should be black and white copies only, and  
title/describe your work. We will copyright the entire  
issue, but the copyright on each piece reverts to the  
author/artist, that she may decide where her work is  
printed. Please request a style-sheet for further  
information and guidelines if you want to write.

COMMON GROUND  
Women’s Studies Academy  
Rockwell Hall  
Buffalo State College  
1300 Elmwood Avenue  
Buffalo, New York 14222  
(716) 688-7831 (9 a.m.-7 p.m.)

©1983 WNY Women’s Newsjournal

WOMEN WHO WORKED ON THIS ISSUE:  
Diane, Laura, Sue, Esther, Bonnie,  
Heather, Maria, Sarah, Beth, Chris,  
Gerri, Linda, Karen P., Karen K.,  
Barb, Marilyn, Holly, Cathy, Donna,  

Roberta, Lisa, Julie, Joan, Sharon,  
Shukriyyah, Peggy, Frigid, Bridget,  
Mouse, Diane P., Cherin, Betty, Nancy,  
Marie, and special thanks to the  
women at Nurses United.