WITCHY SUMMER READING

by Silversmith

For many of us the summer months
are a time to catch up on reading
we've been intending to do. There
are so many good works for women
interested in, or already into,
witchcraft that I can only scratch
the surface of books you might want
to consider...

If you're looking for basic in-
formation and more depth than space
permitted in last month's column on
what feminist witchcraft is all about:
Drawing Down the Moon by Margot Adler
includes a wonderful chapter on "Wo-
men, Feminism and the Craft." The
subtitle of Adler's book, Witches,

Druids, Goddess Worshippers and Other
Pagans in America Today clearly iden-
tifies the remaining material. This
is a book which will help tie it all
together -- the historical roots and
various craft traditions in the U.S.
This work is well researched and well
written. Naomi Goldenberg's Changing

lent summary of feminist witchcraft.
Again it is only one chapter, but is
part of an intriguing work on the
end of patriarchal religion. Dream-
ing the Dark by Starhawk takes the
reader to a deeper understanding of
the craft and deals with much heavi-
er issues than merely explaining and
defining feminist witchcraft.
Moving slightly from what femi-
nist witchcraft is to what witches
do and how to do it: Z. Budapest
clearly explains feminist witch-
craft, holidays, rituals, elementary
magic, tarot and much more in a light
and witty way in The Holy Book of
Women's Mysteries, volumes 1 and 2.
These may be the classics of the
feminist, Dianic, craft. Starhawk's
first book, Spiral Dance, covers much
of the same material in a more philo-
sophical and less woman-identified
way. She includes a variety of ex-
ercises to develop one's psychic
abilities, beginning with some simple
basics and moving on to more involved
work. Marion Weinstein in Positive
Magic and Earth Magic is more in line
with traditional craft work. The for-
mer is the more inclusive book with
specific sections on the Tarot,
Astrology, I Ching, etc. Two authors
who don't specifically categorize
their work as part of the craft, but
give ways to develop psychic abili-
ties and to work with meditation and
creative visualization (certainly
part of the craft) are Diane Marie-
child in Mother Wit and Hallie Igle-
hart in Woman Spirit: A Guide to Wo-
men's Wisdom. In my mind there is no
question that Mariechild has written
the better book. Iglehart's is newer
and I was disappointed in the rather

surface treatment given much of the
material. Mariechild's work has a
depth and vision. The reader will
even find a chapter on doing rituals

with children.
In another direction, if this sum-

mer is your time to discover the many
and varied Goddesses of our mytho-
herstory some fine references are
available: Lost Goddesses of Early
Greece by Spretnak is a feminist re-
capturing of some familiar stories.
Short, inspiring, well written and
with beautiful illustrations. If you
remember Greek mythology at all these
Goddesses probably are old friends.
Moving into less familiar areas and
cultures, Merline Stone's Ancient

Mirrors of Womanhood, volumes 1 and 2,

recount in prose and poetry the stor-
ies of Goddesses from all parts of the
world. Both volumes are organized by
geographic areas making it easy to
find those which may be closest to
your own herstory or to discover the
less familiar ones. Monaghen's

Goddesses and Heroines, a large work which in-

cludes most every culture and time
period imaginable. Her approach is

more direct and less literary than
Stone or Spretnak, but material in-
cludes dates of festivals, symbolism,
etc. Newest in this genre is Barbara
Walker's Women's Encyclopedia of Myths and Secrets. This is an enor-
mous book and includes references to

an almost unbelievable number of
sources from which Walker drew her
material. It is far more than God-
desses. Extensive as the book is I
occasionally look for something
which is not there and feel a dis-
proportionate sense of frustration.
It includes so much it is easy to
expect it all to be there. Both
Walker and Monaghen have organized
their works alphabetically. They
are easy to use if you know what
you want to look up but there is no
cross-referencing. If you want Celt-
ic Goddesses, for example, you'll
have to read the whole thing to find
them all.

Another minor, but irritating,
problem with all of these books about
Goddesses is that there is no pro-
nunciation guide in any of them. We
may do fairly well with the Goddesses
of the mythologies we learned in
school but I for one would love to
be able to discuss those from Africa,
the East, Mexico, Central and South
America. Can you pronounce "Huixtoci-
huatl" with confidence?

Among the more scholarly works on
Goddesses, two new books are of note.
Inanna by Wolkstein and Kramer is a
translation of the Sumerian stories
of the Goddess along with interpre-
tative material to help the reader
understand the symbolism. It is

beautifully done and fascinating read-
ing although one can get a bit tired
of flipping back and forth from the
poetry to the interpretative section.
Gimbutas' book Gods and Goddesses of
Old Europe has been revised and re-
issued with a new title which makes
clear the revision. It is now God-
desses and Gods of Old Europe. Like
many others, Gimbutas has recognized
the primacy of the Goddess, Her
imagery, Her worship.

If your interests are more toward
periodicals now is the time to order
back issues of Woman Spirit while you
can. Issue #40, Summer Solstice '84,
will be the last of this beautiful
magazine of poetry, informative arti-
cles, chants, art, etc. Issue #1 has
been unavailable for some time, al-
though the last I read xerox copies
of it could be ordered from the pub-
lisher along with #2 on. Another
periodical which will be missed is
Lady Unique Inclination of the Night.
The Lady, definitely a work of art,
printed on fine paper with colored
inks, ceased publication with cycle
#6. Some issues may still be avail-
able at Emma and some may still be
available from the publisher by
special order.

Perhaps summer is your time to
begin work with the tarot, or brush
up your skills. The decks and books
are too numerous to deal with in
depth here, however a few should be
noted: Motherpeace, both the name of
the deck and the book, has been
designed, in full color, with images
for women which depict women of a
variety of races and cultures. The
problem with these beautiful cards
is their size and shape -- round,
and difficult to handle. The ac-
companying book, with full color
plates of many of the cards, is a
wonderful addition to any library.
The authors have not only given use-
ful information for reading the cards
but have provided in-depth background
information which makes for fasci-
nating reading even if one does not
own or use the Motherpeace deck. For
beginners interested in tarot Fair-
child's Choice Centered Tarot would
be most helpful. She covers things
to look for in choosing your deck as
well as an excellent introduction to
reading the cards which is not tied
to a specific deck.

Finally, if it's fiction you want,
Mists of Avalon is now available in
paperback. In case you missed the
review of Mists in an earlier issue
of CG, you know this plot from the
male perspective as the Arthurian
legend, or as Camelot. Bradley has
now given us the female perspective
through the eyes of Morgan and pre-
sented the events in the context of
the Old Religion vs the Christian-
izing of Britain. Bradley has done
an admirable job of researching
Celtic paganism and has woven a
glittering new tapestry of an old
story.

PAGE 11 COMMON GROUND JULY 1984