Review:

Hawkins, Garthwaite, Sorrels Delight Buffalo Audience

Review: GARTHWAITE, HAWKINS AND
SORRELS AT THE TRALF

On October 8, a small but en-
thusiastic crowd welcomed Terri
Garthwaite, Bobbie Louise Hawkins and
Rosalie Sorrels to the Tralfamadore
Cafe. Sunday night is not the most
fortunate time for a concert, but
there was no way I was going to miss
this one. I had seen this group per-
form in the Mary Seton Room at Klein-
hans (which Rosalie Sorrels referred
to as "that huge place") almost three
years ago. They have since returned
to Buffalo twice.

This is not a trio in the true
sense. Rather, these three women are
solo artists who perform their mater-
ial individually, treating the audi-
ence to a combination of jazz, folk
music and poetry (not an easy thing
to bring off, mind you). The trans-
ition from performer to performer was
smoothed over with a liberal sprink-
ling of humorous anecdotes.

Terry Garthwaite, formerly of the
group "Joy of Cooking", is a jazz
musician who uses her voice as an ad-
ditional instrument. An excellent
scat singer, she "doo-whaa-pah-doo'd"
her way through a variety of old jazz
standards, originals and Ella Fitz-
gerald tunes. It was difficult to
sit still as the audience joined in
with the vocal acrobatics. Garth-
waite is also an impressive jazz
guitarist, employing fancy fingerwork
and interesting sound effects. The
sexy, sinewy quality of her vocal-
izing, and her impish stage persona
make her a beguiling performer.

In contrast is Rosalie Sorrels,
a well-known interpreter of tradi-
tional and original folk music.
Rosalie always has been and always
will be a great storyteller. (One
is never quite sure if she'll ever
get around to singing the song, but
the stories are worth it). Once she
starts singing, Rosalie will moan,
wail and bellow her way into your
heart. Her voice fills up the whole
room and part of the parking lot as
well.

Along with several traditional numbers,
Sorrels performed a drugged-out version
of "My Favorite Things" that had the
audience chuckling heartily.

The last time I saw Bobbie Louise
Hawkins, she confined herself to read-
ing her gently humorous and ironic
poetry. She has since expanded her
act to include interpretations of air-
line advertising and theatrics with
real props. Hawkins’ latest discovery
is the '50s comedienne, Ruth Draper.
Her rendition of Draper's “In an Ital-
ian Church", complete with full tour-
ist costume, had the audience rolling
in the aisles. I like the way Hawkins
makes poetry understandable to the
average concert-goer. Nothing stuffy
about this lady!

My overall impression, beyond being
delightfully entertained, was the
great sense of respect and affection
for each other that these three artists
projected from the stage. Actually,
it felt more as if we were all sitting
around someone's living room having a
nice intimate little party (though
it's a pity that Rosalie Sorrels had
to ask often and loudly before being
served a glass of wine. Now, if the
party were at my house...)

I would hope that the size of the
crowd wouldn't deter Garthwaite,
Hawkins and Sorrels from returning to
Buffalo. They are certainly an act
worth seeing and experiencing. If
they do come back, I expect I'll be
the first in line.

by Susan J. Clements

BOOK REVIEW

GYN/ECOLOGY

BOOK REVIEW BY ANNIE GRIFFIN:
GYN/ECOLOGY BY MARY DALY

I wonder how many of us have read
all the books on the Greatest Hits
list of Modern Feminist Theory. I
suppose we all have different lists,
but most would include such favorites
as THE SECOND SEX, A ROOM OF ONE'S OWN,
SEXUAL POLITICS, THE FEMALE EUNUCH,
THE DIALECTICS OF SEX, SISTERHOOD IS
POWERFUL, and the works of Andrea
Dworkin and Mary Daly.

After hearing several women tell
me this spring that reading Daly's
GYN/ECOLOGY had strongly either
awakened or affirmed their commit-
ment to radical feminism, I decided
to postpone my long-intended plow
through THE SECOND SEX and have a
look.

Daly's book is a journey forward
via retrieval of a long suppressed
history of woman-hating and 'gyno-
cide'. She gives accounts of the
four centuries of witch burnings,
the Indian suttee in which the widow
is made to join her dead husband on
his funeral pyre, Chinese footbinding,
African infibulation (genital mutila-
tion), Nazi medicine, and the American
gynecological profession. The re-
peated institutionalization of tor-
ture and slaughter is shocking even
to us, living in a society of porn-
ography, rape and wife-battering.

Daly also includes what has been
recorded: how the suttee and in-
fibulation practices, both of which
are most often forced upon adoles-
cent girls, have been labelled as
‘rituals' by Western male anthro-
pologists and thus not to be criti-
cized; how European historians cite
the practice of supposed anti-christ-
ian witchcraft and gloss over the
recorded system of torture used to
extract bizarre confessions from wo-
men before their execution; and, most
immediate for us, how the practice of
gynecology was forcibly removed from
women in the 19th and 20th centuries
by men who have perpetrated 'male
practice’ on women via drugs, hyster-
ectomies and psychology.

They have tried to take our minds
and bodies away from us and Mary Daly's
book is an urgent call for women to re-
gain control.

GYN/ECOLOGY is also about the way
history is analyzed, and about critical
theory itself. Historical objectivity
is an idea created by male historians
and used to suppress information about
women. Where can there be objectivity
when each paragraph in a history book
involves literally hundreds of deci-
sions about what to include?

Men have recorded what men now in-
terpret and sell as history. Who wrote
the accounts of witch trials and burn-
ings? The men who tried and burned
them. Who writes of the brave and de-
voted Indian widows who want to be
burned alive, and the graceful Chinese
women who sway on their mutilated feet?
Men. History is men writing about men.

Mary Daly is looking for new ways
for women to write about women. She
writes:

Gynocentric writing means risking.

Since the language and style of
patriarchal writing simply cannot
contain or carry the energy of
women's exorcism and ecstasy, in
this book I invent, discover,
remember.

I recommend this book to women who
think that it is quibbling to try to
restructure a language in which man
can mean anyone and woman cannot, and
also to women who believe in a history
of Great Women, to parallel men. Wo-
men cannot discover in the libraries
of the fathers. We must reweave.

In the beginning was not the word.
In the beginning is the hearing.
Spinsters spin deeper into the
listening deep...Spinsters spin
all ways, always. Gyn/Ecology
is Un-Creation; Gyn/Ecology is
Creation.

- Annie Griffin

COMMON GROUND NOVEMBER 1983 PAGE FIVE