COMMON GROUND

Tune 1886

by Sharon Green

"I have found God in myself,
in myself,
her so dearly...

Shange

found God
and I love

have

"

‘tozake

On Saturday, April 26, 11 area
organizations sponsored a conference
entitled "The Empowerment of Women".
Held at Westminster Presbyterian
Church in Buffalo, the focus of the
conference was to combine feminism
and Christianity. The keynote
speaker was to have been Sister Mar-
jorie of the National Office
of Church Women United, and also one
of the signers of that well-known

ad in the New York Times which sup-

the

Tuite,

ported abortion as an option and
which appeared during the 1984
presidential campaign.

Even though the promise of Sister
Marjorie's presence brought out the
anti-abortion protestors on Delaware
Avenue, hepatitis prevented her
appearance, to the disappointment
of those at the conference. In her
place, she sent Terry Hamilton, a
recipient of the 1983 "Outstanding
Young Women in America" award, as
well as a long list of other accom-
plishments. Hamilton, both an
African American and a Roman Catholic,
spoke largely about the sins of

racism, sexism, classism, and homo-
phobia. Calling these ills (partic-
ularly sexism and racism) sins is

a relatively new way of looking at
things (at least in the Catholic
Church), and this viewpoint seems

to be a direct result of the Women's
Movement.

According to Hamilton, racism and

"

sexism "...have destroyed more lives
than war." She reminded us that
Jesus "...recognized women as persons,

yet churches have “...forgotten women,
gay people, the divorced, children
and the disabled." Racism is a "con-
tinuing burden" in the church, in
part because the church "merely mir-
rors society."

In order to reach out to an au-
dience that consisted primarily of
church-related women, Terry Hamilton
defined feminism as "...a way of re-
connecting us with the universe, with
God's creations." However she asser-
ted "by merely labeling ourselves
as feminists, we don't change any-
thing. We must become activists."
She feels that it is up to women to
address the ethical questions that
the white, male-dominated church
often ignores. Also, she pointed

continued on page 13

By Lynne Scribner

Women in
sports are not taken
seriously

in this country.

It is only when we accomplish a spectacular
feat that we receive any recognition.
Why does this happen? I think the
answer lies in our male-dominated

society—the same one that steers
boys into mathematics, science,
and engineering; and girls towards
home-ec and business/secretarial areas to this very day.
There is something very wrong with
our system—patriarchy to be exact.
Would this happen if women were in
leadership positions? I doubt it.
From elementary school on, I re-
member learning few real athletic
skills, certainly not the same
competitive ones the boys were be-
coming adept at. This carries on
through the years. By junior high
school the girls are given such
choices as square dancing and yoga.
Are the boys? In high school,
ping-pong, badminton, and archery
are added to the list of choices.
(Which, taken in their own right,
are perfectly enjoyable activities.)
Now that's not to say I never
played volleyball or floor hockey
(which I actually had a penchant
for at the time. Good thing it
didn't last—When's the last time

you've heard of a women's hockey
team?) Basketball, soccer, and
baseball/softball were also offered,

but, as I got older it seemed as
though it was the girls who had, in
their earlier years, been corralled
who were excelling. Which is fine except
did that leave the rest of us
trying, as adults, to "catch up"
to something we never really

There is, however, a valuable aspect of sports than just learning a skill. It's very important in this society to be competitive. To be, if not aggressive, at least assertive. I think that sports are a way to learn this behavior as children. I don't advocate teaching children to fight for the sake of a "good" fight or to believe you'll always get your way by being the most aggressive person. I do, however, think sports has a place in teaching children a sense of self, and a sense of working within a group for the good of the whole.

Society's male-dominated atti-
tudes permeate every level (in-
cluding collegiate and professional)
of sports. Where does the majority
of the money go in college sports?
To the men's teams (football,
basketball, baseball). Who gets
the new equipment, uniforms, best
practice times? The men's teams,
that's who. Even with Title IX
requiring that equal money be
allocated to both men's and women's
teams at the college level, this
imbalance continues. As far as
coverage of women's sports by
major networks and news services
(at least at the local level), it's
practically non-existent.

I can vividly remember the
Sweet Home girls' volleyball game
(the one in which they broke the
National record for most wins by
any high school team—male or fe-
male) where, for once, local (male)
sportscasters/reporters were visible.
This is positive recognition for
women in sports. We need more of
it, however. We also, I feel, need
more women in sports-related posi-
tions. Trainers, coaches, team
physicians, physical therapists—
women who are in a position to im-
plement and facilitate these pro-
grams, our programs. Men can't be
allowed to dominate the arena any
longer. Women must learn to take
charge of how our sports programs
are run. We need to speak out on
the positive aspects of women's in-
volvement in athletics. We must
reach out and touch our potential
women athletes and guide them in a
positive direction—one that will
prove productive for all women
attempting to better themselves.