Planting your herb garden deserves  
thought. The environment surrounding  
plants is most significant; soil is  
not the only consideration. Some herb  
gardeners will suggest separating per-  
ennials from annuals, because peren-  
nials may overrun empty places left  
by slow-sprouting annuals. Daphne  
is not so fastidious—eclectic is more  
like it—because she does not rely  
much on seeds to grow herbs. This  
overgrowth reminds her of seating by  
section at the Michigan Womyn's Music  
Festival: These folk do not stay in  
their places!  

Situate a main plot in sunshine—  

a southern exposure is perfect because  
it helps maximize radiant energy from  
photosynthesis (which means manufac-  
ture by light). You may need supple-  
mentary beds in and around to accommo-  
date the shade lovers, e.g., comfrey.  
There are also herbs happiest in damp  
if sunny and adequately drained lo-  

cales, e.g., anise, lady's mantle and  
mint. A few herbs prefer moist shade:  
burnet, sweet woodruff, lovage, angeli-  

ca, elecampane and, to a degree only,  
parsley, rue and sage. Of these, lov-  
age, angelica and elecampane will ap-  
preciate rich soil. Bergamot likes  
its moisture mixed with morning sun.  
(Think of it as the music festival or-  
ganizers do—creating services within  
a womyn's village.) To an extent,  
shade may be created in a sunny bed  
by letting tall plants tower over  
short ones, but over time, this is  

not an ideal solution to differing  
orientations toward sunlight—and no  
solution where moisture is required.  
Notice how sets of leaves, from node  
on the stalk of an herb, grow  
in a manner creating shade from  

one set to another. On the  
one hand, you may want to order  
plants a bit to avoid the inadvertent creation  
of shade in the main bed, because  
love of sunshine is the orientation  
of most herbs. On the other hand,  
Daphne believes that herbs really are  
not amenable to being ordered by  
others than themselves, but that we  
can facilitate their environments  
helpfully.  

Pests are no real prob-  
lem in an herb garden; most are re-  
pelled by the scent of it. Daphne  
does grow marigolds—reputed to  
repel roundworms and whitefly, and  
garlic—said to repel aphids. Farth-  
worms ventilate and mix the soil.  
You want them! Unless they encoun-  
ter a heavy stand of wormwood, bees  
will be many. If you live in the  
country, or municipal ordinance per-  
mits, and if you are not sensitive  
to bee stings, you may want to look  
into bee-keeping. Herb-based honeys  
are delicious. And, in Witches Heal  
(p. 13), Billie Potts states her be-  
lief in the healing capacity of bees—  
wax acquired near home; she uses it  
in the preparation of oils, salves  
and ointments.  

Respecting bee stings, mud or  
honey or eggs will soothe them.  
For those especially sensitive to  
bees, and still wanting to garden  
herbs, precautions are in order:  

1) Do not wear perfume or  
scented skin creams in  
the garden;  
2) Wear long pants and sleeves,  
preferably with ribbed or  
elasticized cuffs;  
3) Wear socks; wear gloves;  
4) Some suggest not wearing  
bright colors in the garden;  
5) Work early; work late; and  
avoid mid-day!  
6) Don't fuss with a plant while  
bees are visiting;  
7) Shower when you start to  
sweat.  

Plant chamomile alongside an ailing  
herb for improvement; this is not, however, a  
sure thing. Nettles in controlled  
clumps (if you can manage), borage  
(which is a great drought resister),  
strawberries (which appreciate an  
evergreen mulch such as nettles pro-  
vide), and thyme (which shuns bugs),  
are said to prosper together.  
Angelica, valerian, marjoram, sage and  
spearmint together apparently will  
heighten respective productions of  
essential, i.e., perfume oils. The  
message on sage and rue together is  

mixed and was discussed in this column,  
January, 1933. Mutual relationships  

between herbs and their desirability  
are discussed comprehensively by  
Helen Philbrick and Richard Gregg,  
Companion to Use ‘It  
(Devin-Adair 1966). The  

book covers green manures (plants that  
enrich the soil), as well as plants  
as ‘pesticides' and 'herbicides.'  

It is great action reading!  

Whether you will garden herbs  
need not be the consequence of whether  
you own land. For one possibility,  
herbs will grow on your window sill;  
the Time-Life Encyclopedia of Garden-  
ing Herbs has an excellent section to  
help you and the herbs get started  
(pp. 55-67). The city of Philadel-  
phia even has had a window box program.  
Or, talk to your landlady/landlord,  
or your employer, about the use of  
existing non-productive land for herb  
gardening. Don't overlook flat roof  
space as a possibility for herbs in  
pots or boxes or flats. Another pos-  
sibility is participation in a com-  
munity garden. Daphne saw a beauti-  
ful community garden this past summer in  
Lily Dale, a spiritualist enclave in  
Chautauqua County, New York. As  
Daphne does, one gardener had sur-  
rounded her tomato plants with mari-  
golds. Where the garden had overgrown,  
Daphne had fun picking out the peren-  
nial and strongly self-sowing herbs  
that had come back. If you lack ex-  
isting community projects and do not  
want to organize one by yourself, get  
your local Y.W.C.A. interested. Or,  
seek the assistance of a local garden  
club. Write for information to "Gar-  
dens for All, Inc.," Shelburne Farms,  
Shelburne, VT 05482—a nonprofit or-  
ganization committed to the organiza-  
tion of community gardening.  

If you are differently abled, you  
of course can garden, too. Despite  
lapses in consciousness, Damon R.  
Olszowy's Horticulture for the Dis-  
abled and Disadvantaged (Charles C.  
Thomas, 1978), may be useful in get-  
ting started; a section on herb gar-  

dening will be found at pp. 161-166.  
About two years ago, Daphne's son  
became multiply differently abled;  
we will be redoing our backyard to  
facilitate Hale's return to gardening.  
There is a growing effort to make  

horticulture accessible. And,  
increasingly, including hydroponics,  
it offers a career path for those  
differently abled.  

The size of an herb garden de-  
pends partly on available land.  
It also depends on what you want  
to grow. Are you looking for  
seasonings for food? Flavored  
herbs for teas? Scented herbs for  
potpourri? Medicinals? (Any herb  
labeled officinalis has a medicinal  

function, although medicinals are  
not limited to these herbs.) Do  
you want pretty herbs, flowering  
herbs, herbs for seeds—herbs all  
of one color, herbs for dyes, herbs  
for dried wreaths, herbs for the  
purpose of design? From the most  
functional to the least, if such be  
possible, herbs in combination can  
give you any of the above, including  
a garden focused on one herb alone  
and presenting it in variety. Adel-  
ma Grenier Simmons' Herb Gardening  
in Five Seasons (Hawthorn Books,  
1964), is a wonderful introduction  
to the possibilities here. Simmons  
also provides more information on  
growing herbs from seed than Daphne  
has.