Yes, the collective met,....

or at least a few of us did!

The January blizzard affected

us as well as all the rest of
you Western New York women.
Layout for this issue was supposed
to happen during said blizzard,
and happen it did, but contingencies
have forced us to put out

a thinner issue than is usual

for us. We are pleased to say
that calendar and announcement
pages are fairly up to date--

it seems we are all anticipating
more happenings in February, if
good weather be with us.

We also spent our blizzard
time in some policy discussions
for the paper. We have made a
commitment to do more outreach--
to solicit material from a
greater variety of groups and
individuals in the area; and
to specifically solicit more
opinion pieces, to stimulate
some pro and con discussion of
what may be some more controversial
issues than have been discussed
in this paper in the past.

Another new step is that we
are recruiting an advertising
and distribution coordinator for
Common Ground. We are looking
for a woman with an interest in
sales, with a car and time for
about 20 hours a month of work.
The pay would be a 20% commission
plus reimbursement for mileage
costs. Anyone interested should
call 881-4383 or write us care
of this paper.

We are looking forward to
March and our special issue,
"Woman Express" featuring women
in the arts in Western New York.
We will be presenting a performance
night--tentatively April 20
--featuring the women who will
be presented in this issue, so
save this date on your calendars.

We're excited! 1985 can be
a good year for Western New York
women and hopefully for Common
Ground. We hope to be seeing

more of all of you, during In-

ternational Women's Day, at our
orientation meeting for women
interested in joining or finding
out more about CG (this will

be February 8th, at 406 Vermont
Street--call 881-4383 for more
information) and all around the
town. Enjoy--and have a good
February.

MEARN LAYOUT...
|

together?... typing...layout design..
pasting up....preparing camera-ready
copy:..creating snazzy headlines...
Join the Layout Committee and learn
a wealth of new skills - if you al-
ready know how, come and teach them:

PAGE 2 COMMON GROUND FEBRUARY 1985

CONTENTS

February 1985
Volume 3, No. 6

1. MARITAL RAPE CONVICTION
REMARKS: MARY LOUISE NANNA

POLICY
COLLECTIVE MEETS

2 CONTENTS,
THE

4 ARTS, BOOK REVIEWS

5 ARTS,
WOMANSPEAK INTERVIEW

6 & 7 CALENDAR OF EVENTS
8 POTPOURRI
FRAGILE MOMENT
WOMEN ARTISTS
9 ANNOUNCEMENTS
10 - RESOURCES
11 ADVERTISING

12 SUBSCRIPTION INFORMATION

Are you a

Woman in
Business?

Advertise with
Common Ground

WOMEN WHO WORKED ON THIS ISSUE:

Diane, Heather, Gerri, Peggy, Marilyn,
Susan, Kate, Laura, Frigid, Alice, Jan,
Beth, Susan, Linda, Kay, Cathy, Joan,
Elizabeth, Charlene, Ruth, Esther,
Beth, Judith, Bonnie, Chris, and
Sharon

photos on page one by Anne Montes

POLICY

PHILOSOPHY — Common Ground is potentially, with
help from Western New York women, a forum to
celebrate the rich diversity of our Community. We view

the paper as a ribbon that may connect our
commonalities, our intersection points. We are inviting
you to participate actively in the building of a support
system for WNY women. We affirm our commitment to
enhance the lives of women on physical, educational,
spiritual, psychological, social and economic levels. We
want to present, fair-mindedly, the issues that concern
women, and information of value to women. We offer
Common Ground as a place where women can display
their art and personal literature, and review the
tapestries of their experiences.

EDITORIAL POLICY — Common Ground is especially
looking for articles which address the needs and
interests of local women.

1. Common Ground is a publication of news, culture
and dialogue from women’s perspectives.

2. News, Opinion, Analysis and Commentary will each
be clearly labeled as such.

3. We are seeking to provide accurate, straightforward
information of value to women.

4. The collective will not intentionally print or support
materials or viewpoints which will harm women
because of their views, sexuality, religious or ethnic
background, physical disability or economic situation.

5. While opinions expressed in Common Ground are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
collective as a whole, we do accept responsibility for
choosing what we print.

SUBMISSIONS — We welcome articles, letters,
information and announcements of interest to women.
Graphics, cartoons, art and photography will be
gratefully received. We especially invite women who
do not usually have access to traditional media —
women of color, differently abled, economically or
educationally disadvantaged, and those for whom
English is a second language — to write. Suggested
length of letters: 250 words. Letters must be signed to
be printed. We will, however, respect your privacy and
withhold your name if you request. Suggested length of
articles, commentary, analysis: 500-750 words. Please
type and double space your work, 40 characters across.
If you do not have access to a typewriter, please print
clearly. In time we hope to have a typewriter, paper,
etc., available for those who request it. Include a
stamped, self-addressed envelope and work and home
phone numbers. Because we want to hear your voices,
if your piece needs to be edited for length or clarity, we
will call you/ask you to do it. Keep copies of your work.
We will try to notify you within three (3) weeks if we
intend to use your work. If we print it, we will give you
five (5) copies of the issue in which it appears. Artwork
should be black and white copies only, and
title/describe your work. We will copyright the entire
issue, but the copyright on each piece reverts to the
author/artist, so that she may decide where her work is
printed. Please request a stylesheet for further
information and guidelines if you want to write.

COMMON GROUND
WNY Women’s Newsjournal
P.O. Box 313

Bidwell Station

Buffalo, New York 14222

NEW PHONE NUMBER: 881-4383.
©1984 WNY Women’s Newsjournal

ADVERTISEMENT POLICY AND RATES — See
Advertisement Section.