COMMON  
GROUND  

WESTERN NEW YORK  

@MEN'S  

Vol. VII, No. 5 Jan. 1989  

INSIDE THIS MONTH ...  
Abortion Rights  

New Biographies  

Mothers Who Smoke  

Unwanted Elderly  

Theatre and Book Reviews, News & more  
Community Calendar, Resource Directory  

$1.50 VOLUME VII, NO. 5  

JANUARY 1989  

NEWS JOURNAL  

Us, Them, Pro-Choice  
and the American Way  

Sharon Fawley  

I cannot count the number of times I was told in the  
last campaign that one candidate or another "shares our  
values.” In the puffed-up rhetoric of Campaign '88,  
values were bandied about, bargained for, and traded off  
like used cars.  

One of the things that bothers me was that if a  
candidate supports "our values," then some "they" out  
there must have different values. As I watched George  
Bush, Dan Quayle, and even our own Bill Paxon, a cold  

Who's Who in America  

Certain distinguishing characteristics separate "us"  
from "them." For one thing, God speaks directly to  
"us" in loud, clear, strong, indisputable messages. He  
tells "us" we are right. Anyone who disagrees is,  
therefore, obviously wrong.  

If God does not speak directly to me, I can know His  
will by listening to those He does speak to. They tell  
me what to do and I can do it — unquestioningly.  

God never speaks to "them." They believe they can  
figure things out for themselves. The trouble with  
"them" is that they read and study and maybe even pray  
for some kind of guidance and then they make a  
decision. Since it does not come directly from God,  
however, it is often wrong.  

One of the good things about "us" is that once we  
know God's will, any means can be used to achieve it.  
That's why it is okay for Ollie North to sell arms to  
release hostages. And it's okay if the United States had  
to do a little drug dealing to get money to make his  
scheme work.  

The thing "they" never seem to understand is that the  
United States is God's country. He smiles upon  
whatever is good for the United States and He is telling  
"us" exactly what that is.  

By now, I know I am clearly one of "them." Worse, I  
like making my own decisions. I like thinking things  
through in terms of my own beliefs and values. From  
there, I can usually come up with something that works  
for me.  

I am worried that I may be part of a dying breed. As  
Bush hedged, misrepresented, and outright lied, his  
popularity soared. Anyone who opposed him was  
sneered at as a liberal which magically became a four-  
letter word.  

The Politics of Body and Soul  

I suppose if these things stayed in politics where  
hypocrisy is the name of the game I would worry less.  
Unfortunately, in this area, the trickle-down theory  
works better than it does in economics.  

For example, all the elements of the “us” versus  
"them" dichotomy are present in the latest challenge to  
a woman's right to control her own body. God has told  

"us" that abortion is always murder. It follows, then,  
that any action that stops abortion is acceptable.  

A couple of years ago, that meant blowing up clinics.  

COMMENTARY  

This summer it meant illegal blockades around public  
clinics. It may mean doing something extreme like  
kidnapping pregnant teens, and hauling them off to  
Tennessee, and holding them until they have their  
babies. From that frame of mind, would selling the  
babies be wrong if you used the money to fight against  
other abortions?  

Like master magicians, anti-choice proponents see  

living, breathing women. When we look at their lurid  
pictures and listen to them sing hymns and chant prayers,  
it is easy to be mesmerized. But we must shake ourselves  
free and look beyond appearances.  

Finding the Forest  
Among the Trees  

Again there are clues. Although a spokeswoman is  
put on camera now and then for good public relations,  
anti-choice leaders are men. One local clinic was  
actually blockaded by forty men — all calling  
themselves reverend-something or other. At anti-choice  
blockades, the people walking around with walkie-  
talkies and megaphones are always men.  

And they are men with a mission. My pro-choice  
position was galvanized by an interview I read. The  
interviewer pointed out to an anti-choice spokesman  
that cutting government funds for abortion only  
prevented poor women from getting abortions.  

This man said, “We can control poor women. We  
can't control rich women, yet. If we could control rich  
women, we would.”  

That pretty well expresses the real concern of the anti-  
choice movement. These men hate and fear women as  
much as the Ku Klux Klan hates and fears blacks.  

What is appalling to anti-choice groups is the simple  
idea that a woman can have a life that is truly her own,  
that such a life is valuable, possibly even sacred.  

COMMON GROUND  

WNY Women's News Journal  
P.O. Box 313  

Buffalo, NY 14213  

IF YOUR ADDRESS LABEL IS CIRCLED  
IN GREEN: there is only one more issue  
of COMMON GROUND left before your  
subscription runs out! Resubscribe now  
to be sure you don't miss an issue.  

IF YOUR ADDRESS LABEL IS CIRCLED  
IN RED, this is the LAST issue of  
COMMON GROUND you will receive  
unless your subscription is renewed.  

Facing the Facts of Life  

Since Mary and the concept of a virgin birth, some  
men have been trying to find a way around the simple  
fact that it is women who bestow the gift of life. A  
man's role is very small.  

Yet, Freud wrote that he could not conceive of  
anything an infant more urgently seeks than the  
protection of the father. For such a creative man, that  
statement shows a remarkable failure of imagination —  
not to mention simple observation.  

In nature, animals stay with their mothers,  
sometimes for several years. The father may, indeed,  

stay around to provide protection, but all of us in the  

animal kingdom know that food and sustenance come from the  
mother. It is the female of all species that gives life and  
sustains it.  

I sometimes wonder what kind of religion Christianity  
might have become if this simple fact were recognized;  
if Mary had been truly recognized for giving Jesus the  
gift of life and with it, his humanity. Christianity  
might have become a religion that recognizes and  
respects all people. It might have evolved into a real  
celebration of life.  

The Female Human Being  

But it does no good to whine about what might have  
been. Mary and, with her, all other women have been  
relegated to the status of empty vessels waiting to be  
filled. As women, we must recognize that we are real  
human beings. We alone give the gift of life. We do it  
with our very bodies, from our being.  

We alone must have the right to choose if our bodies  
will be used to give life or not. We do not become less  
human the moment we conceive.  

Establishing ourselves as real people has been a  
long, hard fight and we still have not won. Yet it is  
almost universally acknowledged that the two key  
factors in our progress have been economic freedom and  
reproductive freedom. Before Roe vs. Wade, reproductive  
freedom meant only birth control. Now it also includes  
the right to choose legal, safe abortion.  

continued on p. 7  

BULK RATE  
U.S. POSTAGE  
PAID  
Buffalo, N.Y.  
Permit No. 709  

[x]  

Gayellow Pages  
Renaissance House  
Box 292, Village Sta.  

N.Y. N.Y. 10014