ABORTION RIGHTS - FROM PAGE 1

fundamental right to make the highly
personal choice whether or not to
terminate her pregnancy." This el-
evates a woman's right to choose
over the right of a state to im-
pose restrictions, and by example,
may be used to fend off other pro-
posed restrictions.

Osborne said: "New York State
is lucky—we don't have waiting
periods and restrictive consent laws,
for example. But there is always
some push in the legislature every
year for restrictive laws, or an
attempt to get rid of Medicaid fund-
ing. The court's decision will help.
We are more worried about federal
regulations that govern us because
we accept federal funding. The
reason [we feel] they are more
dangerous is that they are not laws,
and therefore not readily subject to

lobbying and legislative review."
Osborne also felt that Right-to-Life
and conservative groups will begin
grass-roots work for restrictive
regulations.

It is expected that the abortion
battle will again be taken up in
Congress, where anti-abortion amend-
ments get attached to other legis-
lation. June 8, the House defeated,
259-149, a $12 billion bill, partly
due to an amendment that would pro-
hibit federal workers' health in-
surance from paying for abortions
unless the life of the mother was
endangered, even if the pregnancy
was the result of rape or incest.

Support for the constitutional
“Human Life” amendment sponsored by
Senator Hatch will probably be the
new focus of anti-abortion activists,
as well as a bill sponsored by
Senator Helms which would prohibit
the courts from ruling on abortion,
turning all power over to the legis-
lature, thus circumventing Roe v. Wade.

-Info Buffalo News, USA Today

PAGE 2

COMMON GROUND

JULY 1983

COMMON GROUND

POLICY

PHILOSOPHY — Common Ground is potentially, with
help from Western New York women, a forum to
celebrate the rich diversity of our community. We view
the paper as a ribbon that may connect our
commonalities, our intersection points. We are inviting
you to participate actively in the building of a support
system for WNY women. We affirm our commitment to
enhance the lives of women on physical, educational,
spiritual, psychological, social and economic levels. We
want to present, fair-mindedly, the issues that concern
women, and information of value to women. We offer
Common Ground as a place where women can display
their art and personal literature, and review the
tapestries of their experiences.

EDITORIAL POLICY — Common Ground is especially
looking for articles which address the needs and
interests of local women.

1. Common Ground is a publication of news, culture
and dialogue from women’s perspectives.

2. News, Opinion, Analysis and Commentary will each
be clearly labeled as such.

3. We are seeking to provide accurate, straightforward
information of value to women.

4. The collective will not intentionally print or support
materials or viewpoints which will harm women
because of color, sexuality, religious or ethnic
background, physical disability or economic situation.

Vol. 1. No.

1 Abortion Rights
Contents, Policy
3. News, CARASA Bus cards

4 Harambee Books >

5 Update: One Woman's Business
Diary of a Budding Capitalist

6 Women Entrepreneurs Speak-Out
7 Speak-Out Cont.
8 Book Review:

New Directions
Health Hot Flashes

The New Nightingales

9 Daphne's Tree, EMMA IS...
Simple Gifts Run, Her-stories

10,11 Calendar - : 3
5. While opinions expressed in Common Ground are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
12 Nurses Strike collective as a whole, we do accept responsibility for

choosing what we print.

SUBMISSIONS — We welcome articles, letters,
information and announcements of interest to women.
Submissions are gratefully received. We especially invite women who
do not usually have access to traditional media —
women of color, differently abled, economically or
educationally disadvantaged, and those for whom
English is a second language — to write. Suggested
length of letters: 250 words. Letters must be signed to
be printed. We will, however, respect your privacy and

"Alternative Woman" - cartoon

13 AIDS info

“Alternative Woman" - cartoon

14. Poetry Corner

15 Letters, Haven House

16 Announcements

17 Women's Resource Directory withhold your name if you request. Suggested length of
An Evening With Virginia Apuzzo articles, commentary, analysis: 500-750 words. Please
Pregnancy Discrimination type and double-space your work, 40 characters across.
Speak-Out, Cont. If you do not have access to a typewriter, please print

clearly. In time we hope to have a typewriter, paper,

18,19 Ads etc., available for those who request it. Include a

stamped, self-addressed envelope and work and home
phone numbers. Because we want to hear your voices,
if your piece needs to be edited for length or clarity, we
will call you/ask you to do it. Keep copies of your work.
We will try to notify you within three (3) weeks if we
intend to use your work. If we print it, we will give you
five (5) copies of the issue in which it appears. Artwork
should be black and white copies only, and
title/describe your work. We will copyright the entire
issue, but the copyright on each piece reverts to the
author/artist, so that she may decide where her work is
printed. Please request a stylesheet for further
information and guidelines if you want to write.

COMMON GROUND
Women’s Studies Academy
Rockwell Hall
Buffalo State College
1300 Elmwood Avenue
Buffalo, New York 14222
(716) 688-7831 (9 a.m.-7 p.m.)

©1983 WNY Women’s Newsjournal

20 Back Page, Subscription Info

Are you a woman
in business?
Advertise with

Common Ground is looking for
material for future issues, and we
want to invite you and your friends
to write, report events, cover news
stories, conferences, review books
and the arts etc. We are looking
for informative articles and per-
sonal points of view.

No specific ideas? Let us know,
we might have something for you.

WOMEN WHO WORKED ON THIS ISSUE;
Diane, Laura, Sue, Esther, Bonnie,
Heather, Maria, Sarah, Beth, Chris,
Gerri, Linda, Karen, Barb, Yay,
Holly, Cathy, Donna, Roberta, Julie,
Joan, Sharon, Peggy, Frigid, Bridget,
Mouse, Diane, Cherin, Betty, Nancy,
Elaine & Wanda Wyneau.

-September's topic: Education.
Deadline for material Aug. 1.
-October's topic: Volunteerism
and Political Action
Deadline for material Sept. 1.