COMMON GROUND |

OCTOBER 1984

by Sharon Green

As I entered the crowded Convention Center for the free and open-to-the-public rally for Democratic Vice-Presidential nominee Geraldine Ferraro, electricity was clearly in the air.

In fact, I had already begun to sense it moments before on the crowded elevator in the parking ramp, when the lone male aboard verbalized how he felt outnumbered. I wanted to reply, "Now you know how we have felt all our lives!" If I had been in that elevator after the rally, it would have been quite effortless to make such a remark.

As reporters for Common Ground, Marilyn, Kate, and I were admitted to the cordoned-off press area, but with warnings to beware of the arrival of the national press people (more on that later). We attempted to stake our claim on two square feet or so of the raised platform, in order that we could both see over the heads of the crowd and also take photographs.

For the approximately 45 minutes before Ferraro's arrival, several Democrats warmed up the already vibrant crowd. Such people as toastmaster David Swarts (clerk of the County Legislature and secretary of the Democratic County Committee), South District Council Member James Keane, and Patricia A. Mead (town clerk of Hamburg; I couldn't help but wonder if she had been chosen as a token female) gave the audience a solid dose of standard Democratic rhetoric. Any special appeals to women in general—or feminists in particular—were notably omitted by all the early speakers. However, they were all eager to point out to the very receptive audience how Reaganomics has hurt not only the nation but also Western New York (to wit, the closing of Bethlehem Steel, and cutting federal block grants, to name only a few).

N.Y.S. Assemblyman Arthur O. Eve, who reminded the audience that Jesse Jackson was the first major candidate for President to promise to choose a woman as his running mate, also appealed to those present that encouraging some of the estimated 200,000 unregistered voters in Erie County alone before November could make the difference in defeating Ronald Reagan.

Then Rep. John J. LaFalce (D.-Town of Tonawanda) was quick to remind listeners that the Santa Maria Towers, a housing project for senior citizens and the handicapped on Buffalo's West Side, is not a project to be credited to President Reagan, as Reagan had made it seem when he appeared in Buffalo at its opening ceremony only two days earlier. Instead, this complex was funded under a Democratic program, one which Reagan had even tried to cut funds for, until he was overridden by the Democratic Congress.

Finally, two observations about the platform guests. As The Buffalo News and our local newscasters on Channels 2, 4, and 7 were so quick to point out, Mayor James Griffin was quite conspicuous in his complete absence during Ferraro's visit here, not only since he is a Democrat, but also because almost every other prominent Democrat in the area was in attendance. Indeed, this was even more of a slap in the face since he had been a constant companion to our Republican President during his visit only two days before.

My other observation is one that I did not see or hear reported elsewhere, and that is that the majority of the platform guests were white males, again reminding us all where the real power in politics and government lies. Yes, there were exceptions in such people as our newly-elected first Hispanic Judge Raul Figueroa, Council Member Rosemary LoTempio (who, incidentally, was roundly booed when introduced), New York Assistant Secretary of State Sheila Murphy, and Buffalo Common Council President George K. Arthur, but they were definitely a minority.

Finally, as the crowd was just beginning to sound impatient, Geraldine Ferraro arrived amid much spontaneous and exuberant applause, shouting, and sign waving. In fact, a woman whom I interviewed afterward (and who will be referred to in this article several times, but who wished to remain anonymous) was quick to point out how different this response was to the relatively calm flavor of the crowd that greeted President Reagan in Buffalo earlier that week.

As for me, I found it extremely difficult to remain cool and detached as I stood among veteran newscasters and reporters whose contact with the famous is a matter of course on their jobs. I wanted so much to join the crowd in clapping and shouting, yet I dared not. Also, the incredible rudeness of the national news people, who rushed in en masse just moments before Ferraro and pushed us around with both their bulky cameras and equipment as well as their bodies, were almost enough to put a damper on my enthusiasm. And of course, since reporters are supposed to appear non-partisan, I refrained from showing all the excitement that I was feeling.

W.N.Y. Women’s Newsjournal

turn to page 4

It's Friday, 

(It was Reagan on Wednesday.)

By Marilyn Bell

FRIDAY, SEPT. 14, p.m. We're sitting on the bench across from the Convention Center. There are some police officers standing around, school buses unloading high school bands, local radio and TV folks arriving with gear. A few people are going into the Center. (Last Friday, the D'Youville campus was already crawling with various security types, telephone lines were being installed, and rumors about Reagan's visit were flying.)

3:45 We cross to the doorway of the Convention Center, Kate with camera, I have a legal pad. We're waiting for Sharon with CG credentials so we can get into the press area. More people are headed into the Center. Local radio interviewers are asking "Why are you here?" "What do you think of Mayor Griffin not being here?" A man wearing a Democrats for Reagan cap comes along making obscene comments to a couple of women—apparently the end of a political exchange. He enters the Center. (Wednesday I was at the ropes along Fargo Street with the D'Youville contingent protesting Reagan, Secret Service—or whatever—kept walking up and down the street. They all look alike—frowning white men in either blue or grey suits, shoulder holsters showing under their jackets.)

4:00 p.m. I wander into the Convention Center and head toward the first table I see. A woman with a big smile greets me, sees my legal pad and asks if I'm covering the rally for the media or just taking notes for myself. I tell her I'm covering for Common Ground and she directs me to the press entrance. (To even enter the D'Youville parking lot on Wednesday one needed a grey ticket—other colors for other events of the day—and had to go through a metal detector. More security types searched handbags and backpacks.)

4:15 p.m. Sharon arrives and the three of us head into the Center. A glance at our CG name tags and we're directed to the risers in back reserved for press. Local TV is already set up, networks to come. Pro-Ferraro signs are being passed around. The man with the cap is somewhere up in front: I see one other man with an anti-Ferraro sign. Warm-up speeches are being given by various local Democrats. The speakers’ platform includes women, Blacks,

turn to page 4

PAGE 1 COMMON GROUND OCTOBER 1984