ANNOUNCEMENTS

Women's Studies Interdisciplinary Program at Buffalo State following every schedule:

January: Film festival "Women in Alfred Hitchcock" - Venue and time to be announced, discussion as chosen by expert, E. Trak. Librarians help you select toys for your children.

February: Film Festival "Alfred Hitchcock"  
Feb. 28, 7:30 pm, Thursdays 4:00 - 2:00 pm.  
1219 Elmwood Ave., discussion to follow. For more information, write or call:  
March: Women's Studies Month. Performance by Margaret Cusak, a participant in the Affiliate Artists Presentations. A reception will follow. Thursday, March 16, 4-6 pm at the Burchfield Center.

April: Amy Guttman - presentation on “Women in Capitalism and Democracy.” Reception to follow, time and place to be announced.

Dedication of the Kathryn Wittmore room will be held with Natural and Social Sciences. For further information on any of the events, contact Marianne, coordinator, or Debra Kane, student representative, Classroom Building 6122, 3738-6403.

The 1989 conference of the Association for Women Psychologists will be held in Rhode Island March 9-11, and has as a theme “Encouraging contributions from women with diverse circumstances including minorities and backgrounds.”

Try toys out before you invest in them. Child development and parenting books available.  
HOURS: Tuesdays 9:00 - 1:00 p.m. or call 837-9654 for details.

Lesbian and Gay Community Network - call 838-1314 for details. 

The Lesbian Group is the club of the Valley. The fee covers activities for disabled, mental health consumers. For info write or call for a free newsletter or more information to Kathryn Quina, Dept. of Psychology, University of Rhode Island, Kingston, RI 02881, 401-277-3832.

The Ladies Recreation Group is open looking for short stories, novels, and full-length information. Call the Gay Alliance of the Valley at 244-5860 for membership forms.

A series by and about women to be published by Crossing Press to help fill gaps in current women's literature. Deadline for first anthology is January 1989. Send query for specific guidelines to Susanna J. Sturgis, SF Anthology, P.O. Box 39, West Tisbury, MA 02575.

The YWCA of Buffalo and Erie County provides after-school programs in the following Buffalo Public Schools: Academic Challenge (#6), Campus (#63), Science Magnet (#59), Poplar Street Academy (#11), Southside (#93), School #45, and at the Downtown YWCA, 190 Franklin Street.

The program is designed as a service to working parents who are in need of child care during after-school hours. The programs are staffed by qualified coordinators and aides who are experienced in child care and activities. Parents will be responsible for completing forms to transport children to the appropriate school. Children must be picked up at the program site; they will not be bused home from the YWCA program.

The YWCA Extended Day Programs are state licensed. Funding is available for families through the Erie County Department of Social Services. Costs, services, and funding information forms can be obtained by calling the YWCA at 852-6120.

Womanfocus is a prevention program designed to address the special stresses that impact women's lives. Their summer workshop calendar includes a number of offerings on Assertiveness, Self-Esteem, Journal Writing, Anger, and Women & Food, which are listed in the calendar. Pre-registration and pre-payment are essential. Registration is on a first-come, first-served basis. To pre-register, call Womanfocus at 884-3256. For fees see individual workshops. Medicaid recipients $5. Women 60 and over, 20% discount. For fee adjustment, speak to a counselor. No one is turned away because of inability to pay.

Tune in Sundays from 4:30-5:00 pm. This half-hour weekly program addresses issues of interest to women, giving voice to the female perspective and providing a forum for women's voices and concerns. Producer is Behi Henderson. Production assistants are Rebecca Fleming, Susan Gross, Gail Sutton, and Howard Granat.

A support group for Lesbian and Gay adult children of alcoholic and dysfunctional families meets every other Wednesday. For further information call 881-5630 or 836-4738.

Help is available for Displaced Homemakers. Divorced, widowed, separated, and other displaced homemakers can receive assistance in their job search via a variety of services offered by Everywoman's Displaced Homemaker Program. Marketable job skills can be learned tuition-free for those who qualify.

Counselors can help participants market their abilities in such a way as to make their job search a successful one, all done in a positive, self-confidence building atmosphere. For more information and a free brochure call this New York State Department of Labor funded program at 837-2260. There is no fee.

For approximately fifteen years, International Women's Day has been celebrated in the Buffalo area. This year's event is being jointly sponsored by the W.N.Y. International Women's Day Coalition and the U.S. chapter of the National Women's Studies Association. The theme of the Conference is Women, Work, and Social Change, and it will be held at Buffalo State University College, 1300 Elmwood Ave., March 10-11. Anyone wanting to help with the conference or volunteering to house guests, please call Berni at 1-433-3042.

A support group for adult women (over 18) who have been sexually assaulted is held every Thursday night at Crisis Services. The group will offer a safe, confidential setting for you to talk with others who have had a similar experience. There is no registration and no charge. 7-8:30 pm, Crisis Services, 3258 Main St., Buffalo. Call 834-3131, the Advocate Program Mon.-Fri. 9-5 for more information.

One To One, the support group for single mothers and single mothers-to-be, holds regular monthly meetings at the Amherst Lutheran Church, 5125 Main Street at Lafayette Boulevard in Williamsville. It welcomes all single and single expectant mothers regardless of age, race, religion, or economic situation who feel that they would benefit from sharing emotional support and parenting information with others who understand their unique needs and concerns. A $2 per meeting contribution to cover the cost of materials and refreshments is requested. For further information, contact group coordinator Cheryl Dorrenbacher, 141 Henderson Ave., Kenmore, N.Y. 14217, 874-1018.

Call Susan Clements at 882-2420.

JANUARY 1989

COMMON GROUND

Buffalo/Niagara Chapter of Parents and Friends of Lesbians and Gays will meet on the third Sunday of every month at Westminster Presbyterian Church, Delaware Ave. (use kitchen entrance at rear of building) at 2 pm. Parents and Friends of Lesbians and Gays is an all-volunteer parents and family support group for those who have lesbian and gay family members. The group meets monthly, publishes a newsletter, and maintains a hotline. For more information call 827-8833.

Thousands of women have learned to take better care of their health through the Breast Wellness Program, a free and educational program of the Breast Screening Center of Western New York. Trained and certified educators discuss breast anatomy and physiology, diagnostic breast imaging techniques, and instruction of Breast Self-Examination. If you would like the Breast Wellness Program to be presented to your organization or community group, please call Madeline Poe at the Center, 838-1300.

Hester Thrale's Magazine, a division of Moody Street Irregulars and Textile Bridge Press, is looking for work which focuses on women's issues. Hester Thrale was confidant and caretaker of Samuel Johnson. Women may send their manuscripts to Joy Walsh, Dee Cosby, or Lisa Jarnot at Hester Thrale's Magazine, POB 157, Clarence Center, N.Y. 14032.

Sisters of Charity Hospital is offering a special health service for women called "Expressly for Women." It offers nutritional counseling, osteoporosis screening, a resource and referral service, gynecological services, and services for special areas such as bereavement support. For additional information call 862-2414.

The Gay and Lesbian Youth Board of Buffalo is opening a library to benefit the community. Please donate any books, cassettes, videos, periodicals, etc. that you may have available. Contact Sherrill at Compton's or Mark at GLYB 885-0221.

Country Friends, a social group for lesbians. Write for information: P.O. Box 106, Clarence Center, N.Y. 14032.

GROW, a lesbian support group for women, meets alternate Fridays at the Club Denmar, upstairs. For more information, call EMMA at 885-2285. 

PAGE 9