Fraternities

by Yetta Kurland

Last year at the University of  
Buffalo, the Tau Kappa Epsilon fraternity advertised their "TKEE  
Island Bash", depicting topless  
bikini-clad women offering "15  
Kegs of Pure Pleasure" as their  
door prize.

That same year the brothers  
of Phi Kappa Theta realized the  
need for a "Drink till She's Cute"  
party. When women on campus re-  
sponded by protesting this deg-  
radation of women by throwing a  
"Drink till He's Not A Sexist Pig"  
party, the members of Phi Kappa Theta  
could not understand. They insisted  
they had done nothing wrong, and asked  
us to please not take it so per-  
sonally; it was only meant to be  
a joke.

The next semester the brothers  
of Alpha Epsilon Pi printed their  
fall rush T-shirts with stick  
figures and a caption that read:  
"See Dick Pledge Alpha Epsilon Pi,  
See Jane Want Dick."

In the September issue of Ms.  
magazine Andrew Merton, in an art-  
icle called Return To Brotherhood  
reported that at Cornell University  
a fraternity was placed on pro-  
bation after a number of brothers  
"escorted" several pledges into a  
sorority house and left them there  
tied, and naked.

At Dartmouth the Sigma Nu frat-  
ernity built a snow sculpture for  
their Camelot themed winter carnival.  
The sculpture depicted a woman's  
breast, with a caption that read:  
"Guinivere - thanks for the mammaries,  
Arthur."

At the University of Florida the  
Pi Lambda Phi fraternity "became  
upset when a large number of people -  
obviously anti-Greek misrepresented  
certain events that took place at the  
Pi Lam house in September, 1983.  
The Pi Lams did not deny that several  
of the brothers had had sex with a  
17-year-old freshman. But they  
insist that she was willing. She  

Is sexual violence in fraternities  
unavoidable? UB students would say  
yes. When the editor-in-chief of  
the campus newspaper decided that  
there had been too many bad things  
said about fraternities this semester  
he decided that he would not print  
anymore "anti-fraternity" articles  
in his newspaper anymore. Students  
responded to being silenced this way  
by finding their own media outlet,  
writing on walls and buildings  
throughout the University "Frats  
Rape."

In trying to organize around this  
issue over the past year at UB I have  
encountered more backlash, threats,  
and violence directed at me per-  
sonally than any other issue I  
have addressed as Director of Women's  
Affairs in the Student Association.  
Perhaps it has something to do with  
the fact that every officer within  
the Student Association is in a  
fraternity. Perhaps it is because  

the editor-in-chief of the student  
newspaper has strong ties with fra-  
ternities, and is unwilling to  
effectively address sexual violence,  
let alone target fraternities. But  
I think the problem is even bigger  
than that.

Historically, universities have  
allowed and even promoted an elitist  
bonding of brotherhood (especially  
before women were allowed to attend  
these institutions). The ivory tower  
is a place for rich white men to grow,  
foster, develop and learn about  
their culture. It is in this set-  
ting that the fraternity was cre-  
ated. A smaller scale and more  
"social" boys club, it is given more  
freedom to expand on the privilege of  
male bonding. Male bonding is the  
core of fraternities.

And what is at the core of male  
bonding? The love and promotion of  
men. How is this done? Through the  
degradation and hate of women.

It is no surprise that fraterni-  
ties, statistically, have the high-  
est incidence of date and gang rape  
in the country. And it is no sur-  
prise that the institution which  

benefits from the promotion and  
success of male bonding does nothing  
to try to stop it within fraternities.  
In fact, it is with great effort that  
they try to hide it. This semester  
when I spoke to an administrator  
after a series of sexist offenses  

by several fraternities on campus,  

he assured me that he would be willing  
to do something about it as long as  
first of all I didn't reveal his name,  
and second that "we not make this a  
big media event."

So what and who exactly am I  
challenging when I challenge the  
sexism within fraternities?

Since sexism cannot be extrap-  
olated from fraternities, it is the  
very existence of fraternities  
that I am challenging. And, since  
fraternities cannot be extrapolated  
from the university, it is the entire  
institution that I am challenging.

This could explain why I lost  
my position as Director of Women's  
Affairs this semester. This could  
explain why fraternities continue to  
promote sexism with no check from  
the administration. This could  
explain why rape and sexual violence  
is still a prevalent occurrence on  
our campus, and around  
the country.

Campuses

JANUARY

1989

COMMENTARY

from page 1

It is not a coincidence that many anti-choice factions  
also oppose birth control. Some of those that claim to  
accept birth control allow only the rhythm method — a  
method so unsound it is hardly worth the bother. Many  
of these factions also object to any kind of sex  
education including AIDS information.

Choice, say the anti-choice people, must come before  
the pregnancy. Unfortunately, that little slogan  
conveniently overlooks pregnancies that result from  
rape and incest where choice is never a possibility. As  
with any pat response, this one utterly fails to deal with  
the reality of people's lives.

Seeking the American Way ...

Which brings us back to that sacred American value —  
the one that has possibly been battered beyond  
repair.

I know it is hard to believe today, but there was a  
time in America when we, as a people, valued  
diversity. We respected people who were different. We  
bragged about being the melting pot of the world. We  
celebrated our respect for the individual, for privacy, and  
for religious freedom.

As individuals, some of us have always been bigoted,  
but as a people, we have always stood to protect the  
rights of minorities. Sometimes, it has been hard as it  
was when we let neo-Nazis march in Skokie, Illinois.  
Sometimes we have been slow to react as we were to  
the plight of Blacks in America.

Yet, through all the rhetoric and posturing, we have  
clung to an underlying sense that in America,  
minorities have rights that are respected; rights that  
cannot be taken away by a vote; rights that are inherent  
to us as human beings, protected by our Constitution,  
and upheld by our Supreme Court.

.. And Fighting for It

But the times are, indeed, changing. More and more,  

Americans seem to value image over substance. More  

Allegiance than grapple with complex issues.

Fewer and fewer of us seem willing to think for  
ourselves these days. Worse, we seem more and more  
unwilling to let others. We seem eager to fall into a  
goose-stepping uniformity and determined to drag  
everyone with us.

We are always in trouble when we begin to think in  
terms of "us" and "them.” Unfortunately, this time our  
government is leading the way; our churches are  
nodding in agreement; and "we, the people" are either  
cheering on the sidelines or sleeping at the helm.

We now have the spectacle of anti-choice groups  
claiming to be a civil rights movement and quoting Dr.  
Martin Luther King, Jr. and Henry David Thoreau. Yet,  
King and Thoreau both supported more rights for  
people. These groups want to take rights away.

The time has come to fight. We must protect the  
rights of all people to make critical choices about their  
own lives. We can disagree with them. We can educate  
them. We can use all our persuasive skills. But we  
cannot allow force and coercion. We cannot enslave  
women and force them to complete unwanted  
pregnancies.

We simply cannot allow that. This is a battle that  
must engage us all. Lesbians, gays, blacks, Jews —  
any group that has ever been oppressed, any group that  
is vulnerable stands in danger. If rights are taken away  
from women, anyone can be next.

COMMON GROUND PAGE 7