NEW "SQUEAL" RULING

Two courts have now blocked the  
federal government's "squeal rule" that  
would have forced clinics to inform  
parents when unmarried girls under  
18 years old are given birth control  
pills or devices. These challenges  
have effectively stopped the rule  
from going into effect in early March.  
The court case will probably end up  
in the Supreme Court, and even if the  
judges move it ahead on their calendar,  
it is unlikely that there will be a  
ruling before the end of the year.

Major arguments against the rule  
are that the right to privacy for  
the teenager outweighs the right of  
the parents to know, and that the new  
rule would only lead to more teen  
pregnancies, and abortions, as well as  
physical danger for certain girls if  
their parents knew. The arguments for  
the rule include a desire to curb birth  
control and sex among the young, the  
desire to enhance communication between  
teens and parents, and the rights of  
parents to know what is going on with  
their children for whom they are re-  
sponsible.

There are health concerns on both  
sides of the argument: those who  
oppose the rule see an increase in  
venereal disease because girls will  
not be likely to go for treatment and  
will not get good information on pre-  
vention; and those who are in favor  
are fearful that the lack of parental  
knowledge about what birth control  
their teens are using could lead to  
medical complications, misdiagnosis  
and even death if the girl is not  
honest about what could be causing  
her ill health.

HOT FLASHES

...did you hear about the man who was  
sentenced to a 30-day probation and  
fined $400 for paddling his wife's  
lover? The judge said if he had hit  
her too, he might have dropped the  
fine...

...according to the National Science  
Foundation, engineering is attracting  
more women than ever, but despite  
gains in their numbers, only about  
2.3% of all engineers are women...

...researchers (according to Carol  
Austin Bridgewater in Psychology  
Today, Feb. 1983) suggest that pro-  
motions for women in the financial  
industry are to "pacify" them and  
keep them from complaining. Men tend  
to make larger jumps to more important  
positions and women take smaller  
and more frequent promotions...

...there is a new book, Absentee  
Mothers, by Patricia Paskowicz (Uni-  
verse Books) which examines the myths  
about noncustodial mothers. Paskowicz  
discusses why they gave up custody  
(often it was not their decision) and  
the social stigma that goes with that,  
including harassment and job loss...

...a recent story by Matt Geyta in  
the Buffalo News about the conviction  
of a 25-year-old man for "statutory  
rape" of a 16-year-old girl instead  
of "forcible rape" emphasized the  
differences in weight of the man at  
98 lbs. and the girl at 145 (both  
were reported to be 5'6" tall). The  
story also said the defense attorney  
claimed the girl's upbringing made  
her more willing to press charges  
when her mother learned of the rape...

NEWS

HOT FLASHES...HOT FLASHES...HOT FLASHES...HOT FLASHES...

GLCC COFFEE HOUSE

An informal coffeehouse is held  
every Friday evening at the Gay and  
Lesbian Community Center, 97 Rhode  
Island Street (off Niagara Street  
near the Peace Bridge). Beginning  
at 7:00 pm the Center is open, a pot  
of hot water for coffee or tea is  
on, various refreshments are out and  
people begin to drop in for a casual  
evening of fun, games, and conversa-  
tion. Activities at the coffeehouse  
vary. People sometimes bring their  
own cards or games and recruit other  
players, or come empty-handed and  
join someone else's games. Some  
people spend their time browsing  
through the gay and lesbian period-  
icals on hand at the Center, or maybe  
a few people will sit around and  
talk about whatever concerns them  
for the evening. Everyone is wel-  
come to stop by the GLCC on Friday  
evenings for a casual evening of  
fun and socializing in a gay space.

The GLCC is beginning to make  
plans for financing and funding a  
larger space to settle in. Fund-  
raising plans include an auction on  
April 16 at the Unitarian Church.  
Merchandise and services are being  
donated by many area businesses and  
individuals for sale to the highest  
bidder, with all proceeds going to  
the GLCC for operating funds. Last  
year's auction included astrological  
readings, chiropractic evaluation,  
dinners for two, artwork, household  
appliances and much more.  
Contact the GLCC about anything you  
would like to donate for the auction.

GAY PRIDE FEST '83

The GPF '83 Coalition has already  
begun planning for this summer's  
annual Gay Pride Fest celebrations.  
Two social events that have become  
traditional over the years will  
highlight the 1983 festivities,  
the Gay Pride Fest cruise down the  
Niagara River on the Ms. Buffalo and  
the Gay Pride Picnic at Chestnut  
Ridge Park. A series of workshops  
dealing with topics of interest to  
the gay and lesbian community will  
also be included in GPF '83. Indi-  
viduals and organizations with ideas  
or the expertise to plan and coor-  
dinate specific workshops should  
contact the GPF '83 Coalition through  
the GLCC at 886-1274.

Interested individuals and repre-  
sentatives from gay, lesbian, femin-  
ist and other community organizations  
who want to participate should attend  
the next meeting on March 14, 7:30  
pm at the GLCC, 97 Rhode Island  
Street...

...the accusation of "witch" in 17th  
century America, against women often  
from the lowest rank of society, was  
used to keep them in line, or to keep  
them from being different or outspoken  
according to John Putnam Demos's  
book Entertaining Satan (reviewed in  
Psychology Today, Feb. 1983). Demos  
also says that when the "witch" scare  
lost impact, other scapegoats took  
the brunt--Blacks, Jews, Native  
Americans and religious non-conform-  
ists.

ROBIN FLOWER CONCERT

Robin Flower, well known on the  
women's music circuit, will make her  
first Buffalo concert appearance on  
Sunday, April 17, at the Tralfamadore  
Cafe. Robin is a highly accomplished  
musician, songwriter and arranger,  
best recognized for her talents on  
guitar, mandolin and fiddle. She'll  
appear with her own bluegrass quartet  
including acoustic and electric  
guitar, fiddle and upright bass along  
with exciting vocal harmonizing and  
backup.

Robin Flower's style brings toget-  
her bluegrass/country music with ele-  
ments of contemporary protest and  
women's music. Her arrangements of  
traditional bluegrass numbers occa-  
sionally add a jazz touch and usually  
lead to foot stomping and knee slap-  
ping in the audience. Robin has  
released two albums, Green Sneakers  
(on the Flying Fish label) and More  
Than Friends, both available at EMMA.

Tickets are $5 in advance, also  
available at EMMA, or $6 at the door.  
Contact 882-0059 for information...

...the National Women's Health Network  
has hot-line numbers for those who  
want to know the status of a particular  
abortion bill. These are:

Bill Status - (202) 224-3121  
Floor Status - (202) 224-5456  
Bill Status - (202) 225-1772  
Floor Status - (202) 224-8541...

If you or anyone you know took part  
in the Breast Cancer Screening Project  
and had a biopsy or a mastectomy as  
a result of mammogram examination be-  
tween 1973 and 1976, there is a chance  
you didn't have cancer at all, and  
it is possible that your doctor, who  
was informed by the National Cancer  
Institute, did not inform you. The  
highest incidence of misdiagnosis was  
in Boise, Idaho and Columbia, Missouri,  
so if you or someone you know in these  
areas participated, you should write  
to: Maryann Napoli, Center for Medical  
Consumers, 237 Thompson Street, NY,  
NY, 10012...(Info from Network News)

...Depo Provera, a new and controversial  
contraceptive, is still in the middle  
of hearings about its safety...

...Not only has Buffalo State College,  
but now the State University at Buffalo,  
are announcing cutbacks or retrenchments  
of staff. At SUNY, the president has  
announced he will cut whole programs  
rather than trim across the board.

Women have begun to be concerned that  
Women's Studies Programs might face  
cutbacks...

...the State Crime Victims Compensation  
Board, which seeks to provide financial  
relief for victims (or families) of  
innocent crime victims because of lost  
earnings, large unpaid medical expenses,  
or funeral expenses is getting media  
scrutiny lately. Unfortunately, the  
state is required to make these payments  
only to those in severe financial  
hardship, and must count the victim's  
assets including house and life-  
savings when making a determination.  
The Attorney General and others have  
begun actions to ease the restrictions  
for awarding benefits...

COMMON GROUND MARCH 1983 PAGE 11