December 1983 POLICY

- PHILOSOPHY — Common Ground is potentially, with
the help from Western New York women, a forum to
celebrate the rich diversity of our community. We view
the paper as a ribbon that may connect our
commonalities, our intersection points. We are inviting
you to participate actively in the building of a support
WE NEED YOU::: CG is here as access
CONTENTS system for WNY women. We affirm our commitment to
to the community for ideas, analysis, enhance the lives of women on physical, educational,
communication...and more. If you are spiritual, psychological, social and economic levels. We
want to present, fair-mindedly, the issues that concern
your favorite cause, latest book you women, and information of value to women. We offer
read, or a social phenomenon, you Common Ground as a place where women can display
might have to wait a long time-- Women in Print their art and personal literature, and re-view the
because we are here to serve you access Record Company Dispute tapestries of their experiences.
EDITORIAL POLICY — Common Ground is especially
: : Collective Meets looking for articles which address the needs and
events, review all the books. We are Policy Re 66 local women
Hee ae ney tee ey . : 1. Common Ground is a publication of news, culture
oe. : i Women in Print Con't and dialogue from women’s perspectives.
news stories, review concerts, events, Record Company Con't 2. Opinion Analysis and Commentary will each
books and records, research issues, be clearly labeled.
ee trae siete i Bowe ae Community Round-up 3. We are seeking to provide accurate, straightforward
ee tell us what we have missed. We Letters dissemination of value to our audience.
ee a) HAPPY idles irs you a ae 4. The collective will not intentionally print or support
vgn crate griacae me Critical Issue for Buffalo materials or viewpoints which harm women
Feminists because of color, sexuality, religious or ethnic
News background, physical disability or economic situation. —
5. While opinions expressed in Common Ground are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
collective as a whole, we do accept responsibility for
choosing what we print.

SUBMISSIONS — We welcome articles, letters,
information and announcements of interest to women.
Graphics, cartoons, art and photography will be
gratefully received. We especially invite women who
do not usually have access to traditional media —
women of color, differently abled, economically or
educationally disadvantaged, and those for whom
English is a second language — to write. Suggested
length of letters: 250 words. Letters must be signed to
be printed. We will, however, respect your privacy and
withhold your name if you request. Suggested length of
articles, commentary, analysis: 500-750 words. Please
type and double-space your work, 40 characters across.
If you do not have access to a typewriter, please print
clearly. In time we hope to have a typewriter, paper,
etc., available for those who request it. Include a
stamped, self-addressed envelope and work and home
phone numbers. Because we want to hear your voices,
if your piece needs to be edited for length or clarity, we
will call you/ask you to do it. Keep copies of your work.
We will try to notify you within three (3) weeks if we
intend to use your work. If we print it, we will give you
five (5) copies of the issue in which it appears. Artwork
should be black and white copies only, and
title/describe your work. We will copyright the entire
issue, but the copyright on each piece reverts to the
author/artist, so that she may decide where her work is
printed. Please request a stylesheet for further
information and guidelines if you want to write.

WOMEN WHO WORKED ON THIS ISSUE: COMMON GROUND

Diane, Laura, Sue, Esther, Bonnie, Women’s Studies Academy
Heather, Maria, Sarah, Beth, Chris, Rockwell Hall
Gerri, Linda, Karen, Barb, Kay, Buffalo State College
Holly, Cathy, Donna, Roberta, Julie, 1300 Elmwood Avenue

Joan, Sharon, Peggy, Frigid, Bridget,
Mouse, Diane, Cherin, Betty, Nancy, — Re 4222
Elaine, Alice, Charlene, Jan (716) 688-

Ronnie and Wanda Wyneau ©1983 WNY Women’s Newsjournal

ADVERTISEMENT POLICY AND RATES — See
Advertisement Section.

for variety— in styles,

We are looking

content, and approach. We
QO say, so why

“<S d

lope,

the paper for a style sheet
stamped self-addressed envelope
please. Record reviews:

Here Is A Love Song
Unexpected

Book Review: Winged Dancer
Kay Gardner

9 Solstice Greetings
10 & 11 Calendar
12 A Joyous Home Birth
13 A Letter From The Country
14 NOW Conference Report
15 A Mother Laments
16 Announcements
17 Resources
18 & 19 Ads

20 Back Cover, Subscription Info

COMMON GROUND DECEMBER 1983 PAGE TWO