Gender Gap

*From Page 1

Paulette Hammond said some of the
reasons women don't like Reagan is his
attitude toward Title IX, the Equity
Education Act of the 1972 Education
Amendment, which prohibits education
discrimination by an institution which
receives federal funds. The adminis-
tration wants to narrow the interpre-
tation of the act to apply only to the
particular department of a school: re-
ceiving the money (i.e. the student
loan office). In effect, this allows
the school to discriminate against wom-
en in any other area with impunity.
Hammond feels that laws which protect
women or seek to redress years of dis-
crimination are being eroded, defunded
or narrowed in interpretation.

Jackson agreed. She said one of the
Reagan slogans, "In for the E and the R
but not the A", meaning he thinks women
already have enough protection by ex-
isting laws, can be seen clearly for
what it is, because he is systematically
taking the teeth out of enforcement with
staff reductions and budget cuts. With-
out an amendment, any law or statute can
be circumvented.

Jackson, who works for the Equal Em-
ployment Opportunity Commission, cited
the case of her own department. NYS
staff is down from 25 people to 9, and
only 5 of those are investigators.

Last year, EEOC filed 300 complaints
about all kinds of discrimination;
this year, she estimates less than 10
lawsuits have been filed. No on-site
inspections are allowed now. There is
no money for staff and travel, due to
Reagan budget cuts. EEOC has, up to
now, been an exceedingly important tool
for women's economic equality.

Betty Riley also felt this sort of
action was very important, and thought
that gutting affirmative action pro-
grams designed to close the economic
gender gap was one strong reason women
see Reagan as hostile to them.

Jackson and Hammond both spoke
about the effect the recession has had
on women. At the height of the re-
cession, 1981, Reagan made a comment
that he felt high (male) unemployment
was due to the number of working women,
never taking into consideration the
number of single women and women heads
of households who have to work to live.
While it is true that women, overall,
have lost fewer jobs than men, it is
also true they are in jobs that can't
be gone without, or are in jobs many
men would not take anyway.

Hammond felt that one of the reasons
the recession wasn't worse was because
of the number of working women sup-
porting families.

Reagan has also made significant
cutbacks in poverty-related social
programs - Aid to Families with De-
pendent Children, Food Stamps, Child
Nutrition, etc. - which directly af-
fect women who make up (with children)
the majority of this country's poor.

Certain new rules, especially about
day-care eligibility, have put some
women in a bind. If day-care subsi-
dies are cut, then it costs more, some-
times too much to make it economically
feasible for a woman to work. What
happens, said Hammond, is that she
(and her children) end up on welfare.

Jackson offered some statistics.

In the 1982 budget, there was supposed
to be a 7% cut in all social programs,
across the board. In reality, Child
Nutrition programs were slated for a
28% reduction; Food Stamps 13%; and
employment training, critical to dis-
placed homemakers, the vast majority
of whom are women, was to receive a
60% cut in funding.

In addition, the tax cut proposal
hurt those 23% of households making
$10,000 or less (again, the majority
of which are female heads of house-
holds). This tax "cut" costs them
nearly $270 per year more in taxes,
says Jackson.

Even women who are economically
secure enough not to be directly af-
fected by any of these cuts may know
someone who is, or be among the
thousands of human service workers
(the majority of whom are women) who
daily work with those who are affected.

Perhaps the greatest statement about
the economic gender gap is the NOW
"59¢" slogan. Currently, women earn,
on average, only 59¢ of what men in
similar occupations earn $1 for. In
1960, it was 64¢. This downward turn
has catalyzed many women to demand
equality through various channels.

Dottie Harnish made this statement
about mobilization around “women's
issues": "We must make women aware
of the impact of this administration
on women...you must first make people
see there is a need (for change).
Even if you are O.K., other women are
not. We must get this awareness in
the community before you can get
people to do something about it."

Women, even though some may have
thought of themselves as a voting
group before, are finally being treated
by politicians as one to be courted
for votes, listened to, and from whom
to seek advice.

The existence of a powerful female
voting block (strong enough, perhaps
to lure one or more presidential con-
tenders to choose a female VP) has
been demonstrated. Less than 10 years
ago, there were no female governors
and no big-city mayors. Since then,
we've seen female governors in Conn-
ecticut, Washington State, and mayors
in Chicago, San Francisco and Houston,
as well as some Lt. Governors and
smaller city mayors.

In the Florida legislature that
helped defeat the ERA, there were 40
men. Now, there are 9 women in that
body; nearly 25% of the representatives
elected - in part, as a backlash
against the failure of the ERA.

The power of voting women can be
seen in the trek by Democratic Pres-
idential hopefuls to the NOW convention,
where they made speeches designed to
court women's votes. NOW PAC plans to
endorse one of these candidates for the
1984 election. All said they would
consider a female VP.

Possible Democratic contenders, ac-
cording to various sources, are:
Corrine C. (Lindy) Boggs (D-LA);
Geraldine A. Ferraro (D-NY); Barbara
A. Mikulski (D-Md); San Francisco
Mayor Diane Feinstein (although no
Jewish person has ever been seriously
considered before); Frances (Cissy)
Farenthold of Texas; Rep. Patricia
Schroeder (D-Col); Lt. Governor Martha
Griffiths of Michigan; Barbara Jordan
of Texas; and Ann Richards, Texas State
Treasurer. Shirley Chisholm's name
for President or VP is also popular.

On the Republican side are Eliza-
beth Dole, Secretary of Transportation;
Senator Nancy Kassebaum; and even
Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day
O'Connor.

LETTERS

More on Pornography

Dear Common Ground:

I feel anguished by the reportage
of my participation on the politics of
pornography panel at UB on September
22. The frequent failure of com-
munication that night was evident to
me as I heard comments from the aud-
ience. I had supposed from the be-
ginning that most of us there had
strong, angry feelings about porn-
ography and needed to be heard. Yet,
I also heard, for example, the panel-
ists - two teachers, one librarian and
one graduate student - labeled eco-
nomically arrogant. I would like to
believe that people who struggle,
even those on panels, do not finally
compartmentalize each other but rather
share in their differences, self-
determination, dignity and respect.

I heard and read in Common Ground
a comment, possibly originally directed
at me, that women who are raped do not
choose to be. It would be gross for
me or anyone to suggest otherwise. I
had spoken earlier of individuals, es-
pecially those from oppressed groups
of people, choosing to take respons-
ibility for a culture of violence,
that it might end once and for all. Cer-
tainly, barring a nuclear holocaust,
those perceiving themselves well
served by violence aren't going to
end it for us. If I assumed the aud-
ience was with me on that point, when
I needed to be more specific, I apolo-
gize for my presumption.

Whether I made connections I might
have, or presented too theoretical an
analysis to be satisfying, if I did or
did not, it is suggested, “more" a feminist
perspective on pornography than Ellen Du Bois or
Madeline Davis. By my own definition,
I am a feminist - opposing pornography,
yes, and above all, the violence that
distorts our lives. I know that porn
can and does cause violence; I be-
lieve that currently the first cause
is violence, period. That makes me
neither more nor less who I am, nor
does it erase other potentials.

The same may be said for Ellen and
Madeline and Peter, and I'm comfort-
able saying it.

I know, too, that those reporting
that evening's event were faced with
a huge undertaking and an imminent
deadline, and put in great effort to
be accurate and sensitive. Thank you
for being there and also for the many
useful comments made to me before the
panel by several Common Grounders.

You have made, once again, significant
contributions to our community. And
thanks as well to Gerri Bayer for her
well-done article on candidate select-
ion.

All best,

Sarah Slavin

A great drawback of a VP is the
anonymity of the position. The VP is
chosen for a 'balanced ticket, not
necessarily for her or his skills,
but it is a stepping stone to other
things for the one elected.

The panelists seemed to feel that
making women aware of women's situation,
aware of the scope of feminist concerns -
economic, representative, anti-war, pro-
racial, ethnic, religious, and sexual
civil rights; and the interconnectedness
of them in a feminist context - will
widen the gender gap and give more
voter power to women.

COMMON GROUND NOVEMBER 1983 PAGE FIFTEEN