The Politics of Homo

Overview of Homophobia and Civil Rights for Lesbians

by Joan Butcher

{Ed. note: The following is the text of a speech presented to the Buffalo N.O.W. at one of their recent meetings, by Joan Butcher, New York State NOW's Lesbian and Gay Civil Rights Lobbyist in Albany. We thank Ms. Butcher for her permission to print her remarks.]

For more than 12 million American women, being afraid is a way of life. Afraid of being fired from their jobs. Afraid of being refused public accommodations. Afraid of being evicted from their homes. Afraid of losing custody of their children. Afraid of being expelled from their schools.

Why?

Because they are lesbians.

And being a lesbian or gay man in the USA in 1985 is not easy because we live in a homophobic society.

I'd like to give you a few definitions that we in NOW use to help us understand what a homophobic society is, and why we work so hard to change it.

Let's start with the basic word phobia, according to Webster: [a] phobia is an “exaggerated, usually inexplicable and illogical fear of a particular object or class of objects." Homophobia; (according to NOW) [is an] irrational fear of homosexuals and homosexuality, which is pervasive and of varying degrees. Bigotry or anger based on ignorance, myths, stereotypes and misinformation. A fear of being identified as a lesbian, or fear of interaction and association with homosexuals. Heterosexism; (according to NOW) [is] a set of beliefs which present heterosexuality as THE WAY, THE TRUTH AND THE LIGHT. It is traditional socialization based on the assumption that women cannot survive without men, and the presumption that everyone is heterosexual. The institutionalization and enforcement of heterosexuality [is presented] as the official validity.

Why does NOW care?

We in NOW believe it is important

For more than a decade, NOW has been in the forefront of the fight against sexism and the sex role system which denies individual freedom, growth, and fulfillment to any woman or man who refuses to conform to stereotypic roles. The same system which oppresses women in general is responsible for the specific oppression of lesbians and gay men. The sex role system tries to deny us the right to determine our own lives and to control our own bodies through restricting our reproductive freedom, denying our legal equality, and attempting to control our sexuality!

The fight for lesbian rights is therefore an integral part of the feminist struggle for freedom, justice and dignity for all women.

Since its inception, NOW has provided American women with a powerful voice to condemn unfair practices and a viable structure to redress socio/political inequities. Lesbian rights is a priority issue of NOW, both at the national level and in New York State.

But lesbians profoundly threaten those who want to maintain the status quo, the belief that women not only must be weak and helpless but also must receive their definition of themselves from men.

The term ‘lesbian' is often used by the most ardent opponents of equality to intimidate any woman who rejects male supremacy or defies any attempts to have her life defined or restricted by sexist attitudes and practices.

Remember, women comprise more than 53% of the population of the United States. If we are fully united, women have the potential to affect enormous changes in American society. Therefore it is in the self-interest of those who benefit from the system of inequality to create divisions among us based on sexual preference.

Why should you care?

We as women must fight those who oppress lesbians, because that oppression affects us all, regardless of sexual preference.

“Lesbian-baiting”—labeling women lesbians—is used by opponents of women's rights in an effort to divide women and weaken us.

As long as any woman lives in fear of being called a lesbian or of being "discovered" to be lesbian or is terrorized by threats of retribution, no woman is truly free to be herself. Women's lives are destroyed and talents are wasted.

Assuming each homosexual resident has, or had, 2 heterosexual parents and some brothers, sisters, other relatives or friends who know them as the competent, concerned citizens they are, we are talking about an issue which concerns a large segment of the population.

People should be outraged that current New York State law creates second class citizenships by not protecting homosexual residents from discrimination.

People generally realize that racism and sexism affect not only the racial minorities and women, but all people living in such a society. Similarly, discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation both denies basic human rights to a sizable minority of the population and robs society of the talents and resources of productive and useful members. At different times in history, some (and often too many) have found it easier to ignore the women's movement and/or the civil rights movement than to work for them. ALL the great struggles in history have taken extraordinary efforts by people dedicated to eliminating prejudice, ignorance and fear.

Let's remember that all of us were raised with some amount of racism, sexism, and homophobia. Let's be aware that these “mindsets" affect our lives even when we aren't aware of them. Try these questions and see if you can recognize your own homophobia.

Have you ever...

...felt that gay people are too outspoken about gay rights?
...wondered which one is the man in a lesbian relationship?
...felt repulsed by public displays of affection between lesbians or gay men but accepted the same affectional displays between heterosexuals as nice?
...thought that if a lesbian touches an old friend, but been afraid to hug a lesbian friend?
...told any dyke or faggot jokes?
...not asked about a woman's female lover, although you regularly ask, “How's your boyfriend/husband?" when you run into heterosexual friends?
...used the term lesbian/dyke/faggot/queer as accusatory?
...worried about the effect a gay/lesbian teacher has on (your) children?
...suspected your male hairdresser is gay?
...worried about the effect a gay therapist has on a client?
...thought you could “spot one"?
...changed your seat in a meeting because someone you thought was homosexual sat in the chair next to yours?
...attended a lesbian/gay rights workshop and worried people would think you were lesbian/gay?
...failed to be supportive when your lesbian/gay friend is sad about a quarrel or breakup?
...suggested to a young lesbian that she “try men" but wouldn't think of suggesting to a heterosexual adolescent that she "try women" before declaring her heterosexuality?
...looked at a lesbian or gay person and automatically thought of her or his sexuality, rather than seeing them as a whole, complex person?

Unlearning prejudice is a lifetime process. Even other feminists, our friends in and outside of NOW say things that can hurt lesbians. In order to work together we need to continually listen to ourselves with "special ears.”

Have any of these comments been made in your town or in your NOW chapter and not been heard for what they really are?

“The lesbians pushed that vote through."

Homophobic/Heterosexist because: This statement implies a power struggle or threat and, hence is divisive; part of patriarchy's divide and conquer strategy. It implies that lesbians are a "bloc" and not individuals and is based on fear, anger and lack of trust. It is a put-down; no one would let pass unquestioned a similar racist or anti-Semitic remark, “The Blacks/Jews pushed it through."

“If we mention lesbian rights, we may lose the rest of our agenda.”

Homophobic/Heterosexist because: This statement shows failure to stick together, lack of solidarity. It means lesbian rights will always be ‘on hold’ and does not recognize the fact that any woman who challenges the status quo—in other words, any feminist—is likely to be labelled a lesbian in an attempt to keep her quiet.

"Don't come out in meetings... you'll turn off/overwhelm new members and guests."

Heterosexist/Homophobic because: NOW should be a safe, comfortable place, accepting of all. Asking lesbians to hide physical displays of affection and/or pretend they are heterosexual puts the burden of heterosexism and homophobia on lesbians.

The statement shows lack of awareness that lesbians cannot lie, or even fudge a little, without losing self-esteem. This applies to all lies, whether by commission or omission.

Lesbians are expected (rightfully so) to support other issues (sign ERA petitions, participate in Walk-A-Thons and Take Back the Night Demonstrations), but many members aren't equally expected to support lesbian rights.

This is separate and unequal treatment of the lesbian issue. It should not be singled out. It deserves support of all NOW members, just like every other issue.

Is there a failure of officers to speak out in support of lesbian rights?

Leaders set the example for other members. If those in leadership roles are hesitant or cautious in asking political candidates their stand on gay rights legislation, members follow their lead. Similarly, if someone makes a homophobic statement, officers can take the lead by gently informing that person about the ways that statement hurts lesbians (and hence, ultimately, all women) and reminding them of NOW's goals.

Avoid using labels negatively—“That member is a lesbian."

Talking about someone behind her back is unfair to the person in question and fosters division within the chapter as a whole. If you have a grievance with someone over something she has said or done, please air it with her directly (preferably using "I") and preferably when it happens.

Remember: Mushrooms grow in the dark. Beautiful flowers need sunlight and water to flourish. Fear grows where there is ignorance. Knowledge nurtures understanding and respect.

{Ms. Butcher went on to list a number of specific ways that feminists could help combat homophobia through NOW. Common Ground asked the Buffalo NOW chapter to list for us some of the actions the local chapter takes, and the following is their statement.}

Lesbian Rights and Buffalo N.O.W.

Joan Butcher is NOW's Gay and Lesbian Civil Rights Lobbyist in Albany. She presented the above speech to the January Buffalo NOW chapter meeting to update Buffalo NOW members on Gay and Lesbian Civil Rights issues.

Buffalo NOW supports gay and lesbian civil rights as part of its four-issue legislative agenda which also includes passage of the Equal Rights Amendment, reproductive rights, and the elimination of racism. No candidate for county, city, state or federal public office will be endorsed by Buffalo NOW unless they support NOW's position on these issues. In the fall 1984 campaign, Representative Stanley Lundine sought NOW's endorsement, but his voting record on Gay and Lesbian Civil Rights had varied over the years. As a result of negotiations with Buffalo NOW members, Representative Lundine clarified his position on this issue, saying that civil rights should not be abridged for any reason including sexual preference, and received the NOW endorsement in his race against Bill Emery.

Buffalo NOW lobbies for gay and lesbian civil rights legislation both locally and during its annual lobbying visit to Albany.

from page 1

Dead or Alive?

Our landscape when it comes to any discussion of abortion. The anti-abortionists have brought public statements of the issue into the realm of fetal rights. Pro-choice advocates, Jo believes, should bring the discussion back to women's rights. She also feels that since American women have shaken a sense of “shame” about having abortions; Roe vs. Wade “never became a part of the fabric of American life.” She reiterated her concern about the abundance of money on the anti-abortion side—money which has purchased a copy of the controversial film "The Silent Scream" for every member of Congress. Debbie spoke of the inspiration she received from the SUNYAB Women’s Studies Department; inspiration she has channeled into re-activating the SASU Women's Caucus. Although some members of the Caucus have dropped out (she told of one young woman whose family badgered her, calling her "evil" for being a part of it), she still feels it is a growing entity. She expressed appreciation for the International Women's Day program stating that many women are activists but feel they are alone. Audience members echoed this statement saying that networking efforts—such as this program—provide needed communication among the various groups for which women contribute their energy and their time. Rosa Gibson spoke more specifically about neighborhood problems. She urged people to ascertain the needs of their neighbors thereby creating a more secure atmosphere in which to live. Regrettably, I arrived at the discussion too late to hear the remarks of the first speaker, Lee Lyons. The last participant, Ruth Geller, should have her eloquent remarks published. Although she was representing WAND, her comments could really apply to any group or individual interested in activism. (Note: Ruth Geller's remarks will be published in full in a future issue of Common Ground.) She urged tolerance of other women's ignorance as a way of bridging the differences among us and gaining understanding of others' lives. “All battered women in one way or another," she stated, in a society which values money and power above all else. She counseled patience and a renewed commitment to refusing feelings of helplessness in the face of seemingly all-powerful adversaries.

“Moderator Nancy Wilkens pledged the services of the YWCA to act as a registry center for activist women's groups in Buffalo and invited anyone interested in finding out more about groups of interest to them to contact the YWCA.

The "women's movement" in Buffalo may be fragmented but that is often a healthy sign. Throughout the panelists' presentations and the audience discussion there was a strong current of caring, from the neighborhood concerns to WAND to Planned Parenthood to students to the YWCA. It was as if all the little tributaries, each with their own unique twists and turns were coming together to form a wide, deep, swiftly-moving flow. This discussion was an important one because it let activist women see the variety and scope of other women who are still out there plugging away. It seemed to put off—at least for the time being—any obituary writing for the women's movement in Buffalo.