Psychiatric Disabilities - A Changing Attitude

by Christine Van Veghten

Some women may deny the reality of
discrimination, but it seems it is
difficult, nevertheless, to escape the
consequences. A recent work states
that one third of all women are suff-
ering from a clinically documented
psychiatric disorder, or are border-
line under acceptable clinical
criteria. (Brown and Harris, Social
Origins of Depression, Tavistock,
London, 1978). This point may be arg-
ued, as the cause, in part, could be a
historical bias in the definition of
this "clinical criteria" and in the
types of treatment women receive.
However, it remains obvious that the
personal toll on women in present
times is great (suggested reading in
this area is an excellent book, Women
and Madness, by Phyllis Chesler).

Brown and Harris also state that
depression is undergoing a signifi-
cant increase in poor working class
women (23%). They mention four situ-
ations in particular that make women
more likely to react to stress with
depression: "having three or more
children under the age of 14, lacking
an intimate relationship with another
adult, loss of mother before age 11,
and not having employment outside the
home."

One might imagine that these signif-
icant statistics might make society and
lawmakers take notice, if not react
with constructive action. However, not
only has this situation never been add-
ressed in any meaningful manner, but
any gains that may have been made are
being caught up in the conservative
budget-cutting backlash that is affect-
ing many of these social service programs.

Martha W. Griffiths was preceding
the prevailing view of Congress
as believing that "every woman is born
to a rich father who gives her in marr-
iage to a rich husband, who in turn,
thoughtfully dies ahead of her leaving
her well provided, not only with money,
but with tender loving sons." (Blax-
all and Reagan, Women in the Workplace,
University of Chicago Press).

The prevailing attitude of Congress
and society seems to be changing, but
not for the better. How does this af-
fect the women in the W.N.Y. area and
throughout the country who are dealing
with psychiatric difficulties and what
can women do about this?

In 1972, Blue Shield of W.N.Y. inst-
ituted psychiatric coverage under its
basic 50/51 plan. Although this was a
unique service at the time, Henry Beck-
er, Senior Vice President, External
Operations, was quoted as saying, "We
really believed other companies would
be falling in line with this also."
None did, and Blue Shield has been the
sole insurance carrier in W.N.Y. to in-
clude this benefit in a basic contract.

Effective January 1, 1983, this ben-
efit is being dropped. Blue Shield ad-
mits this has been a needed service.

It currently accounts for 7% of their
budget, and according to Mr. Becker,
"Psychologists say 1 of 8 people in
this area need this service. If they
were all getting it, we could have nev-
er afforded it." Blue Shield says they
are dropping this for purely economic
reasons, that the current political
climate is not involved. One may
assume, however, that economics and
politics are always involved in some
way.

What can be done about this? At
this point, to be aware of the issue
and its consequences is a major step.
The Western New York Psychiatric Asso-
ciation is launching a major public re-
lations campaign. If you have an in-
quiry, call the subscriber services
number of Blue Shield. This benefit
will be available to existing direct

single coverage and $2.73 for
family coverage. It will not be av-
ailable to new direct payment sub-
scribers. Women can notify their em-
ployer (or insurance carrier if under
husband's policy) that this is a des-
ired benefit. Speaking up in this
manner may not be a comfortable thing
to do, but other women you work with,
if not yourself, may need this cover-
age.

We should also be aware that the
Reagan administration, via the Dep-
artment of Justice, is rewriting the
Section 504 guidelines. Section 504
of the 1973 Rehabilitation Act guar-
antees "equal opportunities in edu-
cation and employment to the nation's
35 million handicapped citizens."
This section is a cornerstone in the
handicapped rights movement. Just a
few of the proposed changes which
apply to psychiatric disabilities
are:

1. Each disabled child would no
longer have the right to an appro-
priate education. As rewritten, it
states simply that educational serv-
ices must be provided.

2. Emotional illness is expli-
citly removed from the definition of
"mental impairment."

3. All references to the right to
“equal opportunity" have been changed
to “substantially equal opportunity."

4. Specific references to alcohol-
ism and drug abuse have been removed
from the definition of “physical or
mental impairment."

Other proposed changes also affect
the physically disabled. Examples are
a softening of the requirements for
accessibility of buildings, possible
exclusion from post-secondary educa-
tional programs, and funding cuts for
auxiliary aids in education and em-
ployment. You can write your Con-
gressperson concerning this. If you
are not sure of their name or how to
contact them, phone your local
League of Women Voters.

The first step is to be informed,
the second is to become active. Org-

in your local area and be
dealing with a disability in your own
life and/or with attitudes and regula-
tions affecting the disabled.

Some lead information for this
article was compiled from the
Journal of Rehabilitation, Jan-
March, 1982.

Ms. Van Veghten, M.Ed., is a voc-
ational counselor working with a
psychiatric population and a member
of the Common Ground collective.

ONE MILLION WOMEN CAN

(Stop The Arms Race)

Right now there are enough nuclear weapons to destroy

the world 14 times over. It is time for women’s voices

to be heard!
By International Women’s Day, 1983 we will register

one million women to:

* Stop The Arms Race *

YOU can STAR. Clip the coupon below and send $1 to

Women’s International League for
Peace and Freedom, 1213 Race St.,
Philadelphia, PA 19107

COUNT ME IN - I'M ONE IN A MILLION

Here’s my dollar to buck the arms race.

Democracy is not a

spectator sport.

Please let me know how I can register others as STARs.

COMMON GROUND OCTOBER 1982 PAGE 17