PAGE 20 COMMON GROUND

NEWS —

N.O.W. HONORS AREA WOMEN:  
WOMEN HELPING WOMEN AWARD

The Buffalo chapter of the National  
Organization for Women announced its  
choices for the fourth annual Women  
Helping Women Award in the December  
issue of the Feminist Observer. The  
awards this year were presented to  
outstanding women who, without ex-  
pectation of financial or status gain,  
have been willing to give their time  
and talents to helping women in need.

Honored at a dinner December 15  
were: Liz Kennedy, a professor at  
S.U.N.Y. Buffalo, who initiated  
Women's Studies programs at U.B., and  
is a long-time feminist scholar and  
activist; Norine Spurling, Director  
of Artist's Committee Gallery, past-  
Director of Womenworks Gallery, and  
founding member of Western New York  
Women's Art Registry; and the women  
of ASPO (Niagara Frontier Chapter of  
American Society for Psychoprophylaxis  
in Obstetrics) whose work with alter-  
native birthing and post-natal care  
has benefited families for the past  
thirteen years.

This annual award is meant to  
recognize and congratulate women who  
defy the myth that women do not ex-  
tend themselves to helping each other.  
It also gives the community the op-  
portunity to learn about the works of  
women who do not get attention from  
the traditional media, and provides  
role models for women and especially  
girls.

(Ed. note: see the February issue of  
Common Ground for complete coverage  
of the awards banquet.)

Yvonne Scruggs-Leftwich has been  
named commissioner of the New York  
State Division of Housing and Community  
Renewal by Mario Cuomo. She is a  
native Buffalonian, and has been the  
Buffalo regional director of the di-  
vision for more than a year. Her new  
duties will include overseeing public  
housing, rent control and stabiliza-  
tion programs and will involve  
administration of comprehensive pro-  
grams of financial and technical assis-  
tance to cities fighting inadequate  
housing and decaying buildings.

Ms. Scruggs-Leftwich is the first  
Black, and among the first women to be  
appointed by the Cuomo administration.

WOMEN OF COLOR PRESS

Kitchen Table: Women of Color Press,  
after celebrating their first birthday,  
announced that they will have exclusive  
distribution rights to Cheryl Clark's  
self-published book, Narratives: Poems  
in the Tradition of Black Women.

Kitchen Table is the first indepen-  
dent publisher in North America which  
focuses exclusively on encouraging, pro-  
ducing and distributing the work of  
women of color.

They also announced plans to publish  
the first collection of short fiction  
by Latinas written from a feminist-pol-  
itical perspective, Cuentos: Stories  
by Latinas. They are seeking financial  
support to do this work.  
(Ed. note: You may make tax-deductible  
contributions to Working Women's Insti-  
tute, and send to Kitchen Table, BOX 592,  
Van Brunt Sta., Brooklyn, NY 11215. Any  
amount will be appreciated.)

JANUARY 1983

ABORTION RIGHTS UPDATE:

November 30, the United States  
Supreme Court heard arguments from  
Solicitor General Rex Lee that the  
court should refrain from rendering  
decisions on overturning state and lo-  
cal restrictions on a woman's right to  
an abortion. Mr. Lee suggested to  
the court that legislative bodies who  
pass such laws were better “fact find-  
ers" and in a better position to make  
judgments in these areas. In 1973,  
in Roe vs Wade the Supreme Court  
ruled that in the first three months  
of pregnancy, it was a woman's right  
to seek abortion if she chose to do  
so, but from then on the state could  
set up restrictions. The Supreme  
Court is hearing arguments on the  
constitutionality of abortion re-  
strictions in Virginia, Missouri and  
Akron, Ohio.

Reagan administration proposals,  
drafted by the Department of Health  
and Human Services, are being used as  
an alternative tactic to either a  
Human Life Amendment or Supreme  
Court ruling to curb abortions.

Guidelines for facilities which  
receive Title X funding, and which  
do both family planning and abortion  
referrals or actual abortions, would  
force such facilities (clinics and  
hospitals) to provide separate exits,  
entrances, telephones, meeting space  
and supplies, even stationery for  
any service relating to abortions.

The draft states that facilities  
would be barred from even giving the  
appearance that Title X funds are  
supporting abortion activities.

Planned Parenthood chapters have  
harassment and unnecessary because  
it is not apparently in response to  
abuse of Title X monies by agencies  
or facilities which receive it.  
-info from AP and UPI sources.

CARASA RECEIVES GRANT

The Western New York area chapter of  
Coalition for Abortion Rights and Against  
Sterilization Abuse has received a  
$3,800 grant from the Ms. Foundation,  
to mount a media campaign in METRO  
buses to educate people about abortion  
and sterilization issues.

FIFTH FREEDOM REORGANIZES

Fifth Freedom, Western New York's  
gay community monthly newspaper, is  
under total re-organization, accord-  
ing to Marilyn Rogers, the paper's new  
editor. "We're re-doing the whole  
thing -- the banner, editorial con-  
tent -- and we'd like to work on  
going back to typesetting the paper,”  
Rogers said.

"Our content will be more community  
oriented. We're looking to present a  
more positive image to and about the  
gay community," she said. “We want to  
hear from lesbians, a group that has  
been ignored by Fifth Freedom for a  
long time." Rogers extended an invi-  
tation to all W.N.Y. lesbians to  
"come out" to the 5th Freedom for the  
January issue.

One of the goals, to be more com-  
munity oriented, resulted in the sex-  
ually graphic cover art and features  
being eliminated. "Our paper will be  
a clearing house for information for  
the lesbian and gay communities."

REPUBLICAN WOMEN

There is a new coalition of women  
in government, whose membership is  
comprised of Republican elected women  
in Erie County. CREW, (Caucus of Re-  
publican Elected Women) will seek  
qualified Republican women to run for  
office, will network with current  
GOP women office holders, will educate  
themselves on women's issues, and  
work within the Republican party to  
make it more responsive to women.

CREW debuted with more than 30  
members, and is reported to have a  
potential membership of more than 400,  
when all levels of elective office are  
included.

In Erie County, registered women  
voters are overwhelmingly Democratic.  
The presence of women Republican can-  
didates could convince some of these  
women that a Republican candidate  
is preferable to one from their own  
party.

Republican women have been working  
within their party for some time now  
to bring women's issues to the fore-  
front. Carol Siweck issued a strong  
statement in support of women's rights  
in a letter to her party last year,  
urging them to address women's needs.  
(Ed Note: No, Ms. Siweck did not ad-  
dress the issue of abortion. She did  
support divorce reform, rape laws  
reform, funding for shelters from  
domestic violence, day-care, Women's  
Studies, and funding for Displaced  
Homemakers programs in particular.  
As always, CG is in the business of  
providing information, not telling  
readers who to vote for. We suggest  
informed decision-making.)

***HOT FLASHES***  
...Attorney General Robert Abrams has  
announced he intends to file a law  
suit against Puritan's Pride Vitamin  
World for continuing to sell "starch-  
blocker" tablets despite an order from  
the Food and Drug Administration that  
sales of them, which the FDA considers  
a drug, must be stopped. Abrams has  
asked that the pills be seized and de-  
stroyed...

...several recent news articles, at-  
tention has been focused on a phenom-  
enon called "pica", which is a habit  
of some ethnic groups and “not un-  
common among black women of rural  
Southern heritage" of eating non-  
nutritional substances such as "dirt,  
clay, laundry starch, ice, burnt match-  
es, hair, stones, gravel, mothballs,  
even rubber tires" which can displace  
proper nutrition in the diet... The  
Committee on Nutrition of the Mother  
also cited alcohol, tobacco and caf-  
feine as the most dangerous substances  
to be avoided by pregnant women...  
-info from Buffalo News

...the Pershing II missile test firing  
in mid-November failed to "achieve the  
desired accuracy", and thus made it  
the third such test to fail. These  
missiles are scheduled for deployment  
in 1983...

...the use of amniocentesis in  
India and female infanticide in China,  
both countries where traditionally,  
females, and especially female children  
are considered a burden at best, have  
created the fear that there could be  
an imbalance between males and females  
in the coming years...