NEWS

Patterson

By Marilyn

CONGRESS DEBATES IMMIGRATION POLICY

-taken from accounts in Congressional
Quarterly and America Magazine

A bill aimed at reforming U.S. immi-
gration laws failed in Congress in
December when proponents could not
bring it to a vote before the 97th
Congress adjourned.

House of Representatives Sponsor
Romano L. Mazzoli, (D-Ky), has promis-
ed to reintroduce the legislation this
year, ensuring that the Congress will
continue debating a complicated pack-
age of reform laws.

Among its provisions are:

--sanctions against employers who
knowingly hire illegal aliens

--an amnesty program that would
offer legal status to millions of il-
legal aliens now living in the U.S.

--a temporary worker program that
would primarily benefit seasonal work-
ers in the agricultural industry

--new and restrictive procedures
for handling asylum, deportation and
exclusion cases that would require
aliens seeking asylum to produce doc-
uments requesting asylum as they enter
the country.

Mazzoli's bill was the subject of
great debate and many amendments dur-
ing the final hours of last year's
session of the House of Representatives.

A similar bill in the Senate, sponsored
by Alan K. Simpson, (R-Wyo), was
approved by that body in August.
However, a bill must pass both houses
of Congress, and the House session closed with
members still debating over the 300
amendments filed.

The bill, known as the Simpson-
Mazzoli bill, drew a broad base of
opposition, though for different rea-
sons, from Hispanics, labor organiza-
tions, the business community and civil
rights groups.

Hispanics argued against the sanc-
tions for employers. Those sanctions
would threaten employers with steep
civil fines (in the Senate version,
$1,000 per illegal alien hired for the
first infraction and $2,000 per alien
for the second violation) and possible
criminal charges if they hire illegal
aliens.

Hispanics speculate this will re-
sult in employers refusing to hire
dark-skinned people who speak with an
accent rather than risk fines.

The employer sanctions also were
opposed by business representatives
who were concerned about employers
serving as private immigration offici-
als for the government and by civil
libertarians who objected to the in-
stitution of a national identification
card for any segment of American
society.

Black leaders and some civil lib-
ertarians were concerned about the
strict asylum and exclusion provisions
which they thought would discriminate
against Haitians and Salvadorans seek-
ing refuge in the United States.

Labor leaders, while supporting
the bill generally, recommended a tight
control over the temporary worker
program.

The Simpson-Mazzoli bill came about
in response to the recommendations of
the Select Commission on Immigration
and Refugee Policy, which was estab-
lished in October 1978.

PAGE 10 COMMONGROUND MARCH

A primary reason for government
concern about immigration laws is
the number of people who are entering
the country illegally, particularly
from Mexico. A fact sheet issued by
the Department of Justice in 1981
stated "The U.S. Census Bureau has es-
timated that 3.5 million to 6 million
people are in the U.S. illegally, at
least 50 percent from Mexico. About
1.5 million entered illegally in 1980."

As bill co-sponsor Simpson states:
"Immigration to the United States is
now dominated to a high degree by per-
sons speaking a single foreign lan-
guage, Spanish, when illegal immigra-
tion is considered. The assimilation
of the English language and other
aspects of American culture by Spanish
speaking immigrants appears to be less
rapid and complete than for other
groups...If immigration is continued
at a high level and yet a substantial
portion of the newcomers and their de-
scendants do not assimilate, they may
create in America some of the same
social, political and economic problems
which existed in the countries which
they have chosen to depart."

However, even legal immigration
causes Simpson concern because he be-
lieves the United States is no longer
a developing country and, therefore,
cannot absorb large numbers of immi-
grants.

The United States' current ceiling
for immigrants is 270,000 per year;
however, exempted from this category
are refugees.

Counting those people, the number of immigrants
admitted in 1980 was 808,000.

The Simpson-Mazzoli bill would set
a limit of 425,000 admissions per year.
Although family members of citizens
would continue to have unrestricted
entry to the country, their numbers
would be counted in that annual total
of 425,000. Refugees would continue to
be admitted separately, with an as-
sumption that they would not exceed
50,000 per year.

ENFORCEMENT.

Out of the 340,000 absent parent
cases handled by the New York City
welfare agency, only 15,000 of these
receive child support from absent
spouses. New federal and state
legislation has made it possible for
welfare agencies to recoup the money
paid in benefits to children (AFDC),
from the income tax returns and
unemployment benefits of non-paying
parents and spouses.
Forty-five states have now adopted
provisions for withholding child
support from wages.
According to the 1974 federal law
permitting income-tax refunds to be
attached, this means that when a non-
complying parent files a joint return
with his/her current spouse, the
current spouse's return contribution
can also be attached, making the
second (usually wife) paying her
husband's child support to his first
wife.

SURROGATE MOTHERHOOD QUESTION

The concept of surrogate motherhood,
either as a hopeful alternative for a
childless couple (the wife usually be-
ing infertile), or as a cold unfeeling
exploitation of "womb rental", has been
widely publicized on both the local
and national scene in recent weeks.

The center of the controversy has been
the contract between Judy Stiver and
Alexander Malahoff. Mrs. Stiver agreed
to be artificially inseminated with Mr.
Malahoff's sperm, carry his baby to
term, and deliver it to him, for $10,000
plus expenses.

The baby was born with microcephaly,
a birth defect characterized by a
smaller than normal head and often men-
tal retardation.

Mr. Malahoff, who first accepted
the child, and then rejected it as not
being his own, filed suit against the
Stivers. The cliff-hanger results of
blood tests to determine paternity
were presented on the “Phil Donohue
Show", confirming that the baby was
not fathered by Mr. Malahoff. The
Stivers have also agreed to take the
child.

Mr. Malahoff stated he hoped this
child would help bring him and his wife
closer together. He has been attacked
for thinking that a baby, an old and
popular myth, could ever shore up
a failing marriage.

Psychologists, psychiatrists and
columnists seem to be divided on the
issue of surrogate parenting. All
agree that it will be a while before
surrogacy becomes commonplace.

EDUCATION EQUITY UPDATE
-By Nancy Fohl Castro

Title IX was enacted by the federal
government in an attempt to remove sex
discrimination from our schools. Any
educational institution receiving fed-
eral funds was bound by laws to create
a sex-fair learning environment for
our children. Schools found not to be
in compliance with the law could lose
their federal monies. Although the law
was weak and difficult to enforce, it
was a step in the right direction.

The Reagan Administration has
changed this by cutting funds used to
enforce the law. Federal money is no
longer being used to encourage educa-
tional equity.

The good news is that our [New
York] state legislature may be voting
on a state education equity bill,
hopefully in the current legislature.
This bill is based on the law recently
passed in California banning sex dis-
crimination in the schools. It is
actually a more comprehensive bill than
the federal Title IX and would apply
to any schools receiving state aid.

Leonard Stavinsky is the chair
of the State Education Committee and
has been approached to be the sponsor
of the bill in that state legislature.

The bill is being drafted under the
direction of Beatrice Kachuck who is
the N.Y. State Education Task Force
Chair of the National Organization for
Women.

Anyone wishing to make their views
known concerning this bill should write:

Honorable Leonard Stavinsky
Legislative Office Building
Albany, New York 14248