Review:

by Vera Brittain, Seaview Books, 1981, ISBN 0-87223-679-X. Friendship between women is, in spite of the feminist movement, a subject which is little analyzed and even less celebrated. Consequently, when a book like Vera Brittain's TESTAMENT OF FRIENDSHIP can be found, it affords rejoicing.* The story details the friendship between Brittain and novelist/peace activist Winifred Holtby in the early part of the 20th century. The book was written between 1936 and 1939 and first published in Britain in 1940, five years after Winifred's untimely death at the age of 37. This new American edition was printed in 1981 and contains an introduction by Carolyn G. Heilbrun. Part of this story was televised in the recent Masterpiece Theatre production called TESTAMENT OF YOUTH. Vera Brittain explains in the Prologue that she is writing here the Biography of Winifred Holtby, her long-time friend. But TESTAMENT OF FRIENDSHIP goes far beyond the mere relating of the events of Winifred's life. It unfolds a beautiful friendship which begins with hostility and, like all devoted relationships, never ends, even with the death of one of the partners.

Winifred is born and raised in Yorkshire where her father and mother - soft-hearted, loving folk - are part of what we would prosaically call today the "landed gentry." They were not rich, but were quite comfortable financially, albeit rather isolated and un- in her being treated with derision by the faculty and some students, including at first Vera herself. However, Winifred's deeply caring personality and academic perseverance overcame any sense of superiority which her fellows felt toward her.

Both Vera and Winifred were returning to Somerville after serving as nurses during World War I, consequently they were older than the usual second year students. Vera, intense and grieving over the loss during the war of her brother, her fiancé and two of her brother's friends, is not easily tolerant of Winifred's high spirits and fiery determination to become a writer. The war is over, and despite the bitter sorrow the youth of that generation wore like a medal (and which Vera has written of so movingly in her previous work TESTAMENT OF YOUTH), Winifred is eager to get on with her life. Even though Vera is still raw from her war-induced losses and cannot join in Winifred's enthusiastic overture to life, it is the aftermath of the war which eventually brings them together.

Review by the EMMA Collective

in the structure of government, class and society.

A valuable addition to this reprinted work is the introduction, "Women in the Head: Waisbrooker's Way to Peace," by Pam McAllister. McAllister, also the editor of Reweaving the Web of Life: Feminism and Non-Violence, gives us a historical background of Waisbrooker's life and the context of her work, and also relates this work to contemporary feminist movements, particularly the peace movement.

She also gives a moving personal account of her feelings in researching this piece:

"...where to begin to resurrect Lois Waisbrooker, just me learning the ropes at the library; just me tracking down obscure footnotes and references, thrilled when I made some headway and began to make the pieces fit, just me wondering how I can bring others along on this rare and fascinating peek at Victorian America's radical side...Our history books are filled with the minute details of the lives of this king or that, but the lives and life works of women and poor or minority men are lost to us or buried in the fine print of footnotes."

A Sex Revolution is written as a challenge to women, to question the values of the institutional church, the rule of male government, the audacity of war, the significance of class. It was written by a woman notable as a dynamic writer and speaker, a feminist who was arrested several times for her advocacy of women's right to control their own bodies. So why, you may wonder, have you never heard of Lois Waisbrooker?

Waisbrooker wrote A Sex Revolution in 1893, when she was 67 years old. Although she had an enthusiastic following in her day, she was another woman who has been obscured by male history, until this recent reprinting of her book by New Society Publishers.

In her own day, she was called the "Abraham Lincoln of Women." Her arrests were made under the Comstock Act, which allowed Post Office Censorship of obscenity in the mails. This act was used to ban works such as those by Tolstoy, and birth control educator Margaret Sanger, as well as Waisbrooker.

To demonstrate the inconsistencies of the Act, she reprinted an excerpt about horse penises from a Department of Agriculture report. In an accompanying editorial, she pointed out that this was a government report, containing descriptions which, if they were to be applied to human organs, would have been censored. The issue was barred from the mail.

In A Sex Revolution, Waisbrooker tells a story of women bonding as a class, initially to call a halt to the horrors of war, and later to work toward the creation of a more humane world, through other changes.

For several weeks of coachings, the contrast between Winifred's gay, stimulating popularity and my own isolated depression provoked me to barely concealed hostility....But the link which the War had forged between us was too strong to be broken by these trivial hurts and temporary resentments. It drew us into the Cathedral together on the first anniversary of Armistice Day, and by the following term it was sending us out on long walks to Wood Eaton or Marston Ferry, or on bicycle rides to the wet primrose-starred hollows of Tubney Wood. (pg. 93)

Thus begin sixteen years of almost constant companionship. Vera and Winifred share rooms together throughout their remaining years at Somerville, provide comfort for their private griefs and begin to build a mutual activism for peace and women's rights. They are also determined to become writers of fiction and after graduating from Somerville, both turn down teaching positions to pursue writing careers in London. They take a flat together on Doughty Street and in one of Winifred's letters to her friend, Jean McWilliam, she describes its shortcomings with a certain wistful affection.

"This important book gives us a chance to learn from and about our her-story. Despite some of its dated sentimental phrasing, it is quite enjoyable and well worth reading.

A Sex Revolution is available at EMMA, 168 Elmwood Ave., Buffalo. 

PAGE 6 COMMON GROUND JANUARY 1985

Winifred's letters to Jean