The Collective Meets...

Collectives are famous for con-
ducting long and arduous discussions
to reach consensus on some issues.
At Common Ground we have reached a
consensus on one issue that has

generated many strong feelings: the
balance between articles about
lesbians and articles about hetero-
sexual women.

Like many organizations by, for
and about women, Common Ground has

been criticized by some women for
being too direct in acknowledging
lesbians in the women's community.
Other women have criticized us for not
being direct enough. These criti-
cisms have come from collective
members, readers and advertisers
alike and the issue has been under
discussion since the founding of
CG.
= Our recent consensus was to
affirm our original concept of Common
Ground as a newspaper that is a forum
for all women in western New York.
Western New York women are lesbian
and heterosexual. The pages of
Common Ground reflect this, from

processes to reviews of major ore
about lesbianism. Our pieces will
continue to reflect that difference.

The underlying issue is homo-
phobia; that is, the fear of homo-
sexuality and homosexuals. In the

face of that fear in our community,
it is tempting to choose a single
stance. We could become a vehicle
for lesbians to the exclusion of the
heterosexual world, or we could be-
come a vehicle for heterosexual women
to the exclusion of the lesbian
world.

But such separations divide us as
women rather than unite us. It is
to work in unity, not in separation,
that Common Ground was born.

Sexual preference is only one
difference among local women. There
are many others: race, ethnicity,
class, lifestyles, values and inter-
ests to name a few. Homophobia is
a fear of difference. So is sexism,
racism, class prejudice and ethnic
prejudice, or the fear of a disabled
person because s/he looks different.
So is any system of thought which
promotes a dominant/subordinate
picture of the world. Not to
challenge homophobia is not to
challenge the fear of difference
from which all women have suffered.

Thus the Common Ground collective,
a group of lesbians and heterosexual
women, continues to encourage par-
ticipation for all women. We want you
to read about your lives, we want to
give you information that makes your
lives better, we want to list your
events in the calendar. We want to

work together toward change.
RRKEKKKEEKEKKEKKKK KKK KK KKK IKEKEKEKKEEE:

EKKERKREKRKEREKKEEKKEKEKKEKKEREKKKREKKEEKKEE

COMMON GROUND NOVEMBER 1983 PAGE TWO

“CONTENTS”

Panelists Address the Gender Gap
B.P.C. Suit Continues

2. Contents

Policy

The Collective Meets

3. Leslie Anne Emick Defense Fund
Committee Letter

4. Record Review: LIFELINE
Poet's Corner
Blazon Books

5. Book Review: Gyn/Ecology

Concert Review: Hawkins,
Garthwaite and Sorrels

6. News -- Hot Flashes...
7. Her-Stories: Anna Katherine Green
Daphne's Tree
8. La Operacion: Sterilization Abuse
In Puerto Rico
9. U.S. Laws on Sterilization Abuse
Poem -- Family Legend
10 & 11 - Calendar
12. N.O.W. Candidates' Night
13. Candidates' Night Con't
N.O.W. National Conference Report
14. N.O.W. Resolutions Passed
Racism is the Issue
Letter on Sex-Education
Letter on 1 Rn ae 2
16. Announcements
17. Resources
EMMA Is...
What's Cooking: Call for
material

18 & 19 Ads

Backpage

Cover Art this month is by Sandy
Zagmester. If you are interested in
a copy of this graphic, please con-
tact Common Ground.

WE NEED YOU!!! CG is here as access
to the community for ideas, analysis,
communication...and more. If you are
waiting for an in-depth analysis of
your favorite cause, latest book you
read, or a social phenomenon, you
might have to wait a long time--
because we are here to give you access
to others, not necessarily to write
all the articles, cover all the
events, review all the books. We are
a very small group of people, and we
desperately need your help. Report
news stories, review concerts, events,
books and records, research issues,
write your own opinions down on paper
and tell us what we've missed. We
would be happy to give you access to
others in the pages of Common Ground.
We are looking for variety--in styles,
content, topic and approach. We

know you have lots to say, so why

not say it here in CG? Write c/o

the paper for a style sheet -send
stamped self-addressed envelope,
please.

PHILOSOPHY — Common Ground is potentially, with
help from Western New York women, a forum to
celebrate the rich diversity of our community. We view
the paper as a ribbon that may connect our
commonalities, our intersection points. We are inviting
you to participate actively in the building of a support
system for WNY women. We affirm our commitment to
enhance the lives of women on physical, educational,
spiritual, psychological, social and economic levels. We
want to present, fair-mindedly, the issues that concern
women, and information of value to women. We offer
Common Ground as a place where women can display
their art and personal literature, and review the
tapestries of their experiences.

EDITORIAL POLICY — Common Ground is especially
looking for articles which address the needs and
interests of local women.

1. Common Ground is a publication of news, culture
and dialogue from women’s perspectives.

2. News, Opinion, Analysis and Commentary will each
be clearly labeled as such.

3. We are seeking to provide accurate, straightforward
information of value to women.

4. The collective will not intentionally print or support
materials or viewpoints which will harm women
because of color, sexuality, religious or ethnic
background, physical disability or economic situation.

5. While opinions expressed in Common Ground are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
collective as a whole, we do accept responsibility for
choosing what we print.

SUBMISSIONS — We welcome articles, letters,
information and announcements of interest to women.

Graphics, cartoons, and photographs are
gratefully received. We especially invite women who
do not usually have access to traditional media -
economically or socially disadvantaged - and for whom
English is a second language — to write. Suggested
length of letters: 250 words. Letters must be signed to
be printed. We will, however, respect your privacy and
withhold your name if you request. Suggested length of
articles, commentary, analysis: 500-750 words. Please
type and double-space your work, 40 characters across.
If you do not have access to a typewriter, please print
clearly. In time we hope to have a typewriter, paper,
etc., available for those who request it. Include a
stamped, self-addressed envelope and work and home
phone numbers. Because we want to hear your voices,
if your piece needs to be edited for length or clarity, we
will call you/ask you to do it. Keep copies of your work.
We will try to notify you within three (3) weeks if we
intend to use your work. If we print it, we will give you
five (5) copies of the issue in which it appears. Artwork
should be black and white copies only, and
title/describe your work. We will copyright the entire
issue, but the copyright on each piece reverts to the
author/artist, so that she may decide where her work is
printed. Please request a stylesheet for further
information and guidelines if you want to write.

COMMON GROUND
Women’s Studies Academy
Rockwell Hall
Buffalo State College
1300 Elmwood Avenue
Buffalo, New York 14222
(716) 688-7831

©1983 WNY Women’s Newsjournal

ADVERTISEMENT POLICY AND RATES — See
Advertisement Section.

WOMEN WHO WORKED ON THIS ISSUE:
Diane, Laura, Sue, Esther, Bonnie,
Heather, Maria, Sarah, Beth, Chris,
Gerri, Linda, Karen, Barb, Kay,
Holly, Cathy, Donna, Roberta, Julie,
Joan, Sharon, Peggy, Frigid, Bridget,
Mouse, Diane, Cherin, Betty, Nancy,
Elaine, Alice, Charlene, Jan and
Wanda Wyneau.