Buffalo: Big Town For  
Small Presses Part II  

by Esther Roblin  

In our first article on the small  
presses of Western New York (Common  
Ground, January 1983), we discussed  
some of the qualities that characterize  
many small press publishing ventures. The WNY presses that we will  
be introducing to you in this article  
and in Part III next month (there are  
just too many to cover in one article!)  
typify these qualities, while at the  
same time each retains its own individuality.  

Like other small presses around the  
country, the small presses of WNY are  
all run by a single editor-publisher,  
or by a small group of people who  
share tasks. They have no paid staff.  
Besides holding full-time jobs and  
running the press, most editor-publishers  
are deeply involved in all kinds of  
literary-art activities which benefit  
the whole community. Local presses are  
for the most part non-profit, neither  
authors nor presses able to maintain  
themselves through the sale of publications. They have  
a small circulation, often publish  
irregularly and are always hard-pressed  
for time and money. The fuel  
that keeps the presses running is the  
dedication of their editor-publishers  
who, themselves active writers, believe  
in the value of sharing their  
own work and that of others that they  
admire with an appreciative audience.  

Small presses in WNY have come and  
gone. All but two of the presses operating  
today began after 1970. Several are  
feminist, many others are run by women,  
but all give generous space to the work  
of women writers. While most of the work  
published is local, the presses, as they become  
established, receive submissions from  
across the country and from foreign  
countries. A fair share of famous  
names are included in several area  
presses. The variety of publications  
turned out is vast and bears witness  
to the willingness of local presses to  
experiment in terms of both content  
and format.  

* Intrepid Press - Run by Allen De  
Loach, this press is unique in several  
respects. It is both the oldest  
press in Buffalo and the largest in  
terms of circulation. (It is also  
one of the oldest in the country as a  
whole.) It was born, not in Buffalo,  
but on New York City's Lower East Side  
in 1964. Two years later, De Loach  
brought Intrepid to Buffalo. Ever  
mindful of its auspicious beginnings  
among the likes of Allen Ginsberg and  
other NYC 'beat' poets, De Loach con-  
siders Intrepid an international press  
rather than a regional one. Its pub-  
lications are translated into at least  
seven different languages and, according  
to De Loach, “Intrepid sells more  
copies in Pakistan than it does in  
Buffalo!" Intrepid has numbered  
among its contributors many famous  
names including Ginsberg, Levertov,  
Corman, Oppenheimer and di Prima.  
The press publishes Intrepid magazine,  
the Beau Fleuve Series (a name which  
beautifully hints at its Buffalo con-  
nection) and the 23 Club Series. Beau  
Fleuve puts out poetry chapbooks and  
anthologies and published the first  
serious criticism on the work of  
William S. Burroughs. The 23 Club  
Series has published experimental  
prose. Intrepid prints 1500 copies  

RAGES. ROME ERQUND | FEBRUARY 1988  

of the magazine and 500 to 1000 cop-  
ies of its other publications.  

* Conch Magazine Ltd. - This press  
began publishing in 1969 with the aim  
of presenting "an authentic African  
viewpoint through an original analy-  
sis and interpretation of current and  
significant issues in Africa.” Its  
publications are scholarly in nature  
and encompass work in all kinds of  
disciplines (law, medicine, sociology,  
history, etc.). Its first publication  
was a bi-yearly journal, Conch Maga-  
zine, which has a circulation of 2500.  
In 1972, Conch began publishing mono-  
graphs; in 1973, the Conch Review of  
Books: A Literary Supplement on  
Africa, which contains book, film and  
music reviews; and, in 1979, Trado-  
Medic Books which is concerned with  
“all issues of health, medicine, and  
culture in the Third World."  

* Earth's Daughters - Allen De Loach  
published Judith Kerman's first book,  
Obsessions, in the Beau Fleuve Series  
and encouraged her to start her own  

publication, Realizing that women were...  

seriously under-represented in 'main-  
stream' little magazines and intimidat-  
ed by rejection slips, Kerman determin-  
ed to provide a place "where women  
would truly feel welcome". Thus, in  
1971, Earth's Daughters was born and  

it has remained WNY's feminist publi-  
cation par excellence. When Kerman  
left Buffalo in 1978, she entrusted  

the magazine to a hand-picked group of  
women who continue to run it, despite  
many changes in personnel, as a suc-  
cessful collective. The members of  

ED now proudly boast that theirs is  

the oldest continuously running fem-  
inist literary publication in the  
United States.  

It has been said of ED that it  
"comes in all shapes, contains all  
manner of art, and specializes in sur-  
prise." Its hallmark has become its  
appearance in unusual formats. Is-  
sues have arrived as broadsides, chap-  
books, as a paper-sculpture box, as a  
double split-paged book, as a group of  
scrolls inside a storage tube, and  
most recently as a calendar of poetry  
and art. 100 to 750 copies of an is-  
sue are printed. The five women who  
now comprise ED's collective, jimmie  
canfield, Kastle Brill, Robin Willough-  
by, Ryki Zukerman and Bonnie Johnson,  
are all poets (and a few are artists,  
too) who have had a far-reaching in-  
fluence on the literary arts in WNY.  

As a group, they have given many poetry  
readings, most recently a performance  
that was simultaneously signed for the  
deaf; individually, they have had their  
works published by a number of other  
presses and are involved in organizing  
and participating in many literary-  
art-music happenings in the community.  

* White Pine Press - Dennis Maloney,  
a landscape artist with the city of  

Buffalo, founded White Pine Press in  
1973. It is the most prolific of WNY  
presses, having published more than 80  
titles over the past ten years. White  
Pine has published sets of poetry  
postcards, chapbooks of individual  
poets, books of translations, and most  
recently, a cookbook of sugar-free  
vegetarian recipes created by Judy  
Turpin, as well as White Pine Journal,  
a magazine of poetry, translations,  
short fiction, essays and graphics.  
Planned for 1983 are issues devoted to  
the work of the Spanish poet Antonio  
Machado and a double issue on Joel Op-  
penheimer. Besides running White Pine,  
Maloney is a member of MAP, a group  
that specializes in giving performances  
that combine music and dance with the  
spoken word.  

* Allegheny Mountain Press - This  
press was started in 1974 by Helen and  
Ford Ruggieri when they obtained an old  
photo offset printing press. They are  
one of only two area small press pub-  
lishers that also do their own print-  
ing. They publish Uroboros, a liter-  
ary-arts magazine published twice a  
year, that includes poetry, fiction,  
reviews, art and photography, as well  
as Uroboros books, which have been  
primarily poetry chapbooks. Alle-  
gheny is now considering expanding its  
scope to include more commercially  
salable items such as novels or ‘how-  
to' books in an effort to keep the  
press running.  

* Just Buffalo Press - This press  
started publishing in 1975. It is  
only one of a multitude of projects  
flowing out of the Just Buffalo Center  
for the Literary Arts located in the  
Allentown Community Center. Just  
Buffalo, directed by Debora Daley, is  
one of only seven literary centers in  
the country designated and funded as  
such by the National Endowment for  
the Arts. The Center sponsors read-  
ings by local as well as nationally  
known writers, writing workshops and  
master classes; a new "Writers in  
Education" program which, in con-  
junction with the Buffalo Board of  
Education, will create four-day  
residencies for writers in specially  
designated schools; and a Spoken Arts  
radio program on WBFO. The press  
publishes limited edition silk-  
screened broadsides of poems read at  
the sponsored readings, as well as a  
series of poetry chapbooks, three so  
far by local women writers, and a  
magazine, the name of which was recent-  
ly changed from Inc. to Ink. Ink  
prints 300 copies of each issue and  
pays its contributors a token fee;  
authors of the chapbooks are given as  
payment half of the run of 250 copies.  

Next month: more introductions to  
WNY's incredible small press community.  

Allegheny Mountain Press, 111 N. 10th  
Street, Olean, N.Y. 14760.  

Conch Magazine Ltd., 102 Normal Ave.,  
Buffalo, N.Y. 14213.  

Earth's Daughters, P. O. Box 41,  
Central Park Station, Buffalo, N.Y. 14215.  

Intrepid Press, P.O. Box 110, Central  
Park Station, Buffalo, N.Y. 14215.  

Just Buffalo Press, Allentown Com-  
munity Center, 111 Elmwood Ave., Buffalo,  
N.Y. 14201.  

White Pine Press, P.O. Box 236,  
Niagara Square Station, Buffalo,  
N.Y. 14201.