GETTING

Last month's column dealt with utility costs and how to contact agencies if you need assistance paying those costs. One of the agencies is HEAP, a federal program set up to aid low-income families pay heating bills. With the cold January upon us, it is a good idea to give fairly detailed explanations of who can apply and what is required to apply. First, payments are set up two ways. Most payments are sent directly to your fuel vendor unless your heat is included in your rent payment or you have to set up a new account with a utility for fuel. In that situation, payment will be sent directly to you. Emergency service is provided, but on a limited basis.

Heads of households 60 years of age or over may in person or by mail apply to:

ERIE COUNTY RATH BUILDING

ROOM 209  
158 PEARL STREET  
BUFFALO, N.Y. 14202  

Those who have received a HEAP grant for 1984-85 will automatically receive a questionnaire from the Department of Social Services. (Complete this and return this promptly to receive automatic benefits.) Food stamp recipients will also receive applications in the mail. Adult Supplemental Social Security Recipients living alone will receive an automatic cash payment from the N.Y. State Department of Social Services. Any resident of Erie County, including seasonal or migrant residents, may apply.

Next, you must know what your Maximum Gross Monthly Income can be. This is the table HEAP prints in its brochure:

Household Max. Gross Mthly.  
Size Income  
$ 747,  

For each additional person, add $218. Applicants are required to provide proof of where you presently live and one of the following: a rent receipt, a copy of your lease, a fuel/utility bill, a water, sewage or tax bill, or a mortgage payment receipt.

Each person in your household must also provide one or more of the following: a birth certificate, a baptismal certificate, school records, Social Security cards (all individuals in the family), a driver's license, or a marriage certificate.

A copy of your most recent fuel/utility bill is required. If your heat is included in your rent, you must bring a statement from your landlord, indicating that your heat and utilities are included. Proof of income from each member of your household is also required by providing the following: pay stubs for the most recent four weeks, business records if self-employed for the most recent three months, Unemployment Insurance Benefits Book, child support or alimony checks, Social Security, Veteran's Benefits, pensions, Workmen's Compensation (the last four stated require a copy of your most recent check or award letter) and a Bankbook/dividend or interest statement.

Finally, emergencies are defined by HEAP as “a condition of having been without heat for the night preceding the day that they apply, or receipt of notice that shut-off will occur in seven days." They further state that “a voucher will be prepared to relieve the emergency condition only if the applicant arranges with the utility provider to pay the difference between the amount of the HEAP grant and the arrearage owed by the applicant." Vouchers are available for fuel delivery, furnace repair, emergency shelter, utility reconnection, or to prevent disconnection, and is LIMITED BY THE AMOUNT OF FUNDS AVAILABLE. Applicants must provide the previous information mentioned plus verification that there was no heat in the home the night before, verification that all your financial resources do not exceed $1,590 for one person or $2,250 for a household with more than one person. You must also provide furnace repair estimates from three acceptable dealers, proof that shut-off or disconnection has occurred, the fuel dealer's name and phone number and be willing to be investigated. Naturally, copies of the shut-off notices must be provided.

As you can see, to receive help you must be organized. If you feel you may require help in the near future begin to gather the documents listed above. Do not wait for an emergency situation.

It is possible the agency will ask for more than is stated in this column but at least you will be well on your way to fulfill requirements. Have a warm and healthy winter, everyone!

You've come the wrong way, baby!

Crop up during the school years.

Women

Smoking

by Sharon Screen

A recent article in Newsweek magazine (11/25/85) spotlighted the problems associated with smoking for women. For one, while lung cancer is decreasing for white men in this country, it is rapidly rising for all women.

Newsweek's writers were quick to point a finger at Ms. magazine, for "...never publish[ing] a feature article devoted to the health risks of smoking." (p. 77). So in an attempt to fill this gap, I felt it worthwhile to remind our readers of the myriad hazards of cigarette smoking.

This year, more women will die of lung cancer than breast cancer. In addition, women who smoke are more susceptible to emphysema, heart disease and stroke than non-smokers.

Women smokers also risk a host of medical problems related to reproduction. One is infertility. Women who smoke are 25% less fertile; consequently, it takes these women longer to conceive. Smokers are also more apt to begin menopause early. Smoking also lowers estrogen levels which help keep bones strong. Thus smokers increase their tendency toward osteoporosis. Furthermore, if a woman smokes while taking oral contraceptives, she may be more susceptible to heart disease and circulatory problems.

According to the Newsweek article, "the biggest increase in the rate of smoking has been among women in their prime childbearing years—20 to 34 years old” (p. 76). And smoking during pregnancy itself can cause many problems. First, the risk of miscarriage for smokers is 10 times higher than for non-smokers. Second, babies of smokers have lower birth weights. Abnormally low birth weight is linked with various infant problems, including immature lungs, respiratory problems, bowel problems, infections, and intellectual impairment.

Finally, babies of smokers have up to a 50% higher risk of developing SIDS (Sudden Infant Death Syndrome).

If so many dangers exist, why do so many women continue to smoke? Obviously it is a habit that is hard to break, a habit which many older women began long before research uncovered all these risks. The media also exerts a strong influence. With the exception of publicizing the dangers of smoking during pregnancy, advertising has glorified smoking. Tobacco companies run ads that make smoking look glamorous. Many ads also make appeal to women's sense of new-found freedom and ambition.

Feminism is often a scapegoat. Writers like to blame the women's movement for pushing women into smoking.

continued page 14

PAGE 11 COMMON GROUND JANUARY 1986