Winter's Edge

by Lynne Scribner

Valerie Miner's book revolves
around the characters of Chrissie
MacInnes and Margaret Sawyer, two
"elderly" women living in the down-
town San Francisco area referred
to as "The Tenderloin." Chrissie
is a headstrong, gutsy, determined
woman who emigrated from Scotland
some 30 years earlier. She works
as a waitress in Mummer's Cafe.

She is deeply involved in the poli-
tics of the area (the book focuses
on the election for City Supervisor.
Chrissie is backing Marissa Washing-
ton, a black woman she first met while
protesting in Washington in the late
50s.) She is single but, through
her flashbacks, we see she was once
involved with an Indian man back in
Scotland who was killed because of
their "mixed" relationship.

Margaret seems the antithesis of
her good friend. She is naive, good-
natured, at peace with the world.
She is a widow who has three children
--her daughter Janey, a writer who
fled to Canada during the 60s, her
son Rob who lives in Alaska, and her
son Michael (the youngest) who was
killed in Vietnam. She works in a
newspaper shop and endeavors to
mind her own business. She becomes
romantically involved with the local
minister, Roger Bentman.

Miner has a flair for recreating
the atmosphere of the district. She
makes the characters come to life.
There's Ernie, the effervescent gay;
Roberto, a favorite customer who is
raising three daughters by himself;
Gudrun, a Swedish co-worker of
Chrissie's who moonlights as a
hooker and shows an offbeat interest

NEW BOOKS JUST OUT
by E.R. Mann

Room Of Our Own - Volume 9, 1986

The Women's Writing Workshop at
SUNY/Buffalo has produced another fine
volume of poetry and artwork. This
particular collection is varied and
well-balanced, interesting to look
at and to read. The diversity of
women's voices and experiences is
clearly and articulately presented.

The Land of Look Behind - Michelle
Cliff. Firebrand Books 1986.

This is a collection of Cliff's
poetry and prose in which she states
she "tried to depict personal fragmen-
tation and describe political reality,
according to the peculiar lens of the
colonized." The book brings together,
examines and puts into perspective her
personal and political development.

As a light-skinned Black woman who
comes from a "culture of colonialism,
a culture of Black people riven from
each other," Cliff works to make whole-
ness out of the fragmentation that
is the legacy of the colonized. In
doing so, she explores both the inner
and outer terrain; vantage points as
varied - and as similar - as the
Anne Frank House in the Netherlands,
the Crazy Teepee on Route 191 in
Massachusetts, and the tourist beaches
of Jamaica.

in Ernie. Then there's Douglas Sin-
clair, Margaret's boss. He is a
basically good man who has problems
dealing with his son Kevin (who is

in real estate and gets involved in

a bribery scam to help Jake Carson win
the election for City Supervisor).

When Miner describes Chrissie and
Margaret walking down Geary Street
with the wind at their backs, you can
feel it. When she shows them at a
rally for Marissa, you can see the
expressions on their faces. Chrissie
is always trying to get Margaret more
involved in politics, but Margaret
prefers to stay out of it, not think-
ing that politics solve people's
problems. She must reevaluate her
position, however, when she is unwit-
tingly thrown into the middle of
things, and must make a decision that
affects the lives of those around her.

Between the politics there are two
love stories. One, the more obvious,
is between Margaret and the Reverend.
He's a widower who has been waiting
for Margaret to notice him in a
romantic way. She has never envisioned
that his glances, the way he
speaks to her, are anything but
friendly gestures. He finally finds
a way to start “seeing" her which in
doing so creates a conflict of emo-
tions for Margaret. The other love
is that of two close friends--Chrissie
and Margaret. They share a very real
love which neither has seen for its
potential. ‘This love is strong,”
binding, comforting--in a way that
while not romantic, is part of a
committed relationship.

We follow these characters from
the Indian summer of September through
the brisk days of November. In the
end, the reader feels revitalized,
feeling that there is still some good
to be found in people if we take the
time to look for it. The Tenderloin
will survive, friendships will con-
tinue, and a couple of the characters
will be brought closer together.

I would have liked to see a bit
more personal descriptions, for
example with Margaret's children--
especially Janey. I think she
could have been a more visible
character (we only "see" her through
her letters). There also could have
been more background on Ernie and
Gudrun, I felt. What led them to
their place in the Tenderloin? And
what about Marissa? Her getting
elected is the focal point of the
book and yet her character is not
sharply defined. Physically, yes.
Emotionally, not to a great extent.
We know only generalizations of
her ideas for the Tenderloin. The
reader is left to imagine specifics.

Overall, I feel that Miner has
written a good descriptive piece of
fiction that is worth reading. Her
visualization of the area and charac-
ters and ability to see into their
hearts is commendable. The fact
that Chrissie and Margaret's rela-
tionship grows stronger at the end
proves their love is viable and
cannot be taken lightly. And yes,

I agree with Gudrun that you can
make love to someone without having
to make love to them.

©©©6©O6E The Sun is

by Deborah Jop

Since childhood I've been fascina-
ted by the American Indians. Of
course, back then nearly all the
stories I read about these people
were written by white men. That's
why The Sun Is Not Merciful, a com-
pilation of short stories by Anna
Lee Walters, is particularly valuable
to me. An American Indian herself,
she composes short and simple, yet
wonderfully insightful tales of her
people. Each of her stories in some
way focuses on the inescapable lone-
liness of the women involved.

Nearly all of the women are care-
takers of men. One is a quiet and
patient woman who is gracefully grow-
ing older while living with a husband
who is desperately trying to regain
his youth by cavorting with younger
women. Another has a son whom she
helplessly sees growing up to be a
thief and a liar. As in the former
story there is a sense of futility
in the disintegration of the relation-
ships involved that we're quite sure
will never be resolved. In “The Le-
gend of John Stink," however, we have
one of the more uplifting stories.

It concerns a 13-year-old girl who is
sent to be a caretaker for an unkempt
older man that no one else wants any-
thing to do with. Gradually learning

to love him ("like I love the wind,” as
she delicately states it), she dis-

Eleni

ELENI (pronounced e-lay'-nee) is
Nicholas Gage's love song to his mother,
Eleni Gatzoyiannis, a woman executed by
Greek communist guerrillas in 1948,
when her son was 9 years old. Her bru-
tal death haunts Gage into his adult-
hood and when, as a New York Times re-
porter, he is assigned to cover Athens,
he determines to avenge her death. He
systematically travels throughout Greece
and Eastern Europe hunting all those
left living who remember Eleni and the
circumstances leading to her execution.
In the process, Gage flashes back to
his childhood in the small Greek town
of Lia, situated in the rugged Mourgana
Mountains near the Albanian border.

Gage portrays Eleni as a strong wo-
man, bound by the customs and duties
traditionally taken on by eldest daugh-
ters in rural Greek families. Eleni's

PAGE 4 COMMON GROUND JULY 1986