| Women

and
the

Arts

Common Ground will be producing
our 4th annual issue on "Women and
the Arts" in April 1986. We are
looking for submissions in the
areas of poetry, short fiction,
artwork (black & white, high
contrast), photography (black and
white only), cartoons and humorous
pieces.

The deadline for submitting
material is February 15, 1986.

Be sure that a self-stamped, self-
addressed envelope is enclosed, and
that your name, address and
telephone number is on each page.
We are looking for work that par-
ticularly reflects women's views
of the world.

We regret that we will not be
able to offer cash prizes this
year, but will offer in-kind
awards, such as free advertising
or subscriptions to those women
whose work is used in this
issue.

CONTENTS

1 ROE VS. WADE
I.W.D. INFORMATION

2 WOMEN AND THE ARTS
THE COLLECTIVE MEETS

POLICY
3 NEWS

EMMA TO RE-OPEN
4 SALUTING BLACK SISTERS

COLLECTIVE MEETS, CON'T.

5 DAPHNE'S TREE
POTPOURRI: THOUGHTS ON FRIENDSHIP

6 & 7 CALENDAR

8. THE HIPS HAVE IT

9 BOOK REVIEW: MARGARET MEAD
YEAR OF THE TIGER

10 ANNOUNCEMENTS
11 ADS:

COLLECTIVE MEETS, CON'T
12. BACK PAGE:

SUBSCRIPTION INFORMATION

& FOND FAREWELL TO GERRI BAYER,
FOUNDING MOTHER AND FAITHFUL
COLLECTIVE MEMBER OF CG, NOW
MOVED TO RHODE ISLAND.

OUR OFFICES HAVE NOW MOVED FROM

ATION AND ASSOCIATION.

The Collective Meets...

As the new year gets underway, our
recent Common Ground collective meet-
ings have concentrated on formulating
our new year's resolutions. Some of
our policy statements remain firm
since our first issue three and a
half years ago, and some have devel-
oped as new situations present them-
selves and we receive feedback from
our readers. We'd like to share our
thoughts with you, and as always,
encourage your comments and criticism,
both positive and negative.

Within the past year or so, we
have "retrenched" from 20 to 16 pages.
This move was economically dictated.
Our printing costs have inflated 7-
10% EACH YEAR, and we are trying to
"hold the line" on subscription pri-
ces as long as possible. However,
even with a cut in the number of
pages, we have tried our best to a-
void reducing content. Many of our
recent issues have contained as much
or more material as our earlier 20
page, 3 column paper. We accomplished
this by the decision to run some "4
column" pages that contain smaller
type.

However, feedback from our readers
has indicated that too many of these
“small type” pages makes for difficult
reading. After much discussion with
the shared desire to maximize the
number of writers CG features, our
decision is to implement a stricter
editorial policy on article length.
The suggested length of articles to
be submitted has always been 500-750

PAGE 2 COMMON GROUND FEBRUARY 1986

words, maximum, and we are now - no
matter how reluctantly - going to at-
tempt to adhere more firmly to these
guidelines. In addition, regular
column writers have been asked to
tailor their articles to a more concise
format. There will no doubt be times
that a 4 column format is needed, how-
ever, we hope to bring you a more con-
cise and readable news journal. We wel-
come your feedback on this change.
Questions have also arisen con-
cerning CG's policy of placement of
articles: e.g., what makes a front
page piece? Why did this article ap-
pear on page thirteen and not further
toward the front, and so forth. Of
course, we attempt to place articles
toward the front of the paper that
are currently newsworthy and of the
most interest to our general reader-
ship. However, there always are a
number of variables. First, unlike
most mainstream media publications
we try, whenever possible, to keep
an article on a single page. Al-
though this adds much to CG's over-
all aesthetic and readability, it
usually makes layout more difficult
due to length differences of articles.
We also often hold space for a
late arriving article that we have
not seen in full, and we equally
often find that the reserved page
gives the article more or less at-
tention than it actually deserves.
And it is sad but true that we also

Continued on page

POLICY

PHILOSOPHY - Common Ground is potentially, with
help from Western New York women, a forum to
celebrate the rich diversity of our community. We view
the paper as a ‘ribbon that may connect our com-
monalities, our intersection points. We are inviting you
to participate actively in the building of a support system
for WNY women. We affirm our commitment to enhance
the lives of women on physical, educational, spiritual,
psychological, social and economic levels. We want to
present, fair-mindedly, the issues that concern women,
and information of value to women. We offer Common
Ground as a place where women can display their art
and personal literature, and review the tapestries of their
experiences.

EDITORIAL POLICY - Common Ground is especially
looking for articles which address the needs and interests
of local women.

1. Common Ground is a publication of news, culture
and dialogue from women’s perspectives.

2. News, Opinion, Analysis and Commentary will
each be clearly labeled as such.

3. We are seeking to provide accurate, straightforward
information of value to women.

4. The collective will not intentionally print or sup-
port materials or viewpoints which will harm women
because of color, sexuality, religious or ethnic
background, physical disability or economic situation.

5. While opinions expressed in Common Ground are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the col-
lective as a whole; we do accept responsibility for choos-
ing what we print.

SUBMISSIONS — We welcome articles, letters, infor-
mation and announcements of interest to women.
Graphics, cartoons, art and photography will be gratefully
received. We especially invite women who do not
usually have access to traditional media - women of col-
or, differently abled, economically or educationally
disadvantaged, and those for whom English is a second
language - to write. Suggested length of letters: 250
words. Letters must be signed to be printed. We will,
however, respect your privacy and withhold your name
if you request. Suggested length of articles, commentary,
analysis: 500-750 words. Please type and double space
your work, 40 characters across. If you do not have ac-
cess to a typewriter, please print clearly. In time we hope
to have a typewriter, paper, etc., available for those who
request it. Include a stamped, self-addressed envelope
and work and home phone numbers. Because we want
to hear your voices, if your piece needs to be edited for
length or clarity, we will call you/ask you to do it. Keep
copies of your work. We will try to notify you within
three (3) weeks if we intend to use your work. If we print
it, we will give you five (5) copies of the issue in which
it appears. Artwork should be black and white copies
only, and title/describe your work. We will copyright the
entire issue, but the copyright on each piece reverts to
the author/artist, that she may decide where her work
is printed. Please request a style-sheet for further infor-
mation and guidelines if you want to write.

COMMON GROUND
WNY Women’s Newsjournal
P.O. Box 313

Bidwell Station

Buffalo, New York 14222

New Phone Number: 881-4383

(c) 1986 WNY Women’s Newsjournal

ADVERTISEMENT POLICY AND RATES — See Adver-
tisement Section.

WOMEN WHO WORKED ON THIS ISSUE:
ELEANOR, BETH, BETH, CHRIS,
ELIZABETH, CATHY, SHARON, SUSAN,
LAURA, ADELINE, LINDA, PEGGY,
CHARLENE, FRIGID, HOPE, JOAN,
LYNN, CHARLOTTE, ESTHER, AND
WANDA WYNEAU.

Subscribe to
Common Ground!