I am a nursing mother, and I dis-
covered early in my first nursing re-
lationship, as do most mothers, that
a distance double standard exists in
American culture. That double standard
centers around breasts.

Nowadays it is fairly acceptable
and quite common for breasts to be
exposed - either partially or fully -
for the titillation of men. Yet for
them to be seen in their ultimate
and primary function, that is, feeding
babies, is still often taboo.

Think back to elementary school
when you first learned about mammals.
Teachers succinctly defined them for
us as a class of animals that, among
other characteristics, feed their
young with mother's milk. But most
teachers did not elaborate, and so we

all wondered just how they did that,
and where that milk actually came

from. Only our friends on the farm
really knew the facts.

And if we were enlightened further,
we were only shown pictures of animals
such as pigs or cows nursing. In fact
I always was envious of those friends
who actually saw their pet dogs or cats
giving birth and then feeding their
babies. But our teachers hardly ever
made the connection between all those
nursing animals and the mammalian
quality of the human animal. They
would never have been able to actually
utter the word "breast" (indeed, per-
haps they weren't even allowed to),
no less show us a picture of, or talk
about nursing women.

All those teachers were not the
only ones unable to call breasts by
their real name. Many people, both
men and women, still skillfully avoid
the word by substituting more depre-
cating terms. "Boobs", "jugs", "tits",
and "bazooms" are seemingly used as
euphemisms; yet because they depict
breasts as mere playthings for men,

I find these words much more offensive
and explicit than "breast". And

when women themselves refer to their
own breasts as "boobs" or "tits", I
am not only uneasy but I am also
saddened by our inability to feel
comfortable with our own bodies.

Feeling comfortable about one's
body -- and one's breasts in par-
ticular -- is a very important factor
for successful nursing. Ironically,
even though it is perfectly fine

to see partially exposed breasts on
TV, in movies and in advertisements,

NURSING
MOTHERS

By Sharon Przepasniak

the same is unfortunately not true
for partially exposed nursing breasts.
So many women either choose not to
nurse at all, or are compelled to
give it up after only a short time.

Despite the fact that nursing is
becoming more and more common, many
women still feel very self-conscious
with this most natural process. Cer-
tainly, breastfeeding provides both
ideal nutrition for babies as well
as a beautiful bond between mother
and child. And it is obviously much
less work than buying and preparing
formula, not to mention that it is
very inexpensive. But all these
wonderful and practical recommen-
dations aside, some women are pre-
vented from nursing because it is
so difficult to have people other
than our lovers see our breasts,
and in particular, our nipples.

I know women who quit nursing —
after only a short time because they
found it too embarrassing. Others
tired of trying to nurse discreetly,
which, incidentally, is no small feat.
Newborns usually cry when you "change
sides", thus immediately drawing
stares just when you are groping
to do up or undo your bra; older
babies tend to stop and sing, talk
and play with your bra, shirt or
breasts (or all three!) while they
blissfully nurse.

Then some women - myself included -
have struggled to breastfeed unob-
trusively. But at the same time
we become increasingly angry every
time we see breasts flaunted on TV or
on magazine covers. We resent having
to hide our breasts, yet we think it
is still important to defer to the
feelings of our friends and acquain-
tances who were not socialized to be
comfortable around nursing women.

I also know mothers who gave up
breastfeeding early on because they

were tired of doing it in bedrooms,
bathrooms and fitting rooms, often
sitting on the floor, beds or seats
with no back support. Some women
isolated themselves and their babies
because they didn't want to make
people feel ill at ease, and others
felt nervous in the presence of those
who were uncomfortable (and nervous-
ness hinders the ability to nurse
well). Still others would "leave
the room" at the insistence of hus-
bands or parents.

The baby’s gender can also affect
how long a woman nurses; girls some-
times get the benefit from mother's
milk longer than boys. Some women
will stop nursing boys as they ap-
proach one year old, either because
others (often older people, and
especially parents) tell us that it
is wrong or even dirty for little boys
to see and feel their mother's breasts,
or because the women themselves feel

uncomfortable breastfeeding their baby
boys.

Nursing mothers can encounter both
verbal discouragement and crude or
even obscene remarks. They are still
being asked to leave public places
(see NEWS, this issue of CG), probably
not so much because of supposed health
regulations as much as the inability
of others to know how to handle them-
selves and how to continue function-
ing in the presence of a nursing mother.
Such intimidation in public places
is so discouraging and humiliating
that it only serves to further isolate
women in their homes.

So, contrary to current popular
culture, breasts are not primarily
objects to please men. Rather they are
a means of nourishing and bonding with
our infants, and that is why we have
them in the first place. The current
baby boom, as well as the increase in
the number of women who choose to nurse
their babies, should eventually dim-
inish all the above-mentioned ob-
stacles to successful breastfeeding.

Isn't it both ironic and disheart-
ening that in an age of supposed sex-
ual freedom, where virtually every
drugstore magazine rack offers us
all the breasts we'd ever care to see,
some nursing women feel self-con-
scious at best, and censured, at
worst? Until this double standard
disappears, women will still nurse
clumsily and furtively, or worse,
not nurse at all.

PAGE 9 COMMON GROUND _ APRIL 1984