Peels ee eontoete

1

afeeteete

&

e *

Seetoodestesdoateedentente tendo sfeateedente ate ate edeatekeate ate eleateeheaderte sleateneetenteete

teode ae nde age fe ade rtenteste eke atone eke ede nge steeds

Several years ago, two men that I
know well, one of whom is married,
were discussing the Japanese custom
which dictates that a woman from a
well-to-do family who marries a man
from a lower class gives her surname
to her husband at marriage. This is,
of course, just the opposite of what
has traditionally been done in our
country.

These two men momentarily pondered
how it would be to give up their last
names, and for the rest of their lives
be known by their wives' names. One
snapped, "Can you imagine?!", they
both laughed heartily; and then they
quickly dismissed the whole notion as
their conversation turned to other,
presumably more "important" subjects.

As I listened, the proverbial light
bulb popped: those were my sentiments
exactly! And so this conversation
was the initial step in a long decision
making process that only a few months
ago was completed.

Readers of this column may have
noticed that my by-line has changed
from “Sharon Przepasniak" to “Sharon
Green"; after 11 years of marriage, I
have legally returned to my original
surname. (Notice that I deliberately
avoided calling it my "maiden" name,
a term which I have some trouble with.
A medieval word, which is seldom used
in any other context in present-day
American English, "maiden" is a synonym
for virginity and inexperience, which
is simply not applicable to all unmar-
ried women.)

To backtrack a bit, when I got
married in 1973, I toyed with the idea
of keeping my own last name. But for
a few very short-sighted personal rea-
sons, as well as the fact that I was
so caught up in wedding preparations
that the whole idea got tossed by the
wayside, I gave up the name that had
been mine for 22 years, the name that
I had struggled to learn to pronounce
as a toddler and learn to spell as a
first grader, the name that I was
both ashamed of, when in 6th grade my
peers took to calling me "Greenie-
Stickum-Caps" (remember them?), and
proud of, when I saw it on such things
as my high school diploma, my college
acceptance letters, and under my first
"Letter to the Editor" in the Buffalo
Evening News.

After some years of being defiant
and rebellious during college, as so
many of us were in those horrid Nixon-
Viet Nam years, my approaching wedding
prompted in me an almost reactionary
return to more traditional middle-
class values. Assuming one's husband's
surname just seemed to go hand-in-hand
with white dresses, tuxedoes, and
throwing the garter (another sexist
tradition, but more on that another
time).

WHAT'S IN
A NAME?

by Sharon Green

In the early years of our marriage,
nearly all my energy was channeled into
the marriage itself as well as my he-
Yet at work, I was
known either as "Mrs. Sharon,"
at the one job where I dealt with
numerous customers by phone, “Sharon
Green." Employers reasoned that
"Przepasniak" was much too difficult
to spell and pronounce, and even
though such reasons smack of blatant
ethnic prejudice, I guess I welcomed
any chance to be known by my own name.

Of course, since my name is shorter
and simpler, we have always used it
for ordering pizzas, placing restaurant
reservations and the like. Yet even
though that was done for convenience,
I've often felt that my name was tri-
vialized. It could only be used for
such relatively unimportant purposes,
but for the more crucial matters in
our lives, such as bank accounts, the
house deed, and our children's sur-
names, neither of us would ever doubt
for a moment that my husband's name
would be used.

Well, as I have already implied,

I have missed my own name all these
years, and I have felt envious of my
sibling when I hear people say his
full name, still the same as it has
been all his life. As I matured and
approached my 30's, I found myself

at home with babies, and for the first
time in my adult life, I had massive
stretches of time to think and reflect.
And one of the many ideas I began to
ponder is the innumerable ways in
which our culture is patriarchal.
Again, the thought of retrieving my
own name crept in.

Would I feel less like an appendage,
and would we feel more like equal
partners if we both had our own names?
Would “Green" really be less patri-
archal? (After all, it was the name
of my adoptive father, and his father
before him.) Will my children lose
sight of my reasons and my example
if their peers tease them because their
mom has a different last name? Or
does this all even matter? Are last
names ultimately only window dressing?
I tossed such questions around in the
back of my mind for many months.

That conversation I quoted above
had told me a lot about how some
people (usually men) are not only for-
tunate but even smug about it (don't
they call that male privilege?), while
other people (usually women) repeatedly
give in, give up, and sacrifice, often
willingly. The surname custom is not
only an example of this dichotomy, it
is also symbolic of the identity we
women so often lose in marriage. So
I sought the advice of a lawyer, who
informed me that all I need do is
change my driver's license and all
other documents subsequent to that.

It sounded so simple, but the im-
plication of such a change after many
years of marriage (as opposed to those
merely retaining their own name from the
start of the marriage) demanded still more consid-
eration.

The final push I needed to give
myself came last year, when I gave

birth to a daughter. My other child,
then nearly 4, had already enabled me
to realize just how incredibly crucial
and influential a parent's examples
are. But during those first weeks

I held a baby girl in my arms, while

I nursed her and loved her, I vowed
that I would do all I could to set
positive examples for her, and to do
whatever small good I could do for her
for both my children--to make our
culture less oppressive and less con-
fining for women in the future.

The options, I might add, were
unappealing. A common compromise
these days seems to be a hyphenated
version of both names (Jane Doe-
Clark), or simply a double last name
(Jane Doe Clark), although in this
case, the woman's own surname is
treated merely like a middle name and
thus often omitted. In the case of
the former, "Ms." needs to be used
as a title, whereas the latter just
ends up getting called "Mrs. Clark."
As for me, not only would a hyphenated
name be much too long, I don't feel
the need to be identified through my
husband any more than he feels the
need to be identified through me.
Rather, I see us as two individuals
who have chosen to be married.

Hyphenated names also seem imprac-
tical when passed on to the children.
What happens when 2 hyphenated-name
people marry? Will their children
have four surnames?! As for my child-
ren, their last names will remain the
same, that is, the same as my husband.
A different name would be too trauma-
tic for my five-year-old.

Even though this change required
much time and a bit of courage, I took
such an option for granted until I
recently received word from a dear
friend in Switzerland, telling me that
in her country such a thing would be
highly illegal. So now I appreciate
even more regaining my own name.

When my son questioned me about it all,
I asked him, "How would you feel if,
all of a sudden, you could never use
one of your names again?" When Andy,
who just loves his first name, replied,
"I wouldn't like it," I explained,
“Well, that's the way I feel about it."

When put this way, it again sounds
so simple. And it feels so good to
me. It's akin to having an old, long-
lost friend return home at last.

COMMON GROUND NOVEMBER 1984 PAGE