Working Women con't

WOMEN AND WORK

The report shows that black women
have always participated in the work
force in greater numbers than white
women. In 1920, 40% of black women
worked for a wage as compared to 20%

of white women.
By 1947, 31.8% of white women and

46.9% of black women worked for
wages. By 1980, half of all white
women worked for a wage, compared
to 55.9% of black women.

White women have made the greatest
percentage of increase, but black women
are still more likely to be working
for wages.

Since 1970 there has been a decline
of 1.9% in the number of WNY working
men and an increase of 21% in WNY wo-
men working. This is due in part to
the transformation of the WNY economy
away from an industrial base (steel,
automakers, manufacturing) and to-
wards service industries (restaurants,
health care, hotels) where wages are
lower and women traditionally have
worked in large numbers.

Ganley pointed out that the rise
in male unemployment is sometimes
blamed on women entering the job
force. In reality there has been
a loss of about 6,000 jobs for men
but an increase of 41,000 jobs for
women -- obviously it is not just an
exchange of the gender of the job
holder.

In 1970, male unemployment was 4.4%.

In 1980, it was 10.1%. For women,
unemployment has risen from 5.5% to
8.7%. An often overlooked fact is
that in 1980 black unemployment stood
at 19.8%.

Much of this male unemployment has
come with devastating swiftness when
large numbers of (mostly) male workers
lost jobs at the Courier Express,
Bethlehem Steel, General Motors, Chev-
rolet, Harrison Radiator and other
manufacturing plants which have closed
or curtailed operations. These were
highly publicized and visible events.

Much new area employment has been

“recession-proof; these kinds of
jobs are somewhat more stable in a poor
economy than manufacturing jobs.

Relatively speaking, Ganley said,
women are losing ground entering the
job market. In 1970, the average
hourly starting wage for men was
$5.11; by 1980 it was fractionally
lower. For women during the 1970s,
starting wages fell from an average
of $4.38 to $4.20.

Indeed, male and female statistics
show increases in unemployment during
the recession. The recession has not
been "tougher" on men. If anything,
the dramatic increase in women's em-
ployment has come from the economic
necessity of women supporting fami-
lies.

Also, as Ganley suggested, in a
poor economy, employers want to pay
as little as possible for wages, and
women are historically paid (and are
seemingly willing to accept) wages
lower than men. Most women work part-
time, which is also cheaper for the

employer.

WHAT KIND OF JOBS?

When looking at employment, we must
also look at what kind of jobs women
hold. Do they do the work full or
part-time? Most men work full-time,
but most women work only part-time.
Women also hold 63.4% of all minimum
wage jobs and are less likely to be
unionized. Unionized jobs give better
wage, benefit and advancement oppor-
tunities, and the difference between
weekly earnings of a unionized and
non-unionized worker in the same job
can be as much as $64.

What categories of jobs do women
hold? Not surprisingly, women hold
many service-related jobs, but what
is shocking is that half of all women
are in only 20 separate occupations,
and that 60% of all women work in only

three areas--clerical, service and
sales.

According to 1980 statistics, 38%
of women workers in Erie and Niagara
Counties hold clerical jobs. Even
in this traditionally female occupa-
tion, male workers make more than
female--35% more. Median weekly earn-
ings for women are $199 and for men
are $305--a difference of nearly

$5,000 per year total wages.
Women in women-maintained families

earn less than $15,000 per year; the
median is $10,348.

Service occupations boast the se-
cond largest concentration of women,
14%. These jobs don't pay as much
overall, but women make 68.9% of what
men do. Median weekly earnings for
women are $155 compared to $225 for
men. 91.2% of women who are sole-
support of their families and service
workers make less than $10,000 per
year--the median is $8,060.

In sales jobs, women have made
gains through increased participa-
tion in the field as barriers to em-
ployment have loosened, but the differ-
ential between male and female wages
is greater. Women make 52.2¢ for
every dollar men make. Women's me-
dian wages are $176 and the yearly
salary median is $9,152 compared to
$337 and $17,524 respectively for
men.

Even in the professional occupa-
tions (including technical fields)
and administrative jobs where one
would expect the most parity between
male and female wages, women make
70.7% and 59.1% (respectively) of
what men make.

ASSESSING LOCAL CONDITIONS

After a video presentation of three
unemployed women, moderated by Susan
Woods, participants were asked to
evaluate, based on their personal
knowledge or experience in the commun-
ity, the training and employment needs
of area women. They were also asked
to identify the major obstacles which
complicate or obstruct training and
employment strategies for women, and
to prioritize a list of issues of
concern to women which should be
addressed through public policy.
These were to be compiled and hope-
fully utilized by the area Private
Industry Council which administers
the local JTPA.

Only two groups' evaluations were
read to the conference, but major
needs of women included networking,
inexpensive, responsible child care,
effective job search skills, reme-
dial education and vocational train-
ing.

Obstacles were listed as budget
cuts, anti-woman attitudes,

lack of comparable pay for comparable
work, and lack of a holistic

approach to the employment needs of
women.

Public policy priorities included
unequitable earnings, disparate treat-
ment, unequal Social Security and
pensions, non-traditional jobs, forced
part-time work and underemployment,
sexual harassment and reproductive
hazards on the job, as well as many
others. One discussion leader blamed
some of these problems on the admin-
istrative attitude of the Reagan
administration.

During the discussion at the table
where the representatives of Common
Ground were seated, there were six
women and one man. Three of the women
were unemployed, one worked part-time,
the others labeled themselves as having
been underemployed. As these women
discussed employment problems and
being underpaid, the man resentfully
expressed disbelief. He said that
equal pay for women would alter the
economic system in a negative way by
boosting the cost of goods and ser-
vices. One woman then asked if
men's wages should be lowered for
parity purposes. He replied with
horror, "What about men sup-
porting families?" Someone replied,
"What about women supporting fami-
lies?" A woman then asked if he
thought that women should make the
sacrifice of receiving lower pay to
support the economic system. He
looked at her blankly, unable to con-
nect what he had said with that
analysis.

Later, other conference partici-
pants also remarked that they felt
some male attendees (not all) were
very threatened by the women. On
more than one occasion, men stood up
and asked, "What about the men?...

It is hard on them too... Why don't
you talk about men's employment
needs?" They were repeatedly reminded
that it was a conference specifically
addressing women's needs. At this
same discussion table, the women

spent a great deal of time convincing
the man that there was a problem for
women at all, rather than focusing on
solutions for women.

After lunch, at which Arlene Win-
field from the U.S. Department of Labor
Women's Bureau spoke about the his-

tory and function of her agency, the
conference heard Mildred Love of the
National Urban League.

CHANGING PATTERNS OF POVERTY

Love spoke about the Urban League
and its priorities for Black Ameri-
cans who could be served by JTPA.
She pointed out that in 1982, the
largest percentage of Blacks in his-
tory lived below the poverty line.
Many of those who are employed are
underemployed and still fall below
the poverty line.

She said Black women between 20
and 24 years old suffer 32.5% unem-
ployment, as compared to 9.6% for
white women. Black women 25-54 are
14.1% unemployed and white women 6%.

She criticized JTPA because of
its limited funds for supportive
services (like child care) and sti-
pends for workers. She also said
there was a fear that Private Indus-
try Councils who administer the state
JTPA will choose only short-term so-
lutions for workers rather than
lasting employment, and may not do
anything about the hard-core or
structurally unemployed. She voiced
criticism that JTPA has no public
service component and that this has
been detrimental to community organ-
izations and agencies.

The National Urban League has pro-
posed a “Universal Employment/Train-
ing System" whose components include:
--rebuilding the cities' decayed

infrastructure
--Public Service Jobs
--Incentives to businesses to hire
and train long-term unemployed
--Aid to make American industry

healthy
Love also said the N.U.L. felt

additional solutions included:
--comprehensive worker benefit
packages

--immediate relief when unemployment
benefits expire

--better school-to-work transition
help

--creation of an Employment Invest-
ment Board

--Maximizing established community
based groups' effectiveness

--and better education for all

ELIGIBILITY AND POLICY

According to Mary Ellen Boyd, the
JTPA is an unusual case of the percep-
tion being greater than the reality.
This piece of legislation, called "re-
volutionary" by some, was designed
to replace CETA. Ms. Boyd's presen-
tation to the conference included a
brief historical look at the devel-
opment of the JTPA, and a detailed
discussion of the basic differences
between the JTPA and CETA.

Mary Ellen Boyd is Director of
Employment and Income Security for
State Communities Aid Association in
New York City, responsible for the
administration of non-traditional
employment for women. The Employment
and Income Security Division also con-
ducts employment-related research
and is actively engaged in legisla-
tive analysis and policy initiatives.

Historically, the JTPA has been a
topic surrounded by controversy since
its inception in Congress. The Senate
and House versions were remarkably
different at the outset, and with
the House yielding on many points, the
final draft is much closer to the
original Senate version. The points
stressed by the Senate included elim-
inating public service employment;
reducing government intervention and
regulation at the Federal level, and
increasing the role of the private
sector; eliminating stipends, training
allowances and work experience credits;
basing the training programs on
sound business principles, making it
“performance driven." The House
version included an affirmative action
policy within the proposed legislation.

The resulting JTPA is riddled with
weak language which "suggests/recommends"
that it "might be nice" to encourage
minority participation, affirmative
action and serving the “hard to serve."
Mary Ellen Boyd compared this all
to the children's story "The Emperor's New Clothes," saying that it is
"not all it is cut out to be, not
serving the people who need it most."
The performance standard by
which adult programs under the JTPA
will be judged (and incentive awards
allotted) is full-time unsubsidized
employment. Other outcomes, such as
part-time employment, further train-
ing and higher education are not
considered in the performance stan-
dard as "success." Women, particu-

larly “heads of households" often
need alternative goals, other options
or extensive support services (such

as child care) to achieve full-time
employment.

Administrative costs under JTPA
are severely limited, as are costs for
supportive services. This includes
strict guidelines for stipends,
training allowances and child-care
costs which specify maximum allowable
costs on the basis of 15% of funds.
This amount generally precludes the
possibility of most Service Delivery
Areas (SDAs) providing services,
especially child care.

There is an absence of affirmative
action policy in the requirements of
JTPA. Many women are included in the
target groups of the project, but none
are provided guarantees for needs-
based service.

The elimination of community
based organizations as providers of
service and the exclusion of public
service employment under JTPA affect
the participation of women in the
programs which have been and will be
designed. Because of popular views
of “traditional” employment which are
still based on gender differences,
women would be more equitably served
by smaller, community-based organiza-
tions which are closer to or more in
touch with the employment/training
needs of their specific group (i.e.
displaced homemakers, battered women,
etc.) The process of selecting
agencies or organizations to deliver
services under JTPA is based on demon-
strated performance in terms of the
likelihood of "meeting performance
goals, cost, quality of training and
characteristics of participants."

This also affects the delivery of
services to chronically unemployed per-
sons who would probably not “succeed”
in short-term programs based on per-
formance standards. Therefore, ser-
vice providers are rewarded for not
serving the "hard to serve" and
"creaming" the eligible population
by serving those candidates who will
be most likely to gain full-time
employment from a short-term train-
ing program with minimal support
services.

Mary Ellen Boyd described these
structural components of JTPA as
things that "thwart women who seek
to use JTPA services" to improve
their employment status. Bringing
these problems to the attention of
the participants, she urged the
group to see the Job Training Part-
nership Act for what it is, not the
“panacea to cure all ills" that it was
conceived to be.

TRAINING AND PLACEMENT

The section of the conference
entitled "Job Training and Placement--
Keys To Effective Program Design" was
presented by Dr. Simone Charlop, a
sociologist who is a member of the
Committee for Women in Non-Traditional
Jobs. Her experience is in the areas
of adult training education, leader-
ship, and also in criminal justice
and crime prevention.

Dr. Charlop said that JTPA was not
the end-all, be-all of programs for
the employment of women. "We need
people who will advocate for women,"
she said. She added that women who
have political and economic contacts
and/or power should push to become
involved in the Private Industry
Councils. "We pushed to get someone
on the advisory board, only to find
out that all the decisions were being
made in the executive committee. So
we had to push again to make sure
that women had representation during
decision making."

In order to ensure a successful
job-training program for women, Dr.
Charlop outlined some steps that
had to be taken.

The first was recruitment. She
advocates publicizing training pro-
grams available through local women's
groups and agencies that deal with
women. Then, she says to provide
women with information sessions on
eligibility, availability and types
of programs happening, also remem-
bering that a large segment of women
may be mothers and need child care.
In the recruitment sessions, job
readiness evaluations should be made,
along with interest and ability assess-
ment.

After finding eligible, interested
women, Dr. Charlop advises networking
with service agencies to acquaint
trainees with those support systems
(i.e. child care, financial help,
education) that are available to them.

continued page 16