COMMON GROUND

NOVEMBER 1984

Judy Goldsmith

in town

By Sharon Green

On Friday, October 12, Judy Goldsmith, National President of the National Organization for Women, made a brief appearance at Democratic Headquarters on Delaware Avenue. Her purpose was twofold: first, to stump for the Democratic ticket of Walter Mondale and Geraldine Ferraro, and second, to speak out for women's rights. Of course, she considers the two to be closely connected. NOW's endorsement of Mondale/Ferraro (the first presidential endorsement in this organization's 18-year history) is due to that team's record of addressing many issues pertinent to women, as well as their pledges to improve the lot of American women.

To emphasize women's achievements, Goldsmith, who received a standing ovation upon her entrance, opened her short prepared speech with several important references to the previous day. First, October 11 was the 100th anniversary of the birth of Eleanor Roosevelt, who championed causes for both women and minorities. In addition, only one day earlier, Dr. Kathy Sullivan became the first American woman astronaut to walk in space. Finally, on that same day, the first woman from a major party to run for Vice President, Gerry Ferraro, engaged in a live debate with her opponent, George Bush, on network TV.

Next, Goldsmith scoffed at "those pollsters and pundits" who have been predicting Reagan's victory. Her contact with Americans contradicts some reports that Reagan is ahead by 38%. The audience was reminded that most polls are conducted by phone, thus not reaching those poor people who have no phone, many of whom may well be Mondale supporters.

In a previously released statement, she also remarked that, “Women can determine the outcome of the election. The Census Bureau estimates that 8 million more women than men will vote in 1984. There are currently 27 million unregistered citizens in the U.S. A shift of only 5 million voters would have denied Reagan the presidency in 1980." She said that because Mondale had the “vision and courage to choose Geraldine Ferraro as his running mate," many of these women may be more likely to vote.

Almost as much time was spent answering questions from the audience at Democratic Headquarters as was given to her speech. Several of her responses focused on the current ad-

*Turn to page 3

Finally, she also

W.N.Y. Women’s Newsjournal

Hiroshima 1945,

Earth 1984

Book Review

Missile Envy By Dr. Helen Caldicott

Review by Ruth Geller

If you lived in Hiroshima, Japan in July 1945, and someone told you that in a few short weeks the Atomic Bomb was going to be dropped, what would you do? Would you move? Or would you close your door and go on about your life?

After reading Dr. Helen Caldicott's book, Missile Envy, the analogy between Hiroshima and the earth, July 1945 and now, seems very apt to me, and the questions most appropriate.

Caldicott is an Australian physician who gave up a faculty position at Harvard Medical School as well as a medical practice to awaken Americans to the real and imminent danger of global nuclear holocaust. She has spoken widely across the country, has appeared in the documentaries The Last Epidemic and If You Love This Planet, and is the author of Nuclear Madness.

I did not want to read Missile Envy. When Caldicott came to Buffalo recently to speak, I was moved by her message, but I did not want to plow through a depressing, boring book full of depressing, boring statistics. Privately, I thought of Missile Envy as being subtitled "Everything You Didn't Want to Know About Nuclear War and Were Too Afraid to Ask."

To my surprise and pleasure, I found Missile Envy to be not only readable, but quite fascinating. I am not saying that I felt like jumping for joy when I finished the book. But I did feel empowered with a clearer understanding of the arms race, my own personal reactions to it, and my responsibility to end it. Caldicott's power as a writer comes from the same source as her power as a speaker—her passionate commitment and her continual concretizing and personalizing of what the arms race means in our lives.

Caldicott states in the Introduction that she writes the book “with a tremendous sense of urgency as a mother, as a pediatrician, and as a woman—aware that we live on a planet that is terminally ill, infected with lethal macrobes (nuclear weapons) that are metastasizing rapidly, the way a cancer spreads in the body." Those three perspectives—mother, doctor, and woman—merging together give the book a cohesive voice that makes most of the information readily available to even a reader such as myself who often falls asleep over anything non-fiction.

The chapter titles of the book—"Prognosis: How Long Will the Earth Survive?", “Case History", "The Terminal Event"—are suggested by Caldicott's medical experience, and initiate the analogy she makes between the planet Earth and a sick patient. For me, one of the most disturbing parts of the chapter titled "Prognosis" was Caldicott's description of a recent meeting with President Reagan. Reagan's impression was unfortunately confirmed, especially when he quotes material stating that the Nuclear Freeze Campaign is orchestrated by Russia and that the Freeze advocates are K.G.B. dupes. This information, he says, is from his intelligence files, but Caldicott recognizes it as having been copied directly from an October '82 article in Reader's Digest. She concludes:

"I was shocked by this interview. He is not a man of great intelligence, and he lacked both empathy and a deep understanding of the complex subject of nuclear weapons...Furthermore, he is an old man, and old men are prone to obstruction of cerebral vessels...causing small strokes, which, without producing obvious damage, may affect the thinking process."

There are, we learn in the same chapter, 30,000 nuclear weapons in the United States, stored in more than 200 locations in 40 states, and that Stockholm International Peace Research Institute estimates that between 1945 and 1976, there were 125 nuclear weapons accidents in the U.S. This is approximately one nuclear weapons accident every 2 1/2 months. In "Case History," Caldicott gives a brief but excellent historical analysis of U.S. militaristic expansionist policies. She describes the birth of that monster, the American Military Industrial Complex, and explains how its need to justify its own existence and growth was the reason that the Soviet Union became "the enemy" after World War II and continues to be portrayed as "the evil empire." "From the beginning," Caldicott writes, “the nuclear arms race had been fueled by a mad lust for power in the air force and later in the navy, and by a fascination with science."

Continued page 5

COMMON GROUND NOVEMBER 1984 PAGE 1