NOW Conference Is Invaluable to  
Community Activist  

by Paulette Hammond  

The focal point of the National Or-  
ganization for Women is the yearly  
meeting in various cities around the  
country. This year it was held in  
Washington, DC, a city I knew fairly  
well. I felt this would be a good  
opportunity to go to my first National  
Conference. I have already given a  
report on the conference to The Femi-  
nist Observer and will thus confine  
this article to items not mentioned  
in that report.  

NOW (membership 250,000) is the  
largest organization in the country  
dedicated to furthering the rights of  
women. I was fortunate to begin the  
Conference by attending a workshop  
given by Betty Friedan entitled "NOW  
and Then", in which she related the  
founding of the organization in 1966.  
About 100 women attended the meeting  
in Washington, DC to organize the first  
official Conference in 1967. Betty  
spoke of the efforts of Pauli Murray  
and Muriel Fox, whose press releases  
“sounded like the American Revolution  
and it was!” She mentioned the im-  
portance of getting themselves taken  
seriously because they knew that this  
was the start of a big movement which  
would speak to and for women. Their  
first issues were nondiscrimination  
in federal contracts and the right of  
stewardesses to work after marriage  
or reaching the age of 30 (we’ve really  
come a long way on this issue - with  
male and female attendants). Their  
first action was to demonstrate ag-  
ainst an all-male bar (not bra-burning,  
which never occurred but was a media  
creation). She mentioned persuading  
the U.A.W. to support the E.R.A. and  
the problem of men who supported ab-  
ortion rights but did not take women  
seriously. The E.R.A. and abortion  
rights - NOW members helped found  
NeAsReAnlan  

Friedan concluded by stating that  
our power does not rest on the media  
and the issues are not so simple in  
the "Second Stage" (the title of her  
controversial follow-up book to The  

Feminine Mystique). She said our duty  

is to keep the flame alive by renewing  
our commitment to reach out to younger  
women, to watch out for stultification,  
personal ambitions, and divisions. Af-  
ter a standing ovation, there was a  
question and answer period. She was  
asked what was the best part of the  
last 17 years. She replied it was  
August 26, 1979, the 50th anniversary  
of the ratification of the 19th Amend-  
ment, when they walked down 5th Avenue  
in New York City. She elaborated on  
her statement urging us to get younger  
women involved; we need to create new  
images to keep the vision and passion  
alive for them. She spoke of our  
greater awareness of the need to cele-  
brate each other, no matter what choic-  
es we have made in our lives. I was  
very uplifted by her talk and felt this  
was a perfect beginning for the con-  
ference.  

The next workshop I attended was  
"Violence Against Women - A Political  
Solution". This workshop was of par-  
ticular interest because Buffalo NOW  
is involved in the Leslie Anne Emick  
Defense Fundraiser. The panelists  
began with a summary of Rape Reform  
Laws. One of the important reforms  
has been the "Rape Shield Law" which  

“makes previous sexual conduct irrele-  
vant. They also spoke of the pros  

and cons of changing “rape” to “sexual  
assault”, which term would include  
anal/oral/object rape. (New York State  
has passed a Rape Shield Law but has  
not changed the wording). The argument  
for retaining rape in the legal lan-  
guage is its powerfulness and it "be-  
longs to us".  

Laws against marital rape were dis-  
cussed next. Three states - Delaware,  
Washington, and Oregon - have the best  
ones. (New York has a marital rape  
law of sorts - it applies only to mar-  
ried couples living apart under a leg-  
al separation agreement.)  

The issue of consent in rape was  
also discussed. A good model for  
this is the Wisconsin law, which de-  
fines consent as "words or actions  
indicating a freely given agreement  
to the sexual act."  

Things needed to be done in this  
area were raised: removing the need  
for consent of an incestuous parent to  
prosecute incest, and confidentiality  
of Rape Crisis Center records (does  
the defendant have access to this in-  
formation? - this is a growing prob-  
lem.) It was mentioned that some  
states do not have marital rape laws  
but have removed the definition of  
“stranger" from its rape law language;  
it might be possible to prosecute  
marital rape under these conditions,  
but that remains to be tested. The  
panelists then ran down specific  
marital rape law provisions in the  
states (note: NYS needs work!)  

Next, wife abuse was discussed. It  
was pointed out there are no reliable  
statistics on this crime, since there  
has never been a national survey. It  
is estimated, however, that between 4  
and 6 million women are abused by  
their husbands. More grim statistics  
followed: FBI figures say 40% of women  
killed are done so by their husbands;  
25% of suicides are by women who have  
a history of battering; 50% of women  
entering emergency rooms are victims  
of battering; 85% of women killed had  
called the police before being murder-  
ed; only 10% of the victims report  
battering.  

Three needs in this area were then  
discussed. The importance and need  
for shelters was stressed: 29 states  
have allocated money for shelters,  

some by placing a surcharge on the  

marriage license. (Note: Bill Hoyt's  
form doing this will be reintroduced  

in the Assembly - we need to fight for  
its passage.) In the U.S. Congress,  
HR 1397, the Family Violence Prevent-  
ion & Service Amendment of the Child  
Abuse Treatment & Prevention Act, at-  
tempts to address this need.  

The second need is for legal pro-  
tection; the enforceable right of wo-  
men and children to be safe in their  
homes was stressed. 44 states have  
"Protection Order Laws", which, un-  
fortunately, judges are reluctant to  
use.  

Finally, the response of the po-  
lice plays a significant role in the  
outcome of the battering incident.  

33 states have broadened the ability  
of the police to arrest the abuser,  
using “probable cause" without a war-  
rant being necessary. Studies have  
found that arresting the husband was  
the most effective deterrent. 6 states  
have gone even further in protecting  
women from abuse by allowing the woman  
to sue the Police Department for fail-  
ure to arrest the batterer.  

The last panelist was Janice Paint-  
er, a woman who was convicted of first  
degree murder of her abusive son-in-  
law. She was sent to prison for life,  
but with the help of a good attorney  
and $19,000, her appeal resulted in a  
reduction of the conviction to man-  
slaughter (the police had used illegal  

evidence and were guilty of misconduct).  

She is now out on parole. She stated  
that situations like her own happen  
all the time; 70-75% of the women in  
prison are there for defending them-  
selves and their children from abusive  
men, and 97% of these women were rep-  
resented by court-appointed attorneys.  

Painter stressed the need for a  
private attorney and fund-raising to  
pay for her defense. The Equal De-  
fense Alliance is a group which con-  
fers non-profit, tax-exempt status to  
such defense fund-raisers; otherwise,  
taxes need to be paid on the money  
raised. Janice gave NOW a great deal  
of credit for supporting her all the  
way through her ordeal and encouraged  
us to establish a state-wide network  
for abused women to show them how to  
make the system work for them. She  

COMMON GROUND DECEMBER 1983 PAGE FOURTEEN  

concluded that had she known the al-  
ternatives available to her, a man  
would not have had to die.  

The next workshop I attended dealt  
with Reproductive Rights. The recent  
Congressional and Supreme Court vic-  
tories were celebrated, but it was  
pointed out that the "Right-to-Life"  
forces were still with us and have  
moved their tactics to the state and  
local levels. On the state level,  
there has been a barrage of bills deal-  
ing with parental notification, fetus-  
cide, and abolition of insurance cover-  
age for abortion. The Right-to-Life  
forces are attempting to impose a leg-  
islative rather than medical defini-  
tion of abortion. Of about 100 bills  
introduced at the state level, less  
than 20 passed. The importance of  
tracking these bills, networking with  
Planned Parenthood, ACLU, N.A.R.A.L.,  
etc., and lobbying was stressed. Other  
strategies mentioned were: educating  
NOW members and the community by leaf-  
letting (hospital shift changes are a  
good place), doing counter-pickets,  
training activists to speak on the  
subject, sending P.O.M.'s to legi-  
slators, calling press conferences to  
celebrate victories, monitoring legi-  
slators' offices to see how mail is  
running, and writing letters to the  
editor. (From this checklist, I noted  
that Buffalo was doing very well on  
the abortion rights issue.)  

The highlight of this workshop was  
the appearance of Bob Packwood, our  
strongest pro-choice ally in the Sen-  
ate. He was instrumental in defeating  
the Hatch Amendment (he led the anti-  
amendment filibuster by reading Abor-  

nerica, which he plans to  
continue doing - he didn't finish it -  
should the need arise!). He believes  
that the defeat of the Hatch Amendment  
signaled the end of the Constitutional  
Amendment strategy, but we must work  
for refunding of Medicaid abortions.  
An interesting sideline occurred when  
he was asked why he was a Republican:  
he believes in decentralization and  
doesn't trust the government; as long  
as local governments are funded prop-  
erly, they are best able to deal with  
their own problems. (As a Democratic  
Committeewoman, I must admit this idea  
gave me something to think about.)  

The last workshop I attended was on  
"Reagan's Truth Squad". This is a  
media campaign created by NOW to edu-  
cate the public about the administra-  
tion's record on women's issues. It  
involves picketing Reagan and top  
administration officials whenever they  
appear in public around the country,  
carrying green and white signs saying  
"ERA Yes". Other strategies for get-  
ting media attention were discussed:  
letters to the editor, petitions, and  
press conferences (we are experts on  
these by now). Pat Schroeder, Demo-  
cratic Representative from Colorado,  
was lauded for calling a press con-  
ference on Reagan's appointees after  
he made the erroneous statement that  
he had appointed more women than any  

previous president (Carter's record  
was much better). (Note: I have copies  
of Judy Goldsmith’s press statement on  
Reagan's Truth Squad. If anyone would  
like a copy, just leave a message on the  
NOW phone - 885-3475.)  

The first plenary session followed. We  
heard from many feminist politicians: Pat  
Schroeder, Pat Frank (Florida State  
Senator), Barbara Mikulski (Maryland  
U.S. Representative), Nancy Dick (running  
against William Armstrong, second most  
conservative Senator), Dudley Dudley  
(Lieutenant Governor of New Hampshire),  
Bonnie Brown (West Virginia Delegate). It  
was heartening to hear from these  
dedicated women in politics; they  
gave so much credit to NOW for their  
success. Judy Goldsmith, National  

NOW President, outlined our electoral  
strategy: using the gender gap to  
create the political independence  

of women, making an early President-  
ial endorsement for the primary (Dec.  
10, 1983), encouraging women to be-  
come more involved in the political  
process, lobbying for a feminist wo-  
man vice-president (several good  
candidates had already spoken to us),  
and working for a vote on the E.R.A.  
before the primaries to see where the  
candidates stand. The session then  
became a fundraiser for the NOW POW/  
NOW Equality PAC: $65.00 was pledged  
for use in the 1984 elections.  

After lunch, there were more  
speakers and entertainment by the  
young group Peace Child. Memorable  
were Coretta Scott King, who spoke  
on her late husband's philosophy of  
non-violence, Mary Francis Berry,  
member of the U.S. Civil Rights  
Commission (who was recently fired by  
Reagan), and Raydean Acevedo, Presi-  
dent of the Mexican-American Women  
National Association (MAWNA).  

Hearing sessions, which are de-  
signed to use the information gar-  
nered in the workshops and propose  
resolutions for voting by the dele-  
gates at the end of the conference,  
were held next. I went to two:  
Reproductive Rights and Special  
Interests. There was a great deal  
of debate in the RR hearing on  
sterilization abuse. One faction  
wanted NOW to go on record against  
allowing simultaneous consent for  
sterilization during childbirth or  
abortion, while the other faction  
wanted us to support simultaneous  
consent. The anti-argument stressed  
the need to prevent coercion of the  
woman who was under stress, while the  
pro-argument suggested that the lan-  
guage was patronizing in that it in-  
ferred women could not make an in-  
telligent decision under stress. I  
confess I was very confused by this  
debate and feel we need more discus-  
sion before taking a stand; fortun-  
ately, no resolution came from this  
discussion.  

An even more complex issue was  
very briefly addressed but no debate  
occurred: the impact of new tech-  
nologies on the viability of fetuses,  
since younger and younger fetuses are  
surviving using advanced medical tech-  
niques. (I feel this will become a  
very important issue and plan to push  
for debate on it.)  

One resolution did survive this  
session - rededication to restoring  
Medicaid funding for abortion, a front  
we have lost so far to the Right-to-  
Life forces.  

The Special Interest hearings dealt  
with many diverse issues: from Violent  
Pornography to job opportunities for  
older women. All of them were im-  
portant, and the consensus was that  
they should be addressed and not re-  
ferred to as "Special Interests". I