by Mary Paleologos

If Debra were a man, she would be described as “honest,” “straightforward," a "no-nonsense" guy who cuts through the bull and gets a job done.

But Debra is not a man. She is a woman. And for that reason alone, she was called on the carpet the other day and informed that two female co-workers had lodged a complaint against her for being "too direct" with them.

The secretaries claimed Debra, a supervisor, was not asking them "nicely" enough to do things. No, she was never impolite or rude, they admitted. And they couldn't recall any particular incident to emphasize their point. But she was “curt” and "bossy" at times when she asked them to photocopy, file, or take messages while she was away from her office.

Both secretaries also work for male bosses, who are more demanding than Debra in her wildest fantasies. Yet, these women sincerely felt slighted because Debra, a woman, was not quite "nice" enough.

The coordinator in charge of mediating disputes between employees thought the complaint serious enough to report to Debra's boss, never once stopping to think if being "direct" or even "bossy" constituted a legitimate complaint. (The coordinator was also a woman.)

Upon hearing out the coordinator, the office manager, a man, blandly responded: "So what's wrong with being direct? Debra just likes to take charge."

Ironically, the whole situation simply demonstrates that sometimes women can be a woman's worst enemy. Women are so used to battling men, they sometimes forget that fellow women can resent female authority and unwittingly sabotage each other's efforts to get ahead.

Debra's only crime was not playing the anachronistic female game of “pretty please" and “oh, this isn't for me, but for the boss" (wink, wink). It's an intricate game designed to mask and blur authority, so as not to offend those women who still cannot stomach the thought of taking orders from another female. Women with any amount of authority often wind up doing a soft-shoe around subordinates to make every little work task sound like a favor.

Many women still feel resentful and uncomfortable working for other women. Their first internal response is usually: "Who do you think you are? You're no better than I am.” Underlying belief: Only a man is; only men have the legitimate right to dispense orders. It is maleness they still associate with power and position, not education or competence.

Also, if a woman doesn't show her kind, friendly, good, nurturing side in all her dealings, every minute of the day, she risks being labeled "bitch," "cold," "demanding," you name it. (Somehow "professional" is hardly ever used.) But no one thinks how “demanding” and emotionally taxing it would be on a woman to endlessly exhibit these qualities. A second female dilemma that

COMMON GROUND • SEPTEMBER 1985

ONE WOMAN TO ANOTHER

Debra faced because of the incident was dealing with the open hostility of her co-workers. A situation that most women will jump off cliffs to avoid. One fatal flaw in the makeup of the female character (due to socialization) that prevents women from achieving their goals is the desire to be accepted and liked—that constant need for approval.

The thought of being hated sticks in a woman's gut. This fear has stopped many competent women in their tracks and has prevented others from even attempting to use all their potential. To make matters worse, most women eventually find out that if they cross that fine line between careful, low-key "female assertiveness" and honest, down-home aggressiveness, they'll get booted out of their favorite social group or business circle faster than they can say "I need 500 copies right away."

One of Debra's close friends and co-workers, June, had the misfortune of discovering this terrible reality as early as high school. June was an outgoing, smart, and extremely competitive student. By twelfth grade, she was competing for everything: valedictorian of her class, president of Latin Club and Honor Society, editor of the school paper and yearbook, principal violinist in concert orchestra. And four out of five times, she'd get what she was after.

Slowly but surely, her female classmates grew irritated with her highly competitive nature and "aggressive" behavior. Three very close girlfriends completely stopped talking to her. Many once-friendly acquaintances began cold-shouldering her. June heard fellow students attacking her behind her back, saying June had a complex about always being No. 1 and that she never gave anyone else a chance at being tops.

All this hurt her deeply. She felt like an outcast. June had her trophies and awards and scholarships, but she felt as if they had cost her her friends. She made a bad conclusion. If so many people hated her, she thought, then her competitive behavior must be despicable.

In college, she did well scholastically but didn't participate in extracurricular activities or pursue her favorite interest: writing.

“PAGE 12”

popular and well-liked at whatever company she worked. But June hated herself for wasting her potential and intelligence.

Finally, June snapped out of it. She reached a stage in her life where she stopped worrying about what people thought of her. She began writing again, started looking for more challenging work, and was on her way to becoming her own, creative, ambitious, and yes, aggressive self again.

Similarly, Debra's experience sent her into a tailspin of self-doubt. (And with two promotions in two years under her belt, she also sensed co-workers resented her success.) "People hate me. I must be doing something wrong," she cried. She became frightened of herself and the rejection of others. “Am I too aggressive? Am I too pushy?" she asked her friends over and over again, as if that were the cardinal sin of womankind.

“And what if you are?" her friends responded. "Should you sacrifice your goals, pretend to be something you're not, so others won't hate you?"

"Maybe, she said. "I hate to be hated."

At this point in time, Debra could go one of two ways. Either she will seek the approval of her co-workers by stifling her snappy and tough personality, or she'll look her detractors in the eye and silently send them to hell. The former is the painless way out, the latter is much harder on the nerves than anyone can imagine without actually being in that situation.

Let's hope that Debra realizes that sometimes a woman's best friend is herself—her true self that is.

ANOTHER MOTHER TONGUE FROM PAGE 11

stories. I'd also like more about Grahn's own life. Interspersed with the gay history and discussion of language in the book is her ongoing conversation with Von, her first lover, who died in 1974 and for whose sake the research was done: I'd like more about their life together, and also more about Grahn's present life with Paula Gunn Allen. One of the most memorable passages describes the invasion of their apartment by a knife-wielding man. They drove him out, and later, with a group of women in a wonderful modern-day women's ritual, re-wove the protection about their home and life. The account is so powerful it makes me greedy for a whole autobiography.

But all this isn't a fault-finding, just a hope for further wonders. I urge everyone to read this book.

Buy it if you can, because it's a superb, well-indexed reference tool, complete with fascinating, easy-to-refer-to notes, glossary, and bibliography. If you can't buy it, borrow it. I also suggest that readers of this review urge their local libraries to buy it. Another Mother Tongue is a vital book.