COMMON GROUND

NOTES ON WOMEN  
AND THE ARTS

by Eleanor Rudolph

Why have there been no women among  
the early masters of music, painting,  
sculpture, poetry and prose? Jessie  
Bernard answers succinctly: "In all  
the arts, the gatekeepers at every  
step of the route to achievement were  
men. They were entirely engrossed  
in their own male world. They could  
not be distracted from it. Certainly  
not by anything so strange as female  
work. So the obstacles to creativity  
for women were all but insuperable."  
("The Female World")

However, the area of women's accon-  
plishments in the arts has not been  
as barren as we have been led to  
believe. When you consider that men  
have been the arbiters of "greatness",  
as well as the historians, it is small  
wonder that the records of women's  
achievements have been relegated to  

the archives. A couple random examples:

In the 14th century, a Christine of  
Pisa supported six versions by her  
pen, while in 16th century Venice,  
Lucrezia Morinella wrote a book en-  
titled "The Nobleness and Excellence  
of Women, together with the Faults  
and Imperfections of Men".

From early on, women decorated  
pottery and wove designs into baskets,  
rugs and textiles, items essential to  
their existence. Indeed, they had  
little time for the finer arts. At  
one period men even regarded agricul-  
ture beneath their dignity as they  
went about their hunting and warfare.  
Eventually, quilting, embroidering,  
sewing, all anonymous work, were con-  
sidered suitable expressions of women's  
talents. If a woman had painted a  
floral or a portrait, she felt duty-  
bound to turn it over to her father  
or her husband so he could sign it  
and sell it. Such non-person status  
of women prevailed in the arts.

Conditions differed in various parts  
of Europe from the 16th to the 18th  
centuries and were somewhat better in  
the north, where women could train in  
the workshops of established artists,  
though they were still confronted by  
the tyranny of tradition, prejudice  
and domestic demands that prevented  
them from making a career of their art.  
In other words, men allowed them to  
“play at it" as long as they posed no  
threat to their professional or eco-  
nomic status. By the 18th century  
women were admitted to the academies  
but were not allowed to attend draw-  
ing classes or compete for awards.

In this country, when Mary Cassatt  
entered the Pennsylvania Academy of  
Fine Art in 1861, it was considered  
a bold and irregular step for a woman.  
Of an affluent family, she had the  
rare opportunity to go to Europe to  

ALICE

by Bonnie Johnson

Alice did it again the other day.  

She went through a red light.  

The Princess and her friend were in the back seat;  
they grabbed each other and giggled.  

When she looked in the rear view mirror,  

there was a policeman behind her.  

She pulled over and turned off the engine.  

The policeman stuck his head in the window.  
He said, "What did you think you were doing?"  
Alice didn't say anything.  

The policeman said, "I couldn't believe my eyes."  
Alice said, "I couldn't believe my eyes either."  

The policeman was very nice.  

He said, "Well, I won't give you a ticket, but  

please pay attention when you are driving."  

Alice thought, "I'm not even supposed to be driving."  

The policeman looked at the Princess and her friend.  
He asked, "Who is teaching you to drive?"  

The Princess said, "We're taking driver ed."  

The policeman said, "That's good."  

When Alice sees that policeman around the city,  
she smiles and thinks, "That's a very nice man;  
he didn't even arrest me."  

Alice told the Princess not to tell anyone.  

The Princess kept the secret for a whole month;  
then she told.  

"You'll be sorry," Alice said.  

* * * * * * * * *  

Alice takes the Princess to the Eaton Center to shop.  

On the way back, she reaches for her purse  

while the car is moving.  

It lands upside down on the floor.  

She bumps into a big black Cadillac with four pinstripe  
drivers.  

She is very frightened.  

They all stand in the street and look at the bumpers.  

Finally, one of the drivers tells her it is okay.  

They all get back in the car and drive away.  

Alice goes very slowly so they will be far ahead  

in case they change their minds.  

She scolds herself and promises never to do that again.  

She says, "I will keep my eyes on the road when the car is going  
because it plays tricks on me and so do the other cars.  

They tell me they are stopping and then they don't."  

* * * * * * * * *  

Every time Alice drives across the border, she gets scared.  
She feels like a criminal.  

She tells herself, "Don't be silly;  

you're not doing anything wrong."  

But that doesn't help.  

She still feels scared.  

She breathes a huge sigh of relief  

when she drives away from the Border Guard;  
he didn't catch her  

this time either.  

PAGE 1 COMMON GROUND APRIL 1986