Womens’ Resource Directory

GENERAL ANNOUNCEMENTS

HOLLY NEAR - A COMPLETE SET OF ALBUMS.  
Fundraising is taking place to offset  
a budget deficit in the recent Holly  
Near concert. A variety of prizes  
are available. For more information,  
see EMMA, 168 Elmwood Ave., 885-2285.  
Drawing at GLCC auction, May 19.

PEACE POSTERS available this month  
at EMMA, in celebration of W.N.Y.  
Peace With Justice Week. 6 designs  
produced by the Syracuse Cultural  
Workers Project, including the popular  
"Patchwork Power" quilt created  
at the Seneca Women's Encampment.  
EMMA, 168 Elmwood Ave, 885-2285.

WOMEN'S CANOE TRIPS IN MAINE taking  
place this summer, sponsored by  
Unity College. For more information  
contact Debbie Sugerman, Outdoor  
Recreation Dept., Unity College,  
Unity, ME 04988.

A NEW PUBLISHING HOUSE has been  
formed in Portland, Oregon. Lez-  
Press will publish quality work of  
interest to lesbians, as well as  
feminist and gay-oriented material.  
For more information, write Lez-Press  
P.O. Box 4387, Portland OR 97208.

GAY AND LESBIAN YOUTH OF BUFFALO  
meets every Saturday at the GLCC  
from 2-5 pm. This is a social/support  
group for people 16-21 years  
old. On the last Saturday of the  
month there is a movie and discussion.

CITIZEN INFORMATION SERVICE, run by  
the League of Women Voters, can  
answer your questions about New York  
State Government issues such as bill  
status, elections and ballot issues,  
taxes and budget, constitution amend-  
ments, referrals to appropriate agen-  
cies and much more. Phone staffed  
10-4 weekdays during the  
legislative session. Call 1-800-462-6204.

D'YOUVILLE COLLEGE CONTINUING EDUCA-  
TION PROGRAM includes several courses  
of particular interest to women:  
Management courses in Women in Super-  
vision and Assertiveness Training  
for Women, Women in Politics, Poli-  
tical Parties, Introduction to Geron-  
tology, Laws for Everyday, Working  
With Victims of Domestic Violence,  
Recognizing Alcoholism and Drug  
Abuse as a Family Problem, Human Sex-  
uality, and a Lecture Series on Sex  
Roles and Society. The American  
Management Association (AMA) Extension  
Institute and D'Youville College are  
offering a course toward Management  
Certification. There are also several  
courses offered in Computer Technol-  
ogy, Fine Arts, Education, Human  
Health Services, Nursing and Public  
Service. Courses offer Continuing  
Education Units for credit. For more  
information, call 881-7676.

AIDS HOTLINE... NYS residents with  
questions or concerns about Acquired  
Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS)  
may now call a hotline for up-to-  
date, factual information and refer-  
ral to medical care and support  
services. Operated daily from 8 to  
midnight at Roswell Park Memorial  
Institute. Callers should ask for  
the AIDS tape when calling. The  
number is 881-AIDS or 881-2437.

SPECIAL ONE SESSION PROGRAMS AVAILABLE  
from WOMANFOCUS, on a wide range of  
topics such as Women, Stress & Drugs;  
Assertiveness; Women and Panic Attacks;  
and Dealing with Anger. If your  
organization might be interested in  
a Womanfocus workshop, call 842-1766  
to discuss possible programs.

SIGNS OF PILL DEPENDENCY - free copy  
of brochure available from Womanfocus,  
43 Court Street, Buffalo, New York  
14202. Send stamped self-addressed  
envelope.

SPECIAL INTEREST CLASSES for develop-  
mentally disabled adults available  
through People Inc., at a variety of  
locations around Erie County. Call  
or write Steven Deuitch, People Inc.,  
320 Central Park Plaza, Buffalo 14214.  
This program is looking for instructors  
and program sites.

PAGE 14

COMMON GROUND

legislative =

GENERAL ANNOUNCEMENTS

WOMAN SPACE RESTORED TO UPSTATE NEW YORK  
Herizon, a women's social club in  
Binghamton, NY announced the opening  
of its new space at 213 State Street  
after two years of operating without  
a fixed location. The opening of the  
space April 7 filled a need in the  
community left vacant when in January  
1980, Herizon was raided by the police  
for selling liquor without a license.  
After four years of struggle, Her-  
izon now occupies a 4-story building  
in Binghamton, is a private social  
club with over 100 in-town and 70  
out-of-town members. Information  
about Herizon can be obtained by send-  
ing a self-addressed, stamped envelope  
to Changing Herizon, P.O. Box 1082,  
Binghamton, NY 13902. The phone num-  
ber is 607-724-CLUB.

CALL FOR NOMINATIONS TO N.O.W. BOARD

The following positions are open for  
nomination to the Buffalo Chapter of  
NOW Board of Directors: President,  
Vice-President, Secretary, Treasurer,  
Membership Chair, and four seats on  
the Board.

The length of office is 2 years  
for each position: President Hammond,  
Vice President Hoetzer, and Secretary  
Castro have each served one year and  
are eligible for re-election. Treas-  
urer Wolfson was appointed to fill  
a vacancy and is eligible for election.  
Board Members Kathy Jackson, Kathy  
Owens, and Melanie Siegel are eligible  
for re-election. One Board vacancy  
was created by the appointment of  
Wolfson to Treasurer.

NOW members may submit nominations  
in writing to: Paulette Hammond,  
President, Buffalo NOW, 1525 Amherst  
Manor Drive #302, Williamsville, NY  
14221.

SISTERFIRE, the annual D.C. area  
festival celebrating women's art  
and culture, is now in the planning  
stages for the 1984 celebration.

Any craftswoman, food vendor or  
organization interested in reserving  
display space must return an appli-  
cation by June 8, 1984. For more  
information or to receive an appli-  
cation, write to: Roadwork, Dept.  
SF, 1475 Harvard St. N.W., Wash-  
ington, D.C. 20009. Space limited.  
The festival is scheduled for June  
23 & 24 in Takoma Park, MD.

THE COALITION FOR EQUAL RIGHTS is  
serving locally as a clearinghouse  
for the Women's Vote Project to  
help plan joint activities and to  
help organizations plan activities  
that complement rather than dupli-  
cate efforts being made by other  
groups. Their next meeting will  
be April 9, 7:30-9 pm at Clearfield  
Public Library, 770 Hopkins Road,  
Amherst. Topics will include the  
Women's Vote Project, Women's Rights  
Commission of Erie County, and  
State E.R.A. Strategy. For more  
info, call Pat Seaver at 688-5893.

ATTENTION WOMEN MUSICIANS/PERFORMERS:  
The New England Women's Music Retreat  
(to be held in Conn. Labor Day Week-  
end 1984) is seeking women from the  
Northeast who might be interested in  
performing on the Day Stage. They  
are especially anxious to contact  
women of color, Third World women,  
women with disabilities and women  
of various ages and backgrounds. The  
Day Stage audition process will take  
place in late spring. For info on  
audition procedures, send name,  
address and phone number to Kim Kimber,  
NEWMR Day Stage Coordinator, BOX 728,  
West Hartford, Conn 06107.

PREGNANCY TESTING -- Do you have ques-  
tions about pregnancy testing, health  
care while you're pregnant, or for your  
new baby, or other mother and child  
needs? Call the BABY HOTLINE (TLC-  
BABY or 852-2229) for free facts from  
the Healthy Mother/Health Baby Coa-  
lition of Erie County.

Fund.

today.

Please send me more information:

The National Women’s Hall of Fame is growing  
... With your support.

Add your name today to the growing list of NWHF members and patrons by contributing to our Expansion Fund.

YES! I want to be a part of the National Women’s Hall of Fame.  
Contributions of $10 or more qualify you for one full year’s membership.

Enclosed is my tax-deductible contribution of $________.

In the heart of the birthplace of women’s rights in Seneca Falls, New York, the National Women’s Hall  
of Fame is a landmark to women of achievement. The Hall is presently doubling its scope and expanding  
its programs to serve our members, our visitors, and above all, our educational goals.

Tax-deductible contributions of $10 or more qualify you for one year’s full membership.  
All contributions will be acknowledged in our Annual Report. Fill out the coupon below or call (315) 568-2936.

MAIL TO: National Women's Hall of Fame,  
P.O. Box 435, Seneca Falls, NY 13148

Name —  
Address —  
Signature —  

EMMA IS...

Celebrating Spring with a GARAGE SALE!  
Spring cleaning is an excellent way to  
come up with some terrific donations  
for this event. In addition to the  
treasures and "finds" we will have for  
sale, there will also be a baked goods  
sale and donations of that nature will  
also be accepted. The sale will be  
held on the Memorial Day holiday -  
Monday, May 30th, from 8:00 a.m. to  
6:00 p.m. at 172 Ashland (off Bryant,  
off Elmwood). Emma is enthusiastically  
and gratefully accepting any donations  
at the store, 168 Elmwood Ave.  
Arrangements for larger or heavy items  
can be made by calling 885-2285. This  
is an easy way to contribute to Emma  
and is a good reason to come into the  
store and catch up on events and acti-  
vities.

Emma is also pleased to announce  
that the successful “Voices of Women"  
series continues with an exciting new  
program by women video artists. This  
evening of imaginative and creative  
works will be presented sometime during  
the latter part of May. Information on  
the performance will be available at  
Emma as soon as the date and location  
are confirmed. If you know someone who  
would like to share her talents through  
"Voices of Women", or if you would like  
to, please call Emma and share your  
ideas with us.

Some of us in the community are  
feeling the strains of time and finan-  
cial burdens with the incredible number  
of events that seem to happen all in  
the same week/weekend. In an effort to  
alleviate some of these problems, Emma  
has tentatively planned to bring Kate  
Clinton, the feminist humorist, to  
Buffalo in August or September. It's  
sometimes difficult to fit in all of  
these events, but it is our hope that  
by scheduling this far in advance,  
everyone will be able to plan to  
attend. Is there an event, workshop,  
seminar or ??? you would like to attend  
or plan? We are open to suggestions  
and would appreciate some input as well  
as feedback from the community.

It's important to note, now, that  
this is what Emma is all about. You.  
Us. The Community. Sharing skills,  
talents, ideas. Emma is a group of  
hardworking, creative, incredibly  
diverse women who work together on  
trying to effectively meet some of the  
needs of the community. This is not  
easy. If you consider the strengths  
and energies of each woman involved in  
Emma, sometimes agreeing, sometimes  
agreeing only after several (different)  
opinions and approaches have been  
discussed, it's quite an accomplish-  
ment. Add to that the financial  
problems that plague most small busi-  
nesses and you have a glimpse of what  
goes on in Emma's day-to-day existence.

As a new collective member, I must  
admit that I shake my head in disbelief  
as I watch the loose ends get neatly  
tied up. There is a hell of a lot of  
energy expended by each person and it  
seems as if there is always something  
to be attended to. Among the  
challenges are some problems that need  
to be dealt with. Emma has had her  
share of robberies and rip-offs, slow  
sales in the store, events that are not  
highly attended at times. Emma has had  
her share of setbacks, just like anyone  
else. But even the toughest of times  
are somewhat more bearable when you  
have the support of the community to  
back you up. For this, Emma is thank-  
ful to her friends.

Emma is not just the storefront,  
nor is she the group of women who  
comprise the collective. Emma is you,  
and she needs the support of the com-  
munity to sustain and enhance the dif-  
ferent needs of that community. Emma  
is the Western New York Women's  
Resource and Cultural Center. She has  
come a long, long way and is beginning  
to evolve in new and exciting direc-  
tions. If you are interested and/or  
excited by any or all of this, give us  
a call. We are always looking for  
women to join the collective and we  
have skills as well as common goals to  
share with you.

So, take the time. Come on down to  
Emma and browse. Read the literature,  
brochures, posters. Buy something,  
make suggestions, donate to the lending  
library or garage sale, find out what  
is happening in the community. But get  
involved, Emma is struggling to sur-  
vive. And, we will.

". . . together we can make a  
safe home . . . " (Holly Near)

(This “Emma Is" column was prepared by  
Elaine, a new collective member)