Critical Issue for Buffalo

Feminists

What would it be like without Emma?  
Is Emma about to fold? Why do I not  
see anything new when I go to Emma  
these days? These questions plague the  
dozen women who comprise the Emma  
Collective, and we would like to share  
the answers and options that we have  
been debating over the past few months.

A basic fact is that our weekly  
expenses for rent, utilities,  
telephone, insurance and supplies are  
$170 at the bare minimum. This does  
not include any salaries, or any costs  
for purchasing stock. We sell each  
item in the store at the standard 40%  
mark-up over our cost, which is a stan-  
dard set by the publishers and distri-  
butors for all bookstores. Since we  
must pay for the books and records we  
sell, it is this 40% margin that pays  
our overhead bills.

In order to be able to consistently  
stay current with our bills, pay for  
stock in the store, and purchase new  
stock, we need to bring in about $500  
to $600 every week. This amount does  
not take into account a rapidly  
climbing inflation rate in the whole-  
sale prices of books and records, for  
example, Olivia records increased their  
prices for records 10% during this past  
year. Nor do these figures include any  
costs for salaries (we do not pay any  
salaries but have dreamed of being able  
to do so), or any costs for events,  
programs, resources and services.

We have, over the years, relied on  
the ability to order stock “on account"  
which means that we have not in fact  
yet paid for many of the books on the  
shelves. This past year, we found our-  
selves heavily in debt as a result of  
this system, and with barely enough  
income to pay overhead expenses, much  
less pay off accumulated debts or order  
new stock. During the past two years,  
our weekly income has rarely reached  
$500. Our typical weekly income this  
past year has been even less than ever  
before, usually about $200. Many weeks  
we have barely realized $100 in income.

Obviously all of this does not add  
up to a solid financial situation.  
During the past few months, we have  
felt the crunch of the situation more  
than ever before, but feeling the  
crunch has stimulated us to take some  
very positive action. The steps that  
we have taken are showing some results  
in the right direction.

At the beginning of this year, we  
were forced to cease any new ordering,  
and focused our attention on decreasing  
our total debt. We began to raise  
funds to help get us out of our tight  
situation, and have been successful in  
reducing our total debt by about 30%.  
In the past few months, we have used  
the "prepay" system on selected orders  
to be able to bring some new stock into  
the store, and to continue to provide  
new books and records for women who  
want specific items.

We have consulted women in the com-  
munity who have business, legal, and  
accounting expertise to begin to set up  
ways to avoid in the future some of the  
problems we have been struggling with.  
In the past few weeks, we have been  
able to bring in several new items in  
anticipation of the holidays, and will  
continue to do so during December!

One of the perpetual struggles for  
the Emma Collective has been main-  
taining a certain degree of balance  
between our business and the resources,  
or services that we provide for the  
community.

In theory and in practice, these  
two activities are difficult to merge,  
but as feminists we are committed to  
doing so in a very unique attempt.  
From the beginning, Emma has primarily  
been committed to serving women in the  
community with resources far beyond the  
scope of just providing books for sale.  
Most service agencies fund themselves  
with grants, donations, or some private  
or public source of “charitable”  
funding. For Emma, we have used mini-  
mal grants of this type, but have  
instead relied primarily on book sales,  
community fund-raising, and volunteer  
labor. We have explored, and have used  

women's work in publishing. We have  
to a minimal extent, certain grant  

possibilities, but have not used many  
because of the constraints that they typically place on the type of service or activities that can be pursued. We rely solely on  
time and energy - which is what has made possible what we do as a business and a service.  
The Collective has often reaffirmed our commitment to providing a resource service for women in the community, which includes a referral list of other current events of interest to women, assistance for women in crisis, sponsoring women's cultural and political events, and a space that welcomes women for browsing, visiting, meetings, and reading.  

Not all women's bookstores provide this type of service and atmosphere, but we feel it is important in this community.  

All of this is accomplished by the women in the collective who volunteer their time and energy, and friends who join us in various projects and tasks.  

Our primary source of support (aside from the material volunteer labor contributed by collective members and friends) is the income we derive from sales - our business.  

We have had long discussions about our focus, our purpose, and whether or not we should continue to operate with our “business” as our primary source of support. We have not reached any firm conclusions, but several basic premises have remained unchanged.  

We are convinced that Emma represents an important resource for women in the community. We are committed to a strong feminist position and voice in women's literature, women's art, and women's politics. We are committed to work that represents a valuing of the importance of this work for the future of women and the world in which we live. We would like to see Emma become a stronger source for more women in our community.  

We are painfully aware of the devastating effects of many recent closings of women's bookstores in communities all over the country, and of many independent women's presses going out of business. For example, Persephone Press (publisher of This Bridge Called Back and Nice Jewish Girls) went bankrupt earlier this year.  

The '80s were forecast by a group of women in print as a potentially dangerous decade for women's literature and women's writing. We witness the reality of this danger first-hand every time we get a notice of another publisher or another store folding. We are determined that the forecast not come true here in Western New York.  

How can you help? Obviously, many women in these difficult economic times are not in a position to help such a cause financially, no matter how worthy. But we have worked very hard to provide several new and exciting books, records and crafts for the holidays. Your support by holiday shopping at Emma will be a valuable contribution.  

There are several other important ways in which you can become involved. If you can consider joining the Collective, we are eager to welcome your involvement. If you can provide a limited commitment to specific tasks, we have many ways for you to become involved. Our Friends provide staffing, assistance with special events and projects, and help in the many tasks involved in operating a small business.  

If you feel that Emma has not provided the services and resources you need, then we especially need to hear from you. We need your ideas, and we need your energy to help create new and better resources for the community. We welcome your involvement, so give us a call - 885-2285.  

We have reaffirmed our commitment to providing a resource service for women in the community, which includes a referral list of other current events of interest to women, assistance for women in crisis, sponsoring women's cultural and political events, and a space that welcomes women for browsing, visiting, meetings, and reading.  

LETTERS .....

There are still a minority who do not command enough wealth to support all the important feminist causes and to provide basic social services for other women no matter how vital these services are.  

In this situation one logical approach for feminists is to initiate new social services for women to increase community awareness and then to attempt to get public funding for these vital programs. Once publicly funded programs are in place individual feminists can either choose to become professionals in the new publicly supported institutions or move on as a vanguard to draw attention to other social problems requiring greater community input.  

The transition from a private feminist to a publicly-funded institution is one that the staff of Simple Gifts refused to make. The reasons for this decision cannot be entirely clear to outsiders, but I surmise that they wanted to retain their feminist perspective and did not want to accept social service restrictions on the type of services they could offer. Because Simple Gifts had done so much to raise community awareness of the needs of battered women, public funding was available and Haven House was set up to provide more services to battered women. For a while both shelters survived and cooperated with each other, but the base of private donations and volunteers that both groups depended on proved insufficient to support two shelters. Simple Gifts closed due to lack of funding despite the continued need for services for women in crisis.  

As Mann points out, neither Simple Gifts nor Haven House desired or encouraged the competition for community support. But Mann also seems to blame Haven House indirectly for accepting social service funding and setting up in competition with Simple Gifts, and she criticizes Haven House for not being a purely feminist organization.  

This blame and criticism is inappropriate and misplaced. There is not enough money to support two women's shelters in Buffalo today because of depressed economic conditions within an economic system which forces vital human services to compete with each other for increasingly limited funds while vast sums are lavished on military hardware and adventure.  

Rather than a failure or a compromise, Haven House seems to be an example of how feminist ideals and models can be combined with public financial support to create a valuable community resource. Haven House has the look and feel of an alternative institution despite its “professional” staff and social services support. It is run by women, most of whom are clearly feminist and seem committed to helping women in crisis understand the broader social and feminist issues involved in their personal suffering.  

NEWS  

British Women Protest Missile Deployment  

On Wednesday, November 9, Greenham Women Against Cruise Missiles filed a lawsuit against the U.S. government seeking an injunction to halt the deployment of Cruise and Pershing II missiles.  

The lawsuit was filed in the Foley Square Federal Courthouse, in New York City. A press conference and candlelight vigil were organized outside by supporters.  

The plaintiffs will attempt to show that the deployment and threatened use of the missiles violates International Law and the U.S. Constitution.  

"We have come to the United States to appeal to the North American people to help reverse the decision to store these deadly weapons in our country--a decision that threatens ALL of our lives," the women said.  

COMMON GROUND  

Social Service regulations have limited access to the shelter in unfortunate ways, but it has not decreased community awareness of the problem of battered women as Mann suggests. Publicity of the Haven House program has made spouse abuse more visible in the community. Physicians, therapists and police are actively referring women to Haven House, and the shelter is often overflowing. The efforts of the Board of Directors to tie in more effectively with other social service agencies and funding sources will hopefully ensure the financial security and continued existence of a women's shelter in Buffalo.  

I am proud to have Haven House in my community, and I think it owes its success in part to the model of Simple Gifts. If as feminists we must choose which institution to support how do we choose? If we choose to support a publicly funded shelter with a greater chance of survival, how do we deal with our disappointment over the loss of a feminist resource in Simple Gifts? The danger is that in making a difficult choice we turn on each other and blame each other for our guilt and disappointment. Those who have chosen alternative low-income lifestyles may blame professional sisters for lack of feminist commitment and ideological purity or lack of financial support. Those who have chosen to work within the system may blame alternative workers for ideological dogmatism or impracticality or financial mismanagement.  

The feminist cause needs all of us and we must avoid the temptation to form a feminist hierarchy or to shut each other out because we do not agree on all political details. In this case we cannot afford to put down the only existing women's shelter for not being completely feminist. We are all engaged in an important struggle, personally and collectively. We need each other and we need to move forward on all fronts each according to her skills, talents, visions and needs. We must communicate with each other and give each other necessary feedback but if we engage in political backbiting we will set our common cause back decades. To quote Holly Near "we are the sailors and we're in mutiny/ the safety of this journey depends on/ Unity.”  

AUTHOR NOTE: I am a 3rd year Medical student at UB who worked in a Women's Free Clinic and a Massage Collective in California for 5 years before attending medical school. During the past year I have been researching violence toward women in the family including wife beating, child abuse and incest and I worked closely with women at Haven House as part of this project.  

Bonnie L. Richardson  

They claim that opinion polls consistently show that between 60% and 70% of the British people do not want these missiles on their soil and that the European governments have refused to allow the decision of deployment to be voted on by a full Parliament. "It was, and remains, a totally undemocratic decision," they continued.  

On the day of filing, British women demonstrated outside each of the 103 U.S. military bases in Britain. The Women's Encampment for a Future of Peace and Justice in Romulus N.Y. supports these actions and will vigil outside the Seneca Army Depot, where Pershing II missiles are believed to be stored and prepared for deployment.  

-info from Women's Encampment for a Future of Peace and Justice®  

DECEMBER 1983 PAGE FIVE