NURSE'S STRIKE UPDATE

A bargaining session was called by  
Federal Mediator Joseph W. Bania on  
May 19, 1982, for negotiation between  
striking nurses and Buffalo General  
Hospital administration. Some pro-  
gress was made in discussing the eight  

proposals of the striking nurses (See  
below).  
From 3:30 p.m. to 10 p.m. the par-  

ties caucused, from 10 p.m. to 2 a.m.  
the parties met face to face for dis-  
cussion. A representative from the  
Nurses' Bargaining Committee said  
that the Committee was willing to bar-  
gain that night until a contract was  
agreed upon, since progress was being  
made.  

As of May 21, the next bargaining  
talks were scheduled for May 27. The  
nurses would like to see a session  
scheduled earlier, but Carl Krause,  
the lawyer chosen to represent the  
hospital, said he was not able to  
meet any earlier. This meant at  
least 8 more days of picketing, ex-  
tending shift time for nurses in ad-  
ministration, and 1000 workers on  
strike-related lay-offs.  

Rallies and meetings have been  
scheduled for striking workers and  
their supporters. 900 people atten-  
ded the rally held on May 6, and a  
large majority then marched to BGH.  

Other area hospitals, other union  
locals, and the City Council indicated  
support of the striking nurses at the  
rally. A member of the Buffalo Teach-  
ers Federation stated, "Your victory  
will be our victory." President of  
Nurses 1168, Debra Hayes, said the  
rally was tremendous. Solidarity of  
the workers was evident, and strikers  
were heard to say they would stay out  
“as long as it takes."  

Buffalo General Hospital's Public Re-  
lations Director, Daniel C. Newcombe  
said, "The administration is ready to  
negotiate forward, for a fair and  
equitable contract." ©  

NURSES UNITED;  
CONTRACT ISSUES  

Employer's Policies: The nurses are  
requesting that the union be informed  
and consulted on policies and policy  
changes. They also want job des-  
criptions and a procedural handbook.  
As of now, the administration doesn't  
inform the nurses of changes in pol-  
icy and they have no clear job  
descriptions.  

Salary: The union is asking for an  
11.5% increase retroactive to Jan. 1,  
1983. The hospital administration  
has offered 6% effective June 1st.  

Shift Differential: i.e. a percent-  
age over the base pay for working the  
evening or night shifts. The union is  
requesting a differential of .36% for  
the evening shift and .40% for the  
night workers. BGH is offering a  

plan that amounts to about .04%.  

Health Insurance: BGH is presently of-  
fering the Blue Cross/Blue Shield 82/83  
Plan. The striking nurses are asking  
the hospital administration to pick up  
additional costs above the cost of the  
50-51 plan.  

Vacation Bonus Plan: The union is re-  
questing that unused sick days be ap-  
plied to vacation time. Nurses hired  
before 1979 already have this option.  
People hired after 1979 lose unused  
sick days.  

Longevity Increases: The union is  
asking for periodic raises for the en-  

tire nursing staff. What is presently  
available is a plan that gives a nurse  
a yearly raise for the first 4 years,  
then it's merit raises. Only 10  
nurses out of 800 have ever received  
merit raises.  

Union Representation: The nurses'  
bargaining unit is requesting one hour  

per week during scheduled time for  
union activities. The hospital is  
willing to offer 4 hours per week -  
unpaid - for union activities (e.g.  
grievances).  

Transfers & Promotions: The union  
wants transfers & promotions based on  
seniority. ©  

PAGE 6°  

COMMON GROUND  

Photo by Michael Sullivan, R.N.  

Family on Strike  

A strike affects the whole family  
unit. Janice Burton, R.N.  
her situation in the BC  
has drastically altered her family  
life. Most strikers agree they seem  
to be working harder than before, but  
don't mind because they are struggling  
for something they believe in. Ms.  
Burton also feels that, in a sense,  
her family has just expanded a bit to  
include the strikers with whom she is  
spending so much time and energy. Her  
husband, Mark, is also an R.N. at BGH.  
He feels that the routine since the  
strike has been very different, and  
perhaps challenging as well. Although  
a striking nurse is only required to  
picket or do some other type of union  
work fifteen hours per week, a high  
proportion are working many more hours.  
His wife noted that one positive result  
of the strike is that she and her hus-  
band are able to see each other more,  
perhaps not at home, but definitely at  
the Local 1168 Union Office.  

The Burtons had been financially  
planning for the strike for quite some  
time, putting off vacations and house  
remodeling. They are becoming more  
thrifty as the strike continues. Wally  
Cuealing's wife, Karen, also works at  
BGH as a registered nurse. They have  

one small child who needs care. Some  
days Karen takes care of her, and other  
days the extended family does. The  
Burtons also have supportive family  
members who take care of their child.  
Janice feels she can't ask her family  
to do this every day, but other ar-  
rangements are very expensive. Their  
two-year-old daughter seems to have a  
sense that something is different, and  
often asks her parents, "(Are you)  
going to headquarters? (Are you) going  
to headquarters?" Many striking nurses  
bring their children right onto the  
picket line or into the Union office.  

Another nursing representative  
described the National C.W.A. Fund,  
and the Local 1168 Emergency Fund which  
insure people will not be without food  
and shelter. Strikers are being helped  
by both funds and as of June 1st,  
strikers' rents and utilities will be  
paid for by C.W.A.  

The general consciousness seems to  
be that strikers would prefer to be  
nursing and tending to their families,  
but as the situation worsens, a gen-  
eral feeling of powerlessness was  
evident. “Something had to be done  
to bring the power back to the nurses,"  
said Mark Burton.@®  

JUNE 1983  

{Thank you to Karen Kolkedy and Gerri Bayer who re-  
searched and wrote most of the following material}  

Chronology of Events  

Nurses United, Local 1168 of the  
Communications Workers of America have  
been trying for recognition from BGH  
Corporation since 1981.  

The union is presently negotiating  
the first contract with the hospital.  
Unable to reach a settlement, the  
union presented the administration with  
a 30-day notice that a dispute existed.  
No equitable settlements were achieved.  
A 10-day notice was given to the hos-  
pital advising them of a picket plan.  

Most of the nurses were optimistic  
that a contract would be reached; that  
they wouldn't go on strike. However,  

a vote was taken among the nurses  
authorizing the bargaining committee  
to call a strike.  

On May 1st, at 11 a.m., the nurses  
did strike because neither side could  
come to an agreement on the issues.@  

WOMEN  
AND  
UNIONS  

by Karen Kolkedy  

Work contributes to make us who we  
are. Through labor we are not only  
able to survive, but we can become ed-  
ucated and in general progress as a  
society. A study of labor history re-  
veals that people have often struggled  
for dignity and respect on the job.  
Every man and woman is entitled to a  
decent job with decent wages. Histor-  
ically, workers have been struggling  
to obtain good working conditions,  
enough money to support a household,  

a retirement fund and the provision of  
sufficient health care.  

Unionization has been a way that  
workers organized for better worker  
conditions, wages and benefits. Unions  
can be a way of letting workers have a  
voice in decision and policy making,  
and of giving the power back to the  
working people that management may  
have lessened.  

The early attempts of both women  
and men to unionize failed. Union or-  
ganization of men eventually grew  
stronger. Not until the 1850s did  
craft and skilled trade unions consider  
accepting women members.  

The Civil War added to the terrible  
working conditions of both women and  
men. Some men were organized into  
unions working to improve conditions  
and wages. A New York City resident  
suggested that a meeting should be  
called to organize the increasing num-  
ber of women workers. Through adver-  
tisements in the newspaper, a first  
meeting was held and with the assist-  
ance of men, a Working Woman Protective  
Union was established in 1868. This  
was not a trade union, but worked at  
offering legal assistance to women for  
obtaining back wages. Unions usually  
work from a broad base and affect a  
large number of workers. This union  
worked at an individual level and af-  
fected only a few members. Protective  
Unions such as these spread into other  
major cities such as Chicago, Phila-  
delphia and Boston.  

Women who worked outside the house also  

STRIKE STATEMENT BY  
BGH MEDICAL STAFF  

On Thursday, May 19, the offices of  
Buffalo General Hospital's Medical  
Staff issued a statement of their pos-  
ition concerning the strike. The  
statement urged a quick resolution of  
the strike, both because the walk-out  
disrupts the "largest private not-for-  
profit hospital corporation in the  
United States" and affects the health  
and welfare of the entire community,  
and because the strike also affects  
the employment status of "almost 2,000  
...fellow... employees--the majority  
of which (are) without a voice in the  
decision which has so seriously  
affected them."  

The Medical Staff went on to ex-  
plain "that Buffalo General has a  
fixed (hospital bill) reimbursement  
rate and no other source of income"  
due in part to the large number of  
low-income people they serve. How-  
ever, they also said, "Nurses are  
underpaid relative to the work they  
perform in our society. We feel  
that the initial Buffalo General  
Hospital contract cannot rectify  
decades of injustice. But we will  
support continued efforts to alleviate  
this injustice."  

They hope that the strike will be  
resolved before irreparable harm has  
been done to the community, hospital  
and jobs.@  

(info:  

Buffalo News)  

A Women's Trade Union League had  
been formed in the late 1800s after  
Protective Unions were established.  

As this league tried to educate and  
organize women into unions, it became  
aware of problems which kept women  
from joining the unions and taking  
an active leadership role in them.  

Union membership of women largely  
depended on the attitude of male  
relatives towards the union. Often  
if a brother, father or husband was  
a part of the union, the sister,  
daughter or wife would be a member  
as well. The structure of the union  
government and the power source was  
determined by men. This directly  
determined the position and activity  
of its women members.  

Women often did not work directly  
with men in union activity. For  
example, in the General Union of Tex-  
tile Workers, there was a separate  
woman's guild. They had the power to  
do anything but "deliberate and ad-  
vise." The working of women on an  
equal basis with men was something new  
for both sides. Sometimes it was  
thought that it would be difficult to  
organize them and the impact of organ-  
izing them would not be felt anyway.  

To men, the union was important be-  
cause their jobs were important. Both  
sexes felt that women were only in the  
labor force until they found a man to  
marry. It has since become obvious  
that women are in the labor force to  
stay. The perception that women who  
work and are active in their unions are  
violent, aggressive, masculine and un-  
respectable has become less prevalent.  
Women did not want to encourage that  
perception and are still careful about  
it today. Sometimes union meetings  
were held in unsafe sections of towns,  
late at night and in bars. In one such  
union, fifteen women would attend the  
meeting while a hundred and fifty men  
attended. The proportion of women in-  
creased tremendously after the location  
was changed.  

Despite their increasing member-  
ship in unions, women were rarely el-  
ected into leadership unless they made  
up a very obvious majority of the  
workers. Besides the problems mention-  
ed above, another real problem was that  

women had responsibility in the home. Becom-  
ing active in the union required a  
great amount of time. (A family in-  
volved in the current Nurses' Union at  
Buffalo General Hospital observes that  
this is still true and, although re-  
sponsibility in the household seems to  
be more equally shared than households  
of long ago, union participation still  
puts a strain on the household.)  

Lillian Matthews became the director  
of a training school for women organ-  
izers in 1920. She addressed the con-  
cerns of women in male-dominated union  
locals because women felt that the men  
often overlooked or were resistant to  
the issues and problems of women. Wo-  
men had succeeded in entering men's  

Continued on Page 7, Col. 1