IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

UTS REJECTS  
INFANT PROTECTION CODE  

*From Page 8  

tion is that of free choice. Will  
women be given thorough and accurate  
information upon which to formulate  
important and irreversible infant  
feeding decisions? The United States  
has a moral obligation imposed by a  
constitutional/legal framework to  
guarantee freedom from promotional  
coercion which has been proven to be  
a major cause of infant morbidity  
and mortality in this country.  

CONCLUSION  

Why are the various problems as-  
sociated with formula feeding in the  
U.S. so underpublicized? Part of the  
explanation can be found by looking  
to the group of persons who suffer  
most. The lower income, less educat-  
ed portion of the female population  
who have their children in over-crowd-  

ed clinics are the ones who are giv-  
en the least information on breast-  
feeding. Ironically, they are also  
the ones who are least likely to have  
access to clean water, sterile bot-  
tles and the money necessary to pur-  
chase the very expensive breastmilk  
substitutes marketed in their neigh-  
borhood stores. Their situation is  
seriously aggravated if they do not  
speak or read English, for then they  
cannot know how to prepare the formula  

properly.  

We can all personally support wo-  
men we know in that situation and we  
can boycott products of formula com-  

panies which rely on unethical pra-  
ctices to market their product. But,  
the only solution that is likely to  
produce significant improvements re-  
quires the support and assistance of  
the medical community. Women must be  
informed in order to make the crucial  
decision of how to best nourish their  
children. They must pressure the  
medical community to provide all wom-  
en with the resources and information  
they need to make an informed and  
free choice.  

Colleen A. Brown is a 3rd year law  
student with a longstanding interest  
in women's rights and nutrition/hunger  
problems. She is the mother of  
"1-1/2" children and ardently sup-  
ports breastfeeding.  

{Ed. note: Portions of this article  
were originally published in In  

the Public Interest, Fall 1982 under  
the title "A Fickle Formulation:  
U.S. Plays Nursemaid to the Market-  
place". Ms. Brown has re-written  
and revised her article, with help  
from Sharon Przepasniak. ]  

The following is a list of products  
which are being boycotted. It is a  
also a lesson on which companies  
own or are owned by others, whether  
as subsidiaries, parent companies  
or licensees.  

SINGLES SUPPORT GROUP  

by Asia Hanley  

What is a single support group?  

It's a group of women who have re-  
cently ended a relationship with a  
husband or lover and meet on a reg-  
ular basis to give each other emo-  
tional support.  

“Ending an intimate relationship  
leaves a lot of women in crisis,"  
says Donna Kranitz, North Area YWCA  
program director and group leader,  
"there are a whole range of emotions  
and issues a woman has to deal with  
when an intimate relationship ends:  
guilt, anger, self-pity and lack of  
confidence are but a few. By talking  
to other women who have gone through  
similar circumstances, they can begin  
to deal with their own feelings."  

"The group is supportive and never  
judgmental. It provides a safe place  
to vent whatever emotion they're deal-  
ing with at the time. It also makes  
them realize that others have had the  
same troubles and survived," says  
Donna.  

The original group had its begin-  
nings in early 1980, under the title  
"Is There Life After Divorce." From  
this emerged a unified core of eight  
women who urged the 'Y' to continue  
with a program for divorced and sep-  
arated women.  

An ongoing series of weekly sup-  
port sessions was established.  
Speakers were brought in periodically  
to talk on subjects that would aid  
the group members with particular  
problems. In addition, a list of re-  

source centers within the community  
was compiled and made available.  

The original members are now out  
of crisis, but they continue to meet  
because, as Mary Jane, a veteran mem-  
ber, put it, "Now is the time to set  
goals for the eventuality of living  
alone for the rest of my life and  
learning to like it."  

Although women of all ages have  
attended the meetings within the two  
year period of the group's existence,  
the average woman is in her mid-thir-  
ties or older. Mary Jane's concerns  
are a very real possibility for many.  

Another reason that keeps some of  
the core group members coming to  
meetings is that they have formed  
lasting friendships. The women so-  
cialize outside of the meetings and  
give each other practical help too.  

Says Donna, "One of the women was  
moving and several of her friends  
from the group got together and help-  
ed her out."  

Carol, a long time member calls it  
"a life-saving group." She had been  
married for 15 years when her marriage  
broke up. She had no family in the  
area to give her support and two  
children to raise. “You were sup-  
ported as soon as you walked in," she  
says, “when one woman was down the  
others would rise up and console her."  

Carol attributes her newly ac-  
quired self-confidence also to the  
fact that Donna, the 'Y' leader, en-  

couraged the group  

Nestlé's Chocolate * Nestlé's Cookie Mix *  
Lancôme Cosmetics * Crosse and Black-  
well * Wispride Cheese * Swiss Knight  
Cheese * Old Fort Cheese * Cherry Hill  
Cheese * Rogers Cheese * Locatelli  
Cheese * Beringer Bros. Wines * Maggi *  
Souptime * Nestea * Nescafé * Taster's  
Choice * DeCaf * Cain's Coffees * Sun-  
rise Coffee * Manhattan Coffee * Mc-  
Vities * Pero Coffee Substitute *  
Stouffer's Frozen Foods * Toll House  
Chocolate Chips * Deer Park Spring  
Water * Alcon Pharmaceuticals * Ionax  
Skin Care Products * Contique Lens  

Cleaner * Pine Hill Crystal Water *  

Los Hermanos Wines * L'Oréal Cos-  
metics * Libby's * Rusty Scupper  
Restaurant * Beechnut Baby Foods *  
Chambourcy Yogurt * Nestlé's Quick  

If you are interested in more in-  
formation write INFACT, 1701  
University Ave., S.E., Minneapolis,  
MN 55414  

Copies of the very well-written  
and informative "Petition to Al-  
leviate Domestic Infant Formula Mis-  
use and Provide Informed Infant  
Feeding Choice" prepared by attorneys  
Lois Salisbury and Angela Glover  
Blackwell are available for $7.50*  
(including an extensive bibliography)  
from Colleen Brown (home 886-1553;  
work 636-2071).  

*reduced price available for low-  
income persons, groups or agencies.  

that everyone would have a chance to  
participate as leader. Carol says  
she was overwhelmed at the thought at  
first because of her low self-esteem,  
but when her turn came, she pulled  
herself together and acquired new  
self-respect as a result.  

This veteran member recently drop-  
ped out because of lack of time. Now  
she is attending school again as well  
as keeping down a new job and func-  
tioning in her role as a mother. Says  
Carol, "I haven't solved all my prob-  
lems, but now I have the ability to  
cope with them and the independence to  
explore new avenues."  

The singles support group has grown  
from the original eight. There have  
been as many as 30 women at one meet-  
ing. Donna says the time to restruc-  
ture has come. "We'd like to give  
everyone a time to share but even  
meeting the two hours, it's impos-  

sible to allow for everyone to par-  
ticipate," she said, "and we also  
have different emotional levels at  
any given time. Therefore, the older  
members have decided it might be bet-  
ter to begin a new group which would  
be guided by a veteran member."  

The new group will begin in March  
and although the times and dates are  
not yet formalized, interested par-  
ties should contact Donna Kranitz at  
875-3111.  

COMMON GROUND FEBRUARY 1983 PAGE 9