NEWS

Girls are serving as “altar servers" in some of Chicago's Catholic churches, despite a directive from the archbishop prohibiting that activity!

In one Chicago church, according to a story in the Buffalo News, girls will continue to serve, but no new girls will be trained. Another had been preparing girls to be liturgical assistants, but postponed the program because of opposition.

There is a church law that allows only boys to be altar servers.

The number of abortions among Erie County residents dropped by 4% in 1982, the State Health Department has reported. There was a decline of 290 abortions from 1981's figure of 6,684.

Peter Slocum, spokesperson for the Health Department, will not call that a trend. Erie County has a relatively high ratio of abortions to live births. The new figure may be attributable to the fact that fewer women are using abortion as a method of birth control.

NURSES

*From Page 1 ; :
Only about 100 (of 800) crossed the picket lines, mostly those in higher level positions.

The strike itself was an educational experience for many women involved. “Women are not socialized to deal with picket lines--we didn't know what to do, but we learned. Nurses started communicating with each other on the line. It was an exciting experience, we began to understand that others suffered the same conditions as we did."

A turning point came at 49 days into the strike. New York State regulations state that at this point striking workers are eligible for unemployment benefits. Buffalo General did not have unemployment insurance, and had to pay the full amount out of hospital funds. "The hospital census at this time was down by half," said DeVinney, "and they were hurting."

The strike was finally settled on July 19, and all nurses are now back to work. Some of the effects of the strike still remain, however. “The hospital is still trying to bust us," she stated. "There are 40 grievances out right now, and we still face harassment."

One event that members of the union consider very unfortunate is that 1,100 other hospital workers were laid off during, and largely due to, the strike. Many of these people are still not back to work. "Which goes to show in its own way," added DeVinney, "how important it is to be organized." Another unfortunate development was that because these other workers were laid off 'during a labor dispute' they, too, had to wait 49 days before collecting unemployment.

The U.S. Civil Rights Commission has decided to maintain its opposition to "last hired, first fired" policies, despite objections from its staff director, a Reagan appointee.

The statement was issued from an "emergency meeting" called by the staff director, Clarence Pendleton, that "strongly disagreed" with a Justice Department brief filed in the Supreme Court in support of white firefighters in Memphis, Tennessee.

In the case, a district court blocked the Memphis Fire Department from starting lay-offs based on "last hired, first fired" policies because it would substantially reduce the number of blacks in some areas of the department. A federal appeals court upheld the ruling, but the Justice Department requested that the Supreme Court overrule that decision.

Linda Chavez, the new Reagan-appointed staff director, suggested that the commission reverse its usual stance backing affirmative action programs, because the Justice Department's desire to overrule the federal appeals decision is based on "a rather straightforward interpretation of a civil rights law."

In a 5-1 vote with Ms. Chavez dissenting, the Commission stated that it is "deeply concerned that if alternatives to rigid seniority-based lay-off systems are not pursued, progress made over the last decade to obtain a representative department in Memphis will be wiped out."

The union also regrets that ECMC and the VA Hospitals gave BGH doctors privileges at these hospitals during the strike. "So the doctors’ private pocketbooks didn't hurt," DeVinney noted, “Unfortunately, nurses at these hospitals were already overburdened with their own patients."

Two issues which were not settled to the union's satisfaction were the pension plan and staffing ratios, and they intend to make these a priority in their next contract negotiations. "We need to make a thorough study of the staffing issues to present a better case," said DeVinney. "It is obvious that different types of floors need different ratios."

DeVinney emphasized that the strike spoke to several basic philosophical issues beyond this specific labor dispute. "Nurses, who are fairly low on the totem pole, challenged the entire medical establishment. This deals with the issue of power between men and women. Women have a lot to offer--they are socialized to care, and that is a needed skill.

We learned the skills to fight back against those who care only for business and profit."

"In this day and age, people should receive better health care when they are sick. As nurses, we said through this strike, that we wanted the administration to treat both us and patients more fairly."

“We have to maintain our honesty, too. Not all unions do, and we don't want to follow the tradition of the ‘old union boys'. It is time for women to take a stand, and to become involved, not only in their own labor issues, but in politics in general."

YWCA Residence.

not the official.

lar to your.
an election, but 100 might.

that politicians use is that 250-500 opinions are represented by fifty letters.
issue may change the vote on a bill.

cian to represent your opinion is to offer yourself as a resource. “Present your position, backed with research and information to your representative.

Hoetzer.

does politicize people.
point of contact with an elected official, which everyone needs sooner or later." She adds that "political parties would fold if it weren't for women--we organize, decide the issues, do the canvassing. It is important to get involved--these people are our elected officials, elected to represent our interests.

We are a viable political force."

Sarah Slavin has a doctorate in political science and teaches at Buffalo State College. She helped write candidate Jimmy Carter's position on women's rights. She was a consultant to Anne Wexer, the Presidential adviser on minority and women's affairs during the Carter administration and a Parent Representative on the Pittsburgh Board of Elections and she adds that she's also a voter.

Hope Hoetzer is one of four women Democratic zone leaders in Erie County. She ran for City Council on the Democratic and Liberal tickets. She has worked on several campaigns a year since 1974, and has run several voter registration campaigns, while doing volunteer work for statewide political organizations. In total, Hope is owner of Marrakesh--where there is always a political discussion just waiting to happen.

The YWCA Residence on North Street in Buffalo is currently looking for funds to continue a program that provides shelter for women who have no place to go. The residence can house up to 15 women and 10 children. The staff provides women with meals and referrals, and women can stay up to two weeks.

The program was funded by a $17,000 federal grant that expired on September 30 and Jeanette Hess, the director of the residence says that the number of women who have used the shelter justifies its existence.

The program is for women who live in Buffalo, or women who are stranded in Buffalo. Some are battered women waiting to be admitted to Haven House, or are women who are referred to the YW by ministries or agencies. For more information, contact the

CANDIDATE

*From Page 1

important--you dislike the action,

Join a group with interests similar to yours. One vote may not swing

Hoetzer added that the formula

Fifty letters on a particular

Another strategy to get a politician to represent your opinion is to offer yourself as a resource.

"It is a kind of a gift," said

Slavin says, "The act of voting gives a

She helped

She was a

She acts as secretary to the

Incident-

COMMON GROUND OCTOBER 1983 PAGE THREE