By Diane Prochownik

When Mary K. received the phone
call, asking if she would collect
again for the American Cancer Society,
she didn't know how to tell the caller
that she'd rather not. She'd already
agreed to make bread for the P.T.A.
Bake Sale that week, to staff a table
at a church bazaar, and to assist with
a zoo field trip to be taken by her
daughter's nursery school class. The
door-to-door soliciting for funds was
the one more thing she didn't have time for.

Andrea S. works a nine-to-five job.
She serves on the board of the Parents
Association of the high school her son
attends, staffs book fairs for her alma
mater, and volunteers somewhere where a
relative is a patient. Recently, a friend
tried to persuade her to become a
volunteer member of a crisis hotline
at a suicide prevention center.

Andrea declined because she was afraid
she'd be in need of crisis counseling
herself if she otherwise extended
the scope of her commitments.

Mary and Andrea are only two of the
many women who find themselves victims
of their own social conscience. Coerced
by requests that they do their part and
their own motivation to carry their fair
share, they overload with commitments
to causes, lulled by an unrealistic sense
of what they believe should be their duty.
Volunteerism is the buzzword today, seen
as a cultural cure-all for the nation's
ills. From the local branch library to
the Oval Office, the emphasis is on
volunteer help.

"I believe the spirit of volunteerism
lives in America," President Reagan told
Congress in the fall of 1981. "The truth
is, we've let government take away many
things we once considered were ours to do
voluntarily, out of the goodness of our
hearts and a sense of neighborliness."

The speech was a lead-in to cutbacks in
funding and services that are still being
loudly decried by sociologists, educators,
and social workers. As articles in Working
Woman, Harper's, and USA Today have all
noted during the interim, volunteerism
cannot fill the gap. Even without the
budget cuts and the complexities of our
social welfare needs, volunteers were
never intended to do more than supplement
professionals the way that our social
safety net is structured, nor to ride to
the rescue by stepping in as government
steps out of social programs. To assume
that this could be the case would be to
abandon the notion of a government's social
obligation in its truest sense.

Nonetheless, the spotlight is on
volunteerism today, and regardless of
whose facts you choose to believe, a
large percentage of our population is
engaged in volunteer activities. More
than 37,000,000 U.S. citizens make
contributions in this area, or, if you
consider the broader definition of "working
in some way to help others without monetary
pay," plus such informal assistance as
helping an elderly neighbor, a whopping 52%.

Locally and nationally, volunteerism is
in the forefront of the media. From news
radio to newspapers, the emphasis is on
services and funding, from senior citizen
involvement in the public schools to
recognition fetes at a childcare center
to columns that list agency needs.

Volunteerism isn't free. Programs and
training still cost money. As one
spokesperson succinctly put it, "Even the
chairs that the volunteers sit on, and the
phones that they use to solicit donations,
have to be paid for by someone."

National magazines have also been quick
to point out the dual values of
volunteerism. Not only does it aid the
organization of your choice to lend it
your time and talents, they note, but it
gives you, the worker, the opportunity to
gain new skills, explore experiences,
pursue personal goals, and possibly even
transfer such knowledge to a future career.

Advice columns urge retirees to become
involved with volunteer activities;
relocating families are urged to have one
member (usually mother) join organizations
needing help; banquets are thrown and
plaques are given for long years of
unpaid service. The frenzied press to
encourage participants crosses sexual,
ethnic, and racial boundaries, and is
almost as unlimited in age span. A
November 1982, Reader's Digest article
recounts the experiences of an eleven-year-old
Nebraska girl, a volunteer worker with
handicapped preschoolers. Children Today
(January/February 1983) reports on a group
of Head Start projects, using young people,
age 14 to 22, as part of a Young Volunteers
in ACTION program. The Volunteers Directory,
produced by the Voluntary Action Center of
the United Way, not only describes
organizations and requirements, but also
lists the ages preferred. They range from
13 to an almost indefinite upper limit.

What results from the overt and covert
pressures engendered by all this publicity,
is a sense of guilt when one doesn't perform
to the standards that seem to be set for us.
Women have always been nurturers and the
caretakers of the world's social woes. While
they no longer bear the traditional image of
the underpaid and undervalued menial in their
volunteer roles, women like Mary and Andrea
still feel guilty when they say no to a
request for their time and their efforts.
When everything from job search manuals to
the prodding of your own conscience tells
you to be generous in your willing acceptance
of a slew of volunteer duties, you make
yourself a candidate for volunteer burnout.

For the past few years, self-help books
have regularly hit the bestseller list.
Covering everything from philosophy to
psychology, and assertiveness training to
time studies, the focus invariably becomes
one of stress control. What it all boils
down to is a matter of energy, individual
as well as organizational. Once, when I
chaired a committee, I was told to seek my
volunteers from the busiest women I knew,
since they'd be the most willing to respond.
Unfortunately, these very same women were
asked to respond time after time. Eventually,
they lost their enthusiasm and their interest
in the cause.

If the members afflicted by this disease
exceed the number still functioning, the
organization follows the workers into the
abyss of volunteer burnout. For through the
inability to say "no," the Marys and Andreas
become part of a chain reaction that can
jeopardize just what they are trying to aid.
Stress control cannot be ignored and it has
to start with the individual.

So, by all means, do volunteer work in
areas where your interests lie. You can
learn new skills and earn great satisfaction
through such unpaid activities. But evaluate
just what you can give and exercise the
option of saying "no" by picking and choosing
how you spend yourself. It is, after all,
your energy that others want plugged into
their causes. Otherwise, you could burn out
between the nursery and nursing home circuit.

Diane C. Prochownik is a freelance
writer, who is a mother and former
social worker. She used to volunteer
for everything.