COMMON  
GROUND  

WESTERN New York  

@MEN'S  

Vol. VII, No. 6  

INSIDE THIS MONTH ...  

Pro-Choice Activities  

How Language Can Make You Sick  

The Nonexistent Woman  

Setback in Sharon Kowalski Case  
Theatre and Book Reviews, News & more  
Community Calendar, Resource Directory  

Feb. 1989  

$1.50 VOLUME VII, NO. 6  

FEBRUARY 1989  

NEWSJOURNAL  

The Nonexistent Woman  

by Sharon I. Fawley  

The plain and simple truth about abortion is that  
nobody wants it. It would be wonderful to live in a  
world where birth control is safe and always works,  
where teenagers know about and practice safe sex, and  
where rape and incest are unknown.  

Unfortunately, that is not our world. Unwanted  
pregnancies happen. They happen to older women who  
thought they could no longer conceive. They happen to  
ignorant young women who are deluded by foolish  
notions of romantic love. They happen to girl-children  
who are molested by daddies, brothers, uncles, male  
teachers and neighbors. They happen to women who  
are raped. They happen.  

And when a woman is confronted by the tragedy of  
an unwanted pregnancy, she will seek a remedy. An  
early, safe, legal abortion is one remedy. It is an  
appealing one, but it is a choice any woman  
herself in this situation has a right to consider.  

That right is now under serious challenge. Since  
women have no constitutionally guaranteed rights as  
women, the right to an abortion is always in jeopardy.  
We now have a Supreme Court packed with extreme  
ideological conservatives bent on reversing a number of  
civil rights decisions of past courts.  

But we don't have to go so far away to see the threat.  
Right here in Buffalo, anti-choice groups have been  
given cozy support by Mayor Griffin and Judge  
Flaherty. In Buffalo, they have the go-ahead to illegally  
blockade clinics and harass women seeking medical care.  

It is easy to be deceived by the anti-choice message.  
They chant and pray. They show lurid photos of  
aborted fetuses beside lovely pictures of healthy babies.  
They call one another Reverend something or other.  
They wave flags and say the pledge of allegiance.  

The Woman Who Isn't  

But in all the pictures and prayers and flag waving,  
something is missing. Actually, someone is missing.  
Anti-choice groups seldom talk about women, except in  
the most derogatory or patronizing terms.  

Their slogans imply that women who want  
abortions are careless, immoral, or stupid. They speak  
of sexually promiscuous teenagers. They accuse  
women who do not practice birth control of being  
careless and immoral. They say the time for choice is  
before a woman gets pregnant when presumably a  
woman should only choose to have sex when she fully  
intends to become pregnant. They claim that women  
facing unwanted pregnancies cannot weigh alternatives,  
consequences, and risks, to make an intelligent decision  
for themselves.  

In a recent column, none other than the very erudite  
William F. Buckley pointed out that women have had  
access to the pill longer than abortion has been legal.  
Presumably the point was that with a safe and effective  
birth control option, no woman should ever need an  
abortion.  

Yet many anti-choice people allow only “natural”  
birth control practices — presumably the notoriously  
unreliable rhythm method. Many block every effort to  
educate teenagers about sex and safe sex practices.  
Often, they do not even want their children to receive  
information about AIDS.  

None of this takes into consideration the girl-child  
who is regularly molested by some male relative. What  
choice does she have? And what choice does a rape  
victim have?  

COMMENTARY  

The Clearest Message  

For all their lurid pictures and chants and hymns, the  
real message of anti-choice groups is the one given in  
silence. It is the message they do not talk about, the  
message they never say. Yet it is a clear and chilling  
message.  

Women do not count. A pregnant woman is a non-  
person. She can be, indeed, she must be sacrificed for  
the sake of the fetus. Always. Irrevocably. Nothing  
else matters except the fetus.  

Women in this case means all females. The anti-  
choice view discounts molested children and ignorant  
teenagers... It discounts welfare mothers and professional  
women.  

It is not merely that a woman is shoved into the  
back seat when it comes to making decisions about her  
body, her pregnancy and the fetus. It is that she is not  
considered at all.  

The scope of that is difficult to grasp. Yet in this  
time, even a woman who wants to have her baby must  
be very careful about choosing her doctors, hospitals,  
and treatment.  

A pregnant woman can be thrown into jail and held  
until her baby is delivered if she tests positive for a drug  
and her doctor turns her in. Many religiously affiliated  
hospitals have already decided that the fetus is more  
important than the woman who carries it in a whole  
range of critical situations. Pregnant women who  
become terminally ill have been murdered by their own  
doctors -- sometimes over the vigorous objections of  
themselves and their families -- in unsuccessful efforts  
to save the fetus.  

A California woman faces manslaughter charges in  
the death of her prematurely born infant. Her crime was  
that she did not follow her doctor's orders and she failed  
to get medical attention soon enough (by her male  
doctor's standards) when she went into labor.  

Even with caution, you may find yourself at  
the mercy of a system that does not value your life. It  

+ Continued on page 10  

Pro-Choice Clergy Undaunted by  
Attempts to Disrupt Meeting  

Protesters hoping to disrupt the initial meeting of the  
Religious Coalition for Abortion Rights were shouted  
down and drowned out by applause for pro-choice  
speakers at the gathering. The coalition, which recently  
formed to present the more mainstream religious  
opinion on reproductive rights, attracted more than 70  
supporters at its first meeting January 17th at  
Westminster Presbyterian Church in Buffalo.  

Speakers at the meeting included the Rev. Beryl T.  
Choi, Associate Rector of the Calvary Episcopal Church  
in Amherst, Rev. Charles R. White, Executive Director  
of Buffalo Area Metropolitan Ministries, and Crescentia  
O'Neal Seralathan, Western Region Director for the  
A.C.L.U.  

Rev. White said that he believed public discussion  
was needed on the issue of abortion. Rev. Choi's  
response was that dialogue and debate were impossible,  
in light of the way anti-abortion protestors have  
refused to listen to other opinions.  

Ted Cadwallader, a minister from the Community  
Christian Church in North Tonawanda, demonstrated this  
by leaping to his feet and repeatedly interrupting Rev.  
Choi, who said firmly, "Will you let me finish what  
I'm saying?" Cadwallader, one of about six abortion  
opponents at the meeting, called the group a "pro-death  
movement" and added “abortion is not the answer -  
adoption is!"  

He was shouted down by the majority, one of whom  
asked "When are you planning to adopt?"  

The group gathered about 70 signatures on a  
statement of support for the pro-choice movement, and  
is planning future meetings.  

Outside the church, about 30 picketers chanted and  
sang hymns, while the Reverend Daren Drzymala told  
local TV reporters that the clergy meeting inside were  
"phonies" and "ministers of Satan."  

BULK RATE  
U.S. POSTAGE  
PAID  
Buffalo, N.Y.  
Permit No. 709  

Gayellow Pages  
Renaissance House  
Box 292, Village Sta.  

10014