Health Update

Buffalo Women’s  
Health Network  

The Buffalo Women's Health Network  
started in the Fall of 1981 out of con-  
cerns that a few women had about health  
resources in Western New York.  

Our goals are to build a network of  
concerned individuals and organizations  
and to promote the exchange of informa-  
tion and ideas on women's health rela-  
ted issues.  

We will continue to grow and develop  
the Network as a tool to coordinate the  
flow of information about health ser-  
vices for women. Our other ongoing  
projects are a quarterly news bulletin  
(contained in this issue), as well as  
more in-depth articles pertinent to all  
aspects of women's health. We will  
have a self-help table at the ASPO  
Boulevard Mall Show (see Calendar),  
where speculums, among other things,  
will be available.  

Founding mothers of the Network  
are: Millie Baumgartner,  
Counselor, Erie Medical Center; Elana Kehoe, Cer-  
tified Nurse Midwife; Kathy Kren,  
Health Consumer; Tusie O’Brien, Health  
Educator; Carla Reynolds, Health Consu-  
mer; and Julia Worczak, Women's Health  
Care Nurse Practitioner.  

We urge interested people to send  
names, questions, suggestions, ideas,  
information to: Carla Reynolds  

57 Kettering  
Tonawanda, N.Y.  
834-5306  

SYMPTOMS  

Contagious Cancer?  

Kaposi's Sarcoma, which may be a  
cancer of the cells which make up blood  
vessels, is a recently publicized  
cancer which seems to be spread like  
Hepatitis-B virus: sexually, in blood  
products, and by intravenous drug use,  
making it a potentially transmittable  
or contagious form of cancer. Origin-  
ally labeled as a "Gay male" disease,  
new evidence shows that 16% of reported  
cases were heterosexual. New York  
State is the home of nearly half of all  
reported cases, and there has been at  
least one recently reported case from  
Buffalo.  

Between June 1, 1981, and May 1982,  
there were 355 reported cases of  
Kaposi's Sarcoma (KS) and/or a partic-  
ularly dangerous associated pneumonia,  
Pneumocystis carinii (PCP), according  
to the June 11 report from the Center  
for Disease Control in Atlanta. KS,  
related infections, and PCP strike  
previously healthy persons between 15  
and 60 years of age. Some of them get  
KS and others develop PCP. Others are  
affected by both or succumb to infec-  
tion.  

There may be genetic predisposition  
(inherited tendencies), sexual life-  
style, drug use (especially intravenous)  
or other depressed body immune system  
factors which determine how a person  
is affected.  

Of those affected with either KS or  
PCP, 39.47% were Black or Hispanic.  
While only 8 female cases were reported,  
7 were Black or Hispanic, with a median  
age of 29 years. There is a 50% fatal-  
ity rate for these women so far. All  
the women affected were heterosexual.  

Symptoms of PCP (the pneumonia  
associated with KS) include shortness  
of breath, chest pain and fever. It is  
often the cause of death when it goes  
unrecognized and untreated. Keep in  
mind any of these signs could be symp-  
toms of other problems, but this  
disease, if present, goes frequently  
undiagnosed.  

There are many theories on how and  
why people get Kaposi's Sarcoma and  
Pneumocystis carinii. Frequent sexual  
activity, intravenous drug use and con-  
taminated blood products may only be  
high risk factors which render someone  
more susceptible to a virus or the cumu-  
lative effect of multiple venereal  
disease or other viruses. It may also  
be that a rare Herpes strain may bring  
KS with it.  

If you are in a high-risk situation  
and develop any of these symptoms, see  
your family doctor or clinic. You can  
also obtain free cancer screening at  
Roswell Park Memorial Institute. For  
further information, write: Center for  
Disease Control, Atlanta, GA. 30333.  

Health Alert - VDT’s  

Video display terminals (VDT's), such  
as data processors and computer termin-  
als, have come under recent attack be-  
cause of the large number of health-  
related incidents - especially eye  
problems, skin rashes, birth defects  
and miscarriages - among women working  
with them. VDT's have also been assoc-  
iated with increased stress and iso-  
lation in the workplace.  

VDT's emit six different kinds of  
radiation, including X-rays which are  
harmful to fetuses. Thus far, the  
Food and Drug Administration's  
Bureau of Radiological Health has  
determined "standards for accept-  
able levels of radiation" and will  
monitor VDT's on a spot check basis.  
Acceptable levels of radiation have  
undergone significant revisions  
since first being discovered - usually  
lowered as newer research indicates  
danger from low-level radiation  
especially with constant exposure over  
time.  

In Canada, two provinces, British  
Columbia and Ontario, have recognized  
the dangers to workers who use the  
terminals and have taken actions to  
protect them. Safeguards a worker  
can take include:  

- limit exposure to the VDT's and  
keep track of the amount of time spent  
at each terminal.  

- take breaks away from the VDT's  

- if pregnant, consult your health-  
care provider. You may want to re-  
quest being assigned elsewhere during  
pregnancy. The same holds true if you  
have cataracts.  

- if you have any unusual health  
problems, no matter how slight, report  
them to your own physician and your  
workplace health care facility. En-  
courage your co-workers to do the same.  
This will help substantiate any common  
ailments, and could help discover a  
problem before it becomes serious.  

- have an ophthalmological exam, in-  
cluding a "slitlamp biomicroscopy” for  
cataract development before beginning  
work on a VDT and yearly thereafter.  

Ask your union, or employer if non-  
unionized, to provide information about  
the health risks of VDT's and radiation,  
and monitoring procedures for radiation  
leaks.