a.  
Un  

Violence within families and against  
individuals can take many forms. Those  
who take refuge from this violence  
come from diverse backgrounds. Con-  
trary to popular belief, the incidence  
of abuse cuts across all race, reli-  
gious and class lines. But a woman's  
self-identity may determine if she  
will put up with it or leave the situa-  
tion. For many women, the options are  
limited. When she is economically de-  
pendent on the abuser she can seek wel-  
fare, work at low wages, or suffer the  
abuse. If she has children, she may  
face the painful choice of leaving them  
behind, or uprooting and taking them  
with her—often into poverty. Women  
with good jobs or an alternative living  
situation are somewhat better off,  
but poor women, a disproportionate  
number of whom are elderly and/or women  
of color, face particularly grim hard-  
ships. Not only are they victimized  
in their homes, but women of color con-  
front the added burden of racism  
in addition to the sexism of the very  
institutions which are supposed to be  
helping them—police, social services,  
and battered women's shelters.  

Poverty is also likely to prevent a  
woman from leaving an abusive situation  
and allow her to make excuses for her  
abuser's actions. Economic conditions  
exacerbate family violence, but  
clearly they do not excuse violence  
and do not explain violence in econom-  
ically prosperous situations.  

By E.R. Mann  

Domestic violence is finally being  
properly redefined to include both  
psychological and physical abuse,  
sexual abuse of children, incest,  
abuse of elderly people by their  
children and relatives, battery by  
sons, husbands, boyfriends and male  
relatives, and violence between les-  
bians.  

Rape in marriage is being treated  
as a crime in only a dozen or so  
states, and it is also being recognized  
that an abuser does not have to be  
living with a victim to cause violence.  
"Date-rape," courtship violence and  
premarital abuse are being seriously  
studied. While still somewhat ignored,  
a recent report by Rosemarie Bogel-  
Allbritten in Family Relations, Vol  
30, 1981 (as reported in New Women's  
Times December 1982) estimated that one  
college student in five “experienced  
violence and that a majority of stu-  
dents knew someone involved in court-  
ship violence."  

For some women, realizing the po-  
tential for domestic violence as a  
child, wife, mother and elder, brings  
immediate denial..."that couldn't  
possibly happen to me—that is not  
happening to me." However, Haven  
House Shelter for Battered Women re-  
ports that women who seek shelter from  
them were often beaten as children.  
What is it about the female role that  
sometimes gives societal permission  
for abuse, and keeps women in a ser-  
ies of abusive relationships?  

Much is unknown, but feminists who  
analyze the role of women see clear  
parallels between the status of women  
and children as property under the  
culturally accepted "protection" of  
a man and the rationalizations that  
condone and excuse abuse. The sociali-  
zation of women into accepting roles,  
the major functions of which are to  
please and serve men, or roles whose  
power dynamics make force accepted  
tools for maintaining power, rein-  
force a powerless, subservient role  
for women.  

Feminists have explored the simi-  
larities in apparent motivations be-  
hind witch burnings in Europe, the  
practice of footbinding in China,  
Sutee in India (where a widow, assumed  
to be the cause of her husband's  
death, is expected to throw herself  
on her husband's funeral pyre), geni-  
tal mutilation in some African coun-  
tries, genocide of Native American peo-  
ples, slavery of Blacks, the incidence  
of father-daughter incest, elder  
abuse, the promotion of nuclear wea-  
pons for "peace," the new Right's  
insistence on preserving the nuclear  
family, and even pollution of the land,  
air and water with toxic chemicals and  
nuclear waste. The general attitude  
is "it's there, so why not take it  
(use it, dig it up, build on it, clear  
it)?" All of these attitudes pro-  
mote a power structure where someone  
determines possession of something (or  
someone else) and uses force or coer-  
cion to maintain that possession or  
power.  

Women clearly do participate in  
this power dynamic as sometime abusers.  

Women batter their own children and,  
according to a federally funded study  
of elder abuse, "the most common abuser  
was the daughter or daughter-in-law”  
(off our backs, May 1983).  

The issues involved are very com-  
plicated and there are no complete  
agreements on the causes or solutions.  
Domestic violence, at the very least,  
is being addressed in a concrete, prac-  
tical way by the existence of battered  
women's shelters. These shelters  
offer, at best, a temporary solution  
that gives women a “breather” from  
abuse or the threat of violence.  

Simple Gifts is a shelter in  
Buffalo which also serves women who  
would otherwise be institutionalized,  
and homeless and transitional women.  
In an interview at Simple Gifts with  
Stephanie Owitz and Margurite, two  
shelter workers, Stephanie said that  
"even when the women we serve have  
disagreements with the shelter, we  
hear it all the time—I'm grateful for  
the roof over my head and the food."  
What if every day of your life was  
filled with fear—you and your chil-  
dren's lives in danger? Women who  
have no place to go are trapped.  

*Turn to page 13  

Battered Women Project: Advocacy and Intervention  

A battered women's shelter cannot  
help an abused woman unless she knows  
it is there, unless she can get her-  
self and her children there, and un-  
less she knows that there are support  
services, real help and information  
for her after she arrives, to keep  
her out of the abusive situation.  

Possibly the greatest barrier to  
women who want to "get out" is the  
psychological one. It is an enor-  
mous step for some women to realize  
they don't have to be beaten, and that  
leaving is the right thing to do.  

Outreach and intervention are  
the keys to helping women take con-  
trol over their own lives and say  
"No" to a batterer—be it husband,  
father, boyfriend, son, brother or  
woman lover. Outreach means education  
of the community and the battered  
woman about her rights and options,  
and intervention is the process  
of actually, physically assisting  
a battered woman out of an abusive  
situation.  

Buffalo and Erie County had  
an advocacy and intervention pro-  
gram, and although it no longer  
operates, the need for another such  
program is desperate.  

The Buffalo Battered Women's  
Project started in 1977 as a program  
for displaced homemakers out of the  
Neighborhood Information Center,  
but so many of the women they served  
were battered that the program was  
rewritten in 1979 to deal exclusively  
with battered women and domestic  
violence.  

The only criterion for assistance  
was that the woman be battered, and  
no one was turned away. The BWP made  
information available to women about  
available community services, such as  
legal assistance, information about  
rights under the law, crisis hot-line  
numbers, counseling for the batterer  
and victim, transportation, housing,  
and one-on-one support over the tel-  
ephone and in person.  

The BWP also educated social service  
agencies about battery, in order to  
increase their awareness and sensi-  
tivity toward battered women who seek  
help from them, and in order to  
facilitate cooperation among agencies.  

Most importantly, the BWP helped  
women feel they could leave an abus-  
ive situation by offering practical  
support for that decision, and physic-  
ally assisting women who were leaving  
home, providing transportation and/or  
money, as well as going to court  
with them.  

Currently there is no local program  
that "fills in the gaps" from the  
time a woman decides to leave until  
she arrives at shelter with the depth  
and comprehensiveness that the BWP  
provided. It is precisely this kind  
of support that makes leaving an  
abusive situation realistic for  
many women. The program was not  
refunded, according to an outreach  
worker who was a part of the BWP,  
because once a municipally funded  
shelter opened (Haven House Shelter  
for Battered Women and Their Children),  
no need was seen for a separate  
program. Some may remember that there  
was a controversy in the women's  
community at the time, because the city  
of Buffalo was considering funding  
a program to return lost pets to their  
owners, with a budget that many felt  
would be better spent helping battered  
women.  

In times of economic stress, the  
incidence of battery increases,  
according to those who help battered  
women, but ironically those same  
economic pressures often make it more  
difficult for a victim to leave, and  
make it easier for a victim to blame  
outside things—like the economy—  
rather than the batterer. Reactivating  
a program similar to the BWP and  
making a commitment to keeping it  
going could help many women start  
a new and better life free from fear.  

PAGE 9  

COMMON GROUND  

JUNE 1983