A JOYOUS

HOME BIRTH

by Sharon Przepasniak

Whenever I tell someone that I gave
birth at home, they almost always as-
sume that the baby must have come so
fast that we didn't make it to the
hospital on time. Then when I explain
that our home birth was planned and
prepared for, I usually encounter a
response of surprise or shock - or
both.

Home birth is not for everyone.
However, despite the negative reactions
that befall a couple planning a home
birth, it CAN be a beautiful experi-
ence for many. And despite its
censure by most of the medical com-
munity (especially in the Buffalo
area), it CAN be a safe experience for
many healthy women.

My second child, Ellen, was born at
home this past 4th of July, and it was
a most wonderful event. But the de-
cision to attempt a home birth was
neither a quick nor an easy one. In
fact, I did not finally decide until
my 6th month of pregnancy, after much
reading, talking to other mothers
about their birth experiences, touring
a hospital maternity ward, reflecting
on my own first birth experience, and
finally, much contemplation.

Andy, my first child, was born in
a hospital 4 years ago. The fact that
I had already experienced one birth in
a hospital setting was the major moti-
vation in wanting a home birth the
second time. I should qualify this,
however, by saying that my first birth
experience did not seem so bad to me
at the time; in fact, the nurses and
doctors in that maternity ward were
kind, competent and helpful - at least
as helpful as they could be with so
many other patients to care for at the
same time.

The misery of recuperating from
episiotomy that my gynecologist rou-
tinely did for all his vaginal birth
patients, as I began to read more
about alternative birth methods,
more and more of my friends told me
stories of their hospital births, and

as I remembered my own hospital ex-
perience, I finally came to one con-
clusion: there must be a better way.

Also, in those few years after my
son was born, I attended two infor-
mational sessions of the Buffalo
Childbirth Coalition (formerly known
as the Buffalo Committee for Birth
Alternatives), an active and enthu-
siastic group which supports both
home births and improved hospital
births, as well as works toward es-
tablishing a free-standing birth
center in Buffalo. At these meetings,
I saw films of both home and hospital
births, listened to some local nurse-
midwives speak, and received consider-
able information about a variety of
birth alternatives. It was at one of
these gatherings that I met Elena
Kehoe, a certified nurse midwife, whom
I would eventually choose to be my
birth attendant.

As a result of my reading and learn-
ing, I felt that I was a good candidate
for a home birth. This would be my
second child, my first birth had been
normal and uncomplicated, and my son
was born healthy. A home birth is
much less of a risk for second (and
subsequent) births if you have a hist-
ory of at least one birth with no
medical problems.

In addition, I was in very good
health both before and during my preg-
nancy. I am a non-smoker, I did not
drink while pregnant, and I am very
conscious of eating and drinking nu-
tritionally sound food and beverages.
Important, too, was my emotional pre-
paration. Because I had already been
through one labor and delivery, I did
not have that fear of the unknown.

Nor was I worried about delivering at
home rather than in a hospital.

Finally, my husband, who early in
my pregnancy had been the one who en-
couraged me to consider a home birth,
was both supportive and eager to be-
come even more involved with this
birth than he had been when our son
was born. And after becoming Elena's
patient, I felt both confident in her
ability and comfortable in her presence.

My first visit to Elena proved
to me that home birth is not for
everyone. I arrived with many questions for her,
and so I was a bit surprised when she
had even more questions to ask me.

She needed to know about my medical
history, the medical background of
both my and my husband's families,
the history of my first pregnancy,
and finally, our reasons for wanting
a home birth. Clearly, she needed to
make sure that our home birth was
likely to be a safe, low-risk alter-
native for me, as well as the best pos-
sible experience for me and my family.

I had many reasons for wanting a
home birth, and all of them resulted
from a desire to eliminate all the
negative aspects of a hospital birth.
First and foremost was my wish to
avoid an episiotomy, which many doc-
tors still perform routinely. With
my first pregnancy, I had been more
than willing to accept this procedure
because I was very afraid of the pro-
spects of tearing, and this fear was
reinforced both by my gynecologist
and the nurse who taught our prepared
childbirth class at the time. But
after experiencing the pain of trying
to have bowel movements and trying to
sit comfortably for 2 to 3 weeks, I
decided that I would take my chances
this time. Even if I tore and then
had to be stitched, I couldn't imagine
that being any worse.

However, the likelihood of tearing
was diminished because in our pre-
natal class (which was designed both
for couples planning hospital and home
births), we were taught how to do peri-
neal massage during the last few months
of pregnancy. In addition, Elena
would be massaging my perineum with
olive oil just before the head would
be delivered.

Another reason why I wanted a home
birth was to avoid having an intra-
venous feeding, which I am very af-
raid of. I had had one during my
first birth, and it was one of the
worst parts of the whole experience.

If I were to choose a hospital birth,
it would be at Deaconess Hospital,
where they routinely administer
to all laboring women.

Another part of my first birth ex-
perience that I did not want repeated
was the manual examination of the
uterus after the expulsion of the pla-
centa, to make sure that none of the
placenta remains behind. Some doctors
still do this routinely, yet it should
not be necessary. Any trained birth
attendant should be able to visually
examine the placenta and recognize
whether or not it is intact. Not only
was this manual uterine exam quite
painful, it was also done at the worst
possible time - amidst the euphoria of
greeting your new child.

I also opted for a home birth so
that I could have control over my sur-
roundings. I didn't want to be con-
fined to one sterile, unfamiliar room,
and more importantly, I didn't want
to be confined to one position (prone!)
throughout labor, because of a fetal
monitor. I didn't want to be moved
from a labor bed to a delivery table
during the peak of labor. In addition,
I wanted the option of being able to
drink throughout labor (and even eat
lightly in early labor), especially
since I was due in the hot weather.

Finally, I didn't care to be in hear-
ing range of the cries of pain of other
laboring women; instead, I wanted only
the sounds of those close to me, and
perhaps music.

Furthermore, I desired the support
of others besides my husband. At
least one other coach would give my
husband some relief, and I also felt
that sharing our birth with a few
others close to us would be an ex-
perience that they might not otherwise
have.

Being at home afforded me mobility
throughout labor. All that night it
was near 90 degrees and humid, so I
spent early labor in the bathtub, and
several hours later sitting in a
rocker under a ceiling fan. I also
used a heating pad to help relieve
the pressure on my back. I was able
to drink at any time, and even though
nothing tasted good to me (even the
sip of wine that I tried at one point),
it was necessary to keep fluids going,
especially in the heat.

Elena was accompanied by Fran Assael,
a nursing student who is interested in
learning about home births. Her sup-
port was invaluable, particularly the
light abdominal massages she gave me
during each contraction. She also
functioned as our chief photographer.
My husband, of course, was present,
and he was able to do more than just
talk to me and massage me. Making
coffee, bringing supplies, and con-
versing with the others helped de-
crease his nervousness and made him
feel very involved with the whole
birth process. The fourth person who
was with me was a good friend, Becky
Rzadkiewicz, who is also the baby's
godmother. Her endless support, en-
couragement and excitement will never
be forgotten. And how many godparents
are present at the birth of their
godchild?

With four people around me, there
was a wonderful advantage to home birth
that I had not anticipated - conver-
sation. Because I labored all night,
there was much of it, too, as everyone
attempted to stay alert and pass the
time between my contractions. For the
first few hours, I too chatted. But
even after the pain prevented that, I
listened to it all. The constant chit-
chat in the background proved to be
an enormous distraction for me, and it
made my labor much more bearable.

I also felt strongly about not being
away from home for 2 or 3 days because
of our 4-year-old son. I felt that
the birth should disrupt his life as
little as possible. We also hoped
that he would witness the birth if he
wanted to, and if not, at least he
could see the baby, touch her and kiss
her very soon after birth. Hopefully,
his inevitable jealousy and his need
to adjust to a new household routine
would be somewhat minimized.

Finally, I wanted to be with my
baby all the time after birth. I did
not want her to be whisked away im-
mediately following birth to be weighed
and washed, and then soon put into a
noisy nursery. I wanted all of us
to spend the whole day of her birth
with her, holding her, kissing her,
and just looking at her as much as
possible and without interruptions.
And since I planned to nurse on demand,
I would need to know when she cried,
rather than wait for her to be brought
to me according to a hospital schedule.
This baby would be ours, and so we
should have her with us as much as we
liked.

So did we
get what we wanted from a
home birth? Yes, and more! Not only
was there no episiotomy, but I did not
tear, due to a combination of my mas-
sages during pregnancy, Elena's massage
just before the delivery, and the baby's
small head. There was, of course, no
IV, and no need for one: in fact, I
received no medication whatsoever, and
therefore neither did the baby. When
the placenta was delivered, Elena was
able to assess that it was intact by
looking at it and feeling it. Also,
we had an ample opportunity to look at
it ourselves. (In fact, it was our
job to later dispose of it, so we bur-
ied it in our garden to help fertilize
the soil.)

My son did not witness the birth,
which occurred at 7:15 am, because we
could not wake him up. But he had been
well-prepared because we had talked to
him about labor and birth at length,
and we had also read Mom and Dad and I
Are Having A Baby to him many times,
a book written specifically for small
children. However, he was able to
greet his sister about an hour later
and get used to her right away in
familiar surroundings.

Because we were at home, we were
able to do several other things that
are not always permitted in a hospital.
We now have many memorable pictures,
as well as a tape recording of those
first cries and then the peaceful,
quiet time immediately following Ellen's
birth. After our son greeted his sis-
ter, my husband cooked breakfast for
everyone and so we were able to cele-
brate our baby's birth with those who
had made it such a good experience.
During that day, Ellen's grandmother,
2 aunts and an uncle were able to not
only see her but also to hold her when
she was only a few hours old.

Probably the only inconvenience to
having a home birth is that you need
to make your own arrangements to have
the baby examined by a pediatrician
within 24 hours of birth. Fortunately
we found a doctor who came to our house
later that same day. This, too, proved
to be a positive experience, because
the doctor examined her on our kitchen
table, explaining everything to me as
he checked her and wrote his report
for our family doctor. It was an
interesting learning experience, and it
also eliminated some of the mystique of
what goes on in a hospital.

Oh yes, we had to prepare supplies,
purchase a few inexpensive items (such
as olive oil, and a small rubber suc-
tion to clean out the baby's nose and
mouth just after birth), and sterilize
sheets and towels. But I would hardly

*Turn to page 13