Dear Friend(s),

We have been talking informally with many women about the usefulness of
a group which could meet our needs as feminists and activists. Although
our needs are diverse we are all struggling to integrate our commitment to
a feminist lifestyle with our jobs, families, friendships, studies and/or
our political work. We know we want and need social changes to improve
our lives but we often feel ineffective and isolated in our ability to
carry out our vision.

One way to break our isolation and generate support, ideas and strategies
is by coming together to meet our needs. Members of the Buffalo Women's
Liberation Union are suggesting a Feminist Alliance which would meet once
a month and be open to all interested women.

The Alliance will be shaped by the women who attend the meetings. The
Alliance could provide the opportunity to discuss issues related to work,
unemployment, home, health, sexuality, American foreign and domestic policies
and other social issues.

The initial meeting will have a two-fold purpose. One will be to
formulate topics for future meetings and who will facilitate the discussions.
The other half of the evening will be devoted to an open discussion of the
Women's Peace Encampment in Romulus, New York.

Women who attended the summer demonstrations or who will be attending
the October 22nd and 24th actions are urged to bring memorabilia and share their
experiences. If women haven't been to Romulus here is the perfect opportunity
to find out about the various anti-nuclear activities generated from Seneca
County and women internationally.

All interested women are urged to come to help iron out a viable plan.

DATE: Monday, November 7th

7-9 p.m.

Hispanic Women's

P.O. BOX 43, NIAGARA STATION
BUFFALO, NEW YORK 14201

WHO WE ARE...

We are Hispanic women both homemakers and career women, who recognize the
need for a support group and for an organization to address itself to our particular needs
and issues.

WHAT WE DO...

• We work to improve the image of Hispanics and women.

• We bring together a group of concerned individuals to clarify issues and advocate
for Hispanics and particularly Hispanic women.

• We provide a contact network for Hispanic women.

• We serve as role models for the younger generation and provide guidance and
workshops for younger women.

• We organize workshops and conferences in areas of concern to Hispanics.

We welcome all concerned individuals who might benefit from our group and who
would be willing to contribute in any way to our cause.

HISPANIC WOMEN’S LEAGUE
MEMBERSHIP FORM

PLACE: Lafayette Presbyterian Church, Lafayette and Elmwood Aves. by
side entrance (on Lafayette Avenue) Address

We'll provide beverages. Snacks to share are encouraged.

Occupation:
PLEASE SPREAD THE WORD AND BRING A FRIEND!!!

If you wish to become a member of our group,
please fill out this application and mail to:
HISPANIC WOMEN’S LEAGUE

P.O. BOX 43, NIAGARA STATION
BUFFALO, NEW YORK 14201

If you want to participate but can't make the first meeting, need Please Check One:
transportation or childcare, or have any questions, please call: Sherri Darrow
838-1314 (h) /845-3103 (w) or Theresa Epstein 881-3585. O Regular Membership
O Student Membership
O Associate Membership: Margarita Santiago at 656-3640
Sherri

Theresa D Institutional Membership

COMMON GROUND
Women’s Studies Academy
Buffalo State College
1300 Elmwood Avenue
Buffalo, New York 14222

Holiday Hint: Subscribe to C

BULK RATE
U.S. POSTAGE
PAID

BUFFALO, N.Y.
PERMIT NO. 709

SUBSCRIBE NOW

City

(1) $6 — Low Income (1) $14 — Regular

(1) $15 Household — 2 or more reading paper [ $25 Friend/institutional

Q Send me more information about Common Ground — I want to work/write for CC
Make checks payable to COMMON GROUND, Women’s Studies Academy,

Buffalo State College, 1300 Elmwood Avenue, Buffalo 14222.

COMMON GROUND NOVEMBER 1983 PAGE TWENTY