WOMEN LIGHT CANDLES

It and wore it like a crown. She  
came from Bessarabia, teaching her-  
self English by reading the sides of  
trucks, asserting on the day she re-  
ceived citizenship: “Lincoln freed  
the Blacks, and was for Jews." Her  
husband, the town wise man, had been  
20 years older than herself when she  
married for love in her early teens,  
her long, bright hair untraditionally  
uncut beneath the Chupah. They  
raised their oldest daughters as Co-  
hanim to fulfill the duty of sons who  
prayed for the town's congregation.  
She was once young and strong, sur-  
viving her husband's early blindness  
and death by operating a bakery, mak-  
ing sure all 6 daughters could read  
and write, instilling in them a be-  
lief that there was a better world  
for Jews outside Russia. To be a  
Jew meant to be a survivor. Her last  
words were Yiddish: "I'm not ready."

Her 6 daughters: 1 to leave Rus-  
sia only as an old woman; 1 to edit  
a Yiddish/Spanish journal in Argen-  
tina; 2 to survive the French Under-  
ground and Concentration Camps; 1  
who divorced a faithless husband to  
raise her young son alone in New York  
City. The eldest was my Boba whose  
husband had fled Russia on forged  
papers where my Eltra-Boba claimed  
him as her illegitimate son. My  
Boba, who my great-grandmother proud-  
ly called a “fenetic” when she joined  
her in the United States.

My Boba was devout, the one we all  
regarded as the wisest, the most out-  
flowing of love, the one whose Juda-  
ism most permeated her life. I re-  
member her explaining the photographs  
filling the drawer, identifying each  
of my cousins in South America, in  
Europe, in Israel, those living and  
those dead. I cherish the days we  

would make lakshen and challah for  
Shabbas, while she told me about the  
pogroms, how the Christian boys once  
threatened to throw her down a well  
when she was returning to the shtetl  
from delivering bread, how a priest  
rescued her and told her never to be  
alone again, and how she hadn't  
screamed for fear of retribution a-  
gainst her family and the whole ghetto.  
She never mourned leaving Europe,  
having brought the best of it with  

her in her heart. "Isn't it ignorant  
to kiss the feet of a statue of a Jew  
and spit on Jews?" she would say a-  
bout anti-Semites, as she read the  
Yiddish newspapers, and watched tele-  
vision news to see "how the world is  
treating the Jewish people." She was  
a founder of the Jewish-Bessarabian  
Society, bought acres of trees in Is-  
rael, and in respect of her, none of  
us ever purchased goods from Germany  

after WW II in memory of my MIA pilot-  
uncle, her eldest son. My Boba kissed  
the ground when she visited Israel:  
"Here a Jew can never be thrown away!"  
Her pride, her religion, her selfhood,  
her family was the intimate substance  
of herself.

When I allow Boba to fill my mind,  
I am overwhelmed by the strength of  
her love for her family. Each of us  
felt we were a recipient of her end-  
less caring, her arms holding us  
through the pain of a scraped knee,  
the agony of adolescence, the first  
fears of adulthood. There was always  
time for us, always a central place,  
a special pride in our achievements,  

our belief that our very identity as  
Jews came from her all-encompassing  
love.

She died of cancer in a shuddering  
torture that painkillers couldn't dull.  
I was in the room alone for less than  

10 minutes when she stopped moaning,  

no longer recognizing anyone, and I  
listened to the silence before I  
called my mother from the waiting  
room. When I asked her why she hadn't  
told me how near the crisis was, my  

mother was going to die. For the first  

time I feel old, and I'll never feel  
like a child again." At her funeral,  
we were stunned at the scores of peo-  
ple we had never met before who all  
came to tell the family of some se-  
cret kindness my Boba had performed,  
a gift of food, a gift of time, a  
gift of caring, "tsedakah," in el-  
derly accents of Yiddish, Ukrainian,  
Polish, Middle Europe. A forest of  
trees grows in her name in Israel.

My mother's name "Shifra" means  
content; she told me a year before  
she died "I am content in my life,  
although it is not the one you  
would have chosen." She had her  
Hebrew name acknowledged legally  
in the courts when she was in her  
30's, to “be herself," as she put  
it. I only became close to my mo-  
ther once I matured, having in  
my ignorance mistaken her love of  
the home for a simpleness and nar-  
rowness she never had. In my adult-  
hood, I discovered her humor and  
wisdom and deep understanding of  
people, realizing that it was through  
my mother I had known my grandmother  
and great-grandmother, and that like  
them she was the heart of our family.  
It was at her insistence that a col-  
lege fund was established at my birth,  
and she gave me my Hebrew name "Chavah,"  
for "life." When I close my  
eyes my childhood is filled with the  
Hebrew and Yiddish songs she sang and  
taught us, reciting the B'rochahs with  
her every Friday, drawing pictures to-  
gether for Hebrew School, helping me  
edit my first "major poem" to be read  
at a Temple Service for Soviet Jewry.

At the time, I didn't understand  
her hours of volunteer work at home  
for the Blind Association, the Diabe-  
tes Association, the Sisterhood and  
the Temple - or the importance to her  
of her beautiful thread crafts - or  
how many people depended on her sup-  
port and encouragement, or even how  
she felt about the world outside our  
home. In the myopia of childhood, I  
recognized only how she nurtured my  
growth and how often I chafed against  
it - and only as an adult did I real-  
ize that in her nurturing was the  
seed of my own, independent values,  
and my own translation of Judaism to  
my life. The rituals she maintained,  
she kept for their beauty and their  
tradition as well as their meaning.  
Shabbas evening was family night, a  

peaceful evening where we sang, or  
played games, or discussed serious  
concerns such as school, “being a  
better person," or the family vaca-  
tion. Chanukah meant reading Jewish  
history; Yom Kippur meant trying  
harder; the Kol Nidre was for re-  
membering and Purim was for fun. It  
was Mom who read us the stories, made  
my Queen Esther costume, remembered  

Boba with me as we cried together,  
and delighted in decorating the house  
for each festival. She loved her  
children, all children - my cousin  
recently noted "she was always the  
best to talk to." The Reform Ju-  
daism with bi-lingual services that  
my mother raised us in was as rich  
and lush as Orthodoxy was to her pa-  
rents, but chosen instead because "I  
want to know what I'm praying."  
Within months of her moving to Guad-  
alajara with my father, she spoke  
Spanish, and was surrounded by new  
friends who responded to her uncri-  
tical and sincere acceptance of each  
individual, many of whom had never  
met a Jew before, but now enjoyed  
singing Hebrew music with her in  
their secular choir. They sang in  
Spanish for her funeral, helping me  
remove the cross from her coffin,  
asking my permission to cross them-  
selves when they prayed for her, be-  
cause they "wished to show only re-  
spect." She would have been both  
touched and amused.

The Judaism I love and accept, the  
ethical code I try to live by, is in-  
separable from the image of the wo-  
men who gave me life. The respect  
for education, the need for a per-  
sonal integrity that respects others,  
a belief in fairness and the respon-  
sibility for your own actions, and  
the central importance of love and  
family are as blended into my reli-  
gion as a personal belief in God.  
Because of them, my "differentness"  
in Christian suburbia was a source  
I never doubted or regretted my Judaism any  
more than I ever was ashamed of my  
feminine forebears, rued my sex, or  
was confused about my equality as a  
woman. I often doubt my ability  
to match them, but I never considered  
them easily matched by anyone.

At times I regret not having a child.  
As the eldest of my generation, I have  
no one to give our past. Yet each  
Chanukah for 8 nights I light the Me-  
norah Boba gave me, and every Pesach  
I ritually fill the Seder plate she  
brought my mother from Israel. I in-  
vite the "sojourner to my table” at  
Passover as well as my brother and his  
family, fulfilling the ancient in-  
junctions recited in English from a  
Haggadah I wrote. The white table-  
cloth, the red wine, chanting the  
blessings together, singing the "Eli-  
hu" as I pour the cleansing water  
over each person's hands around my  
table. The traditional kitchen  
smells from my kitchen reminding me  
of my childhood, filling my home with  
the gentleness of memory as soft as  
love.

Eltra-Boba: Great-grandmother

Boba: Grandmother

Minyan: 10 men required for ritual  
Prayer

B'rochah: Blessing, prayer

Chupah: Bridal canopy

Lakshen: Noodles

Challah: Braided bread for Sabbath  
and holidays

Shtetl: Jewish ghetto, often walled

Tsedakah: "Charity", donation

Shabbas: Sabbath

Menorah: 8 branched Chanukah candle-  
holder

Seder: Traditional Passover meal

COMMON GROUND DECEMBER 1985 PAGE 7