NUN QUITS CHURCH

“Agnes Mansour, the embattled Sister
of Mercy who also heads the Michigan
Department of Social Services, decided
to leave her religious order of 30
years rather than give up her job.

The controversy over Mansour's admin-
istration of a program, which included
Medicaid funds for abortion, ultimate-
ly led to a Vatican order that she
must quit her job or renounce her vows.

Mansour repeatedly asserted her per-
sonal objections to abortion, but
refrained from seeking to deny abor-
tions to poor women who could other-
wise not afford one. This was not
good enough for her Bishop, Elmund
Szoka, who maintained the issue was
obedience to the church.

The Sisters of Mercy were very
supportive of Mansour, and Sr. Maureen
Mulcrone was quoted as saying, "the
processes of the Catholic Church have
not kept pace (with the times). All
men are making decisions, all women
are being acted upon."

(info: Buffalo News)

BREAST FEEDING RULING

Ms. Melissa Kallir of Long Island
has won a judgment of $2,244 in bene-
fits after suing the ice cream shop
where she worked. The Appellate
Division of the State Supreme Court
upheld that Kallir was in fact dis-
abled “as a result of complications”
of her pregnancy. Her baby's health
would have been endangered because of
an allergy unless Kallir breast-fed
the infant, but the ice cream shop
argued that she missed work for no
good cause. The ruling continues the
maternity/disability benefits she had
been receiving.

(info: Buffalo News)

SEX/AGE DISCRIMINATION SUIT

The Buffalo Chapter of the National
Organization for Women in its last
meeting featured the nationally pub-
licized sex and age discrimination
suit filed by 10 Buffalo women in
their 40s and 50s against two local
Holiday Inns. Shirley Rock Antinarelli
and several other plaintiffs
described their experiences and discus-
sed the status of the suit.

Mrs. Antinarelli, on the advice of
the Buffalo Chapter of NOW, contacted
9 other employees who had also been
discharged on questionable grounds
and replaced by younger men and women
after years of service. Charges of
sex discrimination were filed with
the Equal Employment Opportunity Com-
mission, the New York State Division
of Human Rights, and the New York
State Attorney General's Office against
the owner of the Holiday Inns located
on Delaware Avenue in Buffalo and in
Hamburg. The joint suit has received
national media attention, with the
plaintiffs appearing on CBS News with
Dan Rather, CBS Morning News and the
Phil Donahue Show.

Jo Alfano, Chapter President,
stated “The Buffalo Chapter of NOW is
proud of Shirley's effort to fight
against these widespread forms of
discrimination. She has set an example
of what one woman can do to not only
protect herself but other working
women as well. We hope that the pub-
licity which this complaint has re-
ceived will encourage other women to
follow her example."

If the complaint is not resolved
in 60 days, the Attorney General's
Office will sue to get back pay and
the women reinstated in their jobs.

(info: NOW and The Buffalo News)

CARASA/NFTA ARE STILL AT IT

CARASA will be represented by the
Lawyer's Guild in its efforts to ob-
tain a Court order requiring the NFTA
to post its pro-choice bus cards. The
lawyers are hopeful that Judge Curtin
will rule that the NFTA in refusing
the cards as "controversial" is deny-
ing CARASA its first amendment rights
using unconstitutionally vague guide-
lines. The Court hearing will be
Thursday, June 2.

Subscribe to
Common Ground

AGENT ORANGE UPDATE

At press time, a long-awaited
ruling from U.S. District Judge
George Pratt let stand a class action
suit against Dow Chemical, Monsanto,
Diamond Shamrock, Thompson-Hayward
and Uniroyal companies, because these
companies manufactured Agent Orange
(a herbicide used in Viet Nam) and
may have known about dangerous levels
of dioxin contaminating their product
and didn’t warn the government. Three
other companies were exonerated because
their product was not very contamin-
ated. The result of this ruling is
that more than 40,000 veterans will
be allowed to sue the chemical com-
panies as a result of health problems
from exposure to Agent Orange. (See
article on Agent Orange, p. 14)

CHILD ABUSE BILL INTRODUCED

A bill has been introduced in the
State Legislature aimed at preventing
child abuse through a 4 million dollar
program. The bill (A6908) would es-
tablish a Children and Family Trust
Fund to support a variety of preven-
tion and service programs. The fund
money would be raised through a $20
surcharge on marriage licenses and
a $2 surcharge on copies of birth
certificates.

The introduction of the bill was
announced on the same day as the
Assembly's Legislative Conference on
Child Abuse, by one of its sponsors,
William B. Hoyt (D-Buffalo), who is
chairman of the Assembly Subcommittee
on Child Abuse.

"The conference and this legisla-
tion serve to draw attention to the
fact that 120,000 children each year
in New York State are reported as
victims of child abuse," said Mr.
Hoyt. Further information supplied
indicated that almost a fifth of all
homicides in the state, and even a
larger proportion of assaults, occur
in the home between family members.

GAY RIGHTS BILL DEFEATED

The New York State "Gay Civil
Rights Bill" was defeated early last
month, with Assemblymen Arthur O. Eve,
William B. Hoyt (both of Buffalo) and
William Parment of Jamestown the only
local legislators to vote for its
passage. Homosexual acts between con-
senting adults are not illegal in
New York State since the State Court
of Appeals struck down those state
laws. This was the first time in 8
years this bill ever got out of com-
mittee and supporters hoped for a good
showing in the Assembly, even though,
according to new NOW President Paul-
ette Hammond, passage was not expected.
The bill would have made discrimina-
tion on the basis of sexual preference
illegal in housing, education and em-
ployment. Supporters expect to rein-
troduce the bill to the legislature.

ROE AMENDMENT

The “Repeal Roe" Amendment to the
U.S. Constitution (S.J. Res. 3) re-
ceived a tie vote in the Senate Judi-
ciary Committee on April 19, and was
sent to the Senate floor for a vote
“without recommendation". The text
of the amendment is: "A right to
abortion is not secured by this Consti-
tution". As a states' rights proposal,
the amendment is expected to have con-
siderable support in the Senate. If
passed, and ratified, it would allow
each state to decide whether or not
to permit abortions. The end result,
after years of political effort by
pro-choice forces, would be a state-
by-state “patchwork quilt", as was
the case prior to 1973, the year the
Roe vs. Wade decision legalized abor-
tion throughout the United States.

(info: Pro-Choice Communications
Network)

BUFFALO STATE COLLEGE
BUDGET CRISIS

The budget crisis of this past
semester, which at one point involved
a projected job loss of 90 lines on
the campus, has abated somewhat. Al-
though at this writing, no final word
is available since the legislature
has not yet voted on the budget, it
appears that many jobs have been
saved. This is of special concern
to Women's Studies, since those who
teach such courses are relatively
junior and predominately female. How-
ever, the final cuts will still dispro-
portionately displace women, as they
are expected to be concentrated in
clerical and secretarial positions,
about 98% of which are held by women.
(info: Women's Studies
Academy, Buff. State)

A DIFFERENT TYPE
OF FUNDRAISER

By Betty Cox

A novel fundraising concept or-
iginating from the Action office
in Ohio, and tested by the YWCA Ser-
vices to Families in Violence in
Schenectady, New York was successful
in receiving tremendous community
support. Their first annual "Hug-
A-Thon” fundraiser promoted the theme
“hugging not slugging" to mark the
fourth anniversary of Mary Hill House,
the Schenectady YWCA Battered Women's
Shelter. The “Hug-A-Thon" began in
Schenectady's refurbished downtown
hub area. Publicity and hugging
booths were set up in the area in
hopes of "drawing the public's atten-
tion to the violence in our society."
To further draw a “widespread audience
who otherwise might not be aware of
needs and services to victims of do-
mestic violence and to focus atten-
tion on loving rather than abusive
behavior", volunteers of the
Schenectady YWCA program recruited
people to sponsor them at a set
amount per hug.

$1500 in proceeds had been col-
lected by the end of April (with
more to come). This drew the atten-
tion of elected officials, who also
sponsored “huggers", and drew atten-
tion to the work of the shelter, as
well obtaining needed financial con-
tributions. In a letter to the volun-
teer coordinator of the center,
Assemblyman James Tedisco stated,
"...three out of ten families in this
country are touched by domestic vio-
lence...Your activities provide an
alternative for that energy...it
would appear your group's efforts
were a success."

NURSES SUPPORT STRIKE

From Page 1

Meanwhile, students in nursing school
around the city have spring graduations
and, at press time, BGH was recruiting
to fill all the positions presently
occupied by striking nurses.

As the strike began, nursing stu-
dents showed strong support, attending
the rally and issuing statements of
support. Nurses from some hospitals
were talking with students to encourage
them not to accept positions at BGH.

Peggy Chinn, nursing instructor at
the State University of New York at
Buffalo, said graduate students in her
classes “are saying that the hospital
is having a terrible time recruiting
because students have taken the stand
that they will not work there."
"I thought (the strike) was going to be
for a small period of time. But these
guys at BGH, they want to break this
union."

“I had toyed with the idea of
leaving (ECMC)," Ms. Wojtowicz said,
“but the more I see, the better (ECMC)
looks. I have 15 sick days a year,
they (nurses at BGH) have five.

You're supposed to come in and cough
all over the place?"

“I don't think that's the way it
should be,” a nurse at Children's
Hospital said. "As professionals, we
shouldn't have to do this. But at
Children's we've had to struggle for
every cent we've gotten. We've come
pretty close to going on strike our-
selves. It's something that we take
very seriously. It puts a lot of
people's lives on the line. As pro-
fessionals, you don't do that unless
you have to. But the Hospital (BGH)
is not claiming inability to pay in
this.

“The public view of nurses is very
distorted," Mary Ann Long of Roswell
said. "You're seen as handmaidens to
the doctor. You're seen as someone
who follows his orders. They don't
see you as someone who has to make
decisions for herself and her patients
and answer for those decisions."

HOT FLASHES...HOT FLASHES...

...Erie County legislator Joan K. 
Bozer (R. Buffalo) has won the
"Bright Spot Award" from Women for
Downtown. She helped form the group
to get women's voices heard in Buffa-
lo's downtown redevelopment. Bozer
is also active in Women in Government
and recently argued for an Erie
County Nuclear Freeze Resolution...

...according to a Public Agenda Foun-
dation Report, women have a stronger
work ethic than men, and are more like-
ly to work harder for their rewards
than men. Julia Kagan of Working
Women also suggested that women may
just feel guiltier than men about
how hard they work. (info: USA Today)

...Women make up 3.8% of armed forces
veterans but only 1.8% of those who
use benefits, according to a USA
Today story! Women vets were nearly
forgotten by the VA for many years.
WWII women pilots were not legally
eligible for VA benefits until 1979
and were not given equal education
benefits until 1972...

...Buffalo NOW has elected new
officers: Paulette Hammond, presi-
dent; Hope Hoetzer, vice president;
Nancy Castro, secretary; Holly Feder,
treasurer; and Marian Ward, member-
ship chair...

...the risk of pelvic inflammatory di-
sease is five times greater for women
using Dalkon Shield than other intra-
uterine contraceptives, reports the
Center for Disease Control. They re-
commend women using these shields
have them removed...

...trace elements of DES have been
found in calves raised in the Utica
area, reports Buffalo area FDA. Use
of this drug has been banned since
1979 as it was found to cause cancer...

...a confidential toll-free hot-line
is now available for pregnant teen-
agers who need advice said State
Health Department Commissioner. Call
1-800-522-5066 between 2-10 pm to find
pregnancy related referral services
available in your area.

...women in clerical jobs experience
more stress than those in high powered
positions because of lack of control
over their condition, according to a
study reported in USA Today...

...a new Census Bureau report shows
that women, while still under-repre-
sented in male dominated occupations,
have made significant increases in
their numbers in several fields.
Those listed included engineers,
dentists, reporters, bankers and
pharmacists, among others...

...Erie County prosecutors have asked
the U.S. Supreme Court to restore
the state law banning loitering for
the purpose of making deviate sexual
overtures. The loitering law was
struck down in a case in 1981 on
appeals by two Buffalo lawyers. The
case involved a charge of one man
propositioning a male police officer...

...could Phyllis Schlafly be changing
her tune? Not likely but...one recent
column she wrote complained that home-
makers were discriminated against in
I.R.A.s as banks assumed their work
had no economic value (news clipping
submitted by Joan Vanderwater)...

...working women have fewer health
problems than housewives, said Johns
Hopkins professor in a recent study.
They see a doctor an average of 3.88
times yearly, as compared with 5.14
times for housewives and 2.87 for
working men...

...the Air Force's first flight to
cross the Atlantic with an all female
crew on May 9th included a woman from
Buffalo (as reported in the Buffalo
News). Airman 1st class Bernadette
Botti, 20, was loadmaster on the
flight...

...a group representing Buffalo area
Native Americans has been awarded a
$60,000 state grant to rehabilitate
the Iroquois Crossroads Center at
1047 Grant Street...

COMMON GROUND JUNE 1983 PAGE 3