CARASA BUS ADS

The Coalition for Abortion Rights and Against Sterilization Abuse, which recently won a court case against the NFTA for refusing to place bus cards which support a woman's right to choose abortion, is in for another battle, this time with the Buffalo regional Right to Life Committee.

The CARASA ads portray several women and the words “Can you tell which of us had an abortion? ... All of Us." The RTL wants to place ads which picture a plastic bag with the caption “Can you tell which of these babies has been aborted? ... All of them." They want the NFTA to run them side by side with the CARASA ads for free.

CARASA received a $4000 grant from the MS Foundation to run the bus cards and set up an informational hotline. The NFTA originally rejected the ads as too controversial, but was forced to run them anyway. They were also told to run them free for six months as part of the settlement.

CARASA successfully argued that abortion is legal after all, and the ads merely remind people that it is legal, and that people who want it to stay that way can be encouraged to do something about it. Failure to run the ads constituted an abridgement of the First Amendment's guarantee of freedom of speech.

ABORTION BILL

In another attempt to limit or eliminate health insurance coverage for abortions in NYS, anti-abortion supporters were narrowly defeated in a 28-27 Senate vote. Proponents of the bill were able to keep the measure alive for a later date by setting it aside before it was declared final. Their strategy was to bring it to a vote again when six absent Senators would be present, thereby improving the chances for passage.

While Senator Walter J. Floss (R-Clarence) supported the bill on grounds of containing medical costs for what he considers elective surgery, opponents of the bill saw it as an attempt to deprive poor women of medical benefits.

RAPE TRIAL FALL-OUT

In an apparent attempt to re-enact the rape of a woman in New Bedford, Massachusetts, a 12-year-old boy allegedly took a 10-year-old female playmate and told her to get on a pool table where he touched her and forced her to do other sex acts, but did not rape her. Other playmates allegedly watched all this through a window.

The boy supposedly watched much of the televised New Bedford rape trial and decided to re-enact it.

He is undergoing psychiatric evaluation.

VICE PRESIDENTIAL NOD

A recent Gallup Poll named three prominent women as well-qualified to serve in the nation's number two executive spot. Mentioned most frequently were recently appointed Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, former Texas Democratic Congresswoman Barbara Jordan, and current Secretary of Transportation Elizabeth Dole.

In a separate poll, of those Democratic voters who said a female VP candidate would affect their vote, a higher percentage said they would be more likely to vote for the Democratic nominee if a woman ran on the ticket.

ANTI-DISCRIMINATION BILL PASSES IN BUFFALO COMMON COUNCIL OVER MAYOR'S VETO

The Buffalo Common Council voted 9-2 to override Mayor Griffin's veto of an anti-discrimination bill, part of which included a ban against discrimination because of sexual orientation. The bill, which affects city employees, programs citizens benefit by or from city agencies, and firms doing business with the city, also prohibits discrimination on the basis of age, race, creed, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability or marital status.

The bill was quietly introduced and received its first vote in the Common Council April 3 where it was passed 9-4. Mayor Griffin, however, vetoed it by saying this anti-discrimination measure was "asking the public to accept homosexuality as a normal way of life." Griffin has had several run-ins with the gay community, most notably surrounding the temporary closure of City Lights, a theatre-district disco. The Mayor called gays “fruits” and other names and the issue escalated into a barrage of charges, counter-charges, ridicule and epithets tossed back and forth between the gay community and the Mayor.

While the bill does not give gays and lesbians legal rights as would a city ordinance, it does protect them from being denied services because of their sexuality, denied the opportunity to be a vendor to the city and makes gay and lesbian employees with the city less likely to lose their jobs because of their sexuality.

SEXUAL ABUSE OF CHILDREN

New York has finally joined 48 other states in eliminating the need for corroborating evidence from a child victim of sexual abuse, in order to get a conviction. On Wednesday, April 18, Governor Cuomo signed a bill which allows the child's own testimony to be sufficient grounds in a sex attack case, just as it is for other crimes.

Assemblyman William B. Hoyt, Chairman of the Assembly Subcommittee on Child Abuse (D-Buffalo) applauded the reform, whose prime sponsor was Assemblywoman May Newburger (D-Nassau). Further reforms were urged, specifically by Brooklyn DA Elizabeth Holtzman, including video-taping of a child's testimony rather than making a child get on the witness stand, thus sparing the young victim further trauma.

The bill does not eliminate the need for corroborating evidence when the victim is mentally retarded or unstable. Other reforms urged were stiffer penalties for those convicted and treatment programs for the victims, their families and the offenders.

Information about child abuse was gathered to give support for the bill's passage. The National Center on Child Abuse and Neglect estimates that 90,000 children are abused each year. In New York, Mr. Hoyt stated that there were 4,331 reports of child sexual abuse to the state's hotline last year. In Erie County last year, there were 222 such reports, an increase of 13.5% from 1982. Hoyt estimates that less than 6% of the incidents are ever reported.

The very nature of these assaults means they are done in secret and that intimidations and coercion are used. Dr. Mary Rimsza said the typical sex abuser was probably a victim himself, and is 17 to 25 years old. They are mostly men, and not homosexual, although that is the myth.

FEMALE FIRE FIGHTERS

The Buffalo firefighter controversy continued with allegations from both sides and possible legal action by the city's four female firefighters.

On April 8, the Buffalo News reported that while Michael L. Broderick, president of the city Civil Service Commission, said the four women "are not qualified firefighters," the women copied figures from their files which prove that each of them received passing grades on their practical field tests.

However, in spite of these marks, the Buffalo News reported that some male firefighters believe that the women are physically unable to do the job. Others are concerned that standards will be lowered, thus endangering human life.

Meanwhile, the female firefighters have demanded apologies from Mr. Broderick and Fire Commissioner Fred Langdon or they will consider legal action.

PORNOGRAPHY & SEXUAL ABUSE

The growing concern over the connection between pornography and sexual abuse and violence was stirred again in the wake of a St. Petersburg, Florida murder trial of a nine-year-old boy.

According to the AP, the boy is on trial for first-degree murder, three counts of sexual battery and aggravated child abuse in the death of 8-month-old Barbara Parks.

The boy's 7-year-old brother testified that he and his accused brother were mimicking what they had seen in pornographic magazines which belonged to their mother. The baby was found on a bedroom floor apparently suffering from trauma to her chest and abdomen. The boys' mother had been babysitting for the infant at the time.

NOW'S CHILD CARE CENTER GUIDE

The local chapter of the American Association of University Women has produced a guide to child care centers, giving objective information about 63 licensed by the state Department of Social Services. AAUW members visited each of the centers, and the guide lists location, facilities available, a description of the program and/or the philosophy under which it operates.

The guide does not rate any of these centers, and includes a suggested list of questions to ask when evaluating a center.

The guide is available to groups through the United Way of Buffalo and Erie County, and as a reference in Buffalo and Erie County Libraries, doctor's offices and other facilities county-wide.

ABRAMS INSTITUTES JOB SHARING

In an attempt to eliminate discrimination against women from his own department, NYS Attorney General Robert Abrams has instituted a policy of job-sharing for non-civil service attorneys general.

The program allows participant attorneys to collect half of their salary and benefits and all of their medical benefits for half-time service. In this way, the attorneys (so far, only women have participated) are able to create a more favorable balance between their careers and family-rearing needs.

In addition, the program would also be able to accommodate those who must provide attention for adult dependents such as ill or aged parents, people with disabilities and people who wish to cut down on their work schedules for other personal needs.

FREE CLASSIFIEDS! ONE MONTH ONLY!

CLASSIFIED AD RATES

CIRCLE APPROPRIATE CATEGORY:

Help Wanted  
For Sale  
Apartments  
Personals  
Announcements  
Jobs Wanted  

CLASSIFIED AD FOR JUNE NEXT MONTH REGULAR RATES APPLY.

Roommates  
Services  
Instructions  
Rides Wanted  
Lost & Found  

ONE MORE MONTH!

Name  

Address  

City — Zip  

Number of lines $1.00 per line = $  

Number of months ad is to run ($2.00 minimum).  

Make checks payable to: COMMON GROUND, Women’s Studies Academy, Rockwell Hall, Buffalo State College, 1300 Elmwood Avenue, Buffalo, New York.  

PLEASE PRINT CLEARLY  

PAGE 3. COMMON GROUND