Book Review

TRIANGLES

by Charlene Eldridge Wheeler

TRIANGLES, a novel by Ruth Geller. New  
York: Crossing Press, Feminist Series.  
1984 ($7.95, paper; 186 pages) ISBN  
0-89594-151-1

A loving look at a slice of  
Jewish family life. Ruth  
Geller’s third book captures  
the warmth and tumult,  

private dramas, holiday  
celebrations, laughter,  
betrayal, and tears. From  
Sunny, coming to terms at  
age thirty with her  
Jewishness and her lesbianism, to Rosie, her ir  
repressible octogenarian  
grandmother whose pro-  
nouncements on life are  
peppered with the Yiddish  
of her youth, the cast of characters delights and engages  

TRIANGLES is about relationships:  
between women and men,  
between sisters, between brother and  
sister, between mothers and children,  
between generations.  

TRIANGLES is about  
self, love for others, love for the  
earth, love for the living and the  
dead, love of tradition.  

TRIANGLES is about pain: the pain  
of living together, the pain of loss,  
the pain of separation, the pain of  
growth.  

TRIANGLES is about secrets:  
secrets we keep from ourselves and from  
one another.  

TRIANGLES is about women's  
strength; about surviving, about  
changing, about awareness, about move-  
ment from numbness into activism.  

Geller's first novel, SEED OF A  
WOMAN (1979), captured the sense of  
social protest and political awareness  
that characterized so much of the 70's.  
Her second book, PICTURES FROM THE  
PAST (1980), was a collection of short  
stories that established Geller as a  
writer knowledgeable in her craft as she  
shared with the reader "slices" of many  
people's lives. While very different  
from either of her previous works,  
TRIANGLES does share the same insightful  
development of characters and con-  
tinues the themes of awareness and  
political action.  

Geller's strength as a writer  
lies in her ability to show us that as  
women we are all connected by the  
struggles we face and overcome.  
Whether that struggle is with our iden-  
tity as a Jew, as a lesbian, as a Peace  
Movement activist or simply as a woman  
trying to survive in a hostile world -  
what matters is that we take respon-  
sibility for who we are and what we do.  

TRIANGLES is the story of a common  
woman, living a common life, working at  
a mundane job. The story unfolds in  
the experiences of Sunny, a Jewish  
woman who at the age of thirty is  
coming to terms with her Jewishness and  
her lesbianism. The very commonness of  
Sunny's life is what speaks most  
strongly as Sunny struggles with the  
experiences of losing a child, facing  
the possibility of breast cancer,  
reconciling with her family - common  
experiences that touch the core of  
every woman's life.  

PAGE 10 COMMON GROUND OCTOBER 1984  

One of the most engaging charac-  
ters in TRIANGLES is Rose, Sunny's  
grandmother, an irrepressible, spirited  
woman who shares her views on life in a  
melodic mixture of Yiddish and English.  
(There is a helpful glossary at the  
back of the book for those of us who  
are uninitiated!) As the story devel-  
ops, much of what we learn about Sunny  
and her family, we learn from Rose - a  
wise and crusty woman who insists on  
living her life without interference  
from her family.  

Geller lives in Buffalo and has  
integrated the geography of the city  
into the setting of the book, which for  
Buffalo readers, adds a heightened  
sense of reality. It is difficult to  
read about driving through customs at  
Peace Bridge, or "the grey house on the  
west side," without feeling a sense of  
identification. After I had finished  
the book, I found myself seeing grey  
houses I had never noticed before. As  
I drove past them, I found myself won-  
dering about the families inside, about  
what stories lay within that hadn't yet  
been written.  

There are some things about the  
book that were problematic for me. In  
the early part of the book, as Sunny's  
thoughts moved from present to past and  
back to the present, the shifts were  
occasionally difficult to follow. Some  
components of the book seem more  
clearly developed than others; for  
example, Sunny's experiences of coming  
out as a Jew seem more realistic than  
her experiences of coming out as a les-  
bian. These were not major distractors  
and certainly did not interfere with  
the total sense of the book as being  
grounded in women's experience.  

TRIANGLES is an enjoyable book to  
read. The people seem like a family  
that could be living next door - or  
even your own. The value of the book  
goes beyond the enjoyment of reading  
it. Through reading of Sunny's growth,  

discoveries and struggles to find  
meaning in her life, we are encouraged  
to examine our own.  

TRIANGLES is available at EMMA:  
WNY Women's Resource and Cultural  
Center, 168 Elmwood Ave., Buffalo.  
EMMA will sponsor a Booksigning by Ruth  
Geller on October 12, 1984 at 7:00 p.m.  

GELLER INTERVIEW  

A CONVERSATION WITH RUTH GELLER  

The following is condensed from an  
interview with Ruth Geller by Charlene  
Eldridge Wheeler and Peggy L. Chinn for  
COMMON GROUND. Since Ruth is a Buffalo  
writer and the story of TRIANGLES takes  
place in Buffalo, we felt that the  
COMMON GROUND readership would like to  
know more about the author and how  
TRIANGLES evolved. The interview took  
place on September 18 in the author's  
home.  

CG: As I read TRIANGLES, especially the  
parts about the Peace Ribbon and  
Meryl's pictures of the Encampment, I  
wondered if there are people who will  
recognize themselves as they read  
TRIANGLES? Is TRIANGLES  
autobiographical?  

RG: There are two people who are real  
in the book - those are the grand-  
parents. People in my family will  
recognize them.  

CG: I loved the dedication  
to your grandmother.  

RG: Yeah, she's great. People said that  
I really did capture her. All of the  
other characters are fictionalized. I  
interviewed my grandmother a lot. Some  
of the stories that she told me fit  
into TRIANGLES, or gave inspiration for  
the characters that I was developing.  
It is all fiction, but all of the  
characters were very real to me. The  
story is not autobiographical, but  
there is a lot of me in it. Many  
things that Sunny goes through, I went  
through - for example, the Jewishness,  
coming out, the family. There is a lot  
of me in her, especially in that many  
of the things she feels I felt.