by Louise Genetti

I stared at the tunafish sandwich  
and glass of milk before me. Although  
I had not eaten the entire day, the  
sight of food was repulsive in my  

mind. It conjured up images of obe-  
sity and slovenly compulsions of non-  
stop eating. Two little voices were  
arguing within me. One forbade me  

to eat anything; if one morsel of  
food passed my lips, I would become  
fat. The other voice begged me to  
eat, that I was starving myself. I  
made a compromise between the two and  
ate only half of the sandwich and left  
the crusts.  

Each meal was a constant inner bat-  
tle - should I eat or shouldn't I?  

I was fifteen and a sophomore in  
high school. My average weight should  
have been one hundred and fifteen  
pounds according to the school's  
height and weight scale. Instead,  
my bony frame boasted a mere eighty  
pounds. In my eyes, this was per-  
fection - a flat, smooth tummy, thin  
legs and a tiny waist. I didn’t see  
the sunken, hollow look of my eyes or  
the black and blue bruises caused by  
the sharpness of my bones rubbing  
against flesh. I didn't pay atten-  
tion when my period failed to arrive  
two months in a row.  

Every day I would weigh myself at  
least four or five times, each trip  
to the scale hoping that a few more  
ounces had melted off. In the morning  
I would push myself to do fifty sit-  
ups, then repeat the act again before  
bed.  

I felt I had no control over any  
aspect of my life. Parents, teachers  
and counselors ruled everything. But  
only I commanded my body. For two  
years I was obsessed with losing  

ARTHRITIS  

by Shari Hirt  

Arthritis. Traditionally, the word  
evokes images of an older person suf-  
fering from "minor aches and pains."  
The truth is, arthritis is not a mi-  
nor problem, and it affects people of  
all ages, including children and  
adults in the prime of life.  

The word “arthritis” literally  
means joint inflammation and refers  
to more than 100 rheumatic diseases  
in which one or more joints are in-  
flamed, a reaction causing swelling,  
pain, stiffness and redness. Arth-  
ritis is the nation's #1 crippler and  
affects over 36 million Americans.  
272,000 of those Americans live in  
Western New York.  

Of the 272,000 Western New Yorkers  
who suffer from arthritis, two-thirds  
are women. The facts are staggering:  
* Osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arth-  
ritis each strike women three times  
as often as men, affecting about 10.5  
million and about 5 million American  
women respectively.  

* Juvenile arthritis is three times  
more common among females, affecting  
as many as 180,000 girls and young  
women in this country.  

* Lupus, a particularly serious and  
puzzling form of arthritis, affects  
about 100,000 American women - nine  
times the number of men who have the  
disease.  

* Each year between 600,000 and 700,000  
women develop arthritis.  

The effects of arthritis on women  
are not limited to management of their  
own chronic illness. Oftentimes, a  
woman who does not have arthritis bears  
the burden of caring for a loved one  
with the disease.  

Each form of arthritis has its own  
symptoms, patterns and treatments. Un-  
fortunately, people ignore the symptoms  

of arthritis, especially the early ones:  

* Swelling in one or more joints  
* Early morning stiffness  
* Recurring pain or tenderness in any  
joint  
* Inability to move a joint normally  
* Obvious redness and warmth in a joint  
* Unexplained weight loss, fever or  
weakness combined with joint pain  
* Symptoms like these persisting for  
more than two weeks  

If you have these warning signs,  
see a doctor.  

PAGE 6 COMMON GROUND JUNE 1986  

weight and becoming the thinnest per-  
son I could.  

This was me, fourteen years ago.  
In 1971, no one discussed the topic  
of Anorexia Nervosa. Very few people  
even knew the disease existed. And  
most parents were oblivious to their  
teenage daughters’ obvious starvation  
habits.  

For most girls, the disease is a  
cry for attention. They are saying -  
look at me, talk to me, I’m a person.  
Or the disease can be connected with  
a constant drive to seek perfection,  
therefore creating an unreal impres-  
sion that extreme thinness is society's  
stamp of approval for a woman's figure.  

It wasn't until I entered college  
that I learned what the disease of  
Anorexia was and the devastating effect  
it had, emotionally and physically, on  
teenage girls. I was one of the lucky  
ones who was able to overcome Anorexia.  
By the time I had reached my eighteenth  

birthday, my appetite returned and I  
was able to gain weight. Media atten-  
tion and research concerning the di-  
sease made it possible for me to re-  
concile myself to the reasons why I  
chose self-starvation over being a  
healthy, normal teenager.  

Today at twenty-nine years of age,  
I still wrestle with bouts of depres-  
sion that create a false sense of se-  
curity in self-deprivation. The  
understanding of dependency in Anorex-  
ia for attention, rooted in my teen-  
age years, is a difficult realization.  
As an adult, I have learned how to  
come to terms with this disease that  
lingers on in the mind. I wonder  
though how many women still carry  
their teenage anxieties into adult-  
hood and manifest them in latent  
Anorexic tendencies?  

By ignoring these symptoms, some  
women become disabled needlessly.  

The Arthritis Foundation is the  
only national voluntary health or-  
ganization that is trying to do some-  
thing about all forms of arthritis  
and related rheumatic diseases. Its  
programs include support for scien-  
tific research, training specialists,  
public information and education, and  
help within the community for people  
who have rheumatic diseases.  

The Western New York Chapter of  
the Arthritis Foundation has many re-  
sources available to those suffering  
from arthritis. Free literature on  
the different forms of arthritis can  
be obtained from the Chapter, along  
with a list of rheumatologists (arth-  
ritis specialists) and clinics in the  
area. There are support groups and  
educational meetings every month,  
open to anyone at no charge.  

Especially helpful is the Founda-  
tion's six-week management program -  
The Arthritis Self-Help Course. Self-  
help means being willing to learn a-  
bout and assume responsibility for  
the daily care of one's arthritis.  
It includes all those decisions you  
make and actions you take to keep  
your arthritis under control. The  
Arthritis Self-Help Course covers in-  
formation on diet, exercise, joint  
protection, depression, relaxation  
techniques and medication. Classes  
are offered every spring and fall in  
different locations throughout  
Western New York. An application and  
physician consent form is required,  
along with a $10 fee. Course locations  
and times can be obtained from the  
Chapter office.  

The Western New York Chapter is  
one of five chapters nationwide test-  
piloting a toll-free number - The  
Arthritis Foundation Answer Line.  
This service is designed to be used  
by those individuals who have to make  
a toll call to reach our office.  
People residing in Niagara, Genesee,  
Orleans, Chautauqua, Cattaraugus,  
Allegany and Wyoming counties can call  
1-800-422-1492 for answers to their  
questions on arthritis. This toll-  
free number is supported in part by a  
grant from members of the American Con-  
tract Bridge League. Erie County resi-  

dents should call 837-8600 directly.  

Arthritis can change a woman's life -  

Louise Genetti  

WOMEN: There is Help and Hope  

style, self-image, sexuality and ability  

to work. It can keep her from reali-  
zing a normal, productive life - but it  
doesn't have to. There is help and  

hope available through early and proper  

diagnosis, self-management and ongoing  
research both locally and nationally.  
You need to take the first step. Don't  
let arthritis beat you; maintain a  
positive attitude and follow your doc-  
tor's advice!  

Sources:  
Arthritis Foundation pamphlets:  
"A Case of Discrimination";  
"A Serious Look At The Facts"; published by the National  
Arthritis Foundation, 1314 Spring St.,  
NW, Atlanta, GA, 30309.  

Biography:  

Shari Hirt is Program Director for the  
Western New York Chapter of the Arth-  

ritis Foundation. Her responsibilities  
include public and professional educa-  
tion and patient services. She is a  

graduate of the State University of  
New York at Buffalo with a B.A. degree  
in Communication.  

SPRING FEVER...  

from page 5  

filled with hearty barley and tooth-  
some chunks of beef for tempeh. The  
stockpot simmering on the back of the  
stove spells hearth, home and comfort.  

The very names of soups conjure up  
faraway places and exotic cuisines.  
The soup chapter of the cookbook, with  
recipes like Billi-Bi, Senegalese,  
cock-a-leekie, hladnik, boula-boula,  
petite marmite, and Kentucky burgoo,  
makes me feel like chopping some  
onions and setting the stockpot to  
simmer. But when the weather fore-  
caster is threatening highs in the  
mid-seventies and cooler along the  
lake, I'll make do with a cheese sand-  
wich.  

The mid-seventies are just too warm  
for soup.  

Salad, soup's warm-weather counter-  
part, somehow lacks the mystique of  
the stew, the broth, the chowder. I  

suppose Waldorf, ambrosia, and aspic-  
with-endive salads do own a certain  
charm...but in my opinion, even Caro-  
lina coleslaw, marinated hearts of  
palm, and Salade Niçoise (a fancy  
name for the lowly tuna plate) can't  
compete with December delights like  
mulligatawny, pepper pot, minestrone, and  
lobster bisque. And picnic favorites  
- potato, egg, and tossed salad -  
hold no fascination at all.  

Of course, summer has its attrac-  
tions. Even feminists have their  
vices, and mine is baseball. There's  
nothing like hanging out the laundry  

on a breezy summer evening, with Phil  
Rizzuto's thready voice coming from  
the battery radio perched on the porch  
railing... "Three and two, and the  
pitch... Struck him out on a fastball!  
Holy cow!" I admit I feel a pang in  
October, when the summer game winds  
up for the year and we're stuck with  
such poor substitutes as football  
(which I detest), basketball and  
hockey.  

Summer's other feature is birdsong,  
although that belongs more to May than  
to August. By the All-Star break, the  
birds are pretty jaded. Even the li-  
quid, flute-like notes of the hermit  
thrush get reedy by the end of July.  
If only we could go directly from June  
to September...  

Well, maybe not. I quite realize  
that in order to grow the vegetables  
that I so enjoy incorporating in mul-  
ligatawny and cream of celery, we  
have to endure those two hellish months.  
Moreover, Western New Yorkers don't get  
an awful lot of eighty-degree weather  
to complain about. No matter how tor-  
rid it gets in June, I can always con-  
sole myself by remembering that come  
September, I'll be looking forward to  
nine solid months of crisp, frosty  
mornings - to say nothing of ice-  
encrusted windshields, four-foot  
drifts, and chill factors of fifty  
below.  

I can hardly wait.