EMMA IS  
Emma is a resource for herstory.  
Since this issue's theme is immigrant  
women and March 8 is International  
Women's Day (IWD), we would like to  
share some of the background of this  
event. On March 8, 1856 and again in  
1908, women textile and garment workers  

marched to protest sweatshop con-  
ditions. Both times they were beaten  
and dispersed by the police. In  

October 1909 the famous “uprising of  
the 20,000" occurred in New York City.  
This was the largest strike by women  
ever known in these United States. The  
International Ladies Garment Workers  
Union (ILGWU) which backed the strike,  
had an 80% female membership, mostly  
between the ages of 16 and 25, two-  
thirds of whom were Jewish immigrants.  
The women won the strike when the com-  
panies yielded in February of 1910. In  

that same year, the International  
Socialist Congress in Denmark passed a  
resolution declaring March 8  

International Women's Day-- a celebra-  
tion of working class women. This day  
was widely celebrated in the 20's and  
30's, and revived in the last 10 years  
to acknowledge the struggle of working  

Common Ground is indebted to Will-  
iam Reich, Gerald P. Seipp and Fran-  
cine Bruno, associates of the law firm  
of Serotte, Harasym, Reich and Gold-  
stein, as well as to Kathy Rimar of  
the SUNYAB Immigration Law Clinic,  

for providing the information con-  
tained in this article.  

Serotte, Harasym, Reich and Gold-  
stein is a Buffalo firm that spec-  
ializes in immigration law. Together  
with other area immigration lawyers,  
they recently formed the Upstate  
Chapter of the American Immigration  
Lawyers Association. One of the aims  
of the Upstate Chapter is to provide  
free legal assistance to aliens seek-  
ing to become permanent residents of  
the U.S. who have little or no re-  
sources of their own. To accomplish  
this aim, the UC has instituted a  
Pro Bono (for the public good) Com-  
mittee which will assign qualifying  
cases to associated lawyers on a ro-  
tating, non-fee basis. Persons  
seeking such assistance may contact  
Kathy Rimar at the Immigration Law  
Clinic (address & telephone below).  

The Law Clinic, which is a train-  
ing ground for law students interest-  
ed in immigration law, will screen  
cases and turn those which qualify  
over to the Pro Bono Committee (PBC)  
which will then contact a lawyer who  
will handle the actual case. Cases  
that do not qualify for the Commit-  
tee may be handled by the Law Clinic  
itself, also on a non-fee basis.  

The formation of the PBC is es-  
pecially important because of the  
recent passage of a rider to a con-  
tinuing Congressional Resolution  
that took effect on January 1, 1983.  
This rider stipulates that none of  
the funds of legal services corpor-  

ations may be used to represent  
aliens unless they are refugees,  
or have already been granted asylum.  
This rider effectively prevents the ma-  
jority of people needing such help from getting  
it--those on temporary or visitors  
visas and those wishing to seek as-  
ylum. The PBC, which should have  
supplemented public sector help, may  
now be one of the few resources av-  
ailable for those who cannot afford  
to pay for legal services.  

Most people who emigrate to the  
U.S. are sponsored by relatives. The  
process begins when a relative in the  
U.S. submits an application to the  
Immigration Office in the district  
where s/he lives, together with doc-  
uments proving the family relation-  
ship to the emigre. If the appli-  
cation is approved, the Immigration  
Office notifies the overseas consu-  
late which, in turn, notifies the  
individual and advises her/him of  
what steps to take next.  

The U.S. Immigration Office rules  
on an individual's eligibility to  
enter the U.S. as a permanent resi-  
dent; the consulate rules on her/his  
admissibility. Eligibility is de-  
cided on the basis of either oc-  
cupation or (nuclear) family re-  
lationship. The reunification of the  
family is the most important criteria  
used in granting an immigrant visa.  
To be eligible on the basis of oc-  
cupation, a person must have a skill  
or profession in demand, the practice  
of which will not take a job away  
from a qualified American.  

Once a person is ruled eligible to  
immigrate, a consul decides on her/his  
admissibility. The individual is  
finger-printed and questioned to dis-  
cover whether or not there are any  
grounds--based on health or types of  
activities s/he has engaged in--which  

would render him inadmissible.  
Grounds may include having poor  
physical and/or mental health or a  
venereal disease; engaging in criminal  
or politically subversive activities;  
acting as a beggar, prostitute or pimp;  
and, until recently, being a homosex-  
ual. A consul has complete discretion-  
ary power in deciding admissibility;  
her/his decision is final; there is no  
way to appeal to a court of law.  

What is true on an individual level  
is also true on a more general level.  
Permanent residency in this country is  
a privilege and not a constitutional  
right. Congress has the power at any  
time to enact any laws it sees fit  
with respect to immigration; the courts  
have no power to challenge this leg-  
islation. Once, however, permanent  
residency has been granted to an indi-  
vidual, s/he is entitled to all rights  
under the Constitution except the  
right to vote. Furthermore, all aliens  
are eligible under the Constitution, at  
the very least, to due process and bas-  
ic constitutional protections.  

If an individual who has been grant-  
ed immigrant status is found to have  
lied on the original application, her/  
his status can be revoked and s/he may  
be subject to deportation. This has  
indeed been the case with Nazi crimi-  
nals who have been found to be living  
in this country under an assumed name,  
and with members of the Mafia.  

Immigration law is a highly spec-  
ialized field and crosses over into  
many other areas such as family, lab-  
or and criminal law. Immigration pro-  
ceedings are considered civil rather  
than criminal, but, in point of fact,  
are as often as not “enforced in a  

criminal, adversarial spirit".  

PAGE 8 COMMON GROUND MARCH 1983  

In The Queen of Wands, Judy Grahn  
provides background on the Triangle  
Shirt Waist Company fire that occurred  
only a year after the strike had ended:  
March 25, 1911. "One hundred forty-  
three young women died in the 1911  
fire, trapped because the doors were  
locked to keep out organizers."  

Although the ILGWU was organized in  

1900, the Columbia encyclopedia men-  
tions no women organizers, writing only  
of the “moderate" leadership of David  
Dubinsky from the 20's to the 60's.  
In 1940, the ILGWU merged with the  
men's AFL. It was during David  
Dubinsky's long tenure that  
International Women's Day was not  

celebrated and fell into disuse after the  
merger with the AFL.  

Our name, Emma, comes partly from  

Emma Goldman who was one of the major  
forces of the socialist struggle to  

improve the lives of workers in the  
early part of this century. This  
background reflects this Collective's  

long-standing concern for historical  
and political experiences of working  
women. At Emma's we have several sec-  
tions where you can find fascinating  
information and background on the  
history of women's labor movements, the  
lives of little known and famous women  
who have struggled to gain equality and  
decent working conditions. We have  
biographies, histories, books on revo-  
lutionary struggles, accounts of third  
world women and of women in other  
industrialized nations. The feminist  
theory section includes a wide range of  
writings that help explain the con-  
ditions under which women have worked  
and struggled.  

Our Collective represents an alter-  
native approach to the manager/worker  
struggle. Each member of the Emma  
bookstore collective is both manager  
and worker. We'll be opening the  
collective later this month to new mem-  
bers. If you are interested in the  
possibility of becoming an Emma member,  
call or stop in soon for details.