see some emotion

"

assessment

"

Language, as we know, serves as our
primary means of communication. Yet
language does much more; words carry,
through their nuances and connotations,
many messages about who we are, how we
act, and how we relate to others. In-
deed, language can both define and re-
fine our feelings and attitudes.

In the last decade or so, women,
both individually and through the
Women's Movement, have questioned --
and in a few cases even changed --
specific words and phrases in the
English language which limited or even
oppressed women. Such terms as "chair"
(instead of Chairman), "spokesperson,"

positions are no longer a male domain.

referring to women according to their marital
status (although my own personal
observations suggest that "Ms." is still
predominantly only a substitute for
"Miss"). Many scholars and academic
writers use either the somewhat clumsy
"he/she" (and notice which pronoun al-
most always comes first!) or "(s)he"
(my own choice for academic writing),
or they preface their article with a
disclaimer stating that their exclusive
use of the male pronoun is due to
simplicity of writing and/or tradition.

Such attempts at making American
English less sexist are certainly
noble, albeit rudimentary. To my mind,
spoken English (as opposed to written
English), especially the most informal,
day-to-day speech that we are all
bombarded with, still abounds with
words that sometimes either completely
ignore women, or keep women less im-
portant than men. In fact, some even
blatantly oppress us.

Many of these utterances we hear
so frequently have pervaded our
collective consciousness for so long
that we usually don't consider their
inherent sexism. Perhaps because I
am an English teacher who has always
been keenly aware of and interested
in the language spoken around me,
some words and phrases have come to
be my "pet peeves." So I present them

below for your perusal, with some
possible alternatives.

So at the top of my list is "YOU
GUYS," or any singular form thereof.
A familiar teenage refrain, this all-
purpose phrase is used to refer to an
all-male group, a mixed group of males
and females, or even an all-female
group (especially when those females
are children or teens.)

Just as the dominance of the he/him

again seems to serve as the generic.
For example, during a recent stroll
through the zoo, I couldn't help but
notice that nearly every adult and
child -- of both sexes -- that I
passed, referring to the animal(s) with
"he," “him," or "those guys." Ap-

and "firefighter" acknowledge that these

"Ms." was reintroduced to eliminate label-

pronoun illustrates, the male reference

apparently when in doubt, always assume
that it's a male until proven otherwise!
And lest we forget, “You guys" is
hardly alone; how often do we remark,
"Oh, boy" and "oh, man"?

Even though most of us say "You Guys"
quite unconsciously, a lifetime of
hearing everyone and everything re-
ferred to as males can certainly
affect our attitudes. And even if
"You guys" isn't part of your vocabu-
lary, you can still be inundated
with it. With this in mind, I observed
TV for a week or so, only to find a
great overabundance of this phrase;
even supposedly enlightened programs
such as "Kate and Allie," “The Donahue
Show," and PBS's "Reading Rainbow" are
guilty of the "you guys" syndrome.

What about alternatives? The best
substitute I've heard is “you folks",

a phrase which only works in reference
to adults, but which also may sound

a bit "down home" to some Buffalonians?
“you kids" is the alternative that I
try to remember to use with children,
but of course it won't do for teenagers
--and they seem to be the ones who
utter “you guys" as if it were the last
phrase on earth!

Once considered very slang, "KID"
has been promoted to “informal" in
usage. Parents almost always use it
in the plural to refer to their col-
lective offspring. But not so with
the singular; for a parent to call
one child "my kid" sounds a bit crass,
or perhaps even cold. Instead, parents
usually use "son" or "daughter," terms
which, of course, bring with them a
whole host of sex-stereotyped conno-
tations. —

Ardent feminists seem more comfort-
able using "kid" in the singular. More
than once I have been asked (and even
a bit put off by), "Can I hold your
kid?" It certainly is nice to downplay
a child's sex, but "kid" just isn’t
a very endearing word. May I suggest
"child"? Granted, it sounds somewhat
formal, but I've found that this
feeling diminishes the more you use

(One note: Interestingly, grand-
parents need not rely so heavily on
sex delineation, since "grandchild"
is both common and acceptable. I've
even heard "grandbaby" on occasion.)
3. BABYSITTING- When used within the
family, this word refers only to a
father caring for his kids while his
wife is out. As such, it implies
that for him, parenting is only an
occasional task. However, I've never
heard of an equivalent term to describe
a woman being home with her kids while
hubby is out for the evening.

Not only do I repeatedly hear about
how my friends' husbands so generously
"babysit" while their wives bowl or
play bingo, this notion is also re-
inforced by repeated mention of "baby-
sitting husbands" in such mainstream,
widely-read magazines as Parents and
American Baby.

When I am out wither alone or with
only one of my children, I am inevi-
tably asked, "Is your husband baby-
sitting?" While I do a slow, silent
burn, I notice that the speaker's
query is usually accompanied by a
smile. The women I meet have a smile
of understanding; they know how much
such little breaks can mean. The
men's smiles, however, are more like
a smirk, or a devilish grin, implying
that I managed to sneak out while my
husband is strapped with some sort of

unmanageable burden from which I will
soon rush home to rescue him.

Because the word “babysitting”

means caring for someone else's
child(ren), usually for pay, the
sensible alternatives would simply
be, "my husband is home with the
kids," or "My husband is caring for
the kids."
4. This next phrase might seem like
a trivial one to quibble over; indeed,
it is one that I never gave a thought
to until I experienced its reality

myself. Why do we almost always say,
passively, “Kate WAS BORN," rather
than, “Linda GAVE BIRTH to Kate “?

The former entirely removes the
laboring mother from our considera-
tion, as if the baby somehow magic-
ally appeared. However, the latter
includes both participants in the
birth process, subtly reminding the
listener of the immense work and
courage involved in giving birth.

So this phrase seems to give credit
where credit is due.

In Western New York dialect,
two of the most common slang terms
for “breast“ are “BOOBS” (used by

many white women I know) and "TITS"
(which seems to be more popular among
our Black sisters). Both even have
the diminutive forms of "boobies" or
"titties." Because men have for so
long viewed women's bodies as their
playthings, I have become somewhat
immune to their use of such words.
But women using such terms to refer
to their own bodies particularly
troubles me. Are we so embarrassed
or even ashamed of our own bodies
that we use these slang words almost
as if they were euphemisms? Obvious-
ly, the best alternative is to simply
use the word "breast"; but this is
easier said than done. Most women I
know feel incredibly more at ease
saying the word "breast" when talk-
ing about chicken parts than about

their own bodies.

Because the next few terms so
clearly speak for themselves, I have
included only the briefest explanations.
6. “MAN OVERBOARD" (I wonder if
there has ever been a woman overboard?)
Alternative: "body overboard."

7. “MANHOLE COVER" could easily
become "street-hole cover."
8. “MASTER BEDROOM" is too reminis-
cent of the patriarchal hierarchy.
Why not simply call it the "main bed-
room"?
9. Have you ever wondered why it's
only called "WIFE-SWAPPING"? The
alternative (if we really want one)
could be "mate-swapping."
10. Last but not least, my own most
dread “pet peeve": "WOMANIZER," (With
no special thanks to the late Richard
Burton for popularizing this word.) 
Because I shudder not only at the
word itself, but also at the whole
notion, no alternative will be sug-
gested here.

As you can well
only scratches the
some of my readers are also observ-
ant listeners and have a few language
pet peeves of their own. I invite
you to share them with us all. Drop
me a postcard c/o Common Ground (note
new address: P.O. Box 313, Bidwell
Station, Buffalo) and I will include
them in a future "Potpourri." Mean-
while, watch what you say—and how

you say it!

PAGE 7 COMMON GROUND OCTOBER 1984