S569 ss

But the buck's ears begin to twitch

I know I haven't much time

"You should run now, beautiful creatures"

I think to myself they will never jump and play again

Or do I

The buck's tail flicks—His head comes up—He snorts and blows the alarm  
The doe turns to run

The buck stays one moment too long

I sight the gun above his foreleg on his heart

All in one second, I snap the safety off and slap the trigger

It's done

The buck falls

One shot—one fatal shot.

I wait and watch—then I retch quietly

The buck doesn't move

It's time—I jump down from the tree

The buck never moves

I walk the twenty yards—break a twig and force it over the buck's eyes  
They don't blink

The buck is dead

I unsheath my knife and slit from groin to breastbone  
I step back as the blood comes out

“Hey! Need some help?" my partner yells

"No thanks," I respond in a whisper as I clean out the guts

He watches me and reaches over to pull up my sleeves

"You all right, kid?" he asks as I tie my rope to the neck and antlers

I nod and reach into my pocket for my lipstick, applying it to my parched lips  
"C'mon kid. I'll help you drag him out—he must weigh 180 pounds—nice job"  
I nod again—nice job—I did a nice job

He watches me as we drag the buck out of the forest.

I wonder if the buck's spirit remains alive and free—I hide my head

To hide my thoughts

“It was like that my first time too, kid—but just think of the meat

You'll have for your kids

This guy will dress out at 120 pounds

Where else you gonna get 120 pounds of free meat to feed them kids of yours?”

I remain silent as we hoist the buck into the trunk of the Ford

And tag his antlers with my name and address

I brush the hair off my shoulder and shrug off my coat

Then I sigh

My partner shuffles a little—then puts an arm around me

"They don't know, kid—I swear they don't” *

I shrug—jump into the car, kicking mud off my boots;

"I'll buy you breakfast—he'll keep in this cold," the man motions to the trunk  
I stare at the forest in my mirror

I shudder as I imagine the doe standing in the trees watching

But as I pull out—I wonder which tree I'll crouch in the next season—next year,

by Barb Oberer

Latvian Rhapsody

A child's first awakening

is to grey,

the only color

of a DP camp.

He spins dreams in the shadows

of a spider in the corner,

he clings to mama

as the war reverberates.

and all the players long to go home. OFF: * nalis  
From grey he proceeds to brown,

the color of abandonment.

This world's sleek control

has not yet seized his mind,

so he falters.

In prison once, for a spell

only to emerge unanswered.

What delays now?

A song sung in a faraway tongue

only for a child's ear. . :  
Solace remains in kindred spirits  
only one remains, his father,

perhaps no more exist. P|

Yet the search is without shame. SARAH SLAVE

He finds his homeland

in a kiss of loam

and the whisper of unseen birch.

"Rosemarinus Officinalis"  
Terez Peipins

Pen and ink drawing by Sarah Slavin  
Oo

PAGE 9 WomanExpress MARCH 1985