| Of- | RY your breasts are smooth vanilla mounds  
topped with ripe raspberries,  

soon you will grow into blood rites  
and the confusion of mixed parts;  

your father suspects a conjuror's trick  
or scientific accidents induced  
by eating injected chickens; poor man,  

he is fearful of growing old;  
my mother wanted gentle flowers  

hothouse girls  

with aspirations contained by glass walls  

herself a tattered orchid A your firm belief on one hand  

she imagined better for her girls J/ that you will never live away from me,  
the greenhouse protected us from raging storms W the other a seeker  

rain slapping against the panes ae who delves into distant deserts  
lightning shattering the dark bowl } anxious to bring forth waters.  

above our isolated pots  

she nurtured us within her fears  

of the world beyond, keeping back Bonita Penfold Raquet  
the waters we searched for daily  

the air was electric and prickled our leaves  

we longed for a coolness to caress us  

I rejoice in the awakening;  

one by one our roots grew out the bottom hole  

became climbers and graspers e artificial. \  
and radical weeds Dried limbs \\  
1  

and groped for real earth to occupy SNOW  

we were ivy reaching up the walls  

to scratch at the glass for a taste of the storm SNOW  

we were weeds willing new shoots out to explore  

the uneven floor for escape routes SNOW  

I became a dandelion }  

sending my seeds parachuting out the vents 2 eee I watch ii  

leaving the cracks open for my sisters to follow white lace evergreens U/.  

: want to shake them \ I  

my mother wanted gentle flowers powder falls. “ if  

but we, one by one They are toys \ \ { )  
1/  
i/  

still safe in her hothouse  
she now fears for us  

and our mistaken lives  
alone  

become innocent  

albino feathers, as  

seeming fronds ©  

é. deceive the eye. I  

Bonita Penfold Raquet  

old woman  

ANOTHER LEAF POEM  

her skin is tissue paper  
soft and wrinkled hand I hold  

eyes like glass marbles Sad leaves  

rolling toward me clothes  

in her need to release the burden from woody boughs  
shrunken tale of a life ; take reluctant bows.  

age befits her ‘ /] Naked arms  
regally she sheds each role \ // wave slender  
like an onion in the cold.  

a layer for her womanhood y A fallen bride's  
brittle memories of rocks uncovered parchment lace  

a layer for the wife she was dances  

brown veins deeply rooted to the wind's ovation.  
a layer of motherhood  

seeds gone now to their own earth  
a layer for her girlhood  

still green with hope  

shedding each  

there are still layers  

ane  

Diane Waterman  

that never came to light + Two men cut my breasts today and let me bleed.  
in their pungence They didn't know they even touched me.  
she gives those up to me One astrologically analyzed me.  
Take them, she says One simply left abruptly. ES  
You will do them justice ;  
It is easier nowadays to accept We went back to our corners.  
the stench, to learn from They plotted new strategy.  
the helpless tears, to eat from My strategy is how perversely -  
the bitterness and recover ; natural.  
You are lucky to be so young Used at every meeting -  
at such a time At every match.  
exhausted  
the marble eyes drown I gave Him a backrub.....I, I gave him a bit of  
and the onion closes back upon itself — me, my life, I, I.....sang to him?  
I am alone again with I  
her hidden layers in my hands He took it seriously.  
And I laughed because -  
I won.  

Bonita Penfold Raquet  

Carla Pascolini  

- PAGE 14. COMMON GROUND JULY 1983