BUFFALO: Big Town for

Small Presses

by Esther Roblin

This is the first of a two-part series
article on the growing phenomena

of small presses in the U.S., and
in Western New York in particular.

There are more than 20 small pres-
ses and little magazines actively pub-
lishing in Buffalo and Western New
York - and most of them are run by
women! The majority are literary pres-
ses, several produce publications on
the arts and four publish work on loc-
al history. They turn out an amazing
variety of materials ranging from sin-
gle poem postcards to literary-arts
magazines; from a single copy, hand-
produced, specially-made-for-a-friend
book to numerous single-author chap-
books; from a weekly newspaper to a
unique four times a year newsletter
completely devoted to the work of
Jack Kerouac; from a coloring book on
the history of Buffalo street names
to a long - and meticulously re-
searched - work on Jesse Ketchum.

A small press is basically a mini-
publishing house. It manages all the
work that goes into producing a book,
guiding it through every phase from
initial conception to finished copy.
Finished copy is taken to a printer
who is paid to typeset, run off, and
bind the books. In other words, a
press produces a book, a printer re-
produces it by one of a number of
mechanical means.

It has been estimated that as much

Clearly, small pres-
ses are not small in terms of their im-
portance; they are "small" only when
measured individually in terms of their
resources and mode of production.

Most small presses are run by a
small staff - often only a single per-
son or a like-minded group of two to
five people. The press reflects the
unique concerns of that person or group
and is therefore often highly individu-
alistic when compared to other small
presses. This fact helps to explain
the wide proliferation of small pres-
ses: someone notices or feels a gap
in the present publishing scene and he
or she creates a press to fill the gap.

Small presses for the most part
publish small-name writers and artists,
people whose work is excellent, and de-
serve a large audience, but whose work
would not be commercially profitable
(serious poetry and literature have
never enjoyed mass popularity) and
who therefore cannot break into the
large, by now mostly conglomerate,
commercial presses. In fact, one rai-
son d'être of many small presses and
little magazines is to give these wri-
ters at least some opportunity to be
heard. Almost always the publisher or
editor of a small press is a writer

her/himself and finds running her/his
own press the only way to give her/his
own work an audience. In the words of
Ted Berrigan at a conference of small
press publishers in Buffalo in 1970,
"All I want to do is to publish and
read my own and my friends' poetry and
that's what little magazines are for."
Some of the writers published in this
way are or become big names locally
and once in a rare while a small press
has the distinction of having been the
first to publish a small-name writer

PAGE 6 COMMONGROUND — JANUARY 1983

who years later becomes a really big
name on the national scene.

Writing in 1947, the authors of The
Little Magazine: A History and Biblio-
graphy, were able to state that “about
80% of our post-1912 critics, novelists,
poets and storytellers" were published
first in the little magazines. A list
of names would include Hemingway, Sher-
wood Anderson, William Faulkner, Amy
Lowell and T. S. Eliot among others.
Needless to say, the little magazines
that guessed so right have now become
legendary.

Small presses have small means by
which to support themselves. Most are
non-profit, by necessity rather than
choice. Most reward their authors with
recognition and copies instead of mon-
ey. They work on shoestring budgets,
literally ‘hanging by a thread' from
one issue to the next, a characteristic
that prompted one local press to name
itself Arachne: hanging by a thread.
Subscriptions and other sales rarely
pay the full costs of printing, mail-
ing, and other necessary expenses of
production such as paper. Often pres-
ses are subsidized out of the publi-
sher's own pocket, through gifts from
friends, and through money earned from

fund-raising events such as readings.
Whatever money comes in is invariably
ploughed right back again into the
next project.

In recent years, the National En-
dowment for the Arts (NEA), as well
as the Coordinating Council of Liter-
ary Magazines (CCLM), has funneled
some money into grants for literary
projects. Some grant money can also
be found by applying to state and lo-
cal arts councils. However, as late
as 1978, foundation support for litera-
ture on the national level comprised
less than 1% of the total grant money
disbursed and the NEA itself granted
less than 2% of its money to literary
projects. To be eligible to apply,
a press must gain official non-profit
status, often a time-consuming pro-
cess, and applying for grants is
certainly no guarantee of money forth-
coming. And even if a press wins a
grant once, there is no guarantee
that money will be forthcoming in the
future. Nevertheless, such grants
often meant the difference between
putting out a new publication or fold-
ing up for presses which are barely
surviving.

Short on help and short on money;
small presses are also short on time.
Almost all publisher-editors have full-
time jobs and run their presses using
whatever spare time they can manage to
find. It is a formidable task. It in-
volves hundreds of hours of work and
lots of knowledge. Decisions must be
made regarding typesetting styles,
printing options, paper and types of
binding, as well as overall artistic
design. Time must be spent in record-
keeping, mailing, developing publicity
and advertising, running back and forth
to printers and bookstores, proofread-
ing, editing, and last but not least,
reading piles of submissions both
solicited and unsolicited.

Not only do publisher-editors run
presses and work full-time at their
paid jobs, they also are likely to be
arts activists in their communities,

a press being only one of a number of
art-related activities they are in-
volved in. Often they are the crea-
tors of various art and literary hap-
penings such as readings, workshops
and multi-media events. They serve not
only as the sponsors of these events,
but also as publicists, coordinators,
readers, performers and audience as
well. Press publications sometimes
arise out of a desire to memorialize
these events in print.

Even more than a shortage of funds

is a significant factor affecting small press product-

ion schedules. Most small presses
publish sporadically, even those lit-
tle magazines that promise a certain
number of issues per year. The issues
usually make it out, but not at regular
intervals. Some presses, rather than
tying themselves into time constraints
impossible to meet, offer so many is-
sues per subscription instead of per
year. A publication appears whenever
a publisher-editor can finally 'get
it all together’.

Small presses usually have a small
circulation. The average run of a
publication varies between 200 and
1000 copies. This is not only a mat-
ter of money. The individuality of
each press, the uncommonness of big
names, and the tendency of such pres-
ses to be avant-garde or experimental,
almost ensure a small readership.

Very often, individual presses develop
a small and specialized, but devoted
audience scattered across the U.S. and
other countries. In fact, there is
evidence that small press publications
rarely reach the ordinary public. Ac-
cording to a survey conducted not too
many years ago by the CCLM, the group
of subscribers to little magazines
consists primarily of, in descending
numerical order, writers, teachers,
librarians, and students. Small pres-
ses appear to be run by writers for
themselves and for other writers.

Last, but not least, small presses
last for short periods of time. They
have a very high birth rate and death
rate. According to Michael Anania, a
former president of the CCLM, “a great
number of magazines die before the ap-
pearance of a second issue." Three is-
sues, the CCLM requirement for member-
ship, is a tough distance for most be-

* Turn to Page 22