ANTI - NUKE  
VOICE  

Dr. Helen Caldicott, founder of  
Women's Action for Nuclear Disarma-  
ment and President Emeritus of Phys-  
icians for Social Responsibility,  
will be speaking at noon on May 4th  
at Erie Community College, City  
Campus as part of the Western New  
York Peace With Justice Week activi-  
ties. The title of her address is  
"We the People: The Hope for Ending  
the Arms Race."  

She explains nuclear proliferation  
in medical terminology, saying that  
this planet has a terminal illness;  
that it is infected with "lethal  

macrobes that are metastasizing  
(spreading) rapidly.  

Caldicott, author of Nuclear Mad-  
ness: What You Can Do, has been a  
leader in the nuclear disarmament  
movement since 1971. She led the  
first national anti-nuclear demon-  
stration in her native Australia,  
against French atom bomb tests in the  
South Pacific.  

She also spent two years educating  
uranium miners about the medical dan-  
gers and the military applications of  
their work. She also studied the  
nuclear fuel cycle; the processing  
of nuclear materials, including wastes  
used in reactors and the manufacture  
of weapons: Pandora Hesiod/Erasmus  

When Caldicott and her husband  
moved to the U.S., she advocated the  
revival of an activist Physicians for  
Social Responsibility group, and Hope blooms, Hate saps.  
founded Women's Action for Nuclear: Blossoms, Sickness and pain  
Disarmament, which now has 70 chapters Withers, Deplete.  
nationwide, including one in the Browns: Death and despair  
Buffalo area. Springs forth, Level:  

She is now putting her energies Falls back-- Lust,  
into the 1984 presidential election, Beckons Greed,  
trying to encourage women to vote Sweet-scented, Envy  
for candidates who support a freeze Spice-pungent. Spread--  
on nuclear weapons. Crumbles Strife  

She advocates an immediate freeze Rose-petal-like, Cripples,  
in the weapons race, and negotiating Clove-like. and  
rapid U.S.-Soviet disarmament. The Hope Selfishness  
re-election of Reagan, she said, Bends Pummels,  
would make such goals impossible. as wiry green stems and  
Caldicott reported a conversation before Slothfulness  
she had with Reagan who said that he Dull garden shears. Degrades.  
believed in preserving peace by Hope All-given  
building more bombs. Spirals sturdily to take away  

"The 1984 elections are a politi- Be cassia bark A: a D. h,  
cal crossroads that may determine our in a tall glass jar. a ap Ine Ss  
survival as a planet," she said. 3 i  
"We have to use this opportunity to Hope remains. spa Tree  
elect a president and a congress who  
are committed to multilateral nuclear  
disarmament as their top priority.  
We may never again get a similar  
opportunity."  

Some of the local groups supporting  
Caldicott's appearance are Educators  
for Social Responsibility, the YWCA,  
League of Women Voters, Leadership  
Conference of Women Religious, Cassan-  
dra Radical Feminist Nurses, EMMA  
Women's Resource and Cultural Center,  

Common Ground, Women's Association of  
Central Presbyterian Church, Lutheran  
Church Women LCA, American Association Sarah Slavin  
of University Women and others. January 17, 1984  

The goddess Pandora, whose name means all-giver, came to earth  

to marry with a mortal man, in whose house she found a large vase.  

Her husband opened the vase, releasing all the evils of mankind.  

In compassion, Pandora brought hope where little else remained.  

To avoid blame, her husband accused her of opening the jar. The  
story was subsequently modified by the historian Hesiod, a noted  

misogynist, to represent Pandora as the bringer of the vase as  

well as its opener. Erasmus, a later translator of Hesiod, by an  

error in translation, changed the word "vase" to the word "box."  

PAGE 7 COMMON GROUND