IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Rules:
1. Fix obvious OCR errors (like '0' instead of 'O', '1' instead of 'l')
2. Preserve the original line breaks and text blocks.
3. Preserve the original meaning and historical context.
4. Do not add any additional text.
5. Do not delete any text.
6. Process EVERY line - do not skip any content.

Corrected text:

Up DATE:

ORE woreanhR’s

by Heather Stratton

In November/82, Common Ground
published my article "Starting
Your Own Business". This article
provided some advice and tips on
how to get off on the right foot.
It was an easy article to write -
everything I advised was just the
opposite to what I did in start-
ing up my own systems consulting
business!

The article was triggered one
evening as I sat at my desk pon-
dering a suitcase full of invoices,
receipts and god knows what else.
It seemed a far easier task to
write the article than to tackle
the suitcase and do my corporate
books for the past year. I cer-
tainly had plenty of paper to write
the drafts - three sets of outdated
letterhead, each with different
names, addresses and telephone num-
bers.

I wish I could announce that
the past six months have seen a
complete turn-around - that the
books were up-to-date, my letter-
head current, and the lawyer and
accountant were being used properly.
However, there has been some head-
way.

kaeKeKeKKKnne

business

The old letterhead has come in
quite handy - it's used to typeset
CG articles. And, I've even found
some uses for the obsolete business
cards - for example, they make ex-
cellent bookmarks. And I haven't
spent any money on new stationery;
rather I merely invested in a roll
of white labels which can be neatly
placed over the old address with the
new one(s) typed over it. As to the
business cards, the current information
is hand-written on them - when I need
to give one to a business associate,

I explain the hand-writing with a
nicely rehearsed anecdote about the
article I wrote. If anything, it

has enhanced my image - a systems
analyst who has been published in that
prestigious newsjournal, CG!

I am proud to advise that the suit-
case is now empty and used only for
travelling. I finally opened the
damn thing up, did the books and filed
my income tax return (with advice from
my lawyer; still didn't have an ac-
countant at that time). Most wondrous
of all, I got a refund on the corporate
taxes and, to date, the expected audit
from the IRS hasn't taken place (I only
hope they haven't taken to reading CG!)

This year's books haven't been
started yet. However, all the invoices
receipts, etc. are neatly organized in
a lovely fake leather accordion file
that has a slot for each month of the
year. Posting the entries is going to
be a lot easier this year (although I
still haven't solved that problem I
have of transposing numbers).

And the systems consulting business
is trundling along. I am very fortu-
nate - without any conscious effort
on my part, I have, through the years,
built up a network - friends who are
very much aware that if I don't work
I might end up on their doorsteps and
proceed to eat and drink them out of
house and home. They all work very
hard at referring me for new jobs!

Success story this is not. However,
things are a bit more under control.

I have followed some of my advice -

I consult my lawyer before making major
decisions and I actually interviewed

an accountant the other day (the best
advice he's given me thus far is a

lead to a good mechanic for my car).

Writing about all this gives pause
for thought: why in heaven's name do
I put myself through all this when I
could be safely working for someone
else, complaining about my boss and
muttering angrily once a year as I
fill out the short income tax form?

I wouldn't even need my own stationery
and the accordion file could be stored
in the cupboard along with the suitcase.

However, there are compensations.

It all seems to meet some eccentric

part of my nature - and, let's face it,
it's pretty nice to know that, once this
article is finished, I'll be out on the

sun deck reading my new spy novel while

the rest of the world works away. 

Diary of a Budding

by Susan J. Clements

9:00 am: I'm sitting on my back
porch absorbing some caffeine and en-
joying the cool morning air. In a
little while, I'll shift to my of-
fice in the next room and start my
work for the day.

You see, I'm self-employed. I run
a small business from my home. An
oblong room where I used to house var-
ious roommates, is my work space. I
like to call it the Front Office, the
Shipping Department and the Art Studio.
My cavernous front room has evolved in-
to a warehouse. I live somewhere in
between all of this.

Therapeutic REACT, Inc. has offic-
ially been in existence for a little
more than a year, but its history goes
back much farther than that. REACT,
by the way, stands for Rehabilitation,
Education, and Adult Clinical Testing.
(How do you like that for an acronym?)

In business, it's essential to find
a partner who you like and respect,
and one you can trust completely. It
should be a person you listen to, and
who listens to you. My partner, Mary,
is exactly this person. Fortunately,
so am I.

CAPITALIST

Mary, an Occupational Therapist,
became frustrated with the lack of
therapy materials for her adult pa-
tients several years ago. She had asked
me to do some drawings from her ideas
for use in her clinic. As it turned
out, we both caught the entrepreneurial
spirit, and the idea blossomed into
Therapeutic REACT.

We entered the business world very
gradually, since we both held full-
time jobs. We've had several things
in our favor, the first being our un-
canny combination of skills. Secondly,
Mary's family is in the computer busi-
ness, and their help and advice have
been invaluable. We were able to bor-
row a significant amount of money with
the help of my parents who put up the
collateral. (M & T wouldn't accept
my dog or my guitar.)

We are basically a small publishing
house. We've designed and produced
a line of occupational therapy mater-
ials specifically for adult patients.
These include flash cards for testing,
crossword puzzles and coloring books.
We plan to expand into instructional
pamphlets and a larger variety of ac-
tivity kits. We do all of our own pro-
duction, contract to local printers,
and market through direct mail.

REACT is still very small at this
point. The money that we make will
be ploughed right back into the busi-
ness for several years. I think we've
done remarkably well for a first-year
venture.

There are several factors contrib-
uting to our success. We've utilized
all the connections we could think of
(the all-important 'networking'). We
also did a lot of research and asked
a lot of questions before actually
taking the plunge. We've taken nec-
essary steps such as borrowing money,
advertising and taking risks. We found
an excellent lawyer and formed our own
corporation.

Three months ago I quit my dead-end
job. Mary and I came to the conclu-
sion that if we were really going to
make a go of it, we needed someone to
take care of the business on a daily
basis. The nights and weekends of
working were not accomplishing what we
wanted. Therefore, my quitting couldn't
have come at a better time.

Sometimes, I can't imagine where we
got the nerve to do all this. We alter-
nate days of being exalted and being
terrified. Fortunately, we never seem
to be terrified on the same day. We are
both fiercely determined, and we intend
to make this business a success. For
myself, and for REACT, things are
really looking up. 

COMMON GROUND JULY 1983. PAGES