Profile of

by Paulette Hammond

The Pro-Choice Network of Western
New York was the brainchild of Jane
Holland, a local family planning and
reproductive health activist. Her
idea, expressed in a letter sent to
several other activists in December
1982, was to form "a monthly caucus
of representatives of the many groups
and agencies concerned with women's
reproductive health care" and "a
woman's health issues switchboard."

The first meeting of the Network
was held on 26 January 1983, at
the Council of Churches, 1272 Delaware
Ave. Twelve women attended as repre-
sentatives of several local organiza-
tions: Graduate Student Association-
U.B., Planned Parenthood of Niagara
County, the Buffalo Chapter of the
National Organization for Women, the
National Council of Jewish Women, the
National Association of Social Workers,
Family Planning Advocates, EMMA,
Common Ground, and the League of Women
Voters. We discussed the purpose of
the group: how to gather and dissem-
inate information on women's health
issues, specifically reproductive
health. We decided to do this through
a contact person from each interested
organization and their newsletters.

A month later, the Network met to
discuss the idea of a “hotline" to
disseminate information. The group
was given a name - the Pro-Choice
Communication Network. Funding was
discussed (a perennial problem, as
most grassroots organizers know!).
The purpose of this umbrella group
was initiated with the mailing of the

minutes of this meeting, which included

a copy of a sample of an “activist
hotline", useful telephone numbers,
(including the 800-numbers for the
State Senate and Assembly), a Planned
Parenthood Alert (encouraging action
on the proposed OMB restrictions on
"Political Advocacy" of nonprofit
organizations), a computer list of
federal legislation dealing with
abortion (kindly supplied by Senator
Moynihan’s office), the Network
mailing/phone list, and a Buffalo
media list with mailing labels. These
mailings have been the main contact
between groups in the network as we
continue to disseminate information
concerning reproductive freedom on
the local, state, and national levels.

The Buffalo Chapter of NOW, a mem-
ber organization, provided $50 to
open a checking account. It was
decided not to charge dues, but to
request donations as the need arose.
Today we take a collection at the
meetings and member individuals have
donated generously when we have
needed it. However, as with most
voluntary grassroots groups, we
live hand-to-mouth. The fact that
we have no formal organization, no
officers (other than a secretary
for checking account purposes), and
a very simple set of by-laws, has made
it a very fluid group. People donate
time and energy as they are able, and
somehow the work gets done.

Back to the history of the Network.
The Network monitored closely C.A.R.
A.S.A.*s (Coalition for Abortion
Rights and Against Sterilization Abuse)
NFTA bus card campaign and supported
their successful effort to have their
pro-choice message placed on N.F.T.A.
buses.

On 26 April 1983, the Network
sponsored a talk by Carol Reichert,
Public Affairs Field Coordinator
for Family Planning Advocates of
N.Y.S. and then chair of NOW-NYS's
Reproductive Rights Task Force. She
spoke on "Reproductive Rights: Issues
and Strategies for the 80's." Very
presciently, she said that the failure
of anti-abortion activists to change
federal law will result in state and
local action. Carol also emphasized
the importance of electoral politics
and lobbying to maintain New York's
strong pro-choice stand.

In July of 1983, Jane Holland moved
to Gainesville, Florida. She stays
in contact with the network, receiving
the minutes of our meetings and send-
ing encouraging notes every once in
a while. Shelly Stuchell of Planned
Parenthood of Niagara County was
subsequently elected chair and
Paulette Hammond, chair of Buffalo
NOW's Reproductive Rights Task Force,
was re-elected secretary/treasurer.

The Network did not meet for sev-
eral months, then, in order to deter-
mine a direction for the newly re-
activated group, a questionnaire was
sent out to all the organizations on
the mailing list. The groups were
asked about their interest in the
Network and whether they would be
willing to co-sponsor an event to

be given by the network. We received
responses from several organizations,
all favorable.

On 22 January 1985, the Network
attempted to hold a press conference
in commemoration of the 1973 Supreme
Court decision legalizing abortion
(Roe Vs. Wade), but the blizzard can-
celled it. On 4 February 1985,

Carol Reichert spoke again to the
group. Her very cogent remarks were
distributed to Network members. (They
are available upon request.)

At this time the National Abortion
Rights Action League (NARAL), whose
mailings the Network receives, decided
to promote a media event to bring
the abortion issue back to the
whose lives it directly affects. A
national and local "Silent No More
Speakout for Women's Lives" countered
the propaganda of "The Silent Scream",
in which the woman having the abortion appears not to exist, just the disembodied fetus and uterus.
Women with stories to tell concerning both legal
and illegal abortions stood up and
recounted their own or a relative's
or friend's experience. The message
was, and continues to be, that illegal
abortion was an abomination; women
desperately sought them, often endan-
gering their health and their lives.
The contrast between legal and
illegal abortions, and the responsi-
ble decisions that women must and do
make concerning their reproductive
lives was highlighted by other women
in Buffalo recounting their own or
a friend's legal abortions. The
"Silent No More" Speakout in Buffalo
was held on 20 May 1985 at the
Unitarian Universalist Church on
Elmwood. It was attended by over
100 people, more than was expected.
The few anti-abortionists who tried
to disrupt the meeting were unsuccess-
ful; they were chanted and clapped
down (we were “Silent No More") by
the overwhelming number of Pro-Choice
attendees. NARAL's national speakout

took place on the steps of the nation's

capitol a week or so later. We were
proud to have been a part of this
successful national campaign.

This well-attended event renewed
the interest and enthusiasm of
people in the Network. This was
fortunate, because Joseph Schiedler,
anti-abortion activist and author of
"Closed: 99 Ways to Stop Abortion”,
had spoken to a group of “Right-to-
Lifers" earlier in the year and some
felt trouble was brewing because of
his fanatic exhortation to stop
abortion by any means necessary. In
other areas this has and continues
to be translated into violence against
abortion and birth control facilities:
firebombings, arsons, and letter-
bombs. In Buffalo, it translated
into the verbal harassment and inti-
midation of patients attending abor-
tion clinics. Anti-abortion picketers
appeared at one abortion clinic, and
then others in the city and suburbs.
In response, the Network (which had
dropped the "Communication" part of
the title because it had become more
than a communication facilitator,
rather an action-oriented one as
well) organized a "patient escort
system." The patient escorts helped
women into the facility, taking the
anti-abortion literature handed out,
reassuring the woman, and generally
trying to counteract the harassment
and intimidation. The anti-abortion
activists, for their part, broadcast
misleading and untruthful “facts”
(repeated in their literature) using
a bullhorn, in an attempt to coerce
or intimidate the women out of having
an abortion. For example, one untruth-
ful statement was that several women
had been carried out on stretchers
earlier, a statement Schiedler says
is particularly effective in his book.
No such thing ever happened at the
clinics, but truth is not the anti-
abortionists' strong point.

Pro-choice activists in the Net-
work feel that the decision to have
an abortion, which is usually not
an easy one to start with, is made
much more difficult and harrowing
than it needed to be by this harass-
ment and that the anti-abortionists
are invading privacy (some took
pictures and wrote down license
plate numbers) of patients.

A recent decision by the NYS
Court of Appeals, allowing plaza
owners to bar picketers from their
premises, has removed the anti-
abortionists to the sidewalk where
they can no longer physically
interact with the patients. The
Network has consequently discontinued

the patient escort system at one
facility. The decision has given
the Network some breathing space to
develop other strategies for counter-
ing this outrageous and unethical
intrusion into a woman's privacy.

Members of the Network have also
maintained a strong media presence;
we appeared on the John Otto show
and other radio programs, and have
written various letters to local
newspapers.

Another tactic inspired by anti-
abortionists, the fake clinic, has
been identified locally by Network
activists. Written testimony from
women who have visited these centers,
which masquerade as abortion clinics
or referral centers, were collected.
The centers advertise in the Yellow
Pages under “Birth Counseling Infor-
mation" and offer free pregnancy
testing and confidential counseling,
as do bona fide abortion and birth
counseling centers. They do not
mention that they do not provide
abortions or referrals. Unsuspecting
women have gone there, expecting to
receive an abortion or referral
should they be pregnant. What they
get instead is a heavy dose of anti-
abortion propaganda, which is religi-
ously oriented. The Network, after
it had determined the true nature of
one center, the Crisis Pregnancy
Center at Main and Winspear, held
a demonstration in front of it on
September 21, 1986, to protest this
fraudulent advertising. The demon-
stration garnered a lot of media
coverage as part of the Network's con-
tinuing effort to publicize these
fake clinics. An excellent in-depth
article by Steve Clancy in the 26
February 1986 issue of Second Story
is the most recent addition to this
campaign. On May 5, 6, 7, and 8,
Roxanne Adrian of Channel 2 presented
a series on the clinics as part of
the 11 o'clock news.

The next project of the Network
centered around the 13th anniversary
of the Supreme Court decision legal-
izing abortion (Roe V. Wade). It
was decided to have a panel discus-
sion on 22 January 1986 at the down-
town YWCA. Shirley Joseph, past
national vice-president of the
National Council of Jewish Women
(NCJW) moderated the discussion
by Kristina Young, Executive
Director of Planned Parenthood of
Buffalo and Erie County, Isabel
Marcus, Professor of Law and Juris-
prudence at UB, Margaret Snell, author
and activist, and a “patient” of
the Crisis Pregnancy Center. All
four women spoke very eloquently
from different perspectives of women's
struggle to maintain choices over
their reproductive lives, including
access to birth control and safe,
legal abortions. (The panel discus-
sion was repeated at UB on May 5th
for their Women's Association.)
Again anti-abortionists were present;
they picketed the meeting on the
22nd.

Most recently, the Network has
co-sponsored another demonstration
against the Crisis Pregnancy Center,
organized by the All People’s Con-
gress, sent people to NOW's March
9 March to Save Women's Lives in
Washington D.C., lobbied to main-
tain Medicaid funding for abortions
in New York State, and reactivated
the patient escort system for a
local physician. The Network is
also working to establish a local
chapter of Catholics for Free Choice,
and bringing Mary Ann Sorrentino,
Executive Director of Planned
Parenthood of Rhode Island (who was
excommunicated for her work) to
Buffalo this summer.

The Pro-Choice Network supports
the full gamut of women's reproduc-
tive rights: sexuality education,
family life education, access to
birth control information in order
to make responsible decisions con-
cerning their lives. These, in
addition to good educational and
employment opportunities, well-
paying jobs, decent, affordable
child care, housing, and health
care insurance, are all needed for
women to use their full abilities
for the betterment of society and
allow their full participation in
our democratic society.

If you agree with our principles
and goals and are outraged about
local attacks on women's rights to
privacy and access to safe, legal
abortion, the Network invites you
to join us. For information con-
cerning meetings, held at the Down-
town YWCA approximately every 3rd

Tuesday, please drop a line to
the Pro-Choice Network
P.O. Box 112

Snyder, N.Y. 14226
or call Paulette at 631-3967
(after 5 pm) or leave a message
at 674-1544.

COMMON GROUND JULY 1986 PAGE 13:

Women's
Movement:
Stage 2?

by Sharon Green

Some say that we are in the second
stage of the women's movement, that
feminism has accomplished many of its
initial goals. I am not so sure.
Ever wonder why...

...there's no such thing as panty
hose or knee-highs that don't run?
(Could it be because Ralph Nader
isn't a woman?)
...they are called "WalkMAN” radios?
...women are rarely pallbearers?

...cut curbs and pushbutton doors
were never provided with the inten-
tion of making life easier for women
pushing strollers or buggies? (We
mothers are most grateful that the
needs of the handicapped were recog-
nized, finally, for all our sakes.)
...Santa Claus and the Easter Bunny
are males?

...some women still wear high heels?
...women can easily say the word
“breast” when referring to a chicken
or turkey, or the breaststroke in
swimming, but we still use unpleasant
euphemisms when referring to our
own bodies?

...there is to my knowledge no term
for the female equivalent of a Peep-
ing Tom? An optimist might speculate
that only men "peep" at women because
women's bodies are more attractive
and interesting than men's. A realist,
however, knows that although this may
be true, our culture sanctions the
notion that women's bodies exist pri-
marily, if not solely for the pleasure
of men--yet the reverse is not true.
Thus women probably never feel com-
pelled to "peep" at men on any large
scale.

...pronoun order is almost always
"he or she” and "his and her" never
the reverse?

...they are called mannequins?

...you learned in Art Appreciation
class all the artists were men?
...you read almost no women writers
in all your high school English
classes?

...your daughters, sisters, and nieces
are still not reading very many women
writers in their classes?

...the news media can bring us full-
color shots of malnourished African
babies at their mothers’ breasts,
and we don't feel embarrassed, while
we American nursing mothers are still
made to feel dirty when we nurse
outside of our homes?

...public bathrooms don't provide for
nursing moms, even though they are
often regulated there?

...forms and mail order blanks usually
have boxes for only "Mrs." & "Ms.",
thus assuming that only single women
use the title "Ms."?

And while we are at it, ever wonder
why...

...Common Ground is not sold in your
local newsstand?

...some of you never heard of Common
Ground until you happened to pick
up this issue?

...Common Ground is always struggling
to survive financially?

If you agree with our principles
and goals and are outraged about
local attacks on women's rights to
privacy and access to safe, legal
abortion, the Network invites you
to join us. For information con-
cerning meetings, held at the Down-
town YWCA approximately every 3rd
Tuesday, please drop a line to
the Pro-Choice Network
P.O. Box 112

Snyder, N.Y. 14226
or call Paulette at 631-3967
(after 5 pm) or leave a message
at 674-1544.