Book Review

BOOK REVIEW  
by Barbara Schutt  
former Editor of the  
American Journal of Nursing  

Feminism for the Health of It by Wilma  
Scott Heide.  Margaretdaughters, Inc.,  
Buffalo, NY, 1985.  

This book has at least two major  
audiences: those who enjoy having  
their feminist convictions reinforced,  
and those who haven't yet taken  
seriously the awesome implications of  
an emerging feminist society. Then  
there are all those others in between.  

In these lively 159 pages, Dr.  
Heide takes to task the leaders of  
today's society for their failure to  
bring humanistic solutions to most of  
our major social problems. Educators,  
researchers, health care providers,  
legislators, economists, broadcasters,  
historians -- whoever are socially  
illiterate about women. They must  
learn to think as feminists, Heide is  
convinced, if they are to deal effec-  
tively with society's ills.  

She speaks with authority from a  
rich and varied perspective as a nurse,  
a human rights activist, an educator, a  
scholar, and a president of the National  
Organization for Women during its for-  
mative years. Having been involved in  
most of the significant national and  
international feminist activities of  
the past 20 years, she is able to draw  
on these experiences to diagnose the  
real problems and prescribe solutions.  

Dr. Heide reminds us "...that  
people find feminist perspectives  
variously exciting, provocative,  
visionary, dynamic, educational,  
prophetic, or threatening. Seldom, if  

ever, is a feminist perspective found  
to be dull, or unrelated to the human  
interest." Certainly hers is not. She  
brings to her writing all of the above,  
plus wit, humor, and warmth, sometimes  
outrageousness, always great imagina-  
tion, and large and unfettered  
thinking. She also brings a refreshing  
compulsion to affect her philosophical  
criticisms with concrete suggestions  
for what to do about it all. Would  
that all other philosophers were such  
activists!  

A constant activist theme of  
Heide's is to change or correct the  
language, for, "Language is a tool of  
thought, a powerful method to create or  
exclude images." She asserts that the  
usage of male-only referents in our  
laws violates civil rights laws, and  
she creates words when there are none  
to say what she means. Modifying our  
male-oriented language is as  
appropriate for Congressmen as it is  
for women. Both need consciousness  
raising groups, she believes. She  
obviously enjoys turns of phrase as  
much as new words, however, repeating  
several times the kernel of her philo-  
sophy to adopt feminist thinking  
universally "so that the power of love  
[feminism] can exceed the love of  
power to control others [masculinism]."  

It is unfortunate that this book is  
being published posthumously, for Dr.  
Heide died suddenly this past May, just  
as the book had gone to press. This  
means we are being deprived of more of  
this kind of refreshing and revolu-  
tionary thinking and acting during a  
time when we are all too cautious about  

what we say or do. She, too, has been  
deprived of that feedback whether  
harsh or generous -- which she always  
relished, and which always sent her on  
other rounds of thought. However, this  
book alone will help us in our (and  
her) “quest for humanity."  

from  
Nurses  

Reprinted with permission  
CASSANDRA: Radical Feminist  
Newsjournal, 3:3, September 1985.  

BLACK WOMEN'S  
COALITION AWARDS  

The Coalition of 100 Black Women  
held its "Spotlight on Women of  
Western New York" awards dinner  
September 9, 1985, in which awards  
were presented to the following  
five women: Ouida H. Clapp,  
recently retired director of Eng-  
lish Language Arts in the Buffalo  
Public School; Julia A. Holmes of  
Pittsford, national president of  
the League of Women Voters of the  
United States; Gigi R. Moore,  
corporate banking officer for Li-  
berty Norstar's Corporate Banking  
Division; Yvonne Scruggs-Leftwich,  
former state commissioner of hous-  
ing and community renewal and now  
deputy to the mayor of Philadelphia  
for strategic planning, policy de-  
velopment and operations; and  
Caroline B. Thomas, a retired so-  
cial worker and chairman of the  
board of the Food Bank of Western  
New York.  

ABOUT MARGARETDAUGHTERS  

Margaretdaughters, Inc. is a  
Buffalo feminist publishing company  
founded in 1984 by Charlene Eldridge  
Wheeler and Peggy L. Chinn, and named  
in tribute to both of their mothers  
whose names are Margaret. Their focus  
is publishing historical and current  
works by women that support feminist  
values and that help to create social  
and political change.  

The first three publications  
demonstrate vividly the reality of  
their publishing commitment and pur-  

pose. Margaretdaughters' first publi-  
cation was Peace and Power: A Handbook  
of Feminist Process, released in 1984,  
is being used world-wide by groups com-  
mitted to creating change in how they  
relate to one another and to the world.  

This fall they are releasing two  
additional titles that reflect both  
historic importance and visions for  

future change based on feminist values.  
These books are Feminism for the Health  
of It by Wilma Scott Heide and A  
Feminist Legacy: The Ethics of Wilma  
Scott Heide and Company by Eleanor  
Humes Haney. These two books are  
briefly reviewed in the EMMA IS column  
in this issue. All three books are  
available at EMMA.  

Margaret Eldridge displays the hand-  
quilted and embroidered banner that she  
created for her daughter's company.  

PAGE 5 COMMON GROUND OCTOBER 1985