by Sharon Green

“FEMINIST ADOPTEES: LET'S SHARE  
IDEAS AND EXPERIENCES. WRITE..."

When I spotted the above ad in an  
issue of Off Our Backs last year, I  
was immediately drawn to it. I am  
both an adoptee and a feminist, but  
until then I had considered the two  
aspects of my being as separate en-  
tities.

But I did respond, explaining my  
own adoption story and my desire to  
both know my complete history; and  
I dare say, to even meet (or at least  
talk to) my birth mother. Within  
a few days, a wonderful letter came  
back from a woman in California, a  
fellow adoptee, my own age, who  
successfully found and met both of  
her birthparents and even two half-  
siblings. And she is a feminist.

Her long letter really got me  
thinking. And her suggestions of  
books that discuss the damage caused  
by the closed adoption system also  
got me reading (see the book list at  
the end of this article.) By defin-  
ition, the closed adoption system  
does not allow a birth mother to see,  
hear from or hear about her child  
after relinquishment. Probably  
because adoption is such a personal  
and emotional topic for me, I had  
never been able to see its connections  
to larger social issues.

The whole notion of an adoptee  
wanting to search for, or at least  
receive some information about her/his  
birthparent(s) is a relatively new  
tone. For so long, adoptees who asked  
questions have been made to feel like  
unwelcome interlopers in a forbidden  
place. But finally, many of us are  
beginning to admit what we have always  
felt: that we have the right to know  
our own histories, and that our birth-  
mothers have the right to know what  
became of us.

And as we admit our needs to search  
and our right to know what most other  
people take for granted, we should  
remember that the closed adoption  
system is based largely on the shame  
attached to a pregnancy out of wedlock.  
(And the vast majority of babies  
surrendered for adoption are children  
of unwed mothers.) This shame is  
largely the result of the misogynist  
attitudes and double standards rampant  
in our male-dominated society.

After all, what is an illegitimate  
child? One with no father - not  
biologically, of course, but legally.

This baby is bereft of both the father's  

legal “ownership” as well as the  
dubious distinction of his surname.  
The pregnant mother, because she is  
not legally attached to a man, is  
stigmatized. Never mind whether she  
is 15 or 30; she has made a mistake.  
Never mind whether it was a one-night  
stand or a serious relationship; she's  
still the guilty party. Never mind  
whether she is emotionally (or per-  
haps even financially) able to raise  
a child alone; she's still single.  
Yet few chastise the father, her sex-  
ual partner in creating that child.  
And these sexist attitudes have only  
changed a little since the days when  
my own birth mother, single and age 25,  
had to make her painful decision.  
Our patriarchal society punishes  
the woman not once, but many times.  
First she is punished for having sex  
by the pregnancy itself; then she is  
punished for the pregnancy by having  
to decide what to do with the baby.  
(Before abortion was legalized, car-  
rying a pregnancy to term was the  
only option for many women and girls.)  
Finally, her non-marital sexuality  
is further scorned by a system that  
almost always places her baby with  
a heterosexual couple, who usually  
must be married and who often assume  
traditional sex roles (husband as  
wage earner and wife as nurturer.)  
The closed adoption system also  
punishes the woman for years to come,  
by brainwashing her into believing  
that she must never meddle in the  

PAGE 12

child's life or interrupt the child's  
relationship with the adoptive parents.  
Although she knew that child intimate-  
ly throughout pregnancy and birth,  

the system convinces her that she must  
do an about-face and totally ignore the  
child for years to come. My own preg-  
nancy experiences tell me that she  
will never forget her child.

If a birth mother has the right  
(and courage) to choose to give up her  
baby; then she must also have the right  
to search, to know of the child's  
whereabouts, to receive information  
periodically, and to later meet her  
child when (s)he is a consenting adult.  
The birth mother should be informed  
if the child is seriously ill or dies.  
I think feminists must address these  
issues because denying birth mothers  
their rights and their needs merely  
perpetuates the cycle of chastising  
these women for their sexuality and  
their pregnancies.

What about us adoptees? Our right  
to know seems to be getting a bit  
more press these days, although  
ironically, the only adoptees who seem  
to get information inexpensively and  
quickly are those with life-threatening  
diseases. Recently the media has  
spotlighted two cases of adoptees who  
received court orders to gain access  
to their adoption records to reach  
biological kin for organ transplants.  
And interestingly, my correspondent  
in California tells me that the many  
adoption organizations that support  
and encourage searches consist pri-  
marily of women.

With a feminist perspective, we  
adoptees can better understand all  
the pressures of this patriarchal  
society on women - including our  
mothers - to give up children for  
adoption. If we can understand how  
our mothers were punished for their  
sexuality, we may feel empathy for  
them rather than resentment that  
they could not care for us. This  
awareness enabled me, for the first  
time, to conceptualize my birth  
mother, to actually think of her as  
a person and a woman, rather than some  
amorphous being who somehow gave  
birth to me and then vanished. It  
also helped me to respect the maturity  
and inner strength she must have had  
to consider my needs above her own  

mother,  

at such a stressful time in her own life.

Open adoption is a concept whose  
time has come.  
There should be some communication  

between birth mother and adoptive parents  

depending on their needs, their comfort  
with one another and their proximity.  
The amount of communication varies from  
situation to situation. In To Love And  
Let Go,  
several birth mothers who take active  
roles in their babies' adoptions,  

each of which were arranged with the  
aid of a private lawyer. Such mothers  
not only participate in choosing the  
adoptive parents, they may also meet  
them before the birth. In some cases,  
the adoptive parent(s) may even sup-  
port the birth mother during labor  

and then witness the baby's birth.

Years ago, infants were whisked  
away immediately after birth, supposed-  
ly to spare the woman the pain of sep-  
aration (and because so many women  
were heavily drugged before delivery,  
this was easy to do.) However, open  
adoption also allows the birth mother  
to spend whatever time she needs, be  
it hours or days, with the baby, to  
hold, gaze at, to love, perhaps to  
breastfeed, and also to begin the  
grieving process that will occur when  
the baby is gone.

Open adoption permits communication  
between the birth mother and adoptive  
parents regarding the child long after  
the adoption is finalized. Of course,  
an agreement based on mutual needs  
must be carefully worked out. And in  
this system, the birth mother is treat-  
ed with dignity. Rather than being  
viewed as a social outcast who has no  
say in her child's future, her judge-  
ment is respected and her choices are  
integral to the adoption process.

Finally, a terrible irony exists  
today. While many childless couples  
wait years to adopt the infant of their  
choice, the abortion rate increases  
all the time. Certainly, many girls  
and women opt for abortion because it  
minimally disrupts their lives. Al-  
though abortion undoubtedly carries  
with it much emotional pain, it is  
quick and, if done early enough, both  
the pregnancy and the abortion can  

COMMON GROUND MAY 1985

remain hidden.

But what about some girls and women  
who waver about the abortion decision,  
and who might be able to carry their  
unwanted pregnancy to term? Perhaps  
if open adoption was a more viable  
alternative, perhaps if these women  
wouldn't have to kiss their babies  
good-bye forever, perhaps if they  
could meet and talk to the adoptive  
parents beforehand, perhaps if they  
could periodically receive information  
and even a photo of their child,  
perhaps if they could someday meet  
that child after their own lives have  
been stabilized, just perhaps the  
staggering abortion rate could decrease  
a bit. Open adoption, therefore,  
should be mentioned by pregnancy,  
adoption and even abortion counselors.

Feminists need to support adoption  
reform; relaxing the oppressive adopt-  
ion laws of the past can only ease the  
pain for all parties involved. Every  
time another month goes by, every  
time I spend more money on my search,  
every time I try to imagine what my  
own birth mother is like, I know  
that there must be a better way.  
Realizing the connections between  
feminism and adoption has at least  
impelled me to more actively pursue  
my search for this woman who was no  
doubt stigmatized and traumatized  
by our patriarchal society.

Yet,  

- Janine Baer, whose ad appears  
at the beginning of this column,  
would like to be a resource for  
feminists in adoption. If you have  
a story to share, write to her at 1430  
Josephine Street Apt. 0-3, Berkeley  
California 94703.

Suggested Reading:  
To Love And Let Go by Suzanne Arms  
(author of Immaculate Deception)

Lost and Found by Betty Jean  
Lifton  
Death and Adoption by Joss Shawyer  
(available from Concerned United  
Birthparents, 595 Central Ave.,  
Dover, New Hampshire 03820)

BUFFALO ADOPTION LIFELINE

There is an organization in Buffalo  
that combines the interests of adult  
adoptees, birthparents and adoptive  
parents in mutually beneficial support  
services. Buffalo Adoption Lifeline  
provides greater adoption awareness  
for all involved in the process.

Search techniques are provided for  
those who request them, and this  
group also provides information and  
support to help adoptive parents  
understand the needs of adoptees.  
Various aspects of reunions are also  
discussed and shared at their meetings.

B.A.L. is also involved in lobby-  
ing for legislative change and in  
researching new policies in adoptions.  
For instance, its members are concern-  
ed about the new Adoption Registry  
of the New York State Health Depart-  
ment, which gives only select bits  
of information to adoptees and which  
discriminates against them $75.00 for  
the meager information, while charging  
only $20.00 for adoptive and birth  
parents.

For more information, write:  
Buffalo Adoption Lifeline, P.O. Box  
318, Buffalo, New York 14207 or call  
Joan Wheeler, 873-9168, or Kathi  
Freundenheim, 882-6232. The next  
meeting of B.A.L. will be May 22,  
at Buffalo State College, Bacon Hall,  
room 116-East.

-by Sharon Green from B.A.L. info  
sheet.

From a Laborer’s View:

Laborers Are  
Always Ladies

By Margaret Snell

In the language of the bosses, the  
more demeaning the job, the more often  
the person holding it (if female, of  
course!) is likely to be referred to  
as a ‘lady'!

Thus "cleaning lady" is far more  
common than "cleaning woman,"  
“saleslady” is more common than  
"saleswoman," and we are all familiar  
with the most degrading reference of  
all, “ladies of the evening," as a  
euphemism for prostitute.

However, one always says "woman  
doctor"; to say "lady" doctor is  
to be condescending; it would consti-  
tute an insult.

For men, however, there is no  
such dichotomy. Garbageman or sales-  
man is the only possibility and never  
garbage gentleman or salesgentleman.  
Of course, unless one prefixes “woman”  
before doctor, professor or engineer,  
it is naturally assumed that doctors,  
professors or engineers are men. It  
is the same in the factory; all au-  
thority and decision making is in  
the hands of men, and when addressing  
the female labor force, managers in-  
variably refer to them as "ladies!"  
What is so appalling about the con-  
temptuous treatment afforded women  
laborers both in speech and deed is  
not the actual physical abuse, as  
horrendous as it is, but the psycho-  
logical acceptance of the abuse by  
female laborers. This shows a damage  

to the image of self-worth in work-  
ing class women that in many ways is  
catastrophic.

The contradiction in being sarcas-  
tically referred to as a "lady" and  
being worked to exhaustion by an unre-  
lenting and inhuman speed-up is a  
calculated violent assault upon the  
female laborer's self-image, and  
upon her physical well-being. It  
also shows an insensitivity and stu-  
pidity in management that must be  

observed to be believed. Presently,  
working class women are a docile and  
obedient labor force, yet management  
is polarizing them by allowing middle  
managers to institute a killing  
“speed-up” that is neither productive  
nor lasting. To have a corporate  
manager display ostentatious "chiv-  
alry" by opening the cafeteria door,  
removing his hat, and standing aside  
to let the woman laborer enter first  
is the height of contempt, when one  
realizes that these same "gentlemen"  
of the corporate structure let the  
“Ladies” work in unsafe conditions  
on defective machinery, using chemi-  
cals of dubious health hazards. The  
term lady is ambiguous, to say the  
least! The women of their own class  
they call Madame. They never call  
laborers Madame. Why? Why do female  
laborers acquiesce to such treatment?

Simple, to survive! One day,  
however, they will not only call us  
Madame, but they will recognize our  
humanity.