CONTENTS

When She Was Six, The Russians Came  
2 Contents, Policy, Distribution  
The Collective Meets  
What's Cooking  
3 From Russia With...  
4 Those Who Suffer the Most  
Poetry  
5 Matrilineage: A Personal History  
6 The Expatriate  

POLICY  

PHILOSOPHY — Common Ground is potentially, with  
help from Western New York women, a forum to  
celebrate the rich diversity of our community. We view  
the paper as a ribbon that may connect our  
commonalities, our intersection points. We are inviting  

you to participate actively in the building of a support  
system for WNY women. We affirm our commitment to  
enhance the lives of women on physical, educational,  

spiritual, psychological, social and economic levels. We  
want to present, fair-mindedly, the issues that concern  
women, and information of value to women. We offer  
Common Ground as a place where women can display  
their art and personal literature, and review the  
tapestries of their experiences.  

EDITORIAL POLICY — Common Ground is especially  
looking for articles which address the needs and  
interests of local women.  

1. Common Ground is a publication of news, culture  
and dialogue from women’s perspectives.  

2. News, Opinion, Analysis and Commentary will each  
be clearly labeled as such.  

3. We are seeking to provide accurate, straightforward  
information of value to women.  

4. The collective will not intentionally print or support  
materials or viewpoints which will harm women  
because of color, sexuality, religious or ethnic  
background, physical disability or economic situation.  

5. While opinions expressed in Common Ground are  
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the  
collective as a whole, we do accept responsibility for  
choosing what we print.  

SUBMISSIONS — We welcome articles, letters,  
information and announcements of interest to women.  
Graphics, cartoons, art and photography will be  
gratefully received. We especially invite women who  
do not usually have access to traditional media —  
women of color, differently abled, economically or  
educationally disadvantaged, and those for whom  
English is a second language — to write. Suggested  
length of letters: 250 words. Letters must be signed to  
be printed. We will, however, respect your privacy and  
withhold your name if you request. Suggested length of  
articles, commentary, analysis: 500-750 words. Please  
type and double space your work, 40 characters across.  
If you do not have access to a typewriter, please print  
clearly. In time we hope to have a typewriter, paper,  
etc., available for those who request it. Include a  
stamped, self-addressed envelope and work and home  
phone numbers. Because we want to hear your voices,  
if your piece needs to be edited for length or clarity, we  
will call you/ask you to do it. Keep copies of your work.  
We will try to notify you within three (3) weeks if we  
intend to use your work. If we print it, we will give you  
five (5) copies of the issue in which it appears. Artwork  
should be black and white copies only, and  
title/describe your work. We will copyright the entire  
issue, but the copyright on each piece reverts to the  
author/artist, that she may decide where her work is  
printed. Please request a style sheet for further  
information and guidelines if you want to write.  

COMMON GROUND  
Women’s Studies Academy  
Rockwell Hall  
Buffalo State College  
1300 Elmwood Avenue  
Buffalo, New York 14222  
(716) 688-7831 (9 a.m.-7 p.m.)  

© 1982 WNY Women’s Newsjournal  

Money is always an issue in small  
presses, and is still so for us—we  
continue to squeeze by "in the black",  
but much of the meeting was spent in  
brainstorming ideas for fundraising  
and encouragement of advertising and  
subscriptions. CG is a unique group  
of women, and a unique publication  
for the women's community. We ask  
your support as we continue our at-  
tempts to serve you.  

WRITE FOR US...TELL US YOUR STORY...  
REVIEW BOOKS,...NEWS,...EDUCATE OTHERS...  

Our subscribers will find in their  
newsjournal this month an added bonus!  
As a further extension of our attempt  
to provide you with additional re-  
sources on various topics, we were  
able to obtain, through the courtesy  
of the National Women's History Week  
Project, a limited quantity of their  
Resource Catalogs. National Women's  
History Week is March 6-12 (as ob-  
served by over half the states) and  
we encourage you to use the resources  
and information in this catalog to  
further promote this concept.  

Common Ground is looking for material  
for upcoming issues and we want to  
invite you and your friends to write.  
We are looking for informative  
articles and personal points of view.  
No specific ideas? Let us know, we  
might have something for you.  

For the May issue (deadline April 1):  
OLDER WOMEN.  

For the June issue (deadline May 1):  
SELF PROTECTION.  

For the July issue (deadline June 1):  
WOMEN IN BUSINESS.  

For the September issue (deadline Aug 1):  
also our first anniversary  
EDUCATION.  

For the October issue (deadline Sept 1):  
VOLUNTEERISM/POLITICAL ANALYSIS.  

Joyce Kessel is assistant professor  
of English at Villa Maria College  
where she teaches writing. Our  
apologies for twice omitting her  
bio in Jan. and Feb. Her poem  
appeared in the Jan. issue of CG.  

The above are suggested topics for  
you to use your imagination on. You may  
of course send us anything at any time,  
regardless of a supposed "theme" for  
an issue. You have a perspective,  
whether personal or professional which  
we encourage you to apply to the topics.  
Please carefully read our policy re-  
garding submissions on p. 2, and send  
a self-addressed stamped envelope to  
us for a style sheet, to avoid dis-  
appointment in having your work con-  
sidered.  

DISTRIBUTION: EMMA, Marrakesh,  
Talking Leaves, The Book Revue,  
Southtown's Women's Resource Center,  
Langston Hughes Boutique, North Area  
YWCA, Hertel News, Latin Gallery,  
SUCB Bookstore, UB Amherst Campus,  
Women's Studies College Winspear  
House, Everything in Fabrics, WNY  
Peace Center, Planned Parenthood  
Niagara County, Aquarian Bookstore,  
Screen Sister, The Printed Page  
Bookstore, The Buffalo Bookstore  
Womanfocus 43 Court St. Suite 200)  

Roswell Park News Stand  
PAGE 2 COMMON GROUND MARCH 1983  

WOMEN WHO WORKED ON THIS ISSUE  
Diane, Laura, Sue, Esther, Bonnie,  
Heather, Maria, Beth, Chris, Gerri,  
Linda, Sarah, Karen P., Karen K.,  
Barb, Marilyn, Holly, Cathy, Donna,  
Roberta, Lisa, Julie, Joan, Sharon,  
Shukriyyah, Peggy, Frigid, Bridget,  
Mouse, Diane, Cherin and  

Wanda Wyneau.  

—_—  
—eeeeeeeeeaee_ll_Oll ee