and other parts of New York. All  
kinds of tee-shirts were visible  
from pro-Sandinista to anti-nuke to  
save the environment. Somehow they  

all seemed tied together: scratch  
a peacemaker and you usually find  
someone who loves the earth enough  
to save the whales, clean up the air  
and water, feed the Ethiopians, pro-  
tect Nicaraguans from an onslaught  
by the U.S. Marines, and free South  
Africa. There's an amazing freedom  
here to talk about all of our causes  
without fear of inciting the wrath of  
an unsympathetic eavesdropper. (An  
aside: When I saw Joan Baez in con-  
cert a few weeks ago at Art Park she  

talked about the new cohesiveness  

she had felt among various groups  

Maybe I'm engaging in wishful think-  
ing but I'm beginning to notice it  
too and the conversations at this  
reception reinforced my awareness  

of the phenomenon.)  

6:45 p.m.: We went for dinner at  
our New York State host church, All  
Souls Unitarian. We were getting  
"starry-eyed," a sure sign of massive  
fatigue, but still we were getting  
snippets of "The grape boycott is on  
again" and "Is there a WAND chapter  
in Rochester?" Wow—people like us  
are really out there!  

10 a.m., Sunday, August 4th: The day  
was perfect—sunny with a balmy  

breeze and luckily minus the infamous  
heat of August days in Washington.  

We arrived by bus at the Pentagon  
staging area and all of us clambered  
out to have our pictures taken hold-  
ing part of the Buffalo Ribbon which  
had been carried down with us. We  
bought Ribbon Buttons on the walk  
over to the march start. Tee-shirts,  
postcards and posters were also being  
sold but not "hawked" in a shrill,  
pushy way. They were offered in an  
almost shy fashion. I couldn't help  
but feel more comfortable with the  
atmosphere that such a seemingly  
small thing helped to establish.  

In the midst of the staging area  
were tables loaded with Ribbon pieces  
from which we could choose. The  
pieces were arranged by their state  
of origin (the states were divided  
up according to the wrapping area  
they'd been assigned previously by  
the Ribbon organizers; New York was  
one of the states, plus Canada,  
which had been assigned to the Pen-  
tagon). I chose two pieces to carry  
for the day, one of a vase of flowers  
appliquéd by a woman from White  
Plains (names and addresses of the  
creators of the pieces were on the  
backs of most pieces) and the other  
an outdoor scene with a lovely poem  
drawn by a group of young people  
from Great Neck, L.I. Michele and I  
took pictures of each other holding  
our chosen Ribbon pieces and plan to  
write to the people who had made  
them.  

We stepped into the line of march-  
ers and were directed on our way by  
yellow-shirted volunteer peacekeepers  
who, because of the 15-mile line of  
people, communicated with each other  
via walkie-talkie. We chatted with  

-COMMON GROUND  

SEPTEMBER 1985  

others in line—Lou from Vermont,  

who was a Vietnam War draft resis-  
ter and continued to work for peace;  
a young woman who attended the School  
of Human Ecology at Cornell; a young  
family carrying their sleeping baby  
in a back-carrier.  

We ended up standing to the  
side of the Pentagon along the  
way on the way to the Memorial Bridge  
over the Potomac. It was here that  
the most heartening part of the march  
took place. Drivers went by us honk-  
ing their horns, shouting greetings,  
waving and giving us the peace sign  
(I hadn't seen that in years). We  
knew then that what we were doing  
had support and encouragement from  
at least some segment of the popula-  
tion.  

Finally, and somewhat anti-climactic-  
ally, we saw the balloons, an enor-  
mous bunch of balloons used to sig-  
nal the Ribbon's completion, go up  
and we knew that our tie-up of the  
Pentagon, Lincoln Memorial, Ellipse  
and Capitol was complete. Back at  
the staging area, Justine Merritt  
had just tied the last piece onto  
the Ribbon to connect us all into a  
15-mile line for peace.  

On the way home: We sang a lot—  

old Freedom Rider songs, mostly,  
plus the special Ribbon song written  
for this event. That was one thing  
I had missed on the march was the  
lack of singing. We were simply too  
stretched out and too involved with  
holding the Ribbon and greeting  
passing motorists to concentrate on  
anything else.  

It was quite an honor to have  
been a part of the Ribbon Wrap and  
I look back on it as a beginning of  
a more intense effort by Americans  
of every stripe to work for a nuclear  
freeze/disarmament. We learned in  
Washington about the PRO Peace march  
slated for next spring and summer  
in which people will walk from LA  
to Washington for peace. Organizers  
of the walk are hoping for hundreds  
of thousands of people to join them  
for the last 15 miles into D.C. We  

also learned about the comprehensive  
Nuclear Weapons Freeze and Arms  
Reduction Act of 1985 (HR 3100) about  
which we were urged to contact our  
Congresspeople. I got the strong  
impression that things are "heating  
up" in peace efforts nationwide.  

May they continue: For, as one  
tee-shirt ominously proclaimed,  
"When you've seen one nuclear war,  
you've seen them all."  

What you can do to work for nuclear  
freeze/disarmament:  

1. Contact the Western New York  
Peace Center, 472 Emslie St.,  

Buffalo 14212, and see what you can  
do to help.  

2. Join WAND, Women's Action for  
Nuclear Disarmament; Women's Inter-  
national League for Peace and Free-  
dom or any of the dozens of peace  
groups in the nation whose primary  
goal is a nuclear freeze/disarmament.  
Many of these groups derive from  
certain professions (Physicians for  
Social Responsibility, Artists for  
Nuclear Disarmament, Musicians Against  
Nuclear Arms, Lawyers for Nuclear  
Arms Control, Writers for Peace, etc.)  
or religious groups (Peace Fellow-  
ship groups abound in most religious  
sects), or other more eclectic or-  
ganizations (Another Mother for Peace,  
Veterans for Peace, SANE: Committee  
for a Sane Nuclear Policy). For the  
addresses and other information about  
peace/anti-nuclear societies, con-  
sult the ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASSOCIATIONS  
published by Gale Research Company.  
This resource is available at most  
public and academic libraries in  
Western New York. There are many  
ways you can help these groups from  
financial support to authoring the  
use of your name as an endorsement,  
to attending rallies and meetings.  

3. Write to your congressional re-  
presentative and/or the BUFFALO NEWS  
(or even COMMON GROUND!) and tell  
them of your concerns for peace.  

4. Talk to your family, friends  

and co-workers about freeze issues  
and study these issues. Area li-  
braries and bookstores are chock  

full of books and magazines with  
nuclear freeze information.