IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

OSIANRA SET ARM RTA LE I MONRO ULE TOE ATE

PAGE 14 COMMON GROUND

Feminist Writing Workshop:  
A Personal Impression

by Joan Dickenson

Hannah, a runner who has twice completed the Boston Marathon, speaks of being raped. The shock, the pain, the powerlessness, the helplessness. The shattering knowledge that it could easily happen again.

She stops. Perched on a chair-arm in her dorm room, down the hall from mine, I look at her. I'd like to help, to reassure, to tell her I was raped too and survived. I start to speak, but what comes out is something quite different, something my body has known for 20 years but my mind has always denied. I say:

It was the same for me.

I never thought the rape damaged me, I say. I took it in stride, proud of my resilience. But now I remember the moment when he came up behind me, on that dark city block at three in the morning, when he'd walked an arm's length behind me for a block and a half, and there was no one else around and I knew I could do nothing, knew it—in my blood and guts and my passive woman's bones, knew he could do anything he wished, knew that only his restraint, his choice could save me.

I stop speaking, suddenly realizing that this vivid retelling may be painful for Hannah. I look in her eyes and see pain, yes, but also compassion and a recognition that despite our differences, we share something basic, something to do with our experience as women.

I smile. I say to her, "I'm going to write about it!" Then I get up. "But right now, I'm starved. Wanna go eat?"

For me, this kind of one-to-one exchange is the heart of the Feminist Women's Writing Workshops.

Susanna J. Sturgis, one of the assistants at the Feminist Women's Writing Workshops, gets her morning reading done on the dock before the On Salad bar and pecan pie.

SEPTEMBER 1986

Of course there are other wonders. I love the group critique process, which has never failed to show me where my work strays and, more important, how I can make it right. I also get a lot of satisfaction out of reading another woman's work, seeing what she couldn't see—it's so hard to get distance from one's own work!—and suggesting how she can get it to do what she wants it to do.

A college dropout, I love spending ten days in a women-only dorm, visiting between rooms in my nightgown, hearing a burst of women's laughter and homing in on the sound. I love entertaining at 1 a.m., dropping off to sleep to the sound of laughter on the terrace outside my window, waking to the click of typewriter keys. I love watching an idea take root in another writer's mind, maybe from something I said, and then seeing her go to her room, close the door, and emerge three hours later with a poem. I love eating dorm food—food that I don't have to cook—at the long table in Wells College's medieval dining room...the conversations, arguments, and bursts of laughter that erupt while we gorge ourselves.

The workshops are built around the morning classes, which meet in the college boathouse, out over Lake Cayuga, with the water lapping around the pilings—or on windy days, smashing into the boards and tossing gouts of spray into the air. If it’s my day to be critiqued, everyone already has copies of my work; I set 21 copies, one for each writer, on the hall table the day before. By the morning class, everyone has read it and marked it up with snags, good points, and questions.

Now everyone's in her chair around the circle. Katharyn Machan Aal, the director, asks who wants to start. Pat raises a pencil.

"I really like this poem," she says, "but I want to know more about the well image. What does it represent?"

"Oh, I like someone else. I took it to mean madness, but I don't know exactly."

And they're off. During my 60-minute critique, I, the writer, must sit silent. A device used throughout the workshop's ten-year history, this pretense that the author is not here works beautifully. It relieves me of the obligation to defend or explain my work, and it lets me really hear what is being said. Instead of answering Pat's question—"The well image represents X"—I note it down and listen to other writers grappling with what the image says to them.

It's Shirley's turn. She starts haltingly. “I read this over and over," she says. "I kept trying to decide what was bothering me... I kept wanting the author to choose a focus. Then it hit me"—she looks around the room: "This poem is about handing a son over to the male culture.”

Sudden tears sting my eyes. Shirley's right. The poem, which follows my thoughts as I cheer for my 12-year-old son at a little league game, astonished at my metamorphosis from 1960s hippie and radical to rural Little League Mom, is about my horror at turning my son over to the patriarchy... and also, I guess, about my need to see something good in the male world where he's going.

But I never saw that before.

Of course there are hassles, disagreements, problems. In a group of 21 women, working intimately with very intense, personal material, it would be astonishing if there weren't. But the workshop is structured to deal with friction. At the first-night orientation, the midway meeting, and re-entry the last night, we go counterclockwise around the circle in traditional feminist fashion, each woman speaking her mind. And everyone listens... Each woman knows that the attention she gets is as respectful as the attention every other woman gets. No one's words weigh more than another's.

At the end of the ten days, it's a wrench to leave. But everyone else is leaving too, so I know that the safe space we've created will continue to exist as long as we keep it in our hearts.

For more information, write Feminist Women's Writing Workshops, Katharyn Machan Aal, P.O. Box 456, Ithaca, N.Y. 14851.

*not her real name