from page 4  
DOWNTOWN RALLY  

Yet as those cameramen—yes, they  
were all male—kept muttering to Kate,  
Marilyn, me and two female reporters  
from a Western New York Catholic pub-  
lication, "Will you guys stand still  
so our cameras don't vibrate?" and  
"Move over, you guys!", it was all I  
could do to keep from responding, "We  
are women, not guys, just like that  
Speaker up there!"  

Well, the bulk of Geraldine Ferraro's  
20 minute speech was a response to many  
of Ronald Reagan's words and actions.  
One of her first comments was similar  
to that of Rep. LaFalce mentioned above,  
that is, that when Reagan wanted to  
slash funding for such projects as  
senior citizen housing, it was the  
largely Democratic Congress which  
didn't allow him to cut such "vital"  
funds.  

(To add to this point, the woman  
I interviewed afterward also pointed  
out to me that Reagan's administration  
has raised shelter costs for senior  
citizens from 25% to 30%, a jump which  
she considers quite substantial. Shel-  
ter costs refer to the amount of a  
senior citizen's monthly income that  
is paid for rent and utilities in  
such housing complexes.)  

Ferraro also compared Reagan to  
her own running mate, Walter Mondale,  
as she said, "While Ronald Reagan was  
making movies, Fritz Mondale was  
making history as a champion of civil  
rights and social justice. While  
Ronald Reagan was hosting 'Death  
Valley Days,' Fritz Mondale was trying  
to get Social Security for senior  
citizens. While Ronald Reagan is  
stuck in the past, Fritz Mondale has  
goals for the American future."  

Of these goals, the one she empha-  
sized most was peace. In doing so,  
she appealed to the women in the  
crowd when she expressed concern and  
even fear for her own son John, as  
well as the sons and grandsons of  
others, should a continued Reagan ad-  
ministration involve us in future wars  
or conflicts. And she hinted at the  
strong likelihood of such an event.  

She also lashed out at Reagan when  
she announced, "There's no substitute  
for leveling with the American people  
—You don't need a president who  
ducks the tough issues." In addition,  
she struck out at Reagan's appeal to  
the patriotism of Americans by stating,  
“American people don't buy the self-  
conscious patriotism made on Madison  
Avenue."  

She made still other appeals to  
the many women in the audience. She  
mentioned how her widowed mother, who  
worked as a garment worker (how many  
mothers do we all know who do two  
jobs, but get pay and recognition for  
only one?), inspired her to work hard  
to get ahead. Then she spoke of how  
she worked as a teacher in New York  
City and attended law school at night  
(although she neglected to mention  
that she also cared for three children)  
in order to “get ahead."  

Also, she indirectly referred to  
women when she stated, "Old barriers  
are coming down and new doors are  
opening up," and directly to women  
by stating, "Women are entering the  
workforce in unprecedented numbers,  
and I know of one woman who plans to  
enter a new job on January 20!" Fin-  
ally, she reminded us that the ERA  
and the enforcement of Civil Rights  

Laws should be a priority. Needless  

from page 4  

CDE  

CloewJSD  

oe!  

IT IT'S FRIDAY, IT MUST BE FERRARO  

CRY! CRY!  

Finally, the last contingent moves  

into the street and I see a few Blacks,  
very few. As I'm shouting, holding  

my protest sign, a Black woman catches  
my eye, smiles and winks. I wonder  

who she is and why she's with the Reagan  
crowd.  

5:02 p.m. Ferraro arrives. The crowd  
is wild with applause and shouting,  

"Gerry! Gerry! Gerry!" She begins her  
speech: Mondale's plan to cut the fed-  
eral deficit—where is Reagan's plan?  
Notes Reagan's dedication of Santa Maria  
Towers and his efforts to slash section  
202 Housing money. If Congress hadn't  
stopped him there'd be no Santa Maria  
Towers. She notes that we cannot ex-  
clude women from politics or minorities  
from voting; "More women are working,  
and I plan to enter a new job in Jan-  
uary." A brief history of Mondale and  
Reagan: “While Reagan was making movies,  
Mondale was making history as a champ-  
ion of civil rights and social justice;  
while Reagan was hosting 'Death Valley  
Days,' Mondale was working for Medicare;  
Reagan jokes about bombing, Mondale  
is working to control the arms race..."  
She calls for leaders who will level  
with Americans. Reviews her own life:  
teaching, law school at night, work-  
ing hard, taking advantage of oppor-  
tunity.  

of finding jobs for Buffalo's unemploy-  
ed steel workers, supplying teachers  
with tools to educate our children,  
fully enforcing civil rights and making  
the E.R.A. part of the Constitution.  
"Put people to work, enforce the  
laws, protect the environment. [These  
are] the best way to respect our flag."  
The time to register voters is now!;  
to control arms is now!; to secure  
the future—now!; to elect Fritz Mon-  
dale, President, and Geraldine Ferraro,  
Vice President—now!  

It's over.  
up, people leaving. We drive toward  
the airport. There are State Police  
cars waiting at each entrance ramp to  
control traffic as the Ferraro motor-  
cade will go this way shortly. A small  
group of women and a few children are  
picketing at the Executive Inn with  
anti-abortion, anti-Ferraro signs.  

(on Wednesday; Reagan's entourage is—  
gone from Fargo. We leave the parking  
lot and find a large anti-Reagan demon-  
stration on Prospect—more along  
Porter. These are people who had no  
tickets to get closer. The signs  
address issues of human rights, justice  
and rights of women, handicapped,  
minorities of color, peace and mili-  
tary spending...)  

SUNDAY, SEPT. 16. Trying to put  

the pieces together. Was the security  
difference merely that of an incumbent  
president vs a candidate for vice  
president—or does it represent  
something more basic? Reagan spoke  
sentimental platitudes of Buffalo the  
ethnic melting pot, generous and caring  
for our older residents, while Ferraro  
spoke of issues, national and inter-  
national.  

Ferraro, obviously had used this  
one before, inserting appropriate  

lines for the city she's in. The net-  
work media people knew the speech well.  

The media crews are packing  

She calls for "quiet patriotism."  

Both were lightweight speeches—  

Perhaps we forget both are politicians  

on the campaign trail to get votes.  
Most campaign speeches won't be new  
and earth shattering. A speech isn't  
a press conference; the audience and  
media don't raise questions and get  
answers. What did I experience this  
week? I heard an old actor who has  
been playing president try out for the  
role again, and I heard a feisty can-  
didate for vice president who happens  
to be the first woman nominated by a  
major party for such high office. As  
one protest sign I saw Wednesday said,  

"A Woman Justice Is Not Justice For  
Women."  

Marilyn Bell PhD, is an artist, author,  

and professor of Sociology at D'Youville  

College.  

PAGE 4 COMMON GROUND OCTOBER 1984