Pi

{|

The Expatriate

By Ruth Geller

Being the granddaughter of immigrants, I had often wondered about the experience of starting life in a foreign country. I imagined that the most difficult thing would be the sense of physical displacement one might experience: not knowing the geography of the area, and living, as it were, on foreign soil. When I was in my mid-twenties, I had occasion to test my theory, for I lived a year in Italy. And what I found the most disturbing about being a foreigner was not the sense of physical displacement, but the loss of my language, and because of this, the temporary loss of an important part of myself.

When I stepped off the train in Milan, I knew two words of Italian: "pizza" and "ciao." The way I learned the language was dictated simply by my physical needs and material necessities: finding the ladies' room, getting something to eat, finding a place to stay. In the weeks and months that followed, I informally studied Italian from a grammar book, and more important, avoided all English-speaking people. I'd heard that the best way to learn a language was to immerse oneself in it, being forced to speak it on a day-to-day basis. As it turned out, I soon put aside the grammar book, because the people with whom I most associated were Napolitanos with little or no formal education; and the contrast between their way of speaking and my grammar book was too great a distance.

Italy is a relatively young country; it has been unified just over a hundred years ago. The various dialects—Calabrese, Siciliano, Napolitano, Bolognese—are virtually separate languages. Italian itself is spoken uniformly by the middle class and the media, and there is great distrust between regional people from one area to another.

Later in my stay, when I spoke my Italian with the more educated people I knew, the Northerners, they laughed at what I suppose must have been a curious mixture of Italian and Napolitano.

But what I began to realize in Italy, after I learned Italian well enough so that I began to think and write in it, was that I felt a strange loneliness not due merely to being physically separated from those who knew me well; not due merely to being on foreign soil, but a loneliness rooted in the fact that I'd lost my native language, my mother tongue. I realized that for months I had not been able to express what I really felt, not because I had no one to express myself to, but because of the actual vehicle of expression. I talked—when I talked in English and was relaxed and myself—in a somewhat loud exaggerated manner with a whole range of accompanying facial expressions and physical gestures; my utterances sometimes sprinkled with profanity and laughter; intonated with Jewish accents, tinged by the broad Albany "a," all softened, but not destroyed, by a state university education. That was the way I talked. In English. In Italy, always speaking Italian, I'd lost something I hadn't even known was mine.

I understood all of this one night towards the end of my stay. I was alone, waiting for a train in a small village outside of Napoli. The train station was a one-room building that also served as a café of sorts, and in it I found a juke box. With nothing else to do, I read the song titles, and found—to my surprise—a recording of Bill Haley and the Comets singing “Rock Around the Clock." Now Bill Haley was never a favorite of mine, either in the 50's, or at the time I found his record in Italy. I always thought that little curl in the middle of his forehead pretty damned ridiculous. But for a lark, I put a coin in the machine, pushed a few buttons, sat down to listen, and to my astonishment...began to cry. I was hearing English. Not my English, not the way I would have spoken it, but English nonetheless, and it reminded me of what I'd left behind.

I realized I had had unconscious attitudes about the way "foreigners" in America clung together. I'd felt, brave and independent as I was in my early twenties, that if I had immigrated to America when my grandparents had arrived, I would have tried to strike out on my own so as to assimilate more quickly into the mainstream culture. But in that small Italian village, in the café beside the railroad tracks, I understood that in assimilation, to whatever the mainstream may be, one loses one's language, one's history, and one's self. And I decided that perhaps it was better to be alienated from the country in which you live than to be a stranger to yourself.

Ruth Geller is the author of Seed Of A Woman and Pictures from the Past, both distributed by Crossing Press. She was a contributor to Persephone Press' Nice Jewish Girls [all available at EMMA, the Buffalo Women's Bookstore], and is just completing her second novel, Triangles.

- ee ee ew

‘e
‘¥
PyNTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S DAY
‘*
*
*
‘«
‘®
‘5
#
*
#
a
Py
e
e

PAGE 6 COMMONGROUND MARCH 1983:

THE BUFFALO WOMEN'S LIBERATION UNION Celebrates

+

*.

*

WITH A NEW ENGLAND STYLE

CONTRA AND SQUARE DANCE
SAT. MARCH 5™

7:30-1:30 p.m. at the LAFAYETTE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH
875 Elmwood Avenue, Buffalo ----With CEIDLEN BELLER CALLING
and the WILDWOOD FLOWER STRING BAND $3.00 at the door

Children under 12-free --childcare available -- cider, cake, baked goods etc.

9 — ee ee

“English,

tion of the traditional female roles. Which brings me to the last point. As a student and then a professor of English, I developed a happy facility in verbal and literal communication in English; as a feminist, I learned to share my emotions, especially with the two women closest to me. Through letters in English, my mother and I now discuss the past and share the present in the intimate and sometimes conspiratorial manner of allies and dear friends. My communication with my grandmother, always so loving, is unfortunately closed, of course. Yet even when she was alive, language considerations had presented a great problem. I used to write to her in Marathi, the language I used with her and my mother, although they both spoke Konkani, their mother tongue. My brothers and I grew up speaking the language of the state we were born in and not the language my parents spoke, a complicated situation, you will agree, especially when all three children had to speak English in school and Hindi (the national language) with taxi-drivers and the like. To come back to the subject, in the last few years my Marathi has deteriorated execrably—I now spell and write like a seven-year-old—a marginally literate one at that; my mother, herself educated in both Marathi and English, is therefore appalled at my childish scrawl and terrible spelling, and used to be horribly ashamed to read my letters out to my grandmother. (Ajibai was not illiterate; in my childhood I have seen her read prayer books and newspapers. Age alone deterred her from reading and writing in her final decade.) Mother's displeasure heightened my anxiety but did not stop my letters to my grandmother. Ajibai, I knew, would only hear the love between her and me, and cared too much to write.

Mother was less forgiving. Only after a fierce intercontinental epistolary battle did she finally accept that a) I had very little instruction in Marathi in school, in the first place, b) our maids and servants spoke in dialects (she, my father, and the cook spoke Konkani, so where was I to hear pure spoken Marathi?) and c) barring my four visits home, I have been almost totally out of touch with both spoken and written Marathi for the last thirteen years. At last, all seems forgiven—except that mother is now determined to send me Marathi primers so I can make a fresh start. Ninety-five, sixty, thirty-two—the last child-daughter of the last child-daughter—with three languages among us, three generations, two continents, two mothers, one (paid) career, and a love that transcends separation by time, distance, and now, states of being. Singlehandedly rearing her children as an adult, my grandmother was not very different from me, although I educate a breed and race of youngsters not my own. The umbilical cord binding us, so naturally connected through my own mother, will never be cut; our matrilinear connection, I am quite certain, will come full circle when my mother's prayers eventually catapult all three of us (as well as all the Kasbekars and Nadkarnis) directly into a state of Brahman—or into the lap of the Mother Goddess—whichever ultimately exists.

*"Ajibai" means "grandmother" in Marathi; "Chichi" was a nickname my mother, Vimal, received as a child and it's stuck ever since.

————————————————————————
Continued from page 5