A Glimpse of Celina By Kathleen A. Magill

(In memory of Celina-Cecelia-Yvonne Skorecka-Herman R.N., B.S., who practiced
professional nursing at Montefiore Hospital, New York City and later died
there on Wednesday, October 20, 1982)

Celina, you're Poland's pride, Hitler's shame; America's find.
Those years in Europe were to forever shape your heart and mind.

That Jewish child you sheltered and claimed was Christian and your own,
Her mother told me she's alive, free, a scholar; now full grown.

Remember how the Nazis shot that man dead in front of you?
You that stood before that soldier's gun not knowing what to do.

They captured you; put you in a Polish concentration camp.
It was a place for female Christians: crowded, dirty and damp;

With hunger, sleeping on the floor, endless rules; a spying guard.
Although it emptied your life of joy, you never became hard.

In that annex to hell you begged God to just let you survive,
And promised to repay Him if He kept you sane and alive.

Some say you were also in the French resistance. Is that true,
That your courage and compassion saved many a desperate Jew?

When liberation came your beloved family was dead,
You could have become bitter, but celebrated life instead.

In Spain you were governess to Juan Carlos, who is now King.
One wonders if your influence helped him to sound freedom's ring.

Later you studied nursing at Salus Infermorum,
Slowly rebuilding your life in that humanistic forum.

As a nurse you cared for many persons, mending minds and hearts.
Then you came to America, where your new-world story starts.

After landing in New York, you practiced nursing at St. Claire,
But decided you needed trees, greater space and more fresh air.

Those years of confinement had increased your need for lots of space.
So you came to Montefiore, then small but still a growing place.

You loved Montefiore; it cared for all peoples with compassion.
You were free to practice nursing in a humane fashion.

One year you found your lost love on an Israeli vacation.
They had said he'd died in a camp, but that was fabrication.

You pledged your love to one another and married in Cyprus.
After a short honeymoon, you both planned a brief hiatus.

Returning to Montefiore you were to later discover
That through an auto accident you again lost your lover.

Your husband's death was a cruel blow; he'd gone forever more.
Bravely you faced the loss of that fine physician from Warsaw.

You rededicated your life to the healing ministry,
Using head, heart and hands to help lessen human misery.

Celina, you're a proud Pole, an amazing American;
Citizen of the world, champion of the rights of all humans;

Nurturing nurse, a marvelous Montefiore Matriarch.
Although you're gone, your kind deeds are etched forever in our hearts.

You left us a special legacy of courage and caring,
Which we will try to honor by emulating and sharing.

Thank you for coming to Montefiore, the Mount of Flowers.
Your nursing there created a beautiful garden bower,

Where kind deeds sprung like roses to comfort all you nursed and knew.
Celina Skorecka-Herman, please accept our fond adieu.

Cecelia (Celina) Skorecka-Herman R.N., B.S. received her degree from the
University of San Carlos at the Salus Infermorum in Madrid, Spain and was
licensed by examination in New York State. In New York City she studied at
the French Institute, where she was exploring advanced French literature.

A linguist, she spoke Polish, Russian, German, Spanish, French and English.
Her professional writing has been published in the Journal of the New York
State Nurses Association. Prior to coming to the United States, she practiced
nursing in an international refugee camp.

The author, Kathleen A. Magill R.N., Ed. D., C.N.A.A. was a colleague and
friend of the late Celina Skorecka-Herman for 20 years. Both women worked together
as surgical nurses and had previous backgrounds in trauma nursing.
Furthermore, both had shared similar European heritages of small countries
—Ireland and Poland—that had resisted invasions and maintained their
national identities for centuries. Dr. Magill has published in nursing and
poetry presses; she attended the Bellevue School of Nursing, Hunter College
and Columbia University, all in New York City. Currently she is a Nursing
Administrator in Buffalo, and is enjoying her involvement in the Western

New York lifestyle.

Dutch Irish and the Devil

(For my Father)

I met you
and found

again

we have the same
allergies and afflictions —
swimmer's ear, and a tendency
toward being fat.

You are, I'm getting there.

Your face stares

out of my morning glass.

The same ski jump nose and snarl,
the same black hair

though yours now white.

The same nasty ways.

Descendants of Dutch Irish

and the devil.

Oh yes, we have the same

nasty ways; you threaten

to throw rocks in windows
because an advertised

flea market didn't take place.
I, in other ways

display my lack of patience
by hating snow:
and blaming everyone for it.

We are both fascinated

with dirty words and sleazy talk.
You old truck driving ways

still intact.

Your bull neck still red

and I, the baby driver still,
approaching golden years

as you ease toward eternity.

And so it goes with fathers

and their sins and the sins

of their fathers — your old postman dad
and the women at the mailboxes he had.
Your musician grandfather,

his lessons known

from Chester West Virginia

to Pittsburgh's Syria Mosque.
Descendants of Dutch Irish

and the devil.

Oh, your shotguns and pistols

my dirty clothes and poetry

your graft, my craft.

Our sins our sins

the glorious transgressions,

the inglorious regressions.

Our remorse, our remorse.

Our mornings after.

We walked through a Florida jungle
to sort it out.

Me trailing behind

like olden days

when you threw pennies

on Ohio railroad tracks

and said Casey Jones

dropped them there.

I believed you then.

We kicked wild potatoes aside

as vines mapped our crooked way

over dead logs and fungus,

over years of storms and steam.

Your orange picking days at minimum wage,
my youthful arrogance and rage

because you left me behind

you left me behind

left me behind.

We ambled on, capturing memories
along with yellow butterflies.
You take my hand again.
Pretending I'm sixteen, you say
come live with me
and be my friend.
Too late, I answer, too late.
The years have got away from us
and I am too much a sinner

in a fashion all my own.

A true descendant

of Dutch Irish and the devil,

I walk away from you

half formed; your mark

forever curved ~

deep within my frown. joy Walsh

COMMON GROUND MARCH 1983 PAGE 19 —