QUESTION:

Anonymous, Buffalo:

"Based on my experience as an R.N. working for an agency, I must answer in the affirmative. Sexism, discrimination, and harassment have been very much a part of my work experience. The sexual harassment I've experienced doing private duty nursing is more intermittent and largely dependent on the presence of a male family member (most of my patients have been women.)

"In the hospital, this experience has been greatly intensified. The harassment, discrimination, and sexism are as elemental to the work as the work itself. Black women still sweep the floors and empty trash cans. One still hears how 'lazy' they are, from the 'professionals', that is, the nursing staff. The nursing staff is 99% white and female, and the M.D.s and med-students are predominantly male.

"The quality and overtness of the discrimination, sexism, and sexual harassment range from the more overt forms: nurses are women, doctors are men ('white' [men] is never stated but implied) and Black women do the housekeeping.

"So while methods and obviousness of discrimination and harassment may vary, the effects are ceaseless and inescapable."

Anonymous, West Seneca:

"I definitely do think that there is discrimination in the job market. In my case, I can speak about discrimination as far as age is concerned. Older women like myself, that is, women from about 40 to 65, have to really prove themselves in the job market. If they have a work background, it's helpful, but many women returning to work don't have this. Also, it's not what you know but who you know. Most times jobs are listed in the want ads but already filled; they are just listed as a matter of procedure.

"Men still have their own 'fraternity' way of thinking about men helping men, and so they tend to help men more than women.

"As far as sexual harassment, I haven't seen too much of that lately, but years ago I saw much more of it, and I would just report it. Women today are more apt to know how to handle it. Years ago, women were embarrassed and they could either grin and bear it, or quit their jobs."

ARE HOLES FEM CINE PCs sie

Community Speak-out

by Sharon Przepasniak

"Do you think that women still experience sexism, discrimination, or sexual harassment on the job?"

Susan Webb Tregay, Snyder: "My experience was that all of the women where I worked were paid less than any of the men. Most of the men had walked in off the streets with no training, whereas a high percentage of the women were trained and highly skilled. My job was highly skilled; I ran the darkroom, and did photo-engraving and some artwork, but I was classified as office work, so I was paid the same as the secretaries. "When the person responsible for your pay comes in and asks you to go to bed with him, that's sexual harassment. There were also the 'ladies' men' too. There was lots of 'honey', 'dear', pats on the bottom, etc.; all of it came from management, rather than co-workers on the factory floor. “Most women don't realize that Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act, as well as the 1979 E.E.O.C. guidelines, protects them against these kinds of things."

Jackie Keller, Tonawanda:

"I'm certain that I have been very lucky in that I haven't experienced sexual harassment or discrimination. I have a B.A., a B.S., and an Associate's degree. I'm a medical secretary, and I kind of run the department. Because there aren't many secretaries with my education, I'm treated quite well. The doctor that's head of my department respects me. I'm 55 and so is he. And since he has five daughters, he seems to be attuned to the needs of women. Also, there's no doubt in my mind who's boss, and so I respect him also.

"Nowadays, it's an employer's market, not an employee's market. I'm glad that I don't have to start all over again now. I might not be as lucky as I have been."

TO MY READERS:

This is my sixth column, and in each one, I've included an invitation to the readers of Common Ground to respond to a future question. To date, I have received no responses from you in the mail. Because I feel my column is one of the places in this paper where readers have an active voice, I hope to hear from you in the future. One of my goals is to reach a variety of women in my interviews; written responses from readers would help achieve this goal.

If you would like to respond to a question, state your viewpoint, or sound-off, send your brief comments to me c/o the paper. Your comments must be signed, but you can state that you'd like your comments printed anonymously. Priority is given, though, to those who would like their name printed.

Anonymous, Buffalo:

"Yes, they do -- lots of it, and frequently. I work in a small company, and see some subtle discrimination, and also some more blatant discrimination. The office workers and management are, of course, all white. When a Black person applies for a white-collar job, the application is politely accepted, but then as soon as the applicant is gone, the jokes begin. But women of color -- and men too -- are sure good enough to work in the factory.

"The sexual harassment I see at work is the type that is supposed to be considered harmless and fun. I've never seen touching, propositioning, or the like; instead, it's on the level of jokes and questions about the sexuality of the women -- and all of these women are in secretarial positions. The jokes and comments are mainly directed at them. Apparently, it's been going on for years, too, and she laughs along with it all. I never hear any of this directed toward women in any upper-level positions. To me, the saddest part is that the secretary doesn't see that as a violation of her as a person, nor as something that has nothing to do with her role as a worker.

"My presence as the only woman in sales has put a little damper on these jokes and comments, I'm glad to say. Just my lack of laughter and my facial expressions have seemed to tell the men around me to 'cool it'. They think I disapprove for religious reasons. I wish I had the courage to tell them why I really disapprove.

"Women will still experience sexism, discrimination, and sexual harassment until the day that they are really taken seriously as workers."

April's Community Speak-Out:

"Do you think that feminists and women in the Women's Movement have a sense of humor?"

Send your responses before March 1 to: Community Speak-Out, Common Ground, c/o Women's Studies Academy, 1300 Elmwood Ave., Buffalo, N.Y. 14222

COMMON GROUND FEBRUARY 1983 PAGE 17