6% |,

by Diane C. Prochownik

When she saw the package of plas-
tic wrapped pork chops, pulled from a
case with a dozen others, her eyes
widened with surprise. She had not
seen pork for over a year and then
not of equal quality. She stood in
front of the baby cereals amazed at
the ease of preparation and the many
varieties. The milk and butter in
the dairy cases and the open display
of fruits and vegetables brought the
same expression to this young mother's
face as that of a child's in an old
fashioned candy store.

She could have come from anywhere,
from Cuba, Haiti, Viet Nam, Poland,
any of the countries whose citizens
have reached our shores through hard-
ship rather than quota systems. As
it was, Eva (not her real name), was
able to come with her family from
Poland, where even what's rationed is
unavailable, where "coffee is not to
be had," where "fabric for curtains
can only be had with the addition of
a bribe," and where “only new brides
can purchase furniture, pots and
pans, curtains, utensils," since per-
mission is not there to purchase re-
placements. Yet on the black market
in Poland, the dollar is worth 750
zloty compared to the 1981 rate of
150 zloty. Despite their high in-
flation rate, the dollar in Poland
can still buy a lot, if one can find
anything to buy.

For Eva, who came here through
joint agency programs that assist
dissidents and their families, our
supermarkets, our furniture stores,
the shoes she can buy for her children,
the ready-made curtains on department
store counters, are all a wonderful

en sHistory Project

} women's History Week Project

has announced The Women's History
Network. The Network provides val-
uable resources for all those who
celebrate women's history, both dur-
ing the special National Women's
History Week each March and through-
out the year. The Network furnishes
continually available access to
information, materials, referrals,
technical assistance, and the criti-
cal “spiritual support" that has
proven so necessary for those who
extend the visible horizons of women's
achievements and possibilities.

For the past 7 years the Project
staff has spearheaded the effort to
recognize and celebrate the contribu-
tions of women in United States hist-
ory. During that time the Project
has developed, discovered, or col-
lected literally thousands of ideas
and resources for women's history
activities: from classroom programs
to community events to workplace ob-
servances. While hundreds of women
and men have written or phoned the
Project office to ask for information
or to share their ideas, many more
are simply not aware that the Project
functions as a year-round resource.
But it does!

For nearly a decade, hundreds have
worked to advance awareness of wo-
men's history. The Women's History
Network now makes it possible for
those who work in different arenas
to gain from and to complement each
other's efforts, by providing a
central, vital link and resource ex-
change. The Network targets its
services especially for educators,
historians, community organizers,
workplace activists, unaffiliated
individuals of good will and abund-
ant energy.

The Question of

Availability

proof of abundance. Even the space
in her small apartment is generous
next to what was allotted in her
native land. It is easy to be lulled
by what one sees and easier yet to
blur the distinction between luxury
and necessity. Those who were born
and raised in this country, coerced
by TV and high powered ads have done
this all the time. How much more im-
pressive it must seem to someone who
could not own a phone, even after
years on a waiting list; to someone
who could order a television set,
then waited a year or more for de-
livery. To Eva the overwhelming
sense of abundance seems almost syn-
onymous with availability, but that's
where the illusion gives way to
reality.

In Poland, the dollar is worth a
great deal in comparative purchasing
power. In America, the dollar is
worth a dollar, and as such can pur-
chase very little. The harsh fact
is that utility rate hikes, cost in-
creases and a real unemployment,
which never accurately reflects in
statistics, have given us our own
economic problems. Our abundance
may seem a paradise to those who
come here from outside and, as such,
will always be in our favor but many
among our own underprivileged have al-
ready learned that the "candy store
counters” don't yield their “goodies”
without ample cash. Despite food
stamp programs and surplus giveaways,
the cost of living in the midst of
abundance is the realization that it's
not all available and that the hard-
earned American dollar has a minimum
value at its home base.

As a result of the activities of
these groups of individuals, women
and men are both beginning to dis-
cover the true extent to which women
have shaped our cultural life. In-
deed, knowledge of the real contri-
butions of real women invariably
leads to amazing self-esteem on the
part of women, and to amazed respect
on the part of men, both of whom have
long suffered from the limiting per-
spectives of traditional education.

The Network's services are de-
signed to be mixed and matched to
provide each individual with the
greatest possible array of tools and
resources to continue the move to-
ward an ever-increasing recognition
of women's history.

Services include a quarterly news-
letter which provides information
dedicated exclusively to women’s
history topics; clearinghouse refer-
rals in response to individual re-
quests from Network participants; an
annual directory of Network partici-
pants and other resources; and tech-
nical assistance in planning and
implementing women's history activi-
ties.

Individuals and organizations inter-
ested in becoming members of The Wo-
men's History Network should write
the National Women's History Project,
Box 3716, Santa Rosa, CA, or phone
(707) 526-5974.

STATE ERA ABOUT TO COME FOR VOTE

Kathy Jackson, head of the Buffalo chapter of the National Organization
for Women's ERA Task Force, reports that the N.Y.S. ERA is coming up for vote

the last week in May.
20-0, with no amendments.
comment :

It passed in the State Assembly Judicial Committee

Several right wing groups have been attempting to attach anti-
abortion, military and other amendments to the ERA.

Those who support an

unamended Equal Rights Amendment are urged by local ERA supporters to

write state representatives.

CUOMO AND ABORTION
AMENDMENT

Governor Mario Cuomo recently re-
iterated his views on the issue of
abortion rights in N.Y. State.

The Governor has stated his per-
sonal objections to abortion, but
steadily maintains the position that
it is and should be, a matter of in-
dividual choice. He has also stated
that he will veto any attempt made
by the legislature to eliminate
Medicaid funding for abortions.

The governor has been criticized
by the Catholic Bishops of New York
State for failing to make public
policy to correspond to his personal
opposition to abortion. However, Gov-
ernor Cuomo maintains that moral
decisions should be left to the indi-
vidual and that this is characteristic
of the American system of government.
In an interview with the Buffalo News,
the governor said, "...the definition
of a fundamental right and wrong, as
far as the civic society is concerned,
is in the Constitution. The last thing
government should do is tell you what
morality is."

Governor Cuomo also discussed his
programs designed to reduce the num-
ber of teenage pregnancies through
counseling, education, and through
providing other types of assistance
such as employment opportunities. In
his interview with the Buffalo News,
he pointed out that anti-abortionists
should be supporting these efforts,
but have not done so.

“...I have to wonder about the
sincerity of their position," he said.

BOY CONVICTED IN INFANT
MURDER, SEXUAL ABUSE

The trial of the 9-year-old St.
Petersburg boy, charged with the mur-
der and sexual abuse of an infant girl,
has resulted in conviction. The boy
was found guilty of aggravated child
abuse, sexual battery, and first de-
gree battery in the abuse and death
of 8-month-old Barbara Parks last
September.

The infant had been left in the care
of the boy's mother and had been put
to bed in the same room as the boy and
his younger brother. The younger boy
was also accused in the attack, but
charges were dropped when he agreed to
testify against his brother.

During the trial, testimony revealed
that the boys were mimicking sexual
acts they had seen in pornographic
magazines that belonged to their mother.
The woman had acknowledged earlier
that the boys did have access to the
magazines.

WOMAN FIRST IN CLASS
AT ANNAPOLIS

For the first time since women were
accepted in 1976, a woman has graduated
first at the U.S. Naval Academy.

The top honors went to Kristine
Holderied who finished first in class
standing based on a combination of ac-
ademic grades and military performance.

As a Navy ensign, she will be as-
signed to meteorological and
geophysics work in Rota, Spain. As
an undergraduate, Holderied was an
oceanography major.

CHILD CARE PROPOSAL

There has been an increasing
demand for child care facilities
in the American workplace. Now,
Representative Mary Rose Oaker (D.
Ohio) has proposed a child-care cen-
ter to be located in one of the large
House of Representatives office
buildings in Washington, D.C. She
feels that such a self-supporting
center would be a way for our law-
makers to "provide practical leader-
ship in addressing the serious need
for child care.”

PAGE 3

HOME BIRTH COSTS

The New York State Insurance De-
partment has ruled that Blue Shield
of Rochester must provide coverage
for home births, as well as fees for
nurse-midwives. Earlier this year,
Blue Shield had stopped such payments.
In fact, one area woman plans to file
a class-action suit stemming from
Blue Shield's denial to cover her
home birth early this year.

Home birth advocates were pleased
with the stand taken by the State
Insurance Department. Those in favor
of home birth cite that it is much
safer than commonly believed, more
natural and more family-centered; it
also avoids much unnecessary and
sometimes harmful medical inter-
vention.

SMOKING MORE ACCEPTABLE
IN RESTAURANTS THAN NURSING

In a recent column in The Buffalo
News, Ann Lancers reported the results
of a recent survey of 70 Chicago
restaurant managers. 87% said that
they would allow patrons to smoke,
but only 34% would permit a woman to
nurse a baby in their establishments.
Another 25% said that they would al-
low nursing only under certain con-
ditions; 24% said that they would not
allow it, and 7% were undecided.

PORNOGRAPHY LAW

The New York Times reported this
month that new legislation has been
enacted in Indianapolis that would
make pornography a violation of
women’s civil rights. The law was
immediately challenged by bookstores,
trade associations and a cable tele-
vision station and a preliminary
injunction was issued which prohi-
bits the enforcement of the law.

The ordinance states, in part,
“Pornography is a discriminatory
practice based on sex because its
effect is to deny women equal oppor-
tunities in society...pornography is
a systematic practice of exploitation
and subordination based on sex,
which differentially harms women...
the bigotry and contempt it promotes,
with the acts of aggression it fos-
ters, harm women's opportunities for
equality of rights in employment,
education, access to and use of
public accommodations, and acquisi-
tion of real property...”

Supporters of the measure hope
that it will go before the Supreme
Court.

JOB DISCRIMINATION

United Features Syndicate colum-
nist Jack Anderson reported on
claims made that the Reagan admin-
istration has not given high priority
to job discrimination complaints
from women.

According to Anderson, Rep. Barney
Frank, D-Mass., said that sex discrim-
ination regarding wages and “compar-
able worth" complaints—complaints
concerning the comparison of jobs
that are usually considered "women's"
jobs with those considered "men's”
jobs—are largely ignored by the
Equal Employment Opportunity Commis-
sion.

A spokesperson for the EEOC denied
Rep. Frank's charges and insisted
that each of 226 complaints had been
considered by the commission; how-
ever, Anderson charged that a member
of his staff had seen an internal
memo from an EEOC official that
stated that a case-by-case review
had not been made.

COMMON GROUND JUNE 1984