COMMON GROUND

November 1983 Volume 2 No. 3  
Panelists Address The

AP

fr

ALTAINGN +

GLICK

Ed. Note:  
This article comes in part from a summary of the panel discussion, "The Gender Gap", held by the Suburban chapter of the National Organization for Women (NOW) on October 11, 1983. Panel members were Paulette Hammond, president, Buffalo NOW; Dottie Harnish, the Dean Erie County IQ; Kathy Jackson of the O.C.; Betty Riley, retired teacher; and Doris Kent, retired Librarian. They all attended the 1983 NOW National Conference.

The Gender Gap. What is it? When did it start? What does it mean? These were a few of the questions addressed by the 1983 NOW national conference. 

Active local women attended the panel discussion. 

The phenomenon is often called the phenomenon of distinct male versus female opinions on current issues, and voter preference for candidates... For the first time in recent history, women have formed what seems to be a voting block which is different from voter and issue preferences of men, and this phenomenon, according to feminists, began in July, 1980, when the Republican party took its pro-ERA plank out of the party platform due to the urging of far-right and conservative groups as well as their candidate, Ronald Reagan. This was an historic move for the Republicans; they were the first party to include the ERA, not the Democrats. 1,200 women protested this move outside the convention, saying “We will remember in November".

And in November, according to exit polls after voting, there was a 5% difference in the way men and women voted. Women cast nearly three-fifths of the votes that Jimmy Carter received. 

In that election, only 51% of eligible voters went to the polls; Reagan won with only 26% of eligible votes.

Information for this article was gathered and shared by the panelists.

Here in Erie County, more women register to vote than do men, and the majority of women register Democratic. These statistics support the feminist contention that women have formed a significant voting block that can deliver votes to a candidate on an issue of concern to them. Kathy Jackson said many feminists felt that Governor Cuomo was elected on the margin of women's votes in New York State.

It is also possible that Assemblyman Bill Hoyt retained his seat in the state legislature due to the organizational efforts of local feminists.

The gender gap is probably most evident in the differences of opinion men and women have on Ronald Reagan. According to Jackson, recent polls indicate that only 34% of all women (Republicans and Democrats) favor Reagan, while 54% of men favor him.

Some analysts say that it's "economic issues” or "peace issues" which are turning people away from Reagan, but if one looks at the timing of the start of this gender gap, the withdrawal of the ERA from the Republican platform, it isn't out of the question to suggest that a broader category of "women's issues", which include economic justice and the quest for peace, is drawing support away from Reagan.

The panelists offered several reasons why women would think Reagan is hostile toward women and women's issues. The specific examples offered were equity education for women, enforcement of existing equal rights laws, withdrawal of affirmative action and issues surrounding women in the workforce, and cuts in social service programs.

*Turn to page 15

At the discussion, the panelists offered several reasons why women would think Reagan is hostile toward women and women's issues. 

W.N.Y. Women’s Newsjournal

B.P.C. Suit Continues

As reported on October 1, 1983, 13 female employees of Buffalo Psychiatric Center have filed a suit alleging sex discrimination in promotion, pay of job titles and other issues. The 13 has stated that the Supreme Court is not a suitable forum, and this point will be argued on November 14.

Also, Cream argues that several of the alleged acts of discrimination against the women occurred more than a year before the filing of the suit. He said that the statute of limitations would not recognize those complaints.

Cleveland responds to this by saying that there is a companion regulation to this statute of limitations which states that where the discrimination is continuing, bringing this other evidence is proper. One of the plaintiffs, Dr. Rachel T. Hill, is seeking $1 million in damages, while the others are asking for back benefits. Dr. Hill has stated that she had been repeatedly promised the job of Chief Psychologist, and had, in fact, been filling this position, while being titled and paid at a lower grade level salary. Hill states that this situation caused her humiliation and embarrassment, both in the community at large, and in her own family, where her husband is Chief Psychologist at Gowanda.

Mr. Cream said the $1 million sought by Dr. Hill is "clearly punitive" rather than compensatory, because she suffered no measurable damages and no punitive damages are allowed.

Cleveland, however, cites precedents for humiliation and embarrassment damages in a continuing stream of cases particularly regarding discrimination, and does not feel it is appropriate to refer to these damages as “punitive".

"Mr. Cream," said Cleveland, in this recent conversation with CG, “is, in effect, alleging that the state has immunity in this type of claim. That is a fascinating statement in this day and age."