D.E.S. - The Baby

Boom Blunder

By Geraldine A. Bayer

DES, the wonder drug that turned out
to be a blunder drug; one that has had
long-term, sometimes deadly effects.
DES (diethylstilbestrol) is a synthetic
hormone that mimics the effects

of estrogen, the hormone that produces
the development and function of a
woman's sexual and reproductive organs.

It was administered originally to
prevent miscarriage in women who had
histories of high-risk pregnancies.

It has been used to fatten cattle and
poultry. DES is currently being pre-
scribed to prevent pregnancy and it
has been given to men to relieve the
discomfort of prostate cancer.

The drug has some serious short-
comings. DES has been directly linked
to a rare form of vaginal cancer in
young women, (the daughters of the
women who originally took the drug).
DES daughters have a good chance of
having other physical problems;
vaginal adenosis, an abnormal, but non-
malignant tissue disorder; structural
abnormalities in the pelvic region
and endocrinological (hormonal) dis-
orders. DES daughters may have dif-
ficulty conceiving or carrying preg-
nancies to term.

DES sons have not been left un-
scathed. They have structural abnor-
malities in the sex organs and fer-
tility problems are not uncommon.

Those women who actually took the
drug have a higher incidence of cancer,
with breast cancer being the most fre-
quently occurring type. Studies are
now being conducted, also, on the

frequency and severity of ovarian and cervical cancer in these women. These
types of malignancies are more common
in menopausal or post-menopausal women.

D.E.S.

Drug

Many DES mothers have now entered that
stage in their lives.

If you were pregnant, were born, or
ate meat between 1940 and 1971, it is
more than just a vague possibility
that you were exposed to DES, and it
is dangerous. Though it may have some
medical uses, the results on its long-
range effects are still inconclusive.

A Historical Perspective

The synthetic was developed in 1938
by an English bio-chemist, Dr. Charles
E. Dodd. Drs. George and Olive Smith,
a physician and bio-chemist respec-
tively, expanded studies on the drug,
noting that it artificially induced
production of progesterone, the hormone
that helps maintain pregnancy. The
drug was then given to women who had
a history of miscarriages, women who
had high blood pressure or diabetes,
and as a "preventative measure" against
spontaneous abortion. Between 1942
and 1967, an estimated 500,000 to
3,000,000 women took DES, ostensibly
to prevent miscarriage.

DES was advertised during those
years as a wonder drug. It was manu-
factured by several different companies
under several different names. The
only things the drug companies over-
looked in persuading doctors to pres-
cribe this drug was adequate testing on
animals and on women.

The American medical community paid
scant attention to a French journal
that reported that DES caused breast
tissue cancer in male mice. Nor did
they notice the reports of the toxic
effects of DES on the livers of experi-

showed that DES actually prevented
the implantations of fertilized ova
onto the uteruses of test mice.

Creative Stress Reduction for Women

by Kathy A. Gaiser

We hardly need to be reminded that
we live in a radically changing and
often threatening world. Issues such
as the growing threat of war, the an-
xiety about increasing unemployment,
the malevolent presence of toxic chem-
icals all about us - these topics and
others clearly demonstrate that our
society provides many genuine reasons
for serious concern and anxiety. In
addition, each of us must confront the
additional tensions which regularly
arise in our interpersonal relations.
For many people, the stress created by
the combined effects of social and
interpersonal tensions can have a
seriously debilitating effect. There-
fore, to understand the nature of
stress is really to learn how each of
us personally adapts to our social/
interpersonal environment.

For women in particular, the chal-
lenge to maintain a healthy and bal-
anced lifestyle has never been greater.
Today, many women who had initially
postponed marriage and/or child-
rearing for the opportunity to esta-
blish themselves in career positions
are now taking the time to establish
families. Unfortunately, the at-
tempt to balance career aspirations
with home life responsibilities often
leads to increased tension for many
women. Therefore, women need to ex-
plore a variety of both traditional
and non-traditional mechanisms for
coping with stress.

Stress researchers have found that
the stress response can be generated
from two basic sources: 1) the
stress of physical activity or exer-

cise; and 2) the stress of emotional
or psychological tension. It has
been shown that physical stress can
have a positive effect, by elicit-
ing a general calming effect through-
out the body, thereby lessening the
negative effects of emotional stress.
Scientists now believe that during
exercise the brain produces natural
morphine-like substances called
endorphins, which may, in fact, be
responsible for the euphoric feel-
ing many joggers refer to as a
"runner's high". Thus, physical
stress can have a naturally bene-
ficial effect on our physical and
emotional state.

On the other hand, our psychological
frustrations can result in a myriad of
serious health problems, such as ulcers,
migraine headaches, menstrual/
menopausal disturbances, dietary im-
balances, chronic infections, heart/
circulatory difficulties, and perhaps
even cancer. In fact, Dr. C. Norman
Shealy, President of the Holistic
Medical Association, has estimated
that perhaps 85% of all physical
symptoms represent a reaction to
chronic emotional stress.

“If you were pregnant, were born, or ate meat
between 1940 and 1971, it’s more than just a
vague possibility that you have been exposed to

Another study made showed intersexual
changes in DES-exposed rats. Drug
testing during that time consisted
often of proving that the drug was
actually what the company said it was.

Luckily, Dr. J. H. Ferguson of
Tulane University, questioned the use
of the drug and conducted his own study
and his results showed that women
taking DES actually had a slightly
higher rate of miscarriage than their
unexposed counterparts. Another series
of tests conducted by Dr. William J.
Dieckmann in the early fifties offered
the same conclusion. Yet the synthe-
tic hormone continued to be marketed
as the miracle drug that could prevent
miscarriages. In some cases, DES was
being prescribed as preventative
therapy, even before the danger signs
of miscarriage appeared.

However, the Dieckmann and Fergu-
son studies did have an impact and DES
use for preventing spontaneous abor-
tion declined during the sixties, al-
though it did not stop altogether until
the 1970s.

DES is now being prescribed to women
as a “morning after" pill to prevent
pregnancy, and it is given to new
mothers to dry up lactation (the pro-
duction of milk). Sometimes, it is
used to relieve menopausal symptoms or
as a hormonal replacement for women
who have had their ovaries removed.
Women with advanced breast cancers
and men with prostate cancers have
also been given the drug.

in persuading doctors to prescribe
adequate testing on animals and on women.”

We can assist our bodies to with-
stand the daily assault of psycho-
logical stress by first learning to
become more attuned to the quiet
signals of tension expressed through-
out the body. Feelings of tension in
the head, neck, and back are some of
the earliest warning signals.

Individuals who practice Hatha
Yoga concentrate their relaxation
efforts by first learning to breathe
properly. According to the students
of this discipline, many of our tension-
related aches and pains are a direct
result of improper breathing, partic-
ularly during stressful situations.
Deep breathing (or diaphragmatic
breathing) is a technique which should
come naturally. In fact, it has been
shown that infants breathe in this
manner automatically. It is only
after we grow older that we unlearn
this excellent means of maintaining
composure. So, for many of us,
breathing is concentrated only in
the upper chest, thereby reducing
our oxygen intake by an estimated
50%. In addition, many of us fail to
recognize the importance of nasal, as
opposed to oral, breathing. Nasal
breathing offers the advantage of
utilizing the tiny nasal hairs that
filter out pollutants and other harm-
ful particles and also provides stim-
ulation to millions of tiny nerve
endings, which elicits a calming
effect throughout the body.

Cont. on Page 9

Page 3

COMMON GROUND
OURS VEIN RNOD vast

SEPTEMBER I?