»

Mary Rowell, Rowbow Textile Studio:

(Note: Mary Rowell and Diana Bowman work independently, yet together, in Studio I and Studio 2. Although their comments appear separately here, they were interviewed at the same time, and so most of their remarks formed a dialogue between them.)

"My first reaction was that for women in business, money is one of the things that women have problems getting. It's seen as more 'natural' for a man to be able to get a loan for his business than for a woman. I think that something needs to be done about that. Also, if a woman is of childbearing age, this also affects her ability to get capital - unfortunately. I also think that as far as the issue of women and pay is concerned, there is still a lot to be done for women to get equal pay for equal work.

I'd like to be commissioned by large textile companies in, say, New York City, but the opportunity to do this is very hard. It depends on who you know, and that's a man's world. Hotels, architectural firms, etc. get their textile work done through these large corporations.

One of the things that I find in our field is that you almost always have to do work in addition to textiles to support yourself. So, because we have to work a second job, and because we don't have lots of capital, we don't have the time to pursue other commissions, travel to New York, etc.

Diana has worked in the textile industry for 10 years, so she knows what the competition is all about, and I've taught textiles for 10 years. Often the jobs we get are not always jobs related to textiles. However, working in the arts and having arts backgrounds, we try to combine and pool our resources. We also do workshops in schools, colleges, and at conferences. Much of the work we do is not only commission work; we also do work for galleries. Finally, we both do costumes for various dance troupes, which have been on local and national TV.

There should be more backers who are willing to support women in business. I'd like to ask other women how they are getting the capital to start, and also to get the kind of equipment that the larger, competitive businesses have. I'm also interested in talking to other women in the textile business."

also

Diana Bowman, Rowbow Textile Studio: "In general, it's much harder for women to compete in business. We're in independent textiles, and as such, we are designers of our own work; this is considered a 'safe' art, as opposed to a manufacturer. We work on commission, and our work is that of craftswomen, as opposed to a large corporation. We'd like to be well-rounded in what we do, yet it's hard for us to try to penetrate that larger market, which we would like to do. Right now, our commissions are small and few and far between.

MARY ROWELL

DIANA BOWMAN

To stay the size that we are, and to stay in a large city like Buffalo, it's close to impossible to get a bank to help us keep going. Banks often feel that men are better risks, so often women have to work another part-time job in order to survive. Also, we are often not believed, especially in banks, when it comes to our varied talents. Also, when it comes to advertising agencies, a lot depends on who you know. 

I'd like to add that the government is the largest employer in textiles in this country. But people are reluctant to give you the information concerning how to get work from them, especially because we're women.

So, we are looking for backers, and we are looking for more work. We're a business, but we're a struggling business."

ELEANOR KUNZ

Eleanor Kunz, owner, Colden Country Store, Colden, N.Y:

"It's tough for a woman. I had no retail training. The easy part was the people. (The retailing) I learned as I went along. I just started with the Manhattan Yellow Pages and went to places.

It was difficult to get a loan when I bought the store nine years ago. I had worked here for years and couldn't see somebody else getting what I had worked on so long.

I went to banks and begged. Some said they thought it was a great idea but wouldn't loan me any money. Eventually, I got a loan from a bank where I had an account.

It's a seven-day-a-week business. You have to be prepared to give up things. The rewards belong to you, but so do the responsibilities. It's with you 24 hours a day.

To women going into business, I'd recommend you go on your own intuition but don't marry your merchandise. Listen to the people who work for you, your customers, and your sales reps.

I am not in any groups for businesswomen. Men have always had a networking system but I think women are reluctant to help each other. They're used to a lot of backbiting and they take criticism personally."

HOPE HOETZER

Hope Hoetzer Co-Owner of Marrakesh

First, it is important to talk about what types of small businesses women tend to start. A majority go into retail and service-related fields (vs. corporate), and tend to sell things like antiques, clothing, and jewelry, as opposed to stereos.

There are many reasons behind this - women have never been encouraged to take business and math courses (I was an English literature major, myself!), and there is, in many ways, a traditional exclusion from certain types of businesses.

In addition, a stereo store, for example, would take a large amount of initial investment. Many women do not have this available - and they do not have the 'ins' in the old boy network to get investors and feel a lack of confidence from banks.

An interesting story connected with this is that Dun and Bradstreet changed the listing for our store a few years back. After a long time of dealing only with me, they discovered my husband was co-owner. They changed my name automatically from owner to employee. When I complained, they said it 'looked better' to have a man's name as owner, anyway.

There are many assumptions women have to deal with in this way. Customers come in the store with a question and ignore me at the main counter, asking a clerk or even approaching male customers. I've even heard 'I want to talk with the real owner.' Salesmen are pushier with women - they feel they can browbeat and flatter them into taking items.

I have to dress up in order to be taken as seriously as a man in jeans. Women are viewed as more malleable.

General harassment is another problem. Many women who own stores make a point of hiring a man as an employee - not only for the customer's outlook, but for security. A man can wear a piece of jewelry in his store to show how good it looks, but I wouldn't - it would give a customer an excuse to touch me.

An increasing number of women are going into business for themselves despite these obstacles, however. Since they are the 'last hired, first fired', entrepreneurship is an alternative. They may not have the capital or be aware of the seasonal fluctuations, but they are good at many other crucial skills - dealing with people, communicating, 'taste' - more confidence in choosing stock. Owning your business has the advantage of giving you flexible hours, allowing you to use your creativity; as well as using the mixed bag of skills that are developed in the domestic arena.

A <<

Continued on page 16

COMMON GROUND JULY 1983 PAGE 7

iv