IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Rules:
1. Fix obvious OCR errors (like '0' instead of 'O', '1' instead of 'l')
2. Preserve the original line breaks and text blocks.
3. Preserve the original meaning and historical context.
4. Do not add any additional text.
5. Do not delete any text.
6. Process EVERY line - do not skip any content.

Corrected text:

vi
nn

ots
Directions
‘86

Issues of Choice
For Jewish Women

The truth is, WE admire YOU, and are
grateful that such a superb event was
sponsored and made possible by Western
New York women. Thank you, and we
look forward to your next conference
with hopes that we won't have to wait
five years.

Can a woman be
a New York doll?

“What do you call an uncircumcised
Jew? A woman.”
~

Over 45 women attended this mor-
ning workshop that focused on the
question of whether or not there is
a conflict between feminism and tra-
ditional role models of Jewish wo-
men. The answer was - to quote -

“yes and no."

Ms. Drorah Setel, author of nu-
merous publications on Jewish femi-
nism and co-editor of a special edi-
tion of The Jewish Calendar which
focused on Jewish women, pointed out
that the assumption of conflict was
an incorrect perspective. She noted
that both Judaism and feminism pre-
sent world views that have to do with
the experience of a particular people.
Feminism is “an understanding of human
experience that comes from women's ex-
perience, it's not just about women.
This is the same as Judaism's relation
to the world.”

The key tenet of feminism, she said,
is that "the personal is political” and
our personal experience relates to lar-
ger structures. Often women feel guilty
until they realize this understanding of
a world model that is concentric circles
with change at the center rippling out.
This is a very Jewish view," Ms. Setel
noted, “because Judaism believes that
personal change is what leads to larger
transformations."

The concept of relationship is cen-
tral to both feminism and Judaism.

She pointed out that Carol Gilligan's
book, In a Different Voice, documented
that men and women see the world dif-
ferently, with women tending to develop
interdependence in relationships while
men consider mature relationships to be
defined by separation. A male is like-
ly to say “What's the law?" while a wo-
man asks "Who gets hurt?" The Jewish
perspective, Ms. Setel noted, requires
the consideration of interrelationships
of the community in moral issues, and
this is in accord with feminist per-
spectives.

Even very traditional Judaism in-
corporates essentially “feminist” per-
spectives. The insistence on the one-
ness and unity of God is like the femi-
nist perspective of “one together."
The concept of "Shechinah,” the re-
lational presence of God, is femi-
nine in its root and literally trans-
lates to “she who dwells among us."
And although the concept of God for-
bids describing deity as male (or
female), the Midrash comments that
when the people received the Torah,
‘each person saw God's face differently.’ Ms. Setel noted that this essen-
tial concept of diversity in the per-
ception of God allows a feminist to
reject male imagery.

Ms. Setel pointed out that neither
feminism nor Judaism is monolithic.

“At Passover, a question posed by the
wicked son" is “What does this mean
to me?" - but Jewish women often find
themselves asking the same question.
“The feminist movement must acknowledge
the validity of all women's experien-
ces, express concern for the wholeness
of a woman's life, and accept that the
female experience has positive teach-
ings for all human beings. Tradition-
al Orthodox Judaism defines women's
roles as separate but equal in impor-
tance. In Europe, Jewish women were
often responsible for the economic and
commercial responsibilities of a fami-
ly as well as maintaining the home be-
cause of the high value placed on male
scholarship. Only in America - where
the male breadwinner role dominated -
was this female definition redefined
negatively in terms of “weak” men and
"dominating" women, a stereotype that
many Jewish women unconsciously accept.

In liberal Judaism, women may take
an active leadership role as cantors
and rabbis, and are included as part
of a minyan. But problems of sexism
still persist in both the congrega-
tional and community level, with women
often not achieving full participation.
Radical Judaism states that the entire
belief system must be transformed and
wants to use other structures, aban-
doning many of the rituals and tradi-
tions in entirety.

Being counted in the minyan, Ms.
Setel noted, "means to be counted as a
Jewish person." The central issues are
authority and power, and when women
move beyond their individual experience
they see their commonality. Women need
to develop a belief in the legitimacy
of being both feminist and Jewish. They
need education on these issues and
must raise their children with a-
wareness. In conclusion, Ms. Setel
stated, “We need to take on our own
authority. We must insist that wo-
men and the value of what we have
to offer cannot be ignored.”

— Hope Hoetzer

Manin

.

Patrice Mason, Leader

“Those wine stains on my grandmother's
tablecloth represent continuity.”

Over 50 women ranging from their
20's to their 60's attended this
gentle workshop that focused on Jew-
ish tradition in the home. Patrice
Mason, author of Banich U‘Mevorach
(Hebrew Through Prayer), teaches at
both the Tivka School and Temple Beth
Am, and is a Rebbitzin (Rabbi's wife).

Ms. Mason began by distributing a
questionnaire that asked about the
participants' earliest Jewish memories,
what memories were the most meaning-
ful, who most impacted on their Jewish
identity, and other questions about
home rituals and religious objects,
and home behavior on Mitzvot (tradi-
tional commandments that actually
number over 600 "good acts"). When
the results were compared, mothers and
grandmothers emerged as central figures
in the home and holidays that molded
women's Jewish identities. "The bot-
tom line," noted Ms. Mason, "is that
the real impact is in the home.”

Positive memories lead to adult
involvement, and modern mobility poses
challenges to building Jewish identi-
ties in children. Grandparents are
less accessible, Jewish neighborhoods
are largely things of the past, most
children attend public schools, and
all this places the real burden on
parents to create a Jewish environ-
ment. "Judaism is an evolving pro-
cess," Ms. Mason noted, and the home
rituals of regular holiday observance
have the strongest impact on the young.
"It gives children a sense of belonging
and creates a rhythm of family life."

Ms. Mason noted that in addition to
traditional rituals, there is a need
to create new, participatory family
observances. Although prayers at meal
time are established rituals, Ms. Mason
commented that at bed time her family
recites the Sh'ma (central prayer of
Judaism - Hear O Israel, the Lord our
God, the Lord is One) together in He-
brew. Every Sabbath, in addition to
the ceremonies of candles, bread and
wine, everyone in the house donates
to Tzedakah (charity) and the family as
a whole decides where it should be gi-
ven. At Chanukah, each child has his
or her own menorah to light.

Some older traditions, noted Ms.
Mason, should really be revived not
only because they are Mitzvot, but be-
cause they add to family observance.
The blessing of the children on Friday
nights, inviting guests to the home at
Passover and giving food to the poor
at Purim are all worthy activities.
And ritual objects should be focal
points in the home not only because
they are beautiful, but because they
are part of family observance.

Ms. Mason said she views Mitzvot
"as an obligation I choose to fulfill
in the framework of Judaism as I un-
derstand it...We're doing a much bet-
ter job teaching our kids to be good
people than Jews who are good people.”
Mitzvot, she concluded, means being
good people through fulfilling rela-
gious obligations.

= Hope Hoetzer

Margy figp

"DANGER FROM THE RIGHT: THREATS TO
YOUR FREEDOM" Barbara Parker,
Leader

"Schlafly has all the answers - I
have all the questions."

A packed basement sat in concerned
silence as Barbara Parker, Education
Policy Director of People for an Amer-
ican Way, presented a film and led a
discussion on the powerful, well-or-
ganized, monied political movement
that is the religious right. The pri-
mary focus was the concerted attack
on public education that has had im-
pact on both Congress and the White
House.

Ms. Parker began with a series of
"updates": a letter circulated in
Palm Beach pitching Schlafly's book
Abuse in the Classroom that warns
public schools and the NEA are filled
with socialists, humanists and athe-
ists who destroy religion while fos-
tering homosexuality and abortion; a
quote from President Tim LeHay of The
American Coalition for Traditional
Values who insists public schools are
“moral cesspools owned by Satan"; a
statement of Jerry Falwell on “Listen
America”, praying he “hopes to see
the day when there are no more public
schools"; a book called NEA: Propagan-
da Front of the Radical Left that
states the National Education Asso-
ciation is trying to make the U.S.
a totalitarian state.

The 1982 film produced by People
for an American Way, "Life and Liberty
for All Who Believe", is a highly im-
pactive overview of the key elements
in the "Religious Roundtable”, the
political-religious coalition that is
the sworn enemy of “secular humanism,
liberalism, feminism,” and most other
values of an open society.

Burt Lancaster, as narrator, notes
that these people are dangerous and
have rewritten Christianity to impose
their doctrine on us all. 40 million
Americans listen weekly to electronic
religious media that uses religion to
preach politics and raises millions
of dollars. Names on checks are used
to generate political mailing lists
for selected candidates like Jesse
Helms. The message of “save, baptize
and register” is emphasized in many
associated fundamentalist divinity
schools. The movement sends 10 mil-
lion pieces of mail monthly, and 70%
of the liberal Congressmen targeted
by the Christian Voice lost their
elections. Some of the most fright-
ening quotes from the Religious
Roundtable, interspersed between
claims of a “divine mandate", attacks
on child protection agencies as "ges-
tapo" and photo-montages of “Burning
Celebrations" of books, tapes and re-
cords, were: "Every sin in the world
can be laid at the feet of liberals,"
“Execute the homosexuals", "God can't
hear the prayers of Jews," and “When
two people are equal, there is no head
and love is destroyed."

Footage of church schools displaying
slogans like "simplicity is truth's
most becoming garb" was contrasted with
literal witch hunts of public school
teachers, and purges of libraries and
curricula and an explanation was given
of the strategy to force Texas to demand
textbook modifications that would in
turn force the other 49 states to accept
these changes (the classic being "equal
time for creationism"). Most telling
of all were three statements that truly
summarize the film's message: a mini-
ster commenting “Our leverage goes up
when the electorate goes down;" another
clergyman noting that "40 million (vo-
ters) is enough to change the consti-
tution, the President and anything we
want"; and Jerry Falwell piously stat-
ing to the heavens "God could even
raise a tyrant to protect the Godly.”

Ms. Parker began her discussion by
noting that the situation is worse now
than in 1982. The Right has organized
for 10 years to discredit public schools
and their tactics have had the effect
of the "Big Lie" - say it long enough
and loud enough and people will believe
it. The present administration looks
favorably on the Right Wing's attempts
to replace the public schools with a
voucher system, as it blesses its ef-
forts to control the content of edu-
cation through control of books and
curriculum. “Our August 1985 report
shows censorship attempts in 46 of 50
states; in 1984 it was 48 of 50 states.
This year over 40% of these ‘attempts
were successful," resulting in the re-
moval of such books as Of Mice and Men,
the Diary of Anne Frank, and any-
thing by Judy Blume and Norma Klein,
and targeting such programs as sex
education, and drug and suicide
prevention. "These people," Ms.

Parker asserted, “want our kids to
be robots instead of learning how
to make them."

Ms. Parker touched on a pending
trial in Hawkins County, Tennessee
that is on the July docket, and is
already being called Scopes II. The
issue is reading curricula grades
K-8 which was attacked for its advo-
cacy of "global understanding, equal
rights for women, civil rights, evo-
lution, and secular humanism." Con-
cerned Women for America initiated
the suit, on grounds that they have
a right to a curriculum in accord
with their fundamentalist beliefs.
This month in Alabama, a suit was
initiated with Governor Wallace's
support to throw out an entire
school curriculum based on its "secu-
lar humanism."

Ms. Parker noted that many commu-
nities ignore these controversies in
the mistaken belief "it can't happen
here." "However, when coalitions are
formed to stand up for public educa-
tion and work with the schools for
improvement, concerned parents can
be successful."

(As a footnote, a recently formed
local group, “The Coalition for
Public Education", has been formed
to tackle local threats to public
education that grew out of the EPIC
controversy.)
=—Hope Hoetzer

Presenter Lois Weinstein ran
a workshop on uncovering and
understanding the mechanisms of
prejudice: how they keep us apart
and prevent solidarity, empathy
and cooperation among people.
She emphasized that prejudice is
a learned behavior--that children
are socialized at a very early age
with subtle cues about what is
considered right and wrong.
Parents play the largest part in
this socialization, and must take
an active role in “breaking the
chain” of prejudice and discrim-
ination, by monitoring their own
behavior to eliminate negative
attitudes which they might inad-
vertently teach their kids, and
by actively introducing cultural
diversity to their children. A
child whose parents respect other
people and cultures, and who inter-
act in a positive way with diverse
people, will learn that there is
no basis for "stereotyping" of a
certain group of people, and no
basis therefore for prejudice or
discrimination, hate or violence.

Weinstein presented "Eye of
the Storm", the famous study on
film by a Midwestern elementary
school teacher, who divided her
third grade class into “blue-eyed"
and "brown-eyed" children. She
assigned privileges to one group
and stigmas and restrictions to
the other, and let them act out
their new roles. A class which
formerly was cooperative and
polite, friendly and caring,
produced in her words, "monsters".
The children who were in the
“inferior” group felt awful, pro-
duced lower test scores, displayed
poorer attention in class and were
visibly depressed. The "superior"
group was exuberant, enthusiastic,
attentive and seemed to "learn
better". The "superior" group
also very quickly got used to their
status and their behavior toward
their "inferiors" became abusive.
Then the teacher turned the tables
on the students. She told them
she had made a mistake. It was
really the brown-eyed children
and not the blue who were superior.
The class then changed roles.

Before showing this film, Wein-
stein had the workshop divided
into blue-eyed and brown-eyed
groups, so we could experience
how that felt. Many participants
who didn't "catch on" to what
she was intending were quite
insulted. This was exactly what
she wanted to have happen: until
you experience obvious prejudice
you cannot know what it feels
like, cannot examine your own
behavior for it, and cannot then
look for the less obvious signs
of prejudice encountered day-to-
day.
NO JEWISH CHRISTMAS

After the film and a short
discussion, Weinstein then spoke
about the need for Jewish families
to help their children combat the
2,000 years of destructive preju-
dice, discrimination and racism
that a Jewish child is subject.