U.S. Laws to Curb Sterilization Abuse

Sterilization is the most common  
birth control method in the world. In  
the U.S., it ranks second to the pill.  
It is important, however, to ensure  
that abuse of the procedure does not  
happen and that the decision to be  
sterilized is made voluntarily and  
with a full understanding of possible  
consequences and complications.

Sterilization abuse occurs when a  
person is coerced into ending repro-  
ductive capacity, or is denied the  
choice to be sterilized. The abuse  
takes varied forms. Often poor and  
minority women are forced to sign  
sterilization consent forms - fre-  
quently not in the patient's native  
language - during labor, or while  
seeking or having an abortion. Some  
women are threatened with the denial  
of other medical services, or the  
termination of welfare payments un-  
less they are sterilized. Many of  
these women do not know that the  
operation is irreversible and aren't  
informed about risks, benefits, or  
alternatives.

During the early 1970s, steril-  
izations rose to about 1 million per  
year. In 1973, in the U.S., involun-  
tary sterilizations became a public  
issue with the Relf case. Two Ala-  
bama sisters, Mary and Minnie Relf,  
aged 12 and 14, were sterilized with-  
out their knowledge or consent. The  
federal district judge found that not  
only were minors being sterilized with  
federal funds, but poor people were  
being “improperly coerced into ac-  
cepting a sterilization operation..."

In 1974, as a result of public  
pressure which grew out of Relf, HEW-  

ordered a moratorium on sterilizations  
performed on all persons under 21 or  
those incapable of giving informed  
consent. In addition, HEW stipulated  
that all sterilizations take place  
only after informed consent had been  
given, and a 72 hour waiting period  
had lapsed between the time of consent  
and the operation.

By as late as 1978, major teaching  
hospitals were found not to be in com-  
pliance with the HEW guidelines. Poor  
women were used for live experiments  
as hospitals trained residents in how  
to perform sterilizations, especially  
hysterectomies. Significantly, 47%  
of the teaching hospitals studied had  
either no minimum age requirement or  
a minimum under 21 years; 33% reported  
that consent had been obtained during  
labor, and 58% obtained consent during  
an abortion. In addition, 30% used a  
consent form that did not advise women  
that refusal to be sterilized would not  
jeopardize welfare benefits.

HEW promulgated new guidelines which  
went into effect on March 8, 1979. The  
regulations mandate that the individual  
wishing to be sterilized be at least 21  
years old, mentally competent, and not  
institutionalized. In addition,  
there must be a 30 day waiting period  
between the time consent is given and  
the operation (consent to expire after  
180 days). Hysterectomies will NOT,  
according to the guidelines, be paid  
for as a method of sterilization for  
family planning purposes. Moreover,  
the sterilization operation must be  
explained verbally, in the woman's  
native language. Consent cannot be  

obtained while a woman is in the  

hospital for childbirth, or an ab-  
ortion and, before consent can be given,  
a woman must be told that refusal to  
have a sterilization will not result  
in a loss of federal benefits. Health  
care providers are required to docu-  
ment compliance with the regulations  
before federal payment is made.

There are some major problems and  
weaknesses with the guidelines. First,  
the regulations only apply to federally  
reimbursed providers, such as Medicaid.  
Second, penalties for non-compliance  
are weak; the only penalty is non-  
payment for that particular steriliza-  
tion procedure. And third, enforcement  

and monitoring can be ignored and cir-  
cumvented unless the guidelines are  
widely publicized and vigorously en-  
forced.

Sterilization abuse occurs every  

time a person is sterilized:

* without giving informed consent

* without knowing that the operation  
is permanent

* without any knowledge of the risks,  
benefits, or alternatives to the  
operation

* without having the opportunity to  
make a carefully thought out de-  
cision

* when he or she has been threatened  
with the denial of other medical  
services, or termination of welfare  
payments

* when lack of access to contra-  
ception and abortion make sterili-  
zation the only alternative to hav-  
ing more children

* when a person chooses to be steri-  
lized but is discouraged, or even  
prevented from undergoing the  
operation

Sterilization abuse was common in mental institutions in  
the late 1930s when my aunt was committed. Forced steril-  
izations most often occur when women are in positions of  
helplessness. Post partum depression is not uncommon but  
the "cure" they chose for my aunt was sterilization.

"I got the first one//this time it's your turn"  
and he decided he'd rather not)

she was the oldest child: Auntie Bert  

dad, and Aunt Opal, the baby  

of the family  

COMMON GROUND NOVEMBER 1983 PAGE NINE