meee Sharing of Bread and Herbs

by Sarah Slavin

What else is for dinner? An herb  
soup! Soup is ideal for marking the  
Pythian experience: Delphi happens  
to mean hollow mountain cauldron.  
Guess where we made our soup? But,  
why all this soup? Because we were  
afflicted by cold drafts off the  
sides of Parnassus. More than once  
hot soup eased this affliction.  
Daphne has adapted this recipe from  
Julia Child's Mastering [so to  
speak] the Art of French Cooking  
(volume one is coauthored by Louisette  
Bertholle and Simone Beck). The  
herb soup base is leek-potato, which  
essentially can be prepared any time  
of the year from ingredients on hand  
(assuming you grow leeks in the  
garden--they will be fine in the  
ground until you wish to use them,  
although come spring, pull and use  
those left from last year's crop).  
Leek-potato soup may be served hot  
or cold, suit your own affliction.

Simmer covered for 25-40 minutes,  
only until the vegetables are tender,  
in 2 quarts water, 1 1/2 lb. unpeeled  
potatoes cut into quarters (a source  
of vitamin C and potassium), 1/2  
bunch chopped celery with tender  
leaves, and 1 1/2 lb. chopped leeks,  

including the edible-looking greens  
(the leeks with greens supply  
vitamin C and sulfur). Cook the  
potatoes and leeks with 2 large bay  
leaves, 1 t. mineral salt (if you  
want it), and about 1 1/2 t. ground  
white pepper, although taste as you  
go--white pepper, the smooth peeled  
peppercorn, is hot. If mineral salt  
(or kelp) is not to your liking, and  
you yearn for salt beyond that sup-  
plied by the celery in the soup, you  
may consider in its place winter  
savory (containing vitamin A), to  
taste. (In Diet for a Small Planet,  
p. 232, Frances Moore Lappe offers  

a seasoning made with pressed seaweed  
and sesame seeds.) Do not imagine,  
however, that large amounts of any  
herb will compensate for a taste for  
salt; too much of an herb for the  
taste buds is too much.

Peel the potatoes after cooking;  
the peelings will slip right off.  
You may want to eat them on the spot.  
Puree the cooked potatoes, leeks,  
and celery. Immediately stir back  
into the cooking water. Much of  
the nutritional content of the pota-  
toes, celery and leeks by now has  
leached into this water. If your  
puree seems unflavorful, cook more  
potatoes and/or leeks as your tongue  
tells you to. Cover, and chill  
overnight.

When you are ready to serve the  
soup, in a small heavy-bottomed pan  
sauté in 2 T. soy margarine, 1 cup  
snipped parsley, a bunch of chervil  
(which contains vitamins A and C),  
and a sprinkle of tarragon leaves  
including the stem, along with a  

PAGE 10 COMMON GROUND = JULY 1986

generous amount of chives (containing  
A, C and manganese) cut into small  
pieces. This soup is basically for  
fresh, not dried herbs; and the  
freshest way to be fresh, as Daphne's  
friend Karen puts it, is to be alive.  
The 'deader' a food, the less its  
vitamin content, one strong argument  
favoring locally grown foods. If  

you lack an herb garden, co-op or  
greengrocer to keep you in fresh  
chervil and tarragon, you might con-  
sider an alternate mixture, 1 1/2  

cups parsley and watercress combined,  
including the watercress stems (water-  

cress is a source of vitamins C and D  
and of sulfur), and a generous help-  
ing of chives. Parsley need never  

be out of season; you probably can  
get three crops in the garden if you  
begin sowing in February, and after  
the outdoor season, grow it on your  
windowsill. Chives, too, prosper in  
the garden and also on your sunniest  
windowsill. If you find watercress  
out of season and the grocery store  
(which will happen), try instead a  
few anise seeds, meaning the dried  
fruit of Pimpinella anisum and not  
star anise, the seed of Illicium  
verum. Taste as you go. Rather than  
any of the combinations of herbs  
suggested, this soup may also be  

made with strips of fresh sorrel  

(a source of vitamins A, B2, and C).  
Cook the soup herbs in the margarine  
just until wilted, one or two  
minutes, then a little at a time,  
mix in a shallow 1 T. potato starch.  
Remove the pan from the burner, and  
slowly heat in 3 cups hot water.  
(Haste makes lumps.) Return the pan  
to heat, bringing the mixture to boil.  
Stir in 1/3 cup raw long grain brown  
rice (for vitamins B and E). Cook  
the herbs and brown rice 25 minutes,  

and puree. Combine with the soup  
base. Snipping fresh herbs, espe-  

cially chives, over the top of each  
serving will add an additional burst  
of flavor and vitamins. Do not cut  
these herbs until you are ready to  
eat them.

This is a Bring Your Own Protein  
(BYOP) party, because the members of  
the Pythian sisterhood are not woven  
all of the same thread...certainly  
not of the same dietary plan. To  
complement the protein in the potatoes  
and whole wheat flour, protein possi-  
bilities include grilled salmon steak  
(for the self-indulgent and those con-  
cerned with the presence of eicosapen-  
taenoic acid, EPA, in their systems; EPA  
is a factor in reducing the chance  
of unwanted blood clots and hence heart  
attacks, to which some women are in-  
creasingly susceptible.) Salmon is  
good with fresh lemon and fresh dill.  
A small serving is all you need.

Or, you might eat a little baked  
skinned chicken (a source of vitamin  
B and potassium), rubbed with olive  
oil, small pieces of parsley (in this  
case freeze-dried is desirable because  
it will adhere better to the surface  
of the chicken--be sure the parsley  
is still green); and Szegö Hungarian  
(rose) paprika (which tastes best  
because it includes only dried  

sweet pepper pods and no stalks or  
stems, and is a source of vitamins  

B2 and C). Rub on the oil and herbs  
after the chicken is inserted with  
twelve or more peeled garlic cloves,  
which cooked, will taste sweet, not  

strong (and which will provide sulf-  
ur). Or, try sour cream and onion pie with  
walnut crust (a source of vitamins B1  

and E), seasoned with horseradish,  
parsley, caraway and paprika. The  
recipe is found in Millie Katzen's  
The Enchanted Broccoli Forest...and  
other timeless delicacies. You may  
substitute yogurt containing live  
culture for the sour cream;  
yogurt and horseradish are said to be very  
good together. Or, try zucchini  
casserole with cheddar cheese and  
fresh marjoram, as in Wings of Life,  
Vegetarian Cookery by Julie Jordan.

A fresh herb tossed salad of ruby  
red, leaf, bibb or Boston lettuce  
(containing vitamins A and C) will  
follow the protein. Romaine, curled  
endive, escarole or spinach would  
overpower the herbs, which is not to  
suggest that you eliminate these  
leafy greens from your diet. As  
creeping thyme grew in abundance at  
Delphi, the taste and fragrance of  
fresh thyme characterizes this salad.  
Lemon thyme leaves and snipped dill  
(with A or C), or thyme and sweet or  
wild marjoram leaves (A) go well with  
halved cherry tomatoes and thinly  
sliced, unpeeled unless waxed, cucum-  

bers (a source of manganese and with  
the tomatoes, vitamins A and C). When  
tomatoes and cucumbers are out of  
season, use grapefruit sections (C)  
and if available, avocado slices  

(A, B and C as well as potassium and  
sulfur). If you want them, cold  
cooked fresh beets (which supply  
vitamins A and B6, and manganese,  

but also a naturally high sodium  
level) go well with this salad. Dress  
the salad with 3 parts olive oil, 1  

part fresh lemon juice and peel (for  

C) and 1 part raspberry vinegar. Al-  
though light-handedness is the policy  

usually gaining the most favor, pro-  
portions throughout this salad depend  
on the cook's taste. The olive oil  
is unsaturated and lacking both  
cholesterol and salt; it contains  
some vitamin E.

Crabtree & Evelyn offers a French  
raspberry vinegar in a bottle with  
a charming label; the vinegar is  
strong tasting. You can make your  
own and may prefer to. Raspberry  
vinegar is an acetic syrup. Let  
it stand overnight at a ratio of 2 lbs.  
raspberries to 1 pint good white wine  
vinegar; without squeezing, strain  
through a cheesecloth bag into a  
large pan and heat with 3/4 lb. sugar  
for every 2 cups of strained raspber-  

ries and vinegar until the sugar has  
dissolved. Simmer and skim for 15  
minutes. Cool and pour into brown  
glass bottles and cap. (Daphne keeps  
her raspberry vinegar in a stirrup  
vase.) If you have access to a wild  
raspberry patch or grow your own  
raspberries, and have more than enough  
to eat, you will find making the vine-  
gar affordable and feasible. Wild  
raspberries, by the way, are known  
as the briar of Mt. Ida on Crete; Mt.  
Ida is the home of Cybele, with whom  
is associated the double-axe--as  
Mary Daly says in Pure Lust, “weapons  
---of our own Wild wisdom and wit".  
At Delphi too, and after the coming  
of Apollo, in 1100-900 B.C., we  
received offerings in the form of  
the double-axe. We ourselves honor  
Cybele; and her strong presence, com-  
plete with red chariot and red yoked  
lions, honors the North frieze of the  
Siphnian treasury at Delphi.

What is dinner without dessert?  
Healthiest. A nice ending to this  
meal will be red grapes and summer  

Con't on p. 11