/TO SHAVE OR NOT TO SHAVE

raeer

|

by Sharon Green Przepasniak

After a long winter and a not-so
pleasant spring, summer is finally
upon us. And as always, after many
months of wearing turtlenecks, sweat-
ers, corduroys and heavy socks, while
yearning for warm weather, I was most
eager to resurrect my shorts, sandals
and cotton skirts (yes, skirts! Even
though, as a mother, jeans are my
standard work clothes, I find that
skirts are cooler than either jeans
or shorts).

However, May brings with it my
annual dilemma: should I shave my
legs? All winter, with the excep-
tion of the handful of times that I
swam indoors with a friend who is
both dear to me and yet thoroughly
repulsed by hairy female legs, I do
not shave.

Giving my legs a seasonal reprieve
from the razor began years ago when
I was in college, not as a result of
any deep commitment to feminism, but
because the collegiate "uniform" of
the early 70's was strictly jeans.
Since I always wore knee socks under-
neath, what did it matter what my
legs looked like?

However, my mother (whose own leg
hair, so light as to be barely per-
ceptible, was nonetheless always
neatly shaved) had taught me well;
so every spring, when the shorts
came out, the hair was removed! Then
came 5 years of "professional" jobs
during which time I often wore dres-
ses or skirts. Most of this time I
taught, and since I was always in
front of others, self-consciousness
about my appearance prompted me to
begin shaving year-round. But since
I had no children to tend to in the
evening during those years, the time
needed to shave my legs (electric
razors are much less brutal, but
take considerably longer than a
straight razor) was never really a
problem.

Then came motherhood, and suddenly
my time was no longer my own. There
are many days when I barely have time
to wash my face and brush my teeth,
no less find 15 uninterrupted minutes
to shave my legs! Also, during these
past few years, I have begun to
question many of the “feminine” rit-
uals that I had learned so well as a
teenager and had always accepted as
givens for my sex.

PAGE 6 COMMON GROUND JULY, 1984

First, I gave all my nail polish
to a niece; doing dishes and changing
diapers are hardly conducive to
keeping one's fingernails polished and
manicured. Next went make-up. Not
only was there no time to put it on,
there wasn't anyone to see it after it
was on anyway! In fact, after wearing
almost no make-up for the past 4 or 5
years, my skin is not only healthier,
but I now find myself almost as re-
pulsed as that friend I mentioned
earlier when I see a woman wearing
a lot of make-up.

But abandoning make-up and finger-
nail polish were relatively easy.
Although most women often wear these
accoutrements, to do so is not one of
our cultural mores. Women without
make-up or women without nail polish
are rarely stared at or ridiculed.

On the other hand, women with hairy
legs are not so easily overlooked, es-
pecially if their leg hair is as dark
as mine is. In fact, the more notice-
able the leg hair, the more obvious
the stares and the more frequent the
comments. According to acquaintances
who never shave, such reactions range
from outright cries of ridicule and
disgust, to sexually harassing remarks
from strange men on the street who
claim to be turned on.

So these reactions prove that hairy
female legs are quite taboo in our
society; indeed, it is rare to see
unshaven legs on women, especially at
such places as beaches and pools,
where much of our bodies are exposed.
For me, the stereotypical woman with
hairy legs was a vestige of the ‘60's:
a "hippie" type, with long hair (on
her head!), no bra, and certainly not
wearing a bikini!

But was this an accurate portrayal?
I think not. The women I know who
have let their leg hair grow natural-
ly have at least somewhat of a femin-
ist perspective. Many of them feel
that if hairy legs on men are not
"gross", then neither are women's.
(These same women would also remind
you that even though many men do

shave their faces every day, beards
and mustaches are certainly an ac-
ceptable - and even attractive - al-
ternative!)

Many women also feel (as I do)
that we spend far too much time, ener-
gy and money trying to make ourselves
look attractive to men. Indeed, these
women would tell us that physical ap-
pearance should take a back seat to
personality, character and intelli-
gence. Still others feel that we
should allow our bodies to be more
natural, and that we should not deli-
berately cause ourselves pain (how
many times have you cut yourself
shaving?!). Finally, many of us
find this shaving chore a perfect
waste of precious time.

Furthermore, those of us who have
had the wonderful opportunity to
either travel or live abroad have
learned that the custom of women
shaving their legs is hardly uni-
versal. Americans view Europe as the
hub of style and culture, yet most
European women allow both their leg
and armpit hair to grow naturally from
puberty on. Tourists from the U.S.
are surprised and even repelled when
they first see such body hair on wo-
men; yet even we Americans can adapt!

After once living in a European coun-
try, I became so accustomed to this
sight that I think I developed a more
worldly outlook which allows me to be
able to accept my own leg hair to a
certain extent.

But even though I can handle the
sight of my own leg hair, I know that
others cannot... Thus every spring I am
compelled to decide: do I shave or
not? For the first few weeks, I don't
bother. Cooler days are interspersed
with the hot ones, and so I don't wear
shorts every day. Also, I am still in
my own yard most of the time.

Then comes the long-awaited 80-
degree weather, and when I first don
my bathing suit, I debate. I can sun-
bathe, unshaven, in my back yard.

But soon a trip to the beach is in-
evitable, especially since swimming is
my favorite sport. And although I
don't like feeling this way, I am still
uncomfortable lying on a public beach
with hairy legs. So by mid- or late
June, I've done the deed.

But two or three days later, as
that horrid stubble scratches against
my sheets at night, I think, “Why was
I so stupid?" So I remain unshaven
for a while, usually until the next
trip to the beach, or until I want to
wear a summer dress and good shoes,
but not pantyhose. This cycle contin-
ues until about September, when I, re-
lieved, can finally wear long pants
again, and thus avoid the whole prob-
lem until the following year.

Well, the Women's Movement has un-
doubtedly done much toward improving
so many facets of our lives. Certainly
the issue of shaving our legs is
not nearly as crucial and urgent as
many others. Yet every time I feel
my daughter's smooth, baby-fat skin,

I shudder to think of her beautiful
legs cut from shaving. I can only
hope that our perceptions of feminine
beauty will be different in the future.

And perhaps I will be able to set a
less ambivalent example for her in
the meantime.