GELLER CON’T

CG: The parts of TRIANGLES that each of us responded to most strongly were the sections dealing with Sunny's daughter's death and people's insensitivity to her long-term grieving. That seemed so realistic. The other part was the experience of the lump in Sunny’s breast - especially the recovery room experience.

RG: There were parts of the book that I had trouble with. Until the very end, the whole breast lump and biopsy experience was something I was going to take out. I did write a draft without that scene and it just didn't work. There were so many things contingent on her hospital stay that wouldn't have been the same if she had had a cold and was home in bed.

CG: I agree. I thought that it was essential. Her response to finding the lump was very consistent with her reaction to Debbie's death and other people's reaction to her grief. It was very real. Things like that always happen when it's not convenient. Her lover's response of “Oh, this woman is always having another crisis, something is always happening to her“ was one I could relate to. I had a child that drowned at the age of three, so all of her responses were very real to me. For years I felt “something else is going to happen at any moment now."

CG: How much of the book was personal? Do you feel it speaks to women reclaiming a sense of Jewishness in a society where all they've heard is "assimilate"? It must be very difficult as a Jew to go to groups that open meetings with a prayer “...because, after all, we are all Christians here.“ That insensitivity must occur countless times for you and for all Jews who have more or less assimilated.

RG: Yeah, and before you know how to deal with it, it's very hard. When you are a Jew - I was always afraid of being pushy - is it pushy to assert yourself as a Jew? Well, in a sense it is. For me, what happened is that I tried to run away from my Jewish identity for years. Then when I wanted to assert my identity as a Jew, people would say “Why are you doing this? Why bother? What's the point? Why is that important?" What I want to show in TRIANGLES is that there are a lot of questions. It isn't only being Jewish in terms of going to the synagogue but it is also who you are with your family, and who you are with non-Jews.

CG: In the book, when Sunny confronts a co-worker about her use of the term “Jew me down", the co-worker thought it was a compliment. She didn't see how that comment was an insult.

RG: A lot of people can't. I think that when you are not a member of whatever group it is, you really don't understand a lot of things. When you say certain things about Jews, they are not just words in the air - they are words that have a history.

CG: In an article in last month's COMMON GROUND you wrote of your experiences at the Peace Encampment that changed your life. Is that tied into TRIANGLES?

RG: Yes, it has to do with confronting your feelings. The powers that be hold people captive by keeping them afraid. Once you confront your fears and understand that those people in power are keeping you in line by keeping you afraid - once you understand that - it makes it a little bit easier to live and a little bit easier to take chances. When you are a Jew, when you are a lesbian, when you are any of the things that people are; and you know that all these ‘moral majority’ people are running around - it's the fear of what the white upper-class heterosexual Christian male will do. The power that that person has is the power of retribution.

CG: There are parts of the book that did not flow for me. Several times as I was reading something would occur and in the way it was structured, I knew that this piece of information was going to be significant later. The one piece that was not finished for me was the reference to the book RAVENSBRUCK, a book about a concentration camp for women.

RG: The point of RAVENSBRUCK was that here was something that Sunny couldn't deal with. She saw the book, she got it, and then she didn't know what to do with it. We live in a terrible world - what do we do with these things? I read in the Lesbian Connection about these two little boys who were nine, who sexually tortured an 8-month-old baby. That's been in my head all day - what do I do? Do I yell and yell, or do I forget it? What am I going to do with this information? All I was trying to say with that [RAVENSBRUCK] is that if you are conscious of what's happening in the world, it's a dilemma as to what to do with that consciousness. My message is that you have to take responsibility - you have to take political action - that one's own salvation is in taking action. Doing nothing is what will kill us.

CG: Is there any special source or significance for the title TRIANGLES?

RG: I thought of the title originally because of the relationship between Sunny and Kay and Jack. That was the basis for the title - I thought. It was always a book about a Jewish family. I just knew that as I was writing, everything seemed to be happening in threes. It wasn't something that I planned. Even geographically, people are spread out in a triangle. It was my partner Shane who pointed out to me that the Jewish star is composed of triangles.

CG: How long did it take to write TRIANGLES? Did you begin with a sense of the entire flow, or did the book emerge as you progressed? For example, I suspect that when you began the book, you were not yet aware of the existence of the Peace Ribbon, and yet that makes the book very current in time. You had already established a theme of concern about the arms race.

RG: Writing the book took about 5 years. When I began, I was very concerned about the issue of the arms race. But it is very difficult for me to integrate politics into my fiction. I always want to, but it is very difficult. We don't have a culture where we are taught how to do this, or even how to think politically. So integrating political consciousness into fiction is something I struggle with. I didn't want to sermonize. I was so happy with the peace ribbon. I wanted to show Mery as doing something; as being active in some way. The ribbon made that possible.

CG: When I read a novel like this, when I get really involved in the characters as a reader, I often go around for several days wishing the book hadn't ended, that I still knew these people and could call them up and ask them what happened - they become like neighbors or friends. Do you find it hard to separate? Have you separated from TRIANGLES?

RG: It was very interesting - I couldn't do it - it was really rough at the end. I was doing the galleys, making the final changes and final decisions about what goes and what stays. After you have worked on a book for so long, you do become obsessed. After I finished the galleys I was talking with my editor Nancy, and I was more agitated about something than I should have been. There was a pause in the conversation and she said "You know, you have to let go sometime." And I let go just like that. In that instant, I just put it all behind me. I realized I had to do that. I had been living with those people, and they were real to me.

CG: As a writer what had you hoped to accomplish in writing TRIANGLES?

RG: I like to tell stories. I wrote the book to be enjoyed. But what I'm primarily trying to do in my writing is to give people the message that - you have to be involved. And that's what I was trying to get Sunny to learn - that she is responsible, she is a part of life, and she had to see that.

INTERVIEW

by J. Duffy

Kate Clinton has a rare job title.

She is a stand-up lesbian feminist comedienne, or "fumerist", and she is receiving widespread recognition for her work. Her latest album, Making Waves, was released this past spring, and her fans can be assured that it is every bit as enjoyable as her first album, Making Light.

Women in Western New York had a chance to enjoy Kate's humor firsthand recently as she performed to a full house at the EMMA-sponsored event on September 15.

Kate has declared that "Women laughing is no luxury reflex. Women laughing is a survival reflex." and this is the magic of the humor she showed us that night. Consciously foregoing the traditional, and generally sexist, subjects of humor, Kate acknowledges the oppression of women. But then she dissects that oppression and makes us laugh at it, and unites us in the process. Her topics are the experiences that all lesbians have shared and can identify with, and she surprises audiences with the hilarity that exists in these situations.

Besides her routines, Kate also impresses a listener with her quickness. Her adlibs are practically non-stop, and she is very responsive to her audience.

The following is an interview with Kate Clinton conducted prior to her performance here in Buffalo.

CG: You seem to be a relatively new performer. When did you begin this career as a stand-up lesbian feminist comedienne?

KC: My first performance was March 1981.

CG: What did you do before that?

KC: I was a high school English teacher. It was sort of typical. Everyone said, "You're so funny; you should do this for a living." So finally I did.

CG: There is a rumor that you come from the Buffalo area. Is it true?

KC: Yes. And I'd just like to say on the record that I grew up in Western New York. I was born in Our Lady of Victory hospital in Lackawanna and lived in the Buffalo area for the next twelve years. In fact, I even came back and taught in Hamburg for two years in 1970.

CG: You call yourself a fumerist-- a feminist and a humorist. Does the word “fumerist” imply an underlying anger in your routines?

KC: I call myself a fumerist because there is a good feminist consciousness underneath my performances. I acknowledge that women are oppressed and the oppression must end. This is very different from mainstream women's humor.

For instance, I saw Joan Rivers on Johnny Carson the other day. She never gives a hint to the oppression of women; in fact, women are often the butt of her jokes. And of course, she's very successful at what she does, which I guess illustrates what the system will reward.

CG: When you performed at the Women's Music Festival in Michigan last summer it seemed everyone there really enjoyed your performance. Did you enjoy the experience as well?

KC: Well, it was my first time ever at Michigan, although I had been to the Music Festival in New England before that. It was really empowering to see everything built from scratch by women. It was also a rare opportunity for performers to meet one another. I really had a wonderful time.

CG: When we think of lesbian comediennes, most of us can only name Kate Clinton and Robin Tyler. Are there others or is the field opening up?

KC: Yes, I think so. Whenever I perform, I ask for any local women with a penchant for humor to introduce me. And there is always someone who is ready to do that. There are plenty of very funny lesbians out there.

I've been threatening to have a humor conference for a long time. I'd also like to do some collaborative writing with other comediennes. If anyone has any funny ideas or stories, I always encourage them to write to me. I of course give credit to the originator.

CG: Can we expect an MTV video from you someday?

KC: Yes. It will be called "Making Waves", and Esther Williams has already agreed to be in it.

PAGE 11 COMMON GROUND OCTOBER 1984