REVIEW:  
NEW NIGHTINGALES  

The New Nightingales: Hospital Workers,  
Unions, New Women's Issues. by  
Patricia Cayo Sexton, for The Coalition  
of Labor Union Women (CLUW). New York  
City, Inquiry Press, 1988. 219 pages.  
Introduction by Joyce Miller, President  

of CLUW.  

"The new Nightingales," defined by  
Sexton as the legitimate heirs to the  
real Florence Nightingale's achieve-  
ments, are hospital workers who have  
extended the traditional altruism of  
women workers in health care institu-  
tions to include caring for themselves.  
The avenue for this self-care is per-  
ceived as unionism, whereby working  
conditions of hospital workers can be  
improved. Sexton correctly states that  
caring for others no longer has to mean  
self-suicide, and that improving one's  
own condition improves the quality of  
care that is provided to consumers.  

This book was written to relate the  
experience of women workers in hospi-  
tals and to redefine women's issues.  
The author, a sociologist, conducted  
two surveys of women workers, one in a  
small Eastern community hospital and  
the other in a large Western medical  
center, both of which had been recently  
unionized. Following the surveys, she  
conducted in-depth interviews with  
women workers in the hospitals, union  
leaders, and union representatives not  
working in the hospitals. From this  
material, the author extracts the words  
of the women, the union leaders and  
representatives, and seeks to let the  
voices of the women themselves be  
heard. The feelings, thoughts and  
ideas expressed by the women themselves  
are a major strength of the book.  
Another strength is the information  
provided about unions, and how women  
have responded to and contributed to  
the union effort.  

While the author  

states that the  

Hopefully, this report will help put  
us Polish women on the cultural map,  
proclaim that we exist too, and that  
for too long our stories have been  
untold. If our talents lie wasted,  
perhaps it is time for a change; if  
our health problems go untreated or  
improperly treated, this too can be  
improved; if we are discriminated  
against in promotions at work, what  
better time than now to call it to  
public attention. Let this latest  
surge for human progress, the women's  
movement, very much include us and  
our need to be recognized and have  
our issues addressed too.  

by Carol Ann Bielecki  

Here are some women you don't see  
in manuscripts. Real women - my  
grandmother, my aunt, my mother, my  
friends and me.  

The most serious issue for my  
foremothers, my friends and me has  
become separating from our parents  
and/or husbands and surviving eco-  
nomically.  

Our education levels varied: my  
grandmother finished 6th grade, the  
others finished high school, and I  
managed to finish three years of  
college.  

Periods of desperation in finding  
ourselves alone mark all of our  
lives. Madness touched a few of  
our lives, driven there by several  
stresses but surviving alone always  
being one of them.  

Some of us succeeded; some of us  
didn't. Here are the success sto-  
ries:  

My mother was always a survivor  

PAGE 8  

COMMON GROUND JULY 1983  

- Reviewed by Charlene Wheeler and  
Peggy Chinn  

The book is not in any way authorized by  
the CLUW; her position is clearly pro-  
union. She criticizes the women's  
movement (and "academic feminists" who  
have largely shaped feminist ideology)  
for seriously neglecting the perspec-  
tives and concerns of working-class  
women. Unionism, the author claims,  
has been much more responsive to the  
concerns and realities of working-class  
women and thus holds an appeal for  
working women that the women's movement  
does not. She states: “Unions are in  
fact the only on-the-job advocates  
women have..." The author contends  
that the basic goals and concerns of  
both movements are more alike than dif-  
ferent, and that appreciation of both  
movements can contribute to an improve-  
ment of women's working conditions.  

The author claims to focus on  
hospital workers - "those non-  
professionals who assist in patient  

care and in typing, cleaning, cooking,  
and keeping the hospital going." The  
author states that she does not focus  
on the registered nurse, who she calls  
"the ‘professional’ hospital worker.”  
In reality, the voices of those defined  
as workers in the hospital speak  
clearly to the hierarchical caste  
system within the ranks of health care  
workers, and eloquently to the view  
that non-professional workers have of  
registered nurses - privileged, relati-  
vely well paid, and not as overworked.  
The voices of the R.N.s, in reality,  
address many of the same problems and  
frustrations as the hospital workers.  
All of the workers, professional and  

non-professional also speak clearly to  
a shared sense of rewards that are pro-  
vided by their work - those that come  
from being able to help other people in  
some substantial way. All of the women  
speak to the desire to provide good  
care, and the constant frustrations of  
trying to do so in a system that does  
not value women's work. These com-  
monalities are not addressed by the  
author, who seems to insist that there  
is a real difference between the  
experience of the "professional" R.N.  
and the non-professional hospital  
worker. As R.N.s reading this book,  
our own experience is that the common  
frustrations - poor and unsafe working  
conditions, overloads of work assign-  
ments, crazy staffing, ad infinitum,  
are common to all women who are hospi-  
tal workers. Sexton mistakenly defines  
R.N. education and training as univer-  
sity, academic elite, at a point in  
time when in reality most R.N. workers  
in hospitals are not university  
trained. However, the insight to be  
gained from this book relative to the  
views of Sexton's workers toward R.N.s  
is an important and valuable lesson to  
all R.N.s.  

Sexton states that she is going to  
redefine women's issues from the  
perspective of the working-class woman.  
She does present a view of issues as  
perceived by the women in her study but  
does not really redefine them. The  
women here focus more on the conflicts  
between traditional family respon-  
sibilities outside and job respon-  
sibilities than professional or  
academic women might. However, the  
basic issue of integrating work life  
and personal life, regardless of the  
definition or nature of that personal  
life, is certainly a concern for all  
women. She identifies discrimination,  
segregation, and comparable worth as  
major issues for working women. These  
are not new or redefined issues, but  
certainly the way that oppressive prac-  
tices in hospitals and other institu-  
tions work against working-class women  
do deserve serious consideration. Most  
importantly, the book stimulates  
thinking and encourages analysis of how  
women may contribute in subtle ways to  
the oppression of other women in the  
health care system.  

Sexton's analysis, her summaries of  
background, and her interpretations are  
superficial. She cites newspaper  
reports of research findings - not the  

literature itself. In some places she  
provides an inaccurate summary. For  
instance, her summary of the major posi-  
tions of feminist analyses of issues is  
not only oversimplified but inaccurate  
and misleading, and only takes into  
account the literature published prior  
to the mid-seventies. Her adamant pro-  
union position leads her to uncriti-  
cally assume that the union is a  
panacea for dealing with women's issues  
among women workers in the health care  
system. She fails to analyze the con-  
dition of women as a group, and rein-  
forces the hierarchy and superficial  
differences among women that are  
inherently promoted by the system. She  
does provide a summary of the real ways  
in which hospitals of all types operate  
to generate profit, but does not ade-  
quately examine the role of the  
"hospital" in creating the hierarchical  
caste system among women workers. Thus  
Sexton fails to assess whether workers'  
expectations of the union's ability to  
address women's issues are realistic,  
when unions in most hospitals are rela-  
tively weak and still male dominated.  
In spite of these shortcomings, it  
is an informative book and well worth  
reading if you are a hospital worker,  
involved in or interested in unions, or  
interested in gaining an understanding  
and appreciation of working-class women  
as they speak. It is a valuable book  
for women in supervisory or management  
positions because of the insight that  
can be gained by hearing the voices of  
working-class women. Sexton's report  
is of interest to working women, par-  
ticularly those in hospitals, because  
of the common ground that is reflected  
in the problems and concerns expressed.  
Most importantly, this book is a “must”  
for consumers who have been frustrated  
by hospitalization experiences - to  
gain an awareness of the working con-  
ditions in which all hospital workers  
must function, and an appreciation of  
how those conditions influence the care  

received. In view of the present labor  
climate in Buffalo and the current  
efforts of Nurses United Local 1168  

(CWA), reading this book is especially  
timely.  

(The New Nightingales is available in  
Emma's lending library. Please plan to  
use the book there, or only borrow it  
for a few days so that others can use  
it as well)  

apartments. She has little materially  
and though you may shop at Sibley's,  
she shops at thrift stores and the  
Salvation Army.  

I still live with my mother and  
have a check. I am just fine right  
now. I, too, came home after trying  
to live independently. I had hoped  
by putting this down to tell more  
realistically what women's lives have  
been like for the last three gener-  
ations. Childhood isn't always but  
can be happy and carefree. Mine was.  
The bullet to bite down on is eco-  
nomic survival after childhood. The  
fun goes out of life when I consider  
that.  

As this simple history shows, life  
turns out risky. Some make it, some  
don't. And I mean it in the simplest  
terms - food, clothing, shelter. All  
of these women had high aspirations  
but the basic issues prevailed. If  
you were raised with a Cinderella  
complex like me, you need someone to  
take care of you - Daddy or Prince  
Charming or at least Mother. Finally,  
these women had only themselves to  
turn to.  

Can it be different for us and our  
daughters?  

HOT FLASHES  

...Researchers are working on a  
test that women can perform on them-  
selves which will indicate when they  
are fertile. Changes in body tem-  
perature and cervical mucus character  
are already being used to indicate  
time of ovulation. While not 100%  
effective, this fertility indicator  
could be used in conjunction with  
other birth control methods.  
...the Empire State Consumer Asso-  
ciation of New York has asked the  
U.S. Food and Drug Administration  
to bar sale of the newly introduced  
contraceptive sponge, today, because  
it contains polyurethane. The  
group thinks further research should  
be done on the possibility of a  
user developing toxic shock syndrome  
because polyurethane may become a  
breeding ground for bacteria. The  
sponge is soaked in spermicide and  
is easily inserted. It can be left  
in place no more than 24 hours and  
costs about $1 each...