COMMON GROUND

Vol. 1 No. 8

W.N.Y. Women’s Newsjournal

WOMAN GANG-RAPED

(New Bedford, Ma.)

An unidentified woman in a crowded
barroom in New Bedford, Massachusetts,
on March 6th was raped repeatedly by
four men, according to a U.P.I. news
story. Prosecutors say two witnesses
cracked jokes and cheered the attackers
on with cries of "go for it!" as the
woman was sexually abused for two
hours on a pool table. About 15
other bar patrons allegedly stood by.

Rape cases are always particularly
frightening, but this one especially
so. Despite the scarcity of coverage
in our local newspapers, we have seen
stories on this case fairly regularly
on national news, both of the case
itself, and of the reactions of the
New Bedford townspeople, including a
march on March 14 to the City Hall.

Common Ground had the opportunity
to talk with one of the women from New
Bedford who participated in this event.
2500-4000 people (estimates have varied,
but “closer to 4000" says our source)
marched from the local YWCA to City
Hall in a silent, candlelit procession.
In a town the size of New Bedford
(about 100,000) many termed this a
“major miracle---this many people have
never turned out for anything!"

Men and women from all over New
York and New England listened as
speeches were read and telegrams from
across the country were presented, in-
cluding one from the Governor of Massa-
chusetts. More than one participant,
however, according to our source, still
felt a bit wary as they marched through
the streets, for "there were a lot of
young men who lined the streets, watch-
ing us."

For this reason and many others,
action in New Bedford has not stopped
with this march. Now a coalition has
formed, the "Coalition Against Sexist
Violence” with a list of goals and
demands it is presenting, in hopes of
making the town safer for women.

Their proclamation includes such items
as: -to create a speaker's bureau
of both men and women to visit local
groups and organizations and discuss
the topic of sexist violence.

-to monitor the trials pro-
ceedings

-to evaluate current rape and

violence legislation and lobby for
new laws
-to network with other similar

organizations throughout the state

-to create a new department in
the police force to deal with victims
of rape, and to have ongoing training
of police officers conducted

-to aid in the creation of a
community Rape Crisis Center with a
multi-lingual staff

Led by such groups as the local YWCA
and the New Bedford Women's Center, one
major demand of the group that seems
to have gone unheeded to date is to
hold witnesses to this crime account-
able. None of the other 15 customers

or the bartender were indicted. Dis-
trict Attorney Ronald A. Pina has
said, "Mere presence is not enough in
this state"...to bring an indictment.
Mr. Pina also said that one defendant
in the bar stopped all others from
calling the police. According to
first reports, this was done by
wielding a butter knife.

The Coalition has also indicated it
will lobby for the ERA, for, as more
women are able and are seen to parti-
cipate more freely in all aspects of
society, perhaps incidents of violence
such as this will decrease. (This
incident took place in a neighborhood
bar, frequented mainly by men. All of
those arrested were native Portuguese,
and traditional Portuguese bars are
men only. Some question of racism
has been raised in relation to the
arrests.)

Despite an apparent majority view
in the New Bedford area that this crime
was indeed a terrible thing, the
minority view is still heard. At the
close of the march, a caller to a local
radio show was heard to say, "She must
have been asking for it--my wife would
never go into a men's bar alone!"

This bar was owned by a corporation,
but the liquor license was held in the
name of a woman from the neighboring
town of Dartmouth. After hearing of
the incident, the woman went in and
relinquished her liquor license.
However, the other male members of the
corporation have said they will fight
this action, as she had no right to
give the license up.

In times of high unemployment,
violence against women has tradition-
ally increased. Buffalo may do well
to heed this warning from the situation
in New Bedford, Massachusetts. Many
of our former local organizations
dealing with rape crisis and battered
women are no longer in existence.
Those that are are well deserving of
the support of the entire women's
community.

(Next month, CG will carry the
complete list of demands and goals
of the New Bedford Coalition Against
Sexist Violence.)

ATTACKS IN DELAWARE PARK

Toward the end of March, a woman was
attacked while jogging in Delaware Park.
This incident was similar to several
assaults in the park on women joggers
last summer. The assailant comes from
behind and strikes women with a wooden
club.

Women should be made aware of these
incidents so they can take precautions.
Some suggestions are: jog or walk in
pairs, keep to the main running track,
report suspicious looking/behaving men
to the park police, if you have been
harassed, report it to the police, and
share information with other women
joggers (and CG) about incidents.

Non-Profits

Fight Back! -

The Office of Management and Budget
(OMB) recently proposed sweeping new reg-
ulations for all non-profit organizations
that receive federal grants, as well as
businesses which have federal contracts.
Although subsequently withdrawn, the
controversy still lingers, and many
non-profit agencies and consumer
groups are keeping a close watch on the
OMB and future regulations.

Both business groups and non-profits
were caught napping during the first
few weeks these new proposals were made
public, but then quick to criticize
this policy shift, which follows a
right-wing mandate to “defund the left."
The philosophy and rationale behind
this shift (which because it is a
regulation change, can be made without
the approval of our elected offic-
ials), is to keep the government from
supporting organizations which, as
part of their function, seek to influence
policy, laws and regulations in oppo-
sition to the government, even when
such activities are paid for with pri-
vately raised funds. (A good example
of this is the recent attempts to
dismantle the Legal Services Corporation,
which gives access to poor people to
legal help. It also does civil rights
work, and on many occasions represented
parties which were suing the govern-
ment.)

There are already regulations concern-
ing "political advocacy" for non-
profits, and include prohibitions against
electioneering and legislative lobbying,
as well as endorsement of political
candidates.

The OMB proposal however, broadened
the definition of “political advocacy”
to include nearly all types of govern-
mental decisions. This means that non-

profit organizations could not comment
on proposed rule making and licensing
by administrative agencies (national,
state or local), rate-making by util-
ities, and state lawsuits that in-
fluence government policy, etc. (For
example: an organization for the dis-
abled which receives some federal money
could not file amicus curiae (friend
of the court) briefs against discrim-
ination against the disabled.)

These regulations would have had a
devastating effect on community groups
that receive federal funds for any pur-
pose, including Block Grants, social
services, health centers, job training
etc. Moreover, the new rules would
have reached far beyond the use of fed-
eral funds. Federal dollars would be
put into jeopardy if an agency engaged
in any of these "political advocacy"
activities, even with privately raised,
segregated funds.

The rules would have disallowed use
of telephone, furniture, stationery,
newsletters, copiers and supplies
etc., even if the costs were fully
reimbursed, forcing an agency to create
a veritable "duplicate office" for that
small portion of their legitimate
business that was deemed to be politic-

*Turn to page 3