One third of all Puerto Rican women of

childbearing age have been sterilized. So

common is this operation that it
is known simply as

La Operacion. It is a documentary film
telling the not-so-hidden truth about
sterilizations of women in Puerto
Rico: encouraged by the Puerto Rican
government, supported by largely U.S.-
owned businesses and the U.S. govern-
ment, sterilizations have been used as
a form of social and population con-
trol to create a perfect island re-
public as an example to others. The
economic situation of the island has
been used by the P.R. government as
an excuse for the sterilization of
nearly one-third of all Puerto Rican
women. The procedure is so common,
it is called simply, la operacion.

Sterilization can be a positive
form of birth control when performed
according to the wishes of the woman
(with informed consent and a
viable range of other choices) so that
sterilization becomes a real choice
not just the most economically ex-
pedient. However, abuse of this pro-
cedure, as documented in La Operacion,
has been directed against poor and
ill-informed women, very young women,
women while in labor or during an
abortion. It is accompanied by coer-
cive or subtle propaganda designed to
convince the masses of women that

sterilizations are desirable, not just
as a personal choice, but for the well-
being of society; Puerto Rico was
going to be a "model" country and this

was one tool the government used.

The intentions of those promoting
sterilizations in this way are clearly
demonstrated by this film. Helen
Rodrigues-Trias, M.D., who spent sev-
eral years in practice in Puerto Rico,
said that sterilizations were used as
a form of population control, a social
policy instituted with the idea that
certain people should not have children—
poor people, dark-skinned people, or
female workers who are needed in fac-
tories as cheap labor, for example.

The film interviews dozens of women
who were sterilized without knowing it
meant they could no longer have child-
ren, without the knowledge that there
were other forms of birth control, or
because their male partners would not
practice birth control or consent to
be sterilized, or (ultimately) because
they were being groomed for low-paying
jobs in factories where pregnancies
were considered bad business practice
by employers.

The history of sterilization and
U.S. involvement were addressed by the
film. In 1898, North American troops
first entered Puerto Rico. By 1930,
corporations owned nearly half the

land. Much was put into sugar cane
production, and by 1937, unemployment
was at 37%.

Based on the principle of eugenics, 
which is a science that deals with
the improvement (as in controlled

COMMON GROUND NOVEMBER 1983 PAGE EIGHT

La Operacion, produced and directed by
Ana Maria Garcia

human mating) of a race, Law #136 was
passed legalizing sterilizations.

(It is important to note that any law
passed in Puerto Rico can be over-turned
by the U.S. Congress.) This law was
passed precisely at the time when women
were needed to work in WWII-era sweat
shops producing goods for human con-
sumption.

Sterilizations were either very in-
expensive or free. The social propa-
ganda which went with it was everywhere—
even in children's textbooks. The P.R.
government deliberately embarked on a
policy of population reduction which
included encouraging mass migrations
of people to the U.S. Between 1945 and
1964, one third of the P.R. population
left.

Whenever unemployment was high, over
population was blamed, and migration
and sterilization went hand in hand as
answers to this problem. According to
the film, "excess" population was rel-
ative to the employment needs of this
"model" country.

More statistics on what has hap-
pened to Puerto Rican women paint a
gruesome picture. By 1953, 17% of
the women had been sterilized; in
one town as many as 76% of the women.
By 1958, 10 - 42% of all working wo-
men had had la operacion. The mayor
of one town, who presided over its
sterilization program, called it his
"greatest achievement." He was proud
because the men could do important
things like socialize and loaf during
the day and the women could work.

By 1956, Puerto Rican women in
government housing projects were being
used to test the Pill, in doses ten
times as strong as are currently on
the market. In fact, during 1960-
1970, Puerto Rico was used as a lab
for development of birth control
products. U.S. involvement in ster-
ilizations was not limited to support
laws.

From 1968-1972, U.S. aid
for birth control increased by $1
million. The U.S. goal was zero pop-
ulation growth, to prevent unrest and
revolution by masses of poor people.
One quarter of the world's women

were to be sterilized, and eventually
100% of all women should use some
method of birth control.

Even with all this money and ef-
fort into population control as the
answer to social and economic prob-
lems, during the 70's more than one
half the Puerto Rican population was
receiving some social service assis-
tance. Inflation and unemployment
were high. New companies encouraged
by cheap available labor employed
fewer workers than old industries.
But by 1974, 200,000 women, or 35% of
the total had been sterilized - the
average age was only 26 years; by
1980 the highest in the world.

The film makes the point that this
same philosophy about sterilization
has been exported to the U.S., where
in predominantly poor, and non-native
English-speaking areas, sterilizations
of women are statistically much high-
er than surrounding areas.

The film is useful and important
for people to educate themselves about
reproductive rights.

Donna Kangeter, one of the women
who helped bring the film to Buf-
falo, said she felt the issue was
so important that she hoped the film
would generate spin-offs and com-
munity discussion. She hoped that
a broad segment of the community
would be able to see it, learn from
it and organize around issues of
reproductive rights and steril-
ization abuse.

Presented by: National Lawyer's Guild,
Coalition for Abortion Rights and
Against Sterilization Abuse (CARASA),
Hispanic Women's League, Women's
Studies College, G.S.A., P.O.D.E.R.,
L.A.N.A.S.A., The Association of Women
Law Students, Common Ground, EMMA The
Buffalo Women's Bookstore.

Puerto

Rico is the

country with the

highest incidence of
sterilization in the world.
This moving documentary explores the
controversial use of sterilization as a
way of population control on the island.