VW ————

«»Buffalo Women’s Health Network«»
— Eee”

Birth Issues

One hundred and fifty people
turned out for a film and panel dis-

"Birth Rights and Respon-

sibilities - An Owner's Guide to Mater-

nity Care”, in Buffalo, sponsored by
the Buffalo Committee for Birth Al-
ternatives. Five Women, Five Births,
a film by Suzanne Arms, author of
Immaculate Deception, opened the pro-
gram. The panelists, John Daly -
attorney and expert on natural birth
litigation, Teresa Epstein - Informed
Birth and Parenting instructor, Elena
Kehoe - Certified Nurse Midwife, and
Lou Swartz - U.B. Law Professor, spoke
on choosing and communicating with
your maternity care provider, your
rights as a patient, the legal as-
pects of informed consent, and home
birth. A lively discussion followed,
demonstrating the keen interest these
topics have for so many people. The
Buffalo Committee for Birth Alterna-
tives is an organization of consumers
and professionals who want to expand
the availability of various birth
options in the Buffalo area. The
thrust of the Committee's work is in
presenting informative and education-
al public discussions, lobbying the
obstetrical community for changes in
hospital policies, and discussions in
monthly meetings on various aspects
of childbirth. The long-term goal of
the group is to see a free-standing
birth center developed in Buffalo.

Monthly meetings are open to the
public. A short informational pre-
sentation is followed by committee
reports and general discussion on
various presentations and projects.
Women and men interested in working
with the group are encouraged to
attend these meetings. For more in-
formation write: BCBA 310 Baynes St.,
Buffalo; or call 881-3585.

The next meeting will be held
Thursday, April 24, 7:30, at 324
Woodward, Buffalo.

Infertility:

The Male Factor

by Millie Baumgartner

For many couples having a child is
one of the greatest joys - and for
those who are involuntarily childless
there has been little help available.
An infertility problem affects one in
every six couples. The Erie County
Medical Center offers a program to
help couples overcome the problem of
infertility with artificial
insemination.

Artificial insemination is

an alternative when there are no
physical problems preventing the wo-
man from becoming pregnant. There-
fore, artificial insemination is used
when there is an infertility problem
with the male. Some of the common
causes of infertility in the man are:
1. he does not produce sperm in large
enough numbers or sufficient quality
or activity to cause pregnancy.

2. some physical condition might de-
crease the quality or activity of the
sperm cells after they are produced.

3. a physical blockage in the long,
thin passages leading from where the
sperm are produced.

4. the man has had a vasectomy.
Some couples in this situation choose
artificial insemination because they
want the woman to experience pregnancy
and to be the mother of their children.

In 1974, the first artificial in-
semination program was begun in Buf-
falo at the Erie Medical Center. The
medical director, nurse practitioner
and counselor work very closely with
the couple while they are going through
the program. Many couples want to keep
artificial insemination a closely
guarded secret. The Center understands
the need for confidentiality and works
hard to ensure it.

First the man is tested. He should
be seen by a urologist who may perform
a variety of tests. One of the simpl-
est tests is a semen analysis. For

this test a man should collect all his
ejaculated semen in a glass container.
This collection should follow a 3-day
period of refraining from sexual ac-
tivity. A woman should contact her
obstetrician-gynecologist for infer-
tility testing. The Center will work
with the doctors to ensure all sug-
gested tests are completed. It is es-
sential for partners to be tested for
infertility because in many cases the
infertility problem is shared by both
people.

Once the physician has determined
that the partners are candidates for
the artificial insemination program,
the Center arranges an interview
with the medical and counseling super-
visors. The couple is interviewed
separately and then together. During
these interviews, medical histories are
taken, and the social, emotional,
motivational and legal aspects of
artificial insemination are discussed
with them.

In the clinic, anonymous frozen
semen specimens are used. This in-
creases confidentiality because the
donor's specimens are collected at a
state licensed lab in New York City
and each specimen is coded. The Cen-
ter knows each donor only by code
number. Even though the donor is
carefully screened, a normal healthy
pregnancy cannot be guaranteed. Women
who have been artificially inseminated
share the same risks and complications
of pregnancy as does any other woman.

The inseminations are done around
the time the woman is ovulating. Usu-
ally three inseminations will be done
which increases a woman's chances of
becoming pregnant. At the time of the
insemination, the Center encourages
the partner to be with the woman. The
procedure is quite simple. The woman
is in the same position as she is for
a pelvic examination with her hips
raised slightly higher than the rest
of her body. The doctor, or nurse
practitioner under the doctor's direct-
ion, inserts a straw-like tube filled
with semen into the woman's vagina and
deposits the semen at the opening of
the uterus. The woman then remains
on the table for about 30 minutes.

Each month a series of three in-
seminations is done. It usually takes
3 to 5 months of insemination for
pregnancy to occur. For some women it
takes less, and for others, it may take
longer. (Remember, it can take com-
pletely fertile couples a year to con-
ceive.) Statistically, 60 to 80 per-
cent of all women having anonymous
donor artificial insemination become
pregnant.

Every couple in the insemination
program must sign a consent form
stating they will accept any child
born as a result of artificial insem-
ination of the woman as a legal child
born of their marriage. This consent
form also includes the couple's per-
mission to use specific donor semen
for the insemination.

The cost of the artificial insemi-
nation program at Erie Medical Center
is as follows: $18 - semen analysis;
$50 - initial interview and counsel-
ing session; $80 - per insemination.
If there are any questions regarding
the program, please call Erie
Medical Center at (716) 883-2213.
Look for the next Health Update re-
garding sperm banking at the Center.

Page 13 Common Ground April 1983