"Shadow on a Tightrope: Writings by  
Women on Fat Oppression". Edited by  
Lisa Schoenfielder and Barb Weiser.  
Reviewed by Janet Chassman.  

This anthology begins with essays  
which represent the first 10 years of  
writings of the feminist fat liberation  
movement. This movement is similar to  
other human liberation struggles, and  
offers a radical analysis of fat  
oppression and ways to end it. The  
first section, "The Fat Illusion,"  
exposes the mythology surrounding being  
fat and losing weight. The facts are:  

- Biology, not eating habits, is  
the main cause of fat.  

- Health problems of fat people are  
not inherently due to fat, but are the  
result of stress, self-hatred, and  
chronic dieting.  

- Weight loss diets damage health,  
almost never "succeed" except tem-  
porarily, and should not be used.  

- Food binges are a natural  
response to chronic dieting.  

Quoting research findings taken  
from traditional medical journals to  
document their contentions, the authors  
argue that fat and thin people eat  
identically - that is, there are both  
fat and thin people who eat a lot and a  
little. Your weight is determined  
internally by your "set point." There  
is no way to change it significantly,  
more than 15-20 pounds.  

Reducing diets, by themselves and  
in combination with exercise programs,  
drugs, or psychological treatment, have  
a 99% failure rate when examined over a  
5 year time period.  

Fat cells are emergency survival  
resources in case of famine. It takes  
4-6, sometimes 8 weeks into a diet  
before your body starts digesting fat.  
Until then, the energy is taken from  
your heart, leg and arm muscles, and  
brain cells. During this time, there  
is no difference between a fat woman  
dieting and a starving thin woman.  

Like survivors of a famine, chronic  
dieters develop compulsive eating  
habits. When dieting stops, the eating  
problems disappear.  

Vivian F. Meyer, writer of “The Fat  
Illusion" was a founder of the Los  
Angeles Fat Underground, the first  
feminist fat liberation organization.  
Together with Judy Freespirit and Lynn  
Mabel-Lois, a medical librarian, they  
revealed fat oppression and myths pro-  
moted by the medical profession and the  
diet industry.  

There is big money to be made by  
telling women that they don't look  
"right". American women spend $11  
billion annually on diet soda, food,  
diet clubs, figure salons, girdles,  
etc. Fat women, and average-sized  
women who compare themselves to models  
and actresses and think they are fat,  
buy these products to lose weight.  
Thin women are also consumers of diet  
products because they have been led to  
believe that if they “let themselves  
go" they too would get fat. In this  
way the diet industry hurts all women  
by taking away our freedom to eat and  
enjoy food we need and like.  

Through personal accounts on issues  
like growing up fat, dancing, exer-  
cising, getting clothes, and everyday  
hassles, this book documents the ridi-  
cule, harassment, and discrimination to  
which fat women are subjected.  

It is hoped that this book will  
help end the isolation of fat women and  
fat women's liberation will emerge as a  
distinct yet basic feminist voice.  

This will happen as fat women come for-  
ward to talk about their oppression and  
all women begin to question and reject  
traditional ideas on body size and  
weight loss.  

BUSTING UP IS HARD TO DO  

Edited by Bonnie  
Earth's Dat  
A  

‘Feminist Arts Pe  
P.O. Box 41 Central  
Buffalo, N.Y.  
$6.00 112 pp  
Reviewed by  

Mann  

Here's a book for anyone who ever  
lost, got angry and survived, or  
almost didn't survive; lost them-  
selves or found themselves and  
want to tell about it.  

These are passionate  
and beautiful. The collective has drawn to-  
gether the infinite portraits of  
the end of all good things, and the  
end that comes not soon enough.  
These poems (and a few prose pieces)  
explore the pain or joy or release  
we experience as people, places and  
even pets move in and out of our  
lives: quietly, like thunder, through  
death, adultery, divorce, time, ne-  
glect, and break-ups without the romantic veil,  
without (too much) guilt, without  
forgetting where responsibility for  
any kind of relationship lies.  
Whether a physical departure or an  
internal leave-taking, they strip  
the veneer that time preservation adopts,  
and look clearly at the toll taken. They "[try]  
to attach the heart to the brain"  
(from Rosalind Pace's "One Half  
Tries to Speak to the Other", p. 69)  
and do so while describing the  
choices we make or accept or the  
lost chances we regret.  

The variety of voices, styles,  
approaches contained in this sub-  
stantial volume keep it from being  
dull or cranky. Rather, it is a  
collection of exciting, deep and  
female experiences. A book like  
this belongs on every woman's  
bookshelf.  

No waters cool  
the burned  
Body  

Elaine Rollwagen Chamberlain  
Roswell Park 1979  

{Swans never sing except when they  
are dying. It was once believed  
that swans carried the soul to  
rest. Coscoroba is a type of swan.]  

Beginnings  

What's past is prologue.  

-William Shakespeare  

This year I turned 40. It seems a good vantage point from which  
to look back at the years.  

A bride. Wrapped in white satin... and dreams.  

Mother of a baby girl. And another at 23. Both beautiful and  
bright. I, who was plain and pale, to have produced such dark-eyed,  
dark-haired daughters!  

Marriage falls apart. It is a slow process of picking up the pieces,  
trying to find the glue that will hold them together. I watch my two  
daughters grow from babies...to toddlers...to girlhood...to adoles-  
cence. And work at low-paying clerical jobs, trying to balance a  
budget, as well as a lifestyle combining motherhood and career.  

My father dies of cancer. Slowly and painfully. We were not only  
father and daughter, we were good friends. His loss leaves me feel-  
ing, not older, but more vulnerable.  

I begin college. A whole new world unfolds. At first it is an in-  
tellectual smorgasbord: I try a little philosophy, sample a little  
psychology, take one economics course (one is enough). Finally,  
majoring in English. Despite the well-meaning objections of family  
and friends. (What'll you do with a liberal arts degree?)  

Graduation. Cum laude. But my hard-won B.A. means nothing in the  
tightened job market here.  

California, here I come. With a suitcase in each hand (all my worldly  
possessions under my armpits). I move into a small apartment in San  
Francisco, walking the same streets as Kerouac and Ginsberg, sipping  
cappuccino at the outdoor cafes. And writing.  

My work begins to be published. In small literary journals. But it  
is sweet.  

A beloved friend passes away. She, too, living on the West Coast,  
alienated from family and friends... Alone. Suddenly, desperately, I  
want to return to my roots. You can't go back, everyone tells me.  
Of course you can, I say. Simply click your heels together three  
times and whisper, there's no place like home, there's no place  
like...  

So, here I am. A little more grey in my hair and a few more crinkles  
around my eyes. I used to call them laugh lines but I find it's  
no longer funny.  

I smile at the image in the mirror: You must be getting old,  
wallowing in nostalgia.  

My mirror twin grins back. Well, old friend, what next? Where  
do we go from here?  

The answer comes to me as I recall what my daughter once said when  
asked what she planned to do when she grew up:  

L-I-V-E!  

Aline Lawrence  

Aline Lawrence is a free-lance writer who feels her best years  
are still ahead of her.  

PAGE 7 COMMON GROUND MARCH 1984