2 LS CAT SO CARPE ERR RD et

From Russia With. . .

by Esther Roblin

In the fall of 1973, Sophia Goldin,
then 18 years old, arrived in Buffalo
with her parents and younger sister.
They had come from Odessa, Russia,
via Rome, the first family in the re-
cent wave of Russian Jewish immi-
gration to settle in Western New York.
The Goldins had no family or friends
living here and did not speak English.
Their coming was planned and supported
by Jewish Family Service, a multi-
faceted organization that has primary
responsibility for caring for Jewish
refugees newly arrived in WNY. JFS
helps families find housing and jobs,
and provides educational assistance
and four months of monetary support
until they either become self-support-
ing or qualify for county assistance.

Since the arrival of the Goldins
ten years ago, JFS has helped to
settle more than 170 additional Rus-
sian families. And Ms. Goldin, now
a social worker at JFS, herself helps
to ease the adjustment of the new ar-
rivals, a process she understands
very well. According to her, social
work is a profession unheard of in
Russia because the government "does
not care that much about people."
When her family made the decision to
emigrate, Ms. Goldin was just pre-
paring to take entrance exams for a
teacher training program at the
university level. However, because
she was Jewish, the only university
she could attend was in Siberia!

Ms. Goldin remembers many other
instances of anti-Semitism. Although
Odessa is a large city with a large
Jewish population, it had only one
synagogue which, when it burned, was
never rebuilt. Jews who attended
services had to sneak in. Ms. Goldin
learned all that she knew of her re-
ligion from her two grandmothers who
celebrated the holidays as best they
could within their own homes. Many
times she was called a “dirty Jew”
by her schoolmates and others. In
fact, Ms. Goldin states, "My family
felt like foreigners in our own
country because we were Jewish!"

The Goldins decided to leave Russia
after reports started coming back from
earlier emigrés in various countries
(Israel, Australia, Canada, as well as
the U.S.) telling those who remained
that "there is a better life," that
"it is not necessary to put up with
all the hardships" they were used to.

According to Ms. Goldin, besides the
religious persecutions and human
rights violations, there are many
hardships that Russians must face on
a daily basis, and some of these es-
pecially affect the lives of women.
In Russia, there is a very strong
work ethic and all women, unless they
are disabled or too old, work full-
time outside the home. It is true
that there is neither sex-related
job discrimination nor occupational
wage differentials, but this works
negatively for women as well as pos-
itively. While many women become
teachers and doctors (occupations
without any special status), most
women do heavy factory work. Then,
after an exhausting 8-hour day of
physical labor, a woman will, on a
daily basis, have to stand in one or
more long lines to buy food for the
evening meal, carry her purchases
home herself and spend more time at
home preparing the meal. Or, alter-
natively, she will get up at 5 a.m.
to get to the market and make her
purchases before she goes to work.

She cannot buy in quantity because
the food is not available, and even
if it were, she would have no means
to carry it home and no way to store
it. By the time the evening meal is
prepared, a woman is often too tired
to enjoy it.

A woman can expect little help from
her husband at home because, while
there is no job discrimination outside
the home, there is definitely role
discrimination inside. Although she
contributes equally to the support of
the home and works physically as hard
as her husband, household tasks are
considered women's work exclusively.

People are often ill in Russia, ac-
cording to Ms. Goldin, because of the
poor quality of their diet which con-
sists mainly of carbohydrates. Chick-
en and meat are too expensive and too
seldom available to buy very often;
fresh fruits and vegetables are avail-
able only part of the year. Ms. Goldin
feels that she is much healthier
since coming to the U.S. and is still
amazed at the availability of fresh
produce all year round and at the
enormous selection of consumer goods
in the stores.

Ms. Goldin also feels that health
care in Russia is inferior to that
available here. She believes that
her two grandmothers, who remained in
Russia because of responsibilities to
other children, both died prematurely,
one of diabetes, the other of a stroke
because of inadequate medical super-
vision.

Encouraged by the reports of a better
life outside of Russia, Mr. Goldin
applied for immigrant visas for him-
self and his immediate family. In
order to leave Russia, a Jewish family
must first have an “invitation” from
a first-degree relative living in
Israel. An invitation from a relative
in another country is not acceptable
to the government which recognizes a
return to the Jewish homeland as the
only valid reason Jews might have for
leaving. Once such an invitation is
obtained and permission to exit is
granted by the government, the family
leaves for Vienna, Austria, where they
are helped by the Hebrew Immigrant
Aid Society (HIAS). It is at this
point that a family may make known its
true intention to settle in a country
other than Israel. Those going on to
Israel leave directly from Vienna;
those wishing to go to another country
are first sent to Rome. If a family
has no friends or relatives in their
country of choice who can sponsor them,
Rome HIAS finds an organization in a
specific locality that is willing to
do so (as in the case of the Goldins—
after spending six months in Rome,
JFS in Buffalo was ready to receive
them).

Within a month of applying to exit
Russia, the Goldins received their
visas. But they were lucky. The time
varies greatly—Ms. Goldin's uncle,
for example, did not receive his visa
until nine years after his initial
application. There are never any
reasons given as to why it takes one
family months to obtain a visa, while
for others it takes years; why some
people are allowed to leave with all
their possessions, while others are
allowed only the clothes on their
backs. Such decisions seem both arbi-
trary and capricious.

Once it becomes known that a fam-
ily wishes to leave, it may become
subject to various kinds of perse-
cution. The wage earners may lose
their jobs, the children may be forced
to leave school prematurely. Family
members may be called ‘traitor’ and
find themselves ostracized. Because
of the likelihood of these things oc-
curring, it is almost always the case
that as many family members as pos-
sible, including aunts, uncles and
grandparents, apply for visas togeth-
er and all who are granted them leave.
A spouse who is unwilling to go must
be divorced. Older people on pensions
lose those pensions. Because the
state saves money in this way when
older people leave, and because their
leaving may free up a desirable apart-
ment, older people seem to be granted
visas more readily than those with
many years of productive work time
ahead of them. If children or grand-
parents are for some reason left be-
hind, it is often the case that they
will never be granted permission to
leave, a state of affairs that has
caused many families tremendous sorrow.

It is bad enough for a family which
has been granted permission to leave,
and knows it will only be a matter of
time, to face these additional forms
of persecution; it is so much worse
for those who are denied permission
altogether, the Refuseniks, who can-
not even reapply until two years have
passed. It is these people who have
sometimes made international news
headlines by publicizing their plight
through hunger strikes.

When Ms. Goldin's family arrived
in Buffalo, they found a pleasant
furnished apartment waiting for them.
Her father found work immediately as
a welder, her mother as a mold-maker
in a jewelry factory. Ms. Goldin
attended an ESL (English as a Second
Language) program at SUNYAB and sub-
sequently received a degree in eco-
nomics. She is presently working
towards a master's degree in social
work. The family's experiences in
adjusting to American life seem
fairly typical. Because of their
strong work ethic and background of
skilled work experience, the Russian
Jewish immigrants, both men and
women, are readily employable. They
seem to acculturate quickly both to
the local Jewish community and to
American life in general. They
quickly become very loyal Americans.

The flow of Russian Jewish im-
migration to WNY was fairly steady
between 1973 and 1980. It has now
come nearly to a stop. The last
family arrived in September 1982,
after a hiatus of one and a half
years, and no other families are
presently expected. Not all those
who originally came have remained in
the area; some have moved to other
cities in search of better jobs or
to be with relatives. Those who have
remained are now the subjects of a
study by Dr. Roger Burton, Paul
Gevirtzman, Steven Harvith and Anna
Daniels, all from the psychology
department at SUNYAB. The primary
aim of the study is to discover how
childrearing values and practices
have been affected by the adjustment
of the immigrants to life in America.
At least 40, and possibly as many as
60 Russian families, as well as a
matched sample of American families,
are expected to participate. Sophia
Goldin is also involved in the study,
both as a subject and as the chief
interviewer and translator. Pre-
liminary results of the study, data
for which will be gathered through
both interviews and observations in
homes and schools, should be available
sometime this spring. @

COMMON GROUND MARCH 1983 PAGE 3