Sins Never to

be Forgiven

by Charlene Eldridge Wheeler

The woman sat at the kitchen table,  
sipping a cup of coffee. It was late  
in the afternoon, but she still had  
time for a few minutes of much needed  
rest. She had spent the day making  
kolachi. Kolachi had been her unique  
gift to the family during the years  
they were growing up, and the kids pro-  
bably wouldn't understand if she didn't  
make it this year.

In early December, she had spent  
two or three days carefully grinding  
the nuts, salvaging the fine nut dust  
so that nothing was wasted, meticu-  
lously making the light yeast dough,  
seeing that it raised just so. The  
sweet nut rolls were carefully hoarded,  
to be shared with loved ones and spe-  
cial visitors, a holiday tradition she  
learned from her Hungarian mother.  
Since the nuts and the butter were  
expensive, she accumulated the ingre-  
dients carefully throughout the year.  
This year she really couldn't afford to  
buy the ingredients, but a couple of  
her children were planning on being  
home for the holidays, and she couldn't  
disappoint them.

In the quiet of the afternoon, her  
thoughts drifted, the way thoughts do  

when precious moments are stolen for  
one's self. Next month she and her  
husband would celebrate their 50th  

wedding anniversary. It had been a  
difficult marriage and it seemed ironic  
to think of “celebrating” it. She'd  
married young. He had been a good  
looking man, except for the unrepaired  
cleft lip. He had carried himself with  
such pride and seemed so noble in  
daring anyone to notice his deformity  
that she had not been able to resist  
believing he was strong. His hands had  
been warm and insistent and his manner  
reassuring and knowing. He'd promised  
a different life, one of travel to pla-  
ces she had never seen. He spoke of  
the beauty of the hills, the quiet of  
country living, and the wonderful life  
they would have together.

They had moved far away from her  
family to the backwoods of a rural  
area. Having grown up in Chicago, the  
beauty of rural existence was not what  
she had imagined it to be and the quiet  
of country living became unbearable  
isolation. Her husband's family  
disapproved of her, because she was not  
one of the hill people but a foreigner.  
They had despised her for her slight  
accent, and although she was better  
educated -- she had gone through grade  
eleven - they treated her as if she  
were ignorant and not worthy of the  
youngest son.

Around his family her  
attitude toward her changed.  
to echo their disapproval of how she  
cooked, how she dressed, how she  
talked. He had forbidden her to talk  
with any of the neighbors, would not  
let her out of his sight, and refused  
to teach her how to drive. In this new  
life she was very much alone,

Her husband was not nearly as  
strong or as knowing as he had once  
seemed. He took to drinking with the  
fellows down in town, and when he came  
home, his mood was foul and he would  
curse her and beat her. He never  
worked steady but did odd jobs, driving  
trucks, pumping gas. There was work to  
be had, but he didn't seem to be able  
to stay at one job very long. Somehow  
his employers never fully appreciated  
his talents enough and he always had a  
good reason why he couldn't work for  
that man or that company.

At seventeen she realized she was  
pregnant. She wasn't sure when she had  
gotten pregnant, the first few months  
of fatigue and morning sickness didn't  
really mean anything to her until her  
belly began to swell and the family  
began to make comments. During her  
entire pregnancy she never saw a doctor  
as her husband said they didn't have  
the money for things like that.

The day her first child was born  
began at 5 am like all the other days of  
her married life. Always she had to  
get up an hour before waking her hus-  
band so that she could get the fire  
going in the wood cooking stove and get  
his breakfast ready. He insisted on  

eating a large breakfast with fresh  
biscuits before going out to look for  
work or spend the day in town. While  
she had noticed some discomfort in her  
belly, she hadn't thought much of it.  
It was the day for doing the  
laundry, and as the newest wife, it was  
her responsibility to do the laundry  

for herself and her husband and all of  
his family. That meant hauling buckets  
of water from a well a good distance  
from the house, heating it on the wood  
stove, doing the wash by hand on a  
scrub board. The sheets, the dresses,  
the overalls - all had to be washed and  
wrung by hand. The hauling, wringing,  
stretching and lifting were a full  
day's work. All through that day she  
had to stop and rest occasionally as  
the discomfort in her belly grew  
intense and then subsided. She got the  
laundry done - just in time to prepare  
supper for her husband at the end of  
the day. If supper was not ready when  
he got home, he would likely fly into a  
rage and beat her. Since she never  
knew when to expect him, she would get  
supper early in the hope of avoiding  
the beatings. That didn't always work.  
Sometimes he was late and would beat  
her because the food had sat on the  
stove too long and didn't taste good.  
While standing over the cook stove  

that evening, she felt her waters  
break. She still did not realize that  
she was in labor. Quietly, she had  

wiped it up, being careful not to call  
attention to it or to what was hap-  
pening to her. To do that would have  
provoked physical and verbal abuse, and  
she had quickly learned that in this  
new family - and with this new husband  
those things came swiftly and without  
reason.

That night was very long. She  
stayed in the kitchen, stuffing rags in  
her mouth when the pain became too much  
to bear. Finally, long after her hus-  
band had gone to bed, she could keep  
silent no longer. In the early hours  
of the morning, she had wakened her  
husband and begged him to get help.

He was gone for hours. When he  
returned with the doctor, he was drunk.  
The doctor arrived just in time for the  
afterbirth; and for years to come, her  
husband would beat her and curse her  
for having to pay the doctor for doing  
nothing. That was a sin he never  
forgave.

There was so much she hadn't known  
then. Her mother had never told her  
anything about marriage, or pregnancy,  
or birthing. Her two older married  
sisters had never told her anything  
either. She hadn't known what to  
expect with a newborn. When her son  
got severe diarrhea at the age of nine  
months she didn't know what to do. And  
when he died, she suffered her grief  
alone.

The years passed.

The war years were difficult with  
money scarce, but she'd lived through  
them with three babies, rationed food  
and no man around to curse and beat  
her. In the 50's her teenage son  
taught himself and her how to drive a  
car. In the 60's things had gotten  
simultaneously better and worse. Her  
husband had a heart attack and was  
unable to work. One of them had to  
have a job, and for the first time in  
her married life, she was able to work  
outside the home. Her husband's  
jealous rages grew worse, and his ill  
health didn't keep him from becoming  
violent. But at least she had been  
able to drive and was once again out in  
the world. She had felt more like the  
self she had been before her marriage.  
They had had good times too, during  
those nearly fifty years. Over time,  
he had mellowed and had gotten easier  
to live with.

The cup of coffee had grown cold  
before her; and when her eyes darted  
toward the clock, she realized that too  
much time had passed. Slowly she got  
up, rinsed her cup at the sink and put  
it carefully in the cupboard. It was  
nearly 5 o'clock and time to get her  
husband's supper. If he didn't eat on  
time, he always got a sick headache.

“Venus of Willendorf", pen and ink by Barbara Hock

The Pentagon Ribbon  
and Me

by Pamela Palma

Up until two years ago, I had  
always had a tremendous amount of  
creative energy. I learned to sew  
at an early age, and by the time I  
was five, I was already making doll  
clothes. I can never remember a  
time when I haven't been in the midst  
of at least a half a dozen different  

projects.  
But two years ago, I ran out of  
inspiration. None of the ideas that  

came to me had any meaning, and the  
scrap basket no longer enticed me.

My creativity came to a screeching  

halt.

It was a time of transition for  
me. I was becoming more involved  
in the women's movement; I made the  
commitment to work for peace as the  
focus of my life; and I affiliated  
myself with WAND, Women's Action for  
Nuclear Disarmament. I began to feel  
that my creative abilities were a gift  
and that these inspirations come  
through me from somewhere else. I  
understood that I could use my art  
to work for peace. By giving out that  
which has been given to me, I would  
be completing a circle, and the re-  
sults would be tremendous. I had no  
idea, however, where it would go. I  
thought perhaps I would make some sort  
of banner for WAND.

It so happened I got wind of the  
Pentagon Ribbon in the summer of 1983  
at the Women's Peace Encampment.

The idea for the Pentagon Ribbon  
began as one woman's vision. She  
determined that if forty people from  
each state were to make a piece 36"  
long depicting what we would hate to  
see lost in the event of a nuclear  
war, we would have enough Ribbon to  
surround the Pentagon one time. She  
reasoned that women should have an  

opportunity to express our feelings  

in a positive way! On August 4, 1985,  
we will surround the Pentagon with our  
love to commemorate the 40th anniver-  

sary of the Bombing of Hiroshima and  

to celebrate our love for life.

The idea of tying a ribbon of love  
around the Pentagon intrigued me.  
Several months later, an actual length  
of the Ribbon fell into my hands, and  
I was hooked.

I knew immediately that my theme  
would be the Earth Mother. The Earth  
is very dear to me. Like the native  
peoples, I believe that she is our  
mother, and that she nurtures us.  
Everywhere in my travels, I have per-  
ceived female imagery. I have longed  
to embrace her, to be comforted at  
her bosom. So I carefully sketched  
the mountains into the shape of a  
woman lying on her side with her back  
to us, as if she were looking out  
toward the morning star. Because the  
image is so subtle, I chose strong  
colors and simple shapes so the piece  
would attract attention to itself.  
The symbolism is even more profound  
than I had planned: The woman seems  
to be awakening, rising up out of  
the Earth after a long sleep.

The Ribbon is an amazing project.  
It unites people of diverse backgrounds  
and philosophies on the common ground  
of love, and verifies the power we  
have as women, individually and col-  
lectively. The woman who first con-  
ceived of the project thought that a  
mile of Ribbon might be a long shot,  
but certainly worth the try. Recent  
estimates claim ten miles of completed  
pieces, and more coming all the time.  
Women can make a difference. We love  
this planet and we will rescue her.  
By expressing the love in our hearts,  
we will keep her safe.

WomanExpress MARCH 1985