The Abortion Issue: In the Middle

Continued from page 10

Because the needs of other women are what keep me pro-choice, I want to see all their abortion needs met, both the physical and the emotional.

Although women's needs and women's lives are of paramount importance to me, I am still in this "mushy middle" of the abortion controversy, mainly because I am now a mother. I am no longer so detached, so nonchalant about abortion as I once was. I've felt my babies squirm and poke inside of me. I've felt the pain of labor and the ecstasy of birth. And now I marvel as I watch these children grow.

However, both my children were very much wanted. And when my patience wears thin, my body aches for sleep, and my mind yearns for intellectual stimulation, this knowledge keeps me going. This desire to have a child is the key to the whole abortion issue. And when my patience wanes or I am tired, I also realize the incredible strain and unending responsibility of caring for children. Not every woman is ready for this job.

Since not every pregnancy is wanted, I believe that safe and legal abortions must remain accessible to all women. Abortions were performed long before 1973, and even if their legality is rescinded, they will undoubtedly continue. However, we all know that the safest "underground" abortions will again become the domain of women who can afford them.

As always, poor women will suffer the most.

When I first became pregnant, I was 28 and married. I had an education and a career to fall back on. I had a house and a little money saved. I felt mature and emotionally stable enough to become a parent. So society sanctioned my pregnancy. But I know that such is not the case for many pregnant girls and women. It is for them that I remain pro-choice.

But since experiencing pregnancy, labor, and birth, my pro-choice stand has become less strident. My heart grieves for those babies who don't have a chance; yet at the same time, my whole womanly being feels for those women who don't have a choice. In my own youth, I could have easily been one of them. So this is what I mean by being in the “mushy middle."

Most of all, I despair over the rapidly rising number of abortions. And I get angry because there are ways to decrease this inordinately high number. If abortions were no longer the result of lack of education, fear, ignorance, carelessness, or lack of a better choice, I'd have no misgiving about being pro-choice.

In my opinion, the most obvious partial solution is to provide widespread and detailed sex education to both boys and girls at least as early as junior high school, as part of the health curriculum. Contrary to what the Moral Majority and other conservatives would have us believe, many children receive little or no sex education at home, and if presented properly in school, as part of the health curriculum it need not encourage sexual activity or promiscuity. [See references at end of article]

Also, if sexist attitudes could be eliminated, and boys were taught to be just as responsible as girls, the old "boy pushes girl until she gives in" standard might change.

Adequate sex education certainly cannot eliminate the need for abortion. Teaching young people about contraception does not ensure they will always use it. And unfortunately, there are still few contraceptive methods for men (yes, it's high time scientists started doing more research for male contraceptives) so the onus is still largely on the woman.

No contraceptive is 100% foolproof. You have to be able to read to correctly follow directions for pills or a sponge or a spermicide. And many of us have heard stories about the I.U.D. that came out with the baby during childbirth. But I do think that learning early on how our bodies work and how to prevent conception has the potential to decrease the number of accidental pregnancies, many of which end in abortion.

Also, I think one of the worst abuses of abortion as a method of birth control is having repeated abortions. I think this is not only irresponsible, it also wreaks havoc on a woman's body. I'd like to think that better sex education might also discourage this practice.

Finally, one of the most tragic ironies of our times is that while scores of babies are being aborted every day, many childless couples are discovering just how few healthy babies there are to adopt. Giving a baby up for adoption—the only option available to most unwed mothers only a generation ago—is not considered by nearly as many single pregnant women nowadays. Why? Is abortion always that much easier? Or is the closed adoption system, in which a birth mother will never again see or even know about her child again, such a dismal option that abortion becomes the lesser of two evils?

Granted, there are many factors that prevent girls and women from carrying pregnancies to term. But I'd like to propose that a more open and less oppressive adoption system might encourage at least some women who are able to, to carry unwanted babies to term and then put them in the arms of people who do want them. Again, the number of abortions might decrease.

I'll talk more about this in my column next month, in which I will discuss the adoption system from a feminist point of view.

[NOTE: Erie Medical Center gives the following referrals for counseling, which are primarily for Catholic women who have had abortions: The Puzzle Project, Rev. Gary Bagley, 100 South Elmwood Ave., 847-6700; Father Jack Weimer, Buffalo State Newman Center, 853-3775; and Father Ewo, U.B. Newman Center, 834-2297. For all women, Child and Family Services may be of help: Amherst 632-5500; Buffalo 842-2750; Depew 683-7435; Kenmore 876-8174; North Tonawanda 693-5344; and Lackawanna 823-2531.

According to The Buffalo News, a telephone survey of 1,036 women and 520 men conducted this January by the Gallup organization found that 3/4 of those surveyed want sex education taught in the schools before children reach high school.

HEALTH HOT-LINE

IUD Alert

In October 1984, the A. H. Robbins Company, a multinational pharmaceutical firm finally announced that its Dalkon Shield (an IUD, intrauterine device) could be dangerous to women's health. The company has already paid $253 million in the settlement of cases which involved PID (pelvic inflammatory disease), sterility, spontaneous septic abortions, loss of reproductive organs, birth defects, and even death.

If you, or any woman you know, is still using a Dalkon Shield, have your health care provider remove it immediately. The National Women's Health Network also recommends that at the time of removal, the health care provider also do the following:

- a PAP smear
- complete blood count (which can indicate whether the shield has caused an acute or chronic infection)
- a culture
- give you the Dalkon Shield, to be saved for purposes of later identification.

Submitted by Sharon Green. (Information from The Network News, Jan/Feb '85 issue. Newsletter of the National Women's Health Network.)

The Health Care Project

For The Unemployed & Uninsured

of Buffalo & Erie County

For information on free medical services, call 883-0733

SUPPORTED BY . .

Erie County Medical Society + WIN Y Hospital Association + Pharmac Association of W.N.Y. + Five Cross and Blue Shield of W.N.Y.

Health Care Plan + Independent Health Association + Erie County Executive's Office + Mayor's Office + Legislative Common Committee

Erie County Department + Erie County Dept. of Social Services + Erie County Dept. of Mental Health + American Red Cross + Salvation Army

United Way of Buffalo and Erie County + Catholic Charities + Catholic Social Services Agency of W.N.Y.

PAGE 11 COMMON GROUND APRIL 1985