The Graduate Group for Feminist Studies Presents:

SCREEN PLAY

A Feminist Celebration of Women in Film

A film festival titled “Screen
Play: A Feminist Celebration
of Women in Film" will be
held Friday Dec. 2 to Wednesday,
Dec. 7 at various sites in and
around Buffalo (see calendar
for details). The festival is
sponsored by the Graduate Group
for Feminist Studies at SUNYAB,
and includes the work of filmmakers
from Peru, India, Senegal,
Australia, Jamaica, Austria,
France, West Germany,
Belgium and the U.S., as well
as videotapes and films produced
by local artists. The
Screen Play festival was developed
in response to what its
organizers say is the virtual
exclusion of films by and about
women and third world cultures
in the mainstream film industry.
It is a program that offers
feminist film theory laced with
wit and packed with political
wallop.

ANNOUNCEMENTS

The YWCA of Buffalo and Erie County
provides after school programs in the

following Buffalo Public Schools:

Academic Challenge (#6), Campus North

(#63), Science Magnet (#59), Poplar

Street Academy (#11), Southside (#93),
School #45, and at the Downtown YWCA,

190 Franklin Street.

The program is designed as a service
to working parents who are in need of
child care during after-school hours.
These programs are staffed by qualified
coordinators and aides who are experienced
in child care, child development.

At the site of many active, emotional
debates over community needs and rights,
Councilman James Pitts (Ellicott) and
Alfred Coppola (Delaware) will probe
building coalitions for a better community
with a panel of local leaders at the
Fifth YWCA Racial Justice Symposium,
December 2, in the Buffalo Common Council
Chambers. Other panelists include
Mary Brown, Executive Committee, YWCA
Assistant Director, student activities; 
Pepe Mans, student activities, SUNYAB; Leroy Coles.

Parents will be responsible for filling
out "Exceptional Transportation"
forms to transport children to the
appropriate school. Children must be
picked up at the program site; children
will not be bused home from the YWCA
program.

The YWCA Extended Day Programs are
New York State licensed. Funding is
available for low income families through
the Erie County Department of Social
Services. Details, costs, funding information
and registration forms can be
obtained by calling the YWCA at 852-6120.

The 1989 conference of the Association
for Women in Psychology will be held
in Newport, Rhode Island March 9-12, 1989. The

Association for Women in Psychology

has as a theme "The Many Faces

of Feminist Psychology" and is
encouraging contributions from
women with diverse circumstances
and backgrounds, including minorities,
disabled, mental health consumers. For info
write or call Kathryn Quina, Dept. of Psychology,
University of Rhode Island, Kingston,
RI 02881, 401-277-3832.

Looking for short stories, novelettes,
novellas and full-length novels for a
speculative fiction series by and about
women to be published by Crossing Press. To
help fill gaps in current women's
fantasy and science fiction. Deadline
for first anthology is Jan. 31,
1989. Send query for specific
guidelines to Susanna J. Sturgis,
Women's SF Anthology, P.O. Box 39,
West Tisbury, MA 02575.

Womenspeak Radio is presented each
Sunday from 4:30-5 p.m. on WBFO FM
88. This half hour weekly program
addresses issues of interest to
women, giving voice to the female
perspective and providing a forum
for women's voices and concerns.
Producer is Behi Henderson. Production
assistants are Rebecca Fleming,
Susan Gross, Gail Sutton, and
Howard Granat.

Executive Director, Buffalo Urban League;
Paula Rosner, Executive Director PRACA
and Karen Schimke, Commissioner, Erie
County Department of Social Services.
YWCA President Marilyn Zahn will moderate.

Haskell Lazere, an expert in urban
and community affairs and civil rights,
will open the symposium at 1:15 pm with
the keynote address, “In Pursuit of
Racial Justice, Building Coalitions for
a Better Community". Lazere was appointed
Chairman of the New York State Advisory
Council to the Division of Human
Rights by Governor Cuomo in 1984. He
has been Director of the American Jewish
Committee since 1968, and has a long
career of leadership in human rights
action in seven states. He is a member
of the Board of Trustees of the College
for Human Services, a founding Board
Member of the Committee on Decent Unbiased
Campaign Tactics (CONDUCT), and
a member of the Advisory Board of the
Congress of Italian-American Organizations.

The Symposium is an expression of
the YWCA national imperative, "to eliminate
racism, wherever it exists". It
is co-chaired by Sheila Nickson, Director,
Office of Affirmative Action and Human
Development, SUNYAB and Marlene Glickman,
Area Director, American Jewish Committee.

Admission is $5, there is no charge
to students. For more information, contact
Nancy Wilkins at the YWCA at 852-6120.

Womanfocus is a prevention program
designed to address the special
stresses that impact on women's
lives. Their summer workshop
calendar includes a number of
offerings on Assertiveness,
Self-Esteem, Journal Writing,
Anger, and Women & Food, which
are listed in the calendar. Pre-
registration and pre-payment are
essential. Registration is on
a first-come, first-served basis.
To pre-register, call Womanfocus
at 884-3256. For fees see individual
workshops. Medicaid recipients $5. Women
60 and over, 20% discount. For fee adjustment,
speak to a counselor. No one is
turned away because of inability
to pay.

Lesbian A.A. meeting every Friday
at 8 p.m., Ascension Church at
Linwood and North. All women are
welcome.

Call for contributions: Narratives,
Essays, Short Stories, Letters, Journal
Entries, Poems, Cartoons, Line
Drawings, Graphics or Black and
White Photographs, all forms of
expressions welcome for an anthology
“In Our Own Voices: Fat Dykes
Break The Silence.” Send with SASE.

A support group for adult women
(over 18) who have been sexually
assaulted is held every Thursday
night at Crisis Services. The
group will offer a safe, confidential
setting for you to talk with
others who have had a similar experience.
There is no registration and no charge. 7-8:30 pm, Crisis
Services, 3258 Main St. Buffalo.
Call 834-3131, the Advocate Program
Mon.-Fri. 9-5 for more information.

One To One, the support group for
single mothers and single mothers-
to-be, holds regular monthly meetings
at the Amherst Lutheran Church, 5125
Main Street at Lafayette Boulevard
in Williamsville. It welcomes all
single and single expectant mothers
regardless of age, race, religion
or economic situation who feel that
they would benefit from sharing
emotional support and parenting
information with others who understand
their unique needs and concerns. A $2
per meeting contribution to cover the
cost of materials and refreshments
is requested. For further information,
contact group coordinator Cheryl Dorrenbacher,

141 Henderson Ave., Kenmore, N.Y.
14217, 874-1018.

Is Your Group Listed?

Calendar & announcement listings
from your group are encouraged!
We must have your information by
the 15th of the month
for the following month.

Common Ground is the perfect
media for your group or
organization, and it's so easy to do!

Send to Calendar:
Common Ground
P.O. Box 313,
Buffalo, NY 14213

The Gemini Dance Theatre and the
Ujima Theatre, in association with
SUNY at Buffalo and Buffalo State
College will present the national
tour premiere of From the Mississippi
Delta by Dr. Endesha Ida Mae Holland
January 28 at 8 pm and January 29
at 3 pm at Buffalo State College.
Adults $15, students, seniors $10.
Tickets at Rockwell Hall Box Office.

Thousands of women have learned
to take better care of their health
through the Breast Wellness Program,
a free and educational program of
the Breast Screening Center of
Western New York. Trained and
certified educators discuss breast
anatomy and physiology, diagnostic
breast imaging techniques and
instruction of Breast Self-
Examination. If you would like
the Breast Wellness Program to
be presented to your organization
or community group, please call
Madeline Poe at the Center, 838-
1300.

Hester Thrale's Magazine, a division
of Moody Street Irregulars
and Textile Bridge Press is looking
for work which focuses on
women's issues. Hester Thrale was
confidant and caretaker of Samuel
Johnson. Women may send their
manuscripts to Joy Walsh, Dee Cosby,
or Lisa Jarnot at Hester Thrale's
Magazine, P.O. Box 157, Clarence Center,
N.Y. 14032.

Sisters of Charity Hospital is offering
a special health service for women
called "Expressly for Women." It
offers nutritional counseling, osteoporosis
screening, a resource and
referral service, gynecological
services, and services for special
areas such as bereavement support.

For additional information call
862-2414.

The Gay and Lesbian Youth Board of
Buffalo is opening a library to
benefit the community. Please
donate any books, cassettes, videos,
periodicals, etc. that you may have
available. Contact Sherrill at
Compton's or Mark at GLYB 885-0221.

Country Friends, a social group for
lesbians. Write for information:

P.O. Box 106, Clarence Center,
14032.

GROW, a lesbian support group for
women, meets alternate Fridays at
the Club Denmar, upstairs. For
more information, call EMMA at
885-2285.