Our Quiet Heath

Three poems written during the first week
of the Libyan war

and start living something real? How much warning
will we get that the life we know is gone forever?
Or was last night's attack the warning? How

are we to know? It probably would be easier

for everything to end in one white flash,

all decisions made for us by the Pentagon. Do we

stop everything, travel to Washington to protest
this evidently popular war? Or do we figure

it's no use? I don't know. But I often drift
into fantasy these days, chin on elbow,

looking out at the birds in the woods,

dreaming of children carefree to pursue

It is as if they planned it this way.
Tomorrow, our taxes are due.

Tonight, our children are engaged in their studies or play stickball in the street,

dreaming of mothers free to wonder,

What shall we eat tonight? -- and not
Will we be alive when morning comes? ---
dreaming, dreaming of our precious peace
that we don't realize yet is gone.

Tonight, millions of Americans
sit in living rooms, chewing
on pencils, writing down
a figure here, turning back
to the instructions, erasing
and filling in to see if they
can make it come out so they don't
owe.
And on the TV screen, 
the story is unreeling, April 18, 1986
five torpedoes launched, no we don't
have that information at

this time, hundreds or is it thousands of people lying dead
to be proud of one's country,
broken, bleeding - The old chestnut, the

American dream -- that one
as we curse the government
that what we can imagine to want

and write checks to pay
is the only limit on what we can get ---

for more ammunition.

It has gone appallingly wrong.

the weeks aside Children chant "U-S-A! U-S-A!" to indicate
terrible things, but I
wouldn't hurt a fly. 

But tonight, it is clear
who wields the knife. Who shuts their minds

and who is twisting it at an early age? The Fonz? Donald

Duck? It certainly isn't Miss Stevenson
Perhaps it is less clear
in first grade, a humanizing influence,
who bleeds, but I don't really think
that anyone can miss the point: 
the pen is the sword tonight. We write our checks tonight
to pay for our own death. 

I wonder if being ashamed of my country

is a feeling I share with citizens
of nations all over the world.
Or is this strong shame shared
only in certain places and ages,
by some white South Africans today,

by a few good Germans fifty years ago?

It seems as though when a country is at war
everything else ought to stop. That we send black youths to fire

on Third World people around the globe
holds a horrifying irony.

I guess being an American

is supposed to transcend color,
the same way the Jews said
"We're good Germans first" in 1933.

And the question is: How long? How long
do we keep putting our money in banks,
insurance, other plans for the future

of the social structure? When do we start

sinking it in gold, grain, guns? How long
do we keep sending the kids to school? They
mustn't be caught there -- but there is no point
in missing a math quiz for nothing. (How much
warning did Libyan schoolchildren get last night?)
How long do we keep buying clothes, taking in

movies and softball games? When do we zero in
on important things? How long do we keep
going to work? I'm a reporter, but who will want
to read about squabbles in the county legislature
when the county is dying of radiation sickness?
When do we abandon our behaviors of illusion

PAGE 12 COMMON GROUND MAY 1986