Womens’ Resource Directory

GENERAL ANNOUNCEMENTS

D'YOUVILLE COLLEGE CONTINUING EDUCATION PROGRAM includes several courses of particular interest to women: Management courses in Women in Supervision and Assertiveness Training for Women, Women in Politics, Political Parties, Introduction to Gerontology, Laws for Everyday, Working With Victims of Domestic Violence, Recognizing Alcoholism and Drug Abuse as a Family Problem, Human Sexuality, and a Lecture Series on Sex Roles and Society. The American Management Association (AMA) Extension Institute and D'Youville College are offering a course toward Management Certification. There are also several courses offered in Computer Technology, Fine Arts, Education, Human Health Services, Nursing and Public Service. Courses offer Continuing Education Units for credit. For more information, call 881-7676.

EMMA IS .. -

This summer EMMA is focusing on some titles that are of particular interest to women in the health care fields, and women who are interested in history. We are bringing in many titles that are not widely available, or titles that are not widely stocked in other bookstores. The viability of women's writing, publishing, and distribution is a remarkable challenge in the decade of the ‘80s. Much of the important writing by women is published only through small independent presses, which are not regularly supported by mainstream bookstores and distributors. Further, those works that are published by the more mainstream publishers are not typically stocked in mainstream bookstores, and therefore are at great risk for being placed out-of-print. Like other women's bookstores, EMMA is careful to support small independent women’s presses, as well as women's works published by the larger mainstream publishers. These alternative businesses are vital to the survival of women's literature, but their own ability depends on women's support. YOU DO make a difference!

For your convenience, we are including a pre-paid order form in this issue for a few selected titles. Here is a brief description of these titles to assist you in making your selections! The order form along with your payment can be either mailed or brought to EMMA.

York, Simon and Schuster, 1981, paper, $9.50) by the Federation of Feminist Women's Health Centers, is a fully illustrated guide to self-examination and self-help. The drawings are excellent in quality and accuracy, and clearly convey the concepts of self-help and mutual help among women. There is a wonderful color photograph section showing the variety of healthy women's genitals as they appear at different phases of the menstrual cycle and during pregnancy. The narrative is direct and clearly written. This book does not replace Our Bodies, Our Selves, but goes beyond it in relation to self-help. It includes a detailed section on menstrual extraction, a self-help technique that is not necessarily endorsed by all women involved in the women's health movement, and certainly not by all health care providers! However, the information in this section adds a significant dimension to the concept of women's control over her own body, whether the technique is ever used or endorsed.

GENERAL ANNOUNCEMENTS

WOMEN'S CANOE TRIPS IN MAINE taking place this summer, sponsored by Unity College. For more information contact Debbie Sugerman, Outdoor Recreation Dept., Unity College, Unity, Me. 04988.

A NEW PUBLISHING HOUSE has been formed in Portland, Oregon. LezPress will publish quality work of interest to lesbians, as well as feminist and gay-oriented material. For more information, write LezPress P.O. Box 4387, Portland OR 97208.

AIDS HOTLINE... NYS residents with questions or concerns about Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) may now call a hotline for up-to-date, factual information and referral to medical care and support services. Operated daily from 8 to midnight at Roswell Park Memorial Institute. Callers should ask for the AIDS tape when calling: The number is 881-AIDS or 881-2437.

JOB OPENING FOR ADMINISTRATIVE ASS'T with Just Buffalo Literary Center at the Allentown Community Center. The position is part-time, 15-17 hours a week. All resumes or applications must be in by June 8 before 5 pm. Contact Deborah Daley, Allentown Community Center, 111 Elmwood Ave., Buffalo, N.Y. 14201.

How to Stay Out of the Gynecologist's Office (New York, Simon & Schuster, 1981, paper, $7.95), also by the Federation of Feminist Women's Health Centers, encourages women to become more responsible for their own health care. With the understanding of female anatomy and physiology provided, any woman can safely use the preventive and alternative methods suggested. For situations where professional help is needed this book gives sound advice about choices of health care facilities and “self-protective tactics." This book includes many photos and illustrations plus an excellent table describing standard laboratory tests and a guide to medical terminology. While the emphasis in both this book and A New View is on self-help and each book addresses some of the same topics, there is very little overlap in content.

Florence Nightingale (New York, Atheneum, 1983, paper, $11.95) is a reprint of Cecil Woodham-Smith's biography that was originally published in 1951. This is one of the most frequently cited biographies of Nightingale. Additionally, it is one of the most authoritative biographies because Woodham-Smith had access to personal papers and letters that other biographers were not previously allowed to use. The book is enlightening reading; it destroys illusions and myths that are erroneously passed along about Nightingale, and provides an important link with the past.

In a Different Voice (Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1982, paper, $5.95) by Carol Gilligan critiques the prevailing psychoanalytic theories of identity and moral development, finding them lacking in their ability to account for the moral development of women. Gilligan's analysis of moral development, contrasting the standards imposed by the masculine bias, is an important example of how we can detect flaws in prevailing world views. Gilligan endorses and affirms the validity of our experience as women.

Hospitals, Paternalism, and the Role of the Nurse (New York, Teachers College Press, 1986, paper, $8.50) by Jo Ann Ashley is a classic study, written from a feminist perspective. It is the first work to explore nursing apprenticeship and paternalism in the hospital setting from a historical perspective, covering the time period from 1893-1948. In the book's Introduction, Wilma Scott Heide states, “What follows will ultimately be recognized as a landmark book, long overdue." Not only is this a landmark book, it is timeless in its implications for women in the health professions.

PAGE 14 COMMON GROUND JUNE 1984

GENERAL ANNOUNCEMENTS

PREGNANCY TESTING -- Do you have questions about pregnancy testing, health care while you're pregnant, or for your new baby, or other mother and child needs? Call the BABY HOTLINE (TLC-BABY or 852-2229) for free facts from the Healthy Mother/Health Baby Coalition of Erie County.

THE PHIL DONAHUE SHOW is considering presenting a program on birth alternatives. However, before they decide, they need to determine if there is enough interest in the topic. It is becoming increasingly important for women to know about alternative birth methods and alternative birth settings. If you would like to see this type of program, write to: Gail Steinberg, The Donahue Show, CBS, 630 McLure Ct., Chicago, Illinois 60611. (Info from Special Delivery Newsletter, submitted by Sharon Przepasniak)

CITIZEN INFORMATION SERVICE, run by the League of Women Voters, can answer your questions about New York State Government issues such as bill status, elections and ballot issues, taxes and budget, constitution amendments, referrals to appropriate agencies and much more. Phone staffed 10-4 weekdays during legislative session. Call 1-800-462-6204.

GAY AND LESBIAN YOUTH OF BUFFALO meets every Saturday at the GLCC from 2-5 pm. This is a social/support group for people 16-21 years old. On the last Saturday of the month there is a movie and discussion.

Notes on Nursing: What It Is and What It Is Not (New York, Dover Publications, paper, $3.00) by Florence Nightingale. Little comment is required to describe this important work. Written initially for all women who had responsibility for care of the sick and of children in homes, it still has timely messages for all health care workers.

Cassandra (New York, The Feminist Press, 1979, paper, $3.50) by Florence Nightingale. This is the only other work of Nightingale's that is currently in print. It is an essay written before she served in the Crimean War, and it contains remarkable insights regarding the plight of women in Victorian England. Many of the ideas expressed by Nightingale are the same that women would express today.

Women of Ideas, and What Men Have Done to Them (Boston, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1982, paper, $9.95) by Dale Spender. In this important and extensive work, Spender has restored to us women from the past, documented their erasure, and graphically shows how that erasure occurred. Most important, she has constructed ideas for reversing the erasure of women's work and for preventing its continuing occurrence. This is a readable, entertaining and enlightening work.

THE COALITION FOR EQUAL RIGHTS is serving locally as a clearinghouse for the Women's Vote Project to help plan joint activities and to help organizations plan activities that complement rather than duplicate efforts being made by other groups. Their next meeting will be April 9, 7:30-9 pm at Clearfield Public Library, 770 Hopkins Road, Amherst. Topics will include the Women's Vote Project, Women's Rights Commission of Erie County, and State E.R.A. Strategy. For more info, call Pat Seaver at 688-5893.

ATTENTION WOMEN MUSICIANS/PERFORMERS: The New England Women's Music Retreat (to be held in Conn. Labor Day Weekend 1984) is seeking women from the North East who might be interested in performing on the Day Stage. They are especially anxious to contact women of color, Third World women, women with disabilities and women of various ages and backgrounds. The Day Stage audition process will take place in late spring. For info on audition procedures, send name, address and phone number to Kim Kimber, NEWMR Day Stage Coordinator, BOX 728, West Hartford, Conn 06107.

SISTERFIRE, the annual D.C. area festival celebrating women's art and culture, is now in the planning stages for the 1984 celebration. Any craftswoman, food vendor or organization interested in reserving display space must return an application by June 8, 1984. For more information or to receive an application, write to: Roadwork, Dept. SF, 1475 Harvard St. N.W., Washington, D.C. 20009. Space limited. The festival is scheduled for June 23 & 24 in Takoma Park, Md.

GOSS

Anatomy of Freedom (New York, Anchor Press, 1982, paper, $8.95) by Robin Morgan. In this latest book, Morgan examines our varying definitions of "freedom" and provides an analysis of how our individual definitions of freedom affect our life choices. This important book presents a marvelous analysis of how feminist ideology can transform the world in which we live, and the values by which we live. It is a readable theoretical book, with many implications for the practical nature of how we live and choices that we make, individually and collectively.

Pure Lust: Elemental Feminist Philosophy (Boston, Beacon Press, 1984, cloth, $18.95) by Mary Daly. Hot off the press, this latest work of Daly's is an extension of her previous works. It is helpful to have read her previous works, but certainly not necessary. For those who are beginning an acquaintance with Daly's work with this book, as she says, “nothing is really lost to those who lust."

PLEASE PRINT:
Name: __________________________
Address: ________________________
City, State, Zip: ________________
Phone: ________________________

Quantity Title Price/copy Amount enclosed
A New View of A Woman's Body $5.80
How to Stay Out of the Gynecologist's Office $7.95
Florence Nightingale $11.95
In A Different Voice $5.95
Hospitals, Paternalism and the Role of the Nurse $8.50
Notes on Nursing $3.00
Cassandra $3.50
Anatomy of Freedom $8.95
Women of Ideas: And What Men Have Done to Them $9.95
Pure Lust: Elemental Feminist Philosophy $18.95

New York State residents, 7% sales tax...
Shipping and Handling ($1.50 for the first book, plus 50¢ for each additional book...
(Do not include this amount if you plan to pick up your order at EMMA)

TOTAL ENCLOSED...