CESP

The Community Emergency Services  
Program, better known as C.E.S.P.,  
has been in existence for a little  
over a year now. C.E.S.P. was begun  
to help the gay and lesbian community  
of Western New York with emergency  
aid when there is nowhere else in  
town. C.E.S.P. has a food pantry to  
provide food and personal care items,  
and an emergency fund to provide  
cash assistance with rent, utilities  
and other necessities in emergency  
situations.

TAKE MY ADVICE...  
This is Good stuff./

CLASSIFIED AD RATES

CIRCLE APPROPRIATE CATEGORY:

Over the past year C.E.S.P. has  
been able to provide members of the  

gay and lesbian community with over Help Wanted Roommates  
five months' worth of food and over For Sale Services  
$1,000 in cash assistance. Apartments Instructions  
C.E.S.P. is sponsored by  
Metropolitan Community Church of  
Buffalo (M.C.C. Buffalo). Funding  

to maintain C.E.S.P. is obtained  

through food drives, cash donations,  
monthly offerings from members and  
friends of M.C.C., fundraisers,  

and the saving and redemption of  
Tops register tapes.

If you are interested in donating  
non-perishable food items, or your  
Tops register tapes, they can either  
be brought to C.E.S.P. between 5  
6:30 p.m. Wednesday and (3  
South Elmwood Ave.) or put in the  
box at the G.L.C.C., 647 West Delavan  
Ave. For cash donations, make checks  
or money orders payable to Community  

Emergency Services Program and mail  
them to Tracy Moore, Buffalo,  

Name  

Address  

City _ Zip  

Number of lines __ x $1.00 per line = $  

Number of months ad is to run _ ($2.00 minimum).  

Make checks payable to "COMMON GROUND"  

Rockwell Hall, Buffalo, N.Y. 14222.  
PLEASE PRINT CLEARLY  

All donations are tax deductible.  
Thank you for your help.

If you find yourself in a situation  
where you need emergency assistance,  
call M.C.C. at 883-3375 and leave a  
message for Tracy. Help is available  
to any gay or lesbian person regard-  
less of their religious affiliation.

info from G.L.C.C. newsletter

.- We urge you to make a PO box  
Contributions. Please write to the  
address above.

“I subscribe Now” “I subscribe Now”

Name Name  

Address Address  

City City  

© $6 — Low Income _ $11 — Regular  
© $15 Household — 2 or more reading paper () $25 Friend/Institutional  
© Send me more information about Common Ground — I want to work/write for CG  
Make checks payable to COMMON GROUND, P.O. Box 313  
Bidwell Station, Buffalo, N.Y. 14222  

© $6 — Low income $11 — Regular  
© $15 Household — 2 or more reading paper () $25 Friend/institutional  
© Send me more information about Common Ground — I want to work/write for CG  
Make checks payable to COMMON GROUND, P.O. Box 313  
Bidwell Station, Buffalo, N.Y. 14222  

PAGE 7 COMMON GROUND DECEMBER 1984