Advertising Supplement  
to Common Ground.  

m—S  

BUFFALO WOMEN’S BOOKSTORE  

Already?! Yes, if you want these special products specifically for women. As part  
of EMMA's special holiday order, we are featuring some exciting new records and cassettes,  
as well as 1984 calendars that are ideal for gift giving. A number of items of interest,  
both new and old are available (see the order form on the reverse side):  

RECORDS AND CASSETTES:  

~~Here Is A Love Song is Margie Adam's newest release. If it is anything like her piano and  
vocal work on previous albums (Songwriter, Naked Keys, We Shall Go Forth) it promises to  
be quite exciting!  

~-Lifelines is the latest by Holly Near, and it is done with Ronnie Gilbert of the  
famous old folksinging group The Weavers. Those who heard of Holly's recent tour with  
Ronnie will be sure to want this album.  

~-Carnegie Hall is a double album by Meg Christian and Cris Williamson, a recording of  
last year's historical concert. They sing old favorites as well as new songs on no  
other album.  

--Testimony is done by Ferron, a Canadian woman always popular in Buffalo. We  
are happy to feature again this old favorite which is one of our most often  
requested albums, and hard to find in many other stores.  

--Live At The Great American Music Hall is a must for those who caught Garthwaite,  
Sorrels and Hawkins' concert last year at the Tralf, or their performance scheduled  
there for this Oct. 2. A blend of Terry's jazz, Rosalie's classic folk and Bobbie  
Louise's priceless storytelling, this record appeals to a wide variety of musical taste.  

CALENDARS:  

~-Lunar Calendar is an annual favorite! The 32 page wall hanging depicts the unfolding  
spirals from each new moon to old moon, provides times of moonrise and set, and includes  
traditional solar days and dates for easy reading. Also info on gardening by the moon  
and an extensive bibliography.  

--WomanFriends is a wall calendar including 12 photographs by contemporary women,  
quotations about friendship and an essay by the author. It looks at the varieties of  
friendship between women, in traditional and non-traditional settings, between older  
and younger women, women at work and recreation.  

~-Black Women: Achievements Against The Odds is an 88 page desk calendar which can  
be used for the years '84, '85 and '86. It features portraits, and bibliographies  
of over 100 black women ranging from a slave poetess born in 1746 to a tennis player  
born in 1957, including women active in education, civil rights, religion, sports,  
labor, journalism, government and much more!  

168 ELMWOOD BUFFALO N.Y. 14201 716-885-2285