REVIEW:

Politics of Women’s Spirituality

by Marilyn Bell

Politics of Women's Spirituality:  
Essays on the Rise of Spiritual Power  
Within the Feminist Movement, (edited  
by Charlene Spretnak, Anchor Books,  
1982) is both exhilarating and dis-  
appointing. It says too much, not  
enough and in the wrong order. In  
three parts -- "Discovering a History  
of Power", "Manifesting Personal  
Power" and, "Transforming the Politi-  
cal", Spretnak brings the reader  
54 selections. An additional appen-  
dix, in two parts, covers the debates  
over hierarchy in women's spirit-  
uality and over the literal truth of  
Goddess worship and the existence  
of matriarchal societies. The book  
closes with an afterward by the  
editor.

Among the contributors one finds  
well known writers in the women's  
movement such as Adrienne Rich,  
Phyllis Chesler, Gloria Steinem, Mary  
Daly, and the well known in women's  
spirituality -- Starhawk, Z. Budapest,  
Margot Adler, etc. There are also  
many selections by less well known  
writers. Many of these selections are  
excerpts and reprints and will be  
familiar to readers.

Spretnak undoubtedly intends this  
collection to answer the critics of  
feminist spirituality who view it as  
a “cop out" and a withdrawal from  
political action. The introduction  
includes a critique of patriarchal  
religion and some description of  
feminist spirituality, and prepares  
the reader for a discussion which  
does not occur for another 350 pages.

From Page 7

and is told it's her fault if she's not. Sure,  

here, however, miles apart  
public transportation, and social custom (in-  
cluding woman's own internalized knowledge  
that she's not really human) says women be-  
long at home. Isolation combines with pover-  
ty, male violence, and jealousy to keep women  
barefoot and pregnant -- more than a quaint  
adage here. Militating against this some-  
what is the fact that many young couples  
settle near their families (sometimes on  
the same land), which allows young women  
the support of mothers, sisters, and other  
female relatives.

I don’t want to leave you with the  
impression that this area is a country-  
and-western song populated solely by gun-  
totin' male rednecks and shoeless, cowed  
women. There are colleges, excellent  
libraries, concerts, plays, women's  
supports, and independent single women;  
women are breaking into local government.  
But the dominant culture is deeply patriarch-  
al. Deer hunting touches many more women  
than the Wellsville Creative Writers or the  
Bolivar Food Co-op.

FOOTNOTES

1. In Cattaraugus County, it's $6,432  
(figures from Southern Tier West in  
Salamanca).

2. For an eloquent poem about the anomaly  
of being a woman-identified woman in up-  
state New York, see Judith McDaniel's  
"November Passage" in Lesbian Poetry,  
eds. Elly Bulkin & Joan Larkin  
(Persephone Press, 1981).

3. Nationwide, 46% of males and 15% of  
females buy licenses for either hunting  
or fishing... and lots of women fish.  
(Figures from the state Dept. of  
Environmental Conservation).

4. An ordinary hunting license allows you  
to kill one buck. The state also issues  
a limited number of deer-management permits,  
valid for either a buck or a doe.

5. Other important and needed rural act-  
ivities that -- like hunting -- have been  
distorted by patriarchy include the  
volunteer fire department and CB  
(Citizens Band) radio.

6. Have I set up a false rural-urban  
comparison that should really be  
economic and social? Doesn't "bare-  
foot and pregnant" characterize lower-  
class American life everywhere? Maybe  
-- but since this area is so poor, the  
prevailing social and economic level is  
lower-class.

PAGE 8 COMMON GROUND

OCTOBER 1982

The final section “Transforming the  
Political" gets to the point of  
politics and spirituality. In the  
first half of the section, "Unity of  
Politics and Spirituality", many writ-  
ers approach the question of  
dualism. Emphasis is on a holistic  
view; “both/and", rather than  
"either/or". Politics is seen as  
the "what" and spirituality as the  
"how".

High points of this section are  
the articles by Inglehart (The Un-  
natural Divorce of Spirituality and  
Politics) and Starhawk (Justice and  
Ethics in Goddess Religion). Ingle-  
hart provides an excellent analysis  
of the patriarchal trap of dualism,  
especially as it is seen in the  
spiritual/political duality. Starhawk  
carries to a logical conclusion the  
holistic, sacredness of life,  
perspectives found in Goddess religion  
with her courageous piece on justice  
and ethics. Because life is sacred  
it demands our full participation.

In these two selections, especially,  
the "political" woman is called on to  
investigate her spiritual nature,  

and the "spiritual" woman reminded  
that she must be a participant in  
bringing about the kind of culture  
her beliefs require.

The second half of the last sec-  
tion, “Applications of Spirituality  
as a Political Force", includes  
selections dealing with eco-feminism,  
the anti-nuke movement, connections  
between feminist and Native American  
spirituality; re-powering victims of  
sexual assault, and the attack by the  
"Christian Right" on feminism.

In this final section the power of  
spirituality becomes apparent, the  
spiritual feminists are seen in the forefront of  
political action and true revolution,  
not reform, is shown to involve  
creating a new basis for societal  
institutions such as economics, educa-  
tion, occupations, etc.

Focusing on the final section of  
Politics of Women's Spirituality is  
not meant to imply that the first and  
second sections are not well worth  
reading. They are. The first section  
is our Goddess heritage, the selec-  
tions are wide ranging in both time  
and geography. Some are exciting, in-  
spiring. Others, oh well... Generally  
the first section is a poor choice  
for first. No matter how good the  
material, it falls short of the goal  
of the book. Similarly, part two  

which focuses on the level of per-  
sonal power is a mixture ranging  

from excellent pieces which address  
the questions of self-image and devel-  
opment of a personal sense of power,  
to the weakest writing in the book  
which sounds like a PR piece for in-  
dividual psychic healers.

Where the selections in Politics  
of Women's Spirituality are on target  
this is a wonderful book, making the  
reader want more. And, like any un-  
even collection, the works that miss  
the mark can assure readers that it's  
nap time. 'Political' feminists, un-  
sure of any value in spirituality,  
should read this book backwards.  
Begin with part three - but read this  
book! 'Spiritual Feminists' will  
probably have read much of it else-  
where, and will dip in here and there,  
with less regard to sequence. For  
these readers it brings together  
many major works in one place, pre-  
serving especially work which origin-  
ally appeared in periodicals now un-  
available. You will probably want to  
own this book. For women who are not  
either of the above but are curious  
about women's spirituality, what it  
is, where it comes from, Politics of  
Women's Spirituality is the best  
introduction available.

Marilyn Bell, this month's cover  
artist, is a frustrated artist/  
printmaker (never enough time for  
artwork) who in her other life  
teaches Sociology and Gerontology.