by Linda Rose

Ed. note: Several years ago, the au-
thor of this article was asked to write
a "How To" piece for a creative writing
class. This was the result. Today,
Linda sees it as 'heavy satire'. The
Selections Committee saw it quite dif-
ferently - our 'common' reaction was
one of horror. However you see it,
it's real - and, tragically, there are
a lot of similar situations out there.

The first step in this guide is to
fall in love with the high school "foot-
ball hero." Make sure he is a big,
strong, popular guy, standing about six
feet, seven inches, with blond hair,
blue eyes, and a great smile. Muscle
from head-to-toe is a must. Also, make
sure that he is the dominant type:
loud, overpowering, someone that people
listen to.

The next step is to get engaged. It
shouldn't be too hard. Make sure you
are engaged when you're still in high
school. Remember, it's great to be
popular. After all, being a senior and
engaged is where it's at. I was the
only one in my class. Everyone was
happy for me because I knew what I
would be doing after graduation. I
would be married, taking care of my
-and having fun.

Being engaged is fun and just a
bit of a challenge. Smile, put out,
promise him you will always be happy,
even if you live in a one room over a
drug store. Another good point is to
make sure his parents like you (the
daughter-they-never-had type). Wear
dresses, help "mom" in the kitchen and
around the house. Then she will know
that you will be helping "Sonny" out
in the manner he is accustomed to.
Please -- I repeat -- please don't
drink or smoke around "mom": God knows
if you do drink or smoke, and you have
children, they'll be retarded.

The next step is as easy as pie, to
quote a phrase (though if you bake at
all, pie isn't that easy). The big day
has arrived; honeymoon plans are made;
parties and showers are over. It's
time for wedded bliss! (?)

As the old saying goes, "Not to-
night, dear, I have a headache"? Don't
ever use it with Mr. All-Star, because
it is the perfect excuse to have a
headache induced. Remember all those
muscles? They had a special purpose.
Every time you use a “no-no" word --
"why?" "But," "No" — you will be
punished. You will have been asking
for a beating. Observe the following
example of the perfect way to get a
beating:
You: "John may I please have three
dollars to buy gas for the car?"
John: “No."
You: “But why not?"
Now the muscle works. He may start
by telling you to come to him. When
you do, he may grab your hair and pull
you away from a window. He will pro-
ceed to slap you and scream at you.

PAGE 16 COMMON GROUND FEBRUARY 1983

HOW TO GET MARRIED

AND RUIN YOUR LIFE...

If you try to escape or scream, he may
tighten a grip on your neck and kick
your leg. After a few minutes of cry-
ing, he will come and put his arm ar-
ound you and tell you he forgives you.
Then he'll want to make love to you,
thinking that everything will be better
and forgotten. Get used to saying,
"I'm sorry," "I didn't mean it," and
"Please don't hit me -- I'll never do
it again."

You will have to adjust to a few
other goodies, like sharing your man
with friends, neighbors, the city, or
even Canada. I'm sure you've heard of
international affairs. Since your man
is so handsome, he will be popular.
You, after two nervous breakdowns and
shock therapy, will be ready to resort to
drastic measures: “Hon, I'm pregnant;
aren't you happy?" -If you're as lucky
as I was, he'll decide he's not happy,
and will force a miscarriage on you
("I'm sorry," you say again.)

He will decide in a few years that
he does want a child, and he will find
the "right person” for the job. He
can probably find her anywhere: bars,
friends' houses, even in your own per-
sonal telephone book. She will be
happy to oblige him.

Now, after three nervous breakdowns,
assorted bruises, cracked bones, and a
bout with baldness -- mine from having
my hair being pulled -- you'll know
what to watch out for. You will be so
sick of the beatings and emergency room
visits in the middle of the night; you
will be sick of being raped after your
nose stops bleeding; you will be asha-
med to wear long sleeved tops and long
pants in the summer in order to hide
your bruises; you will be tired of
telling people, "I fell and hit my
face on the stairs."

After you live through this ordeal
and are off the Valium and the Thoro-
zine and you've moved away from him,
you'll begin to realize that you are
free. You can begin to forgive him,
but you'll never forget the pain,
abuse, and embarrassment he created
for you. Slowly, you can begin to be
a person again, maybe for the first
time in your life. You have survived
and you've come out strong.

As for him, he's got another wife
who was searching for a good guy --
like the one you had.

Linda Rose is a CG collective member,
a lesbian and a mother: She shares a
space on the West Side with a lover,
daughter, two cats, a dog & 12 fish.

The EMMA collective.

EMMA IS...

This month marks the end of EMMA's
first year in her home on Elmwood. In
her 64 years, EMMA has gone from a
traveling bookstore in the back of a
van, to a store on Fillmore near Leroy,
to Main and Greenfield, and finally to
her present location. During this time
over seventy women have been a part of
To the best of
our knowledge, we are one of (if not
the) oldest women's bookstores which has
been continuously collectively run.

The collective relationship makes
us unique as a small business. We meet
weekly and make major decisions by
consensus. We have no "manager" or
"boss" and strive to keep the
collective non-hierarchical although we
recognize that those women who have
been in the collective longer, or have
specialized skills, may, in fact, wield
more power in decision making. While
this aspect of the collective
relationship is usually not problematic
for us, it is confusing to those who
want to talk to “Emma" or the boss or
manager.

We have just finished a round of
personal herstories in which we all
have shared parts of our lives with
each other. This helps us know who we
are, individually and collectively, and
understand each other better as we work
together. We agree that collectively
operating a women's bookstore is a
political act. Although unlike many
other political groups, we have no
formal principles of unity, we are
generally agreed that EMMA is a
feminist bookstore (although we refuse
to fight over definitions of "feminist"
and “feminism"). We struggle in our
ordering, decision making, community
activities, etc. to be non-racist,
non-classist, and to oppose the oppression
of lesbians and gay men, people of
color, and third world peoples.

We are beginning a new book
discussion group at EMMA around the
book Rocking the Cradle: Lesbian
Mothers: A Challenge in Family Living
(Hanscombe, Ct and Alyson Publications, 1981). In
conversations with lesbian women in
England and Wales, Hanscombe and Foster
investigate many important issues
beyond just that of being a lesbian and
a mother: the nuclear family itself,
as a myth and/or reality, is
considered; questions of women-
identified women raising children are
discussed. This is an important book,
for lesbians who are mothers, or who
are considering motherhood as well as
for anyone who is concerned about
families, children, and our changing
lifestyles. The discussion group will
begin with an organizational meeting on
March 2, at 7:30 p.m. at the bookstore
= 168 Elmwood. If you are interested
in being in the group, but cannot
attend the organizational meeting, call
the store. If there is another book you
would be interested in discussing, let
us know. Other book discussion groups
can be arranged.

If you haven't stopped by EMMA
lately, come visit us. We keep the hot
water on for tea/coffee. We can
probably play your favorite women's
music for you, or introduce you to new
artists (Have you heard Georgia Kelly,
Kate and Anna McGarrigle? Do you know
who Ruby Green is?) Our bulletin board
will help you keep up with women's
events in the area. And most of all,
we like your company.

--The Emma collective: Charlene,
Chris D., Chris V., Diane, Flo, Karen
K., Karen P., Kate, Marilyn, Mary
Ellen, Peggy, Sarah