the  
collective  
meets  

To those of you who have written  
us faithfully, sent your subscription  
renewals as requested, sent articles  
and letters, and are wondering about  
the lack of response: We have had  
a very difficult time with our mail  
over the course of the summer, and  
even now are only receiving things  
that were sent to us in June. There  
are quite likely pieces of mail sent  
long ago that we have not received  
yet. If you have sent a check, please  
check to see if it has been cashed  
(which we do within a week of receiving  
it), and void and resubmit it if  
there is a problem. To help correct  
this situation, we now have a new  
address for all mail: P.O. Box 313,  
Bidwell Station, Buffalo, N.Y. 14222.  
We also anticipate having a new  
phone number in the near future, so  
watch for an announcement of this.  

Thank you for your patience  
during this transition! And thank  
you also to those of you who have  
responded with support through a  
difficult financial time for Common  
Ground. We are on a somewhat more  
solid footing now, but like most  
struggling volunteer organizations,  
we need to ask for your continued  
support. All you wonderful charter  
subscribers who got us off to a good  
start two years ago—your subscription  
renewals are due once again and we  
still need you!  

PAGE 2 COMMON GROUND OCTOBER 1984  

CONTENTS  

wr  

10  

11  

12  

$5  

14  

ES  

16  

FERRARO IN BUFFALO  

THE COLLECTIVE MEETS  
POLICY  

NEWS  

FERRARO, CONTINUED  
BEGINNING WITH BUTTERFLIES  
POETRY CORNER  
WOMANEXPRESS  

REAGAN VISIT  

WOMEN'S VOTE PROJECT  

NOTES FROM W.A.N.D.  
POTPOURRI  
& 9 CALENDAR  

BOOK REVIEW: TRIANGLES  

A CONVERSATION WITH RUTH GELLER  

INTERVIEW: KATE CLINTON  
RUTH GELLER, CONTINUED  

EMMA IS  
BOOK REVIEW:  

AT SEVENTY  
ANNOUNCEMENTS  

WOMEN'S RESOURCE DIRECTORY  
ADS  

BACK PAGE  
SUBSCRIPTION INFORMATION  

BABBBBABRBSF  

POLICY  

PHILOSOPHY — Common Ground is potentially, with  
help from Western New York women, a forum to  
celebrate the rich diversity of our Community. We view  
the paper as a ribbon that may connect our  
commonalities, our intersection points. We are inviting  
you to participate actively in the building of a support  
system for WNY women. We affirm our commitment to  
enhance the lives of women on physical, educational,  
spiritual, psychological, social and economic levels. We  
want to present, fair-mindedly, the issues that concern  
women, and information of value to women. We offer  
Common Ground as a place where women can display  
their art and personal literature, and re-view the  
tapestries of their experiences.  

EDITORIAL POLICY — Common Ground is especially  
looking for articles which address the needs and  
interests of local women.  

1. Common Ground is a publication of news, culture  
and dialogue from women’s perspectives.  

2. News, Opinion, Analysis and Commentary will each  
be clearly labeled as such.  

3. We are seeking to provide accurate, straightforward  
information of value to women.  

4. The collective will not intentionally print or support  
materials or viewpoints which will harm women  
because of color, sexuality, religious or ethnic  
background, physical disability or economic situation.  

5. While opinions expressed in Common Ground are  
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the  
collective as a whole, we do accept responsibility for  
choosing what we print.  

SUBMISSIONS — We welcome articles, letters,  
information and announcements of interest to women.  
Graphics, cartoons, art and photography will be  
gratefully received. We especially invite women who  
do not usually have access to traditional media —  
women of color, differently abled, economically or  
educationally disadvantaged, and those for whom  
English is a second language — to write. Suggested  
length of letters: 250 words. Letters must be signed to  
be printed. We will, however, respect your privacy and  
withhold your name if you request. Suggested length of  
articles, commentary, analysis: 500-750 words. Please  
type and double-space your work, 40 characters across.  
If you do not have access to a typewriter, please print  
clearly. In time we hope to have a typewriter, paper,  
etc., available for those who request it. Include a  
stamped, self-addressed envelope and work and home  
phone numbers. Because we want to hear your voices,  
if your piece needs to be edited for length or clarity, we  
will call you/ask you to do it. Keep copies of your work.  
We will try to notify you within three (3) weeks if we  
intend to use your work. If we print it, we will give you  
five (5) copies of the issue in which it appears. Artwork  
should be black and white copies only, and  
title/describe your work. We will copyright the entire  
issue, but the copyright on each piece reverts to the  
author/artist, that she may decide where her work is  
printed. Please request a style-sheet for further  
information and guidelines if you want to write.  

COMMON GROUND  

P.O. Box 333  
Bidwell Station  
Buffalo, N.Y. 14222  

(716) 688-7831  
©1984 WNY Women’s Newsjournal  

ADVERTISEMENT POLICY AND RATES — See  
Advertisement Section.