Womancare; A

Gynecological Guide to

Your Body REVIEW

by Peggy L. Chinn

One of the most important books to
appear in the area of women's health
is WOMANCARE. It is an encyclopedic
volume of 938 pages covering a wide
range of topics that are of specific
concern for all women. The greatest
strength of the book is that it accom-
plishes the goal of the authors to de-
mystify women's bodies, women's health
problems, and the practice of medicine
on women. It is written in language
that can be understood by most women;
the complicated and frightening lang-
uage of the medical profession is ex-
plained so that it can be understood.
Admittedly, translation of another
language is a difficult task and once
the translation is understood, it is
still difficult to use and remember
the meaning of new ideas and terms.
But the book is organized in such a
way that the reader can easily find
certain sections of interest
view these sections to begin
a real sense of mastery over the lang-
uage and ideas that have for too long
remained the sole domain of medical
knowledge.

The authors initially set about to
write a book that would teach women how
to do a gynecological self-examination.
They knew that this very basic skill
of self-examination is a first step
toward changing our negative attitudes
toward our female bodies, and is cent-
ral to viewing ourselves as fully acce-
ptable and equal human beings. The ab-
ility to understand our bodies, to view
them, and to interpret what we see
has the far-reaching consequence of
challenging the traditional relation-
ship between a woman and her doctor,
where s/he alone views the inner parts
of the woman's body. However, the
authors quickly recognized that the ab-
ility to perform a self-examination was
just the beginning. Women need to be
informed about the language used by
medical people in making their diagno-
ses, and most importantly, we need to
be informed of the many different
types of treatments and therapies that
are offered by medical practitioners
in order to challenge those treatments
that have been traditionally offered as
the “correct" treatment by any one
physician.

Extending the book to this com-
prehensive range was no easy task.

More importantly, gaining the confi-
dence and understanding needed to chal-
lenge practitioners of medicine is a
monumental task for all women in our
society, and cannot be gained simply by
reading this or any other book. How-
ever, this book does provide a wonder-
ful and refreshing start. It consist-
ently repeats the theme that it is
possible to take charge of our own
health and to insist on our right to
make our own informed decisions about
our health.

The book begins with a description
of how the book came to be written,
which is an unusual start for any book
dealing with health and medical prob-
lems. The authors relied on many
authoritative texts, as well as the ad-
vice and consultation of many reliable
practitioners of medicine - a typical
approach for a book of this type. But
they also consulted with well-trained
experts in related fields like nursing,
and on the experiences and suggestions
of women of all walks of life who are
like those of us who will use this
book.

The first few chapters focus on the
gynecological self-exam, breast self-
exam, and the normal development and
physiology of the menstrual cycle.

The next few chapters deal with health
and medical care, and include extensive
reference sections that provide details
of specific diseases and their treat-
ment alternatives. The topics range
from the various options in relation to
birth control, to the major diseases
affecting the reproductive organs, to
cancer in women. The appendix offers

a list of resources that can be cont-
acted for special assistance.

A limitation of this book is its
focus on disease. This is also a
strength of the book for we do need
well-informed and reliable sources
when we are faced with disease or the
possibility of a disease, and this is
such a book. However, although the
authors attend to the matter of pre-
vention of various diseases in a limi-
ted fashion, they do not deal with
health per se. Normal pregnancy, for
example, is not addressed in any de-
tail and one will not find here any
comprehensive guidelines for self-
care during pregnancy. In fact, if
we did not know better, we might as-
sume that pregnancy is essentially a
disease from the approach taken in
this book. The menopause is acknow-
ledged to be a normal developmental
stage for women, but is discussed in
the reference section on “disease”
as a sub-heading under “menstrual
discomforts of this phase of life”
rather than on its advantages and
comforts. The authors’ warning about
the dangers of estrogen replacement
therapy is far too watered down and
conciliatory to the medical and drug
enterprises, and they do not give
this approach the serious challenge
that it deserves as a therapy.
Likewise, I could find no discussion
of the role of nutrition in women's
health; for example, nutrition is
not mentioned as a factor influencing
pregnancy or influencing the dev-
elopment or treatment of cancer.

The book is also limited by a
subtle heterosexual and racist under-
tone which the authors make some at-
tempt to disclaim but which is still
there. They acknowledge in the
introductory chapter the special
problems of women of color in re-
lation to the health care system, and
they have a brief section addressing
the problems of lesbians in relation
to the health care system. But if a
woman of color or a lesbian were to
try to find specific information as to
how their color or their lesbianism
affects their health, this book is
not very helpful.

The strengths of this book out-
weigh its limitations. If for no
other reason, all women need this re-
source for its wide range of infor-
mative content. In addition, it can
aid in developing a positive attitude
toward our bodies and our ability to
challenge the mystification of medical
practice. In order to be fully pre-
pared to take charge of our own health,
it is important to recognize the limi-
tations of this book, and seek other
resources as well that help us do
just that.

Peggy L. Chinn, R.N., Ph.D., is a
member of the Emma Collective.

By SARAH SLAVIN

Those charming soft-stemmed plants known
as herbs are very much a part of herstory,
of women's spiritual experiences and heal-
ing rites. Merlin Stone, in the first
chapter of When God Was a Woman, notes
that "in nearly all areas of the world,
female deities were extolled as healers,
dispensers of curative herbs, roots, plants
and other medical aids, casting the priest-
esses who attended the shrines into the
roles of physicians for those who worship-
ed there" (p. 3). Herbs themselves were
revered by early societies, which were
gynocentric. As herbalists, women were
the first “pharmacists.” During child-
birth in days long past, women knew to
drink the astringent tea made from
artemisia, an herb that received its
name from Artemis, the moon goddess,
and that was revered by and used as a
charm the world over. Some Native Amer-
icans, who lived in what is today Canada,
worshipped a Plant-Mother, La Mere des
Herbes, from whom stemmed all creative
energy, the Herb that was/is the beginning
of all that grows. Herbs, then, have
provided human beings with sustenance,
pleasure, spiritual countenance and
medicine. This first column, which will
appear regularly in Common Ground, focuses
on certain of the healing capacities
of herbs.

There's not much if anything in the
way of herbs that lacks healing capacity.
That capacity may be abused, and hence
should be addressed with caution. As
great a problem lies in the loss, until
fairly recently, of the herbal collections
of herb lore and healing capacities.
(See Mrs. M. Grieve, A Modern Herbal, 2
vols 1931; NY: Dover Publications,
1971.) To dose self, friend or child
indiscriminately, no matter how enchanting
the lore and how sure the capacity, is to
ask for trouble. A healthy dose of old-
fashioned learning first will spare the
doser rue thereafter and will meet the
concern that rightfully accompanies heal-
ing power. Take comfrey as an example. It
is said that the roots and leaves of comfrey
are good for whatever ails us. Comfrey is
versatile in its application. Comfrey can
also provoke a rash from surface laceration:
desirable, at least, used as a
poultice, the leaves must be beaten to a
pulp, and taken internally, infused,
because the leaves are covered with bristles
and contain atropine, or an atropine-like
substance. Lacking knowledge, we should
save the virtues of comfrey for punch and,
at that, drink it in small amounts for it
may prove constipating!

Laurel, which I have chosen as the em-
blem for this column, is a stimulant. The
volatile oil of laurel, which is expressed
from the leaves, can be applied to ease
the discomfort of bruises, muscle sprains
and earache. Although the berries were
once used to induce abortion, and the
leaves infused as tea for a laxative,
narcotic properties are attributed to the
berries, leaves and oil of laurel, mean-
ing that its use too is not to be taken
lightly. Laurel water yields small amounts
of prussic acid, a cyanide and another
sign for caution. Remember that, as a
sign of respect and power, the Delphic
priestesses crowned the oracle with bay
laurel; and the Sybils chewed it to en-
hance their prophetic powers. The water
nymph Daphne, daughter of the river, was
transformed into a laurel tree after Apollo
harassed her: she who carries a branch of
laurel is safe from corruption and pesti-
lence. Small wonder the patriarchy coopted
the laurel branch as its sign of victory,
and the laurel wreath to distinguish poetic
mastery. Consider the source.

Comfrey and laurel will suffice for ex-
amples of herbal healing capacities. Whether
drawn upon in homeopathic medicine, as is
the case for comfrey today, or for laurel
water pharmacy in the past, comfrey and
laurel have served healers long and well.
So too have other herbs too numerous to
mention. Those who claim that “old wives,”
medicine women and witches were unschooled
in the finer points of medicine know not of
what they speak--or perhaps they know too
well and fear the revelation that, indeed,
these women founded the healing arts with
knowledge and care, with pleasure and
spiritual countenance. In the words of
John Dryden, one of the metaphysical poets
about whom Robin Morgan has written much:
"Medicine is mine;/ What herbs and simples
grow/ In fields and forests,/ All their
powers I know."

At the very

Sara Slavin is associate pro-
fessor of political science at
State University College at Buf-
falo and a member of EMMA.

SEPTEMBER 1982 | COMMON GROUND

Page 5