SEES ey SRE SERA TEV ER RELEASE RE ESSERE E CSCC ER

HEN THE GANGS WERE BUSTED
” Sean Evin Prison, 1980-1983

(Dedicated to Iranian Women Prisoners)

I
Who knows what evil lurks in the hearts
of my guard khanoms,
I always wanted the criminals
to get away, banality's all that's stamped
Mom in the hospital, Dad left,
Me ten, taking care of two kids. hard hearts
like flowers on tombstones.
In the city project space, No massive fraulein stalks
me Wash hung in the supper plates, the seven Kurdish beauties
And I wanted to be a gun moll, locked in this stale old
I told my little sister. Persian harem.
She broke down, Dad gone, Freshly showered and chadored in flowers,
Mom sick, and her sister the young girls wait to visit their mothers,
Wants to be a gun moll. strong fathers, brave brothers;

Little sisters bring oranges

Pretty Boy Floyd and Baby Face Nelson, and wait under plane trees.

Graced my dreams, instead of Grimm's.

I'd scheme better than Bonnie Still, a shadow of fear floats into our cells.

Or Ma Barker -- a real Calamity Jane. Somebody's been tried and led out in the night;
pictures appear, sounds ring out while I sleep,
and I saw one tall woman

proud as a witch

wrapped all in black
Learned to flick a butt, hooded in black
And blow smoke rings at twelve. blindfolded in black
Hung on a street light, grasp a long dirty rag
Rubbing leaves on my fingers — attached to a pasdar,
So the smoke wouldn't smell, who heeled her away

to the Evin tucked away
Then sneak out late, from commissions that probe,
When Mom went to work nights, and I heard someone scream
And cycle through Delaware Park till dawn, and I saw someone's blood

on some stairs that I climbed,
Or later, ride the East Utica bus and I think disinterested bullets
Downtown and back. Heavy breathers are finding their mark
Following in the dread night. tonight at Evin.

I'd leave them in the dust
And circle the labyrinth of Langfield ‘ pasdar: guard
To cover tracks.

One gets elusive or caught, Cynthia B. Dwyer
I learned. I got elusive,
My girlfriends got pregnant.

III

When the gangs were busted,

I always wanted the criminals

To get away. Remote ancestors

With large jaws and short foreheads.

They formed the habit of crime
in their primitive prime,
It has been said.

And the washing machine
Whirred in the kitchen,
And the laundry hung
In the supper plates.

In the saturation of time and weather,
Raskolnikov hid a hatchet
Under his arm, driven by want.

And curtain racks with Kafka needles
Threatened punishment in the parlor,
And the washing machine whirred

In the kitchen,

One of the "miserables", Jean Valjean
Ripped off a loaf of bread for his family.
So when the gangs were busted,

I always wanted the criminals

To get away.

Joy Walsh

PAGE 8 COMMON GROUND JANUARY 1983 ; Photo by Doris Santercole