Review

by Julia Pericek Sage

GROWING UP CATHOLIC  
Mary Jean Frances Cavolina Meara,  
Jeffrey Allen Joseph Stone,  
Maureen Anne Teresa Kelly and  
Richard Glen Michael Davis  

$4.95 Doubleday/Dolphin  

For those of us educated and  
indoctrinated from birth in the  
Catholic religion, this book is a  
therapeutic trip down the nostal-  
gic lane which leads us to the  
happy (?) days of holy days;  

Saints, Sinners and Sisters; con-  
fessions, confusion and catechisms;  
bazaars, bingo and limbo. For the  
infamous NON-CATHOLICS, this work  
provides a humorous look into the  
mysteries, mystique and machinations  
which pervaded the early years of  
many of their friends' lives.  

A quick review of the table of  
contents reveals such enticing head-  

ings as "True Confessions," "A Cath-  
olic Woman's Rhythm Diary," "Sex  
Education," and “Idle Hands Are the  
Devil's Playthings."  

Trivia buffs will enjoy such sec-  
tions as "Prayer: A Pop Quiz,"  
"Catholic Fun Facts - The Numbers  
Game," “The Latin Test," and "Clean  
Entertainment: The Legion of Decen-  
cy Hit Parade." List lovers will be  
in heaven as they peruse columns of  
patron saints, acceptable Catholic  
swears, acceptable/unacceptable Ca-  
tholic names, popular parish names,  
"What Every Catholic Woman Carries  
in Her Pocketbook," and "What's In/  
What's Out, Who's Hot/Who's Not."  

Illustrations are feasts for the  
eyes. Reprints of a Baltimore Cate-  
chism book cover, a Catholic ID Card  
and an elementary school report card  
accompany photos of children angeli-  
cally praying, making their First  
Communion or Confirmation and class  
pictures complete with Sister Mary  
Holy Card.  
Sketches graphically illustrating  
such topics as the Catholic school  
uniform, religious catalog items,  
school days and nuns' fashions.  

Heavier fare is covered under the  

titles of "The Fallibility of Infalli-  
bility," "Judgment Day," "The Loss of  
Heaven and the Pains of Hell" and  
"Miracles."  

GROWING UP CATHOLIC gleefully  
offers something for everyone and  
more than fulfills the cliché -  
"Someday you'll look back on this  
and laugh." Blessed are they who  
have a sense of humor, for they  
shall survive to write a book.  

Julia is the rebellious product  
of twelve years of Catholic school  
indoctrination.  

COMMON GROUND DECEMBER 1985 PAGE 10  

A multitude of irreverent  

conferences which focus on issues  
important to women, ongoing op-  
portunities for study and conscious-  
ness raising and occasional feminist  
prayer services are all designed to  
affirm, educate and encourage bonding  
among women.  

But we have barely begun and much  
more remains to be accomplished. The  
acceptance and appreciation of women  
as fully human persons, both within  
the church and in secular society,  
still lie far down the road. The vi-  
sion of equality, as old as Christi-  
anity itself, remains the beacon  
drawing us on, and the bonding of  
women within the Task Force gives  
strength and courage for the journey.  
What is happening among women in the  
Task Force on Women and the Churches  
in Western New York is a microcosm  

"WOMEN AND  
CHURCHES"  

of what is happening to women in other  
parts of the world.  
Reports from international meet-  

ings, such as the one held in Nairobi,  
Kenya, last July, verify the fact that  

women are discovering for themselves  
that more unites them than separates  
them. Women are also learning that  
by working together, they increase  
their chances of effecting change.  

The Task Force on Women and the  
Churches welcomes new members and is  
open to all interested women. Addi-  
tional information about the Task  
Force or any of its activities may  
be obtained by calling the Center for  
Justice at 838-4910.  

The Task Force on Women and the  
Churches is an ecumenical group of  
women who have come together to  
focus attention on the roles and  
concerns of women within the church  
structure in Western New York. The  
Task Force also attempts to foster  
communication and connections be-  
tween women across denominational  
lines.  

Among the activities sponsored  
by the Task Force throughout the  
year are day-long conferences which  
focus on issues important to women,  
ongoing opportunities for study and  
consciousness-raising as well as oc-  
casional educational mailings to  
clergymen, both Catholic and Pro-  
testant.  

The Task Force is affiliated with  
the Center for Justice in Buffalo  
and one of our members is an adjunct  
staff person at the Center. Addi-  
tional information about the Task  
Force or its activities may be ob-  
tained by calling the Center for  
Justice at 838-4910.  

The monthly prayer services, cur-  
rently being sponsored by the Task  
Force on Women and the Churches, are  
ecumenical, non-denominational and  
somewhat experimental. Each service  
is planned and conducted by different  
small groups of women. Readings from  

the scripture as well as other sources  

are used and the themes vary from  
month to month.  
To obtain the date of the next  

prayer service, please call the Center  

for Justice, 838-4910.  

Virginia Power is one of the ori-  
ginal members of the Task Force on  
Women and the Churches and presently  
serves as one of its Co-Coordinators.  

She is a Roman Catholic who has  
been active in the Church Feminist  
movement both at the local and na-  
tional levels for over fifteen years.  

"CHURCHING" from page 1  

baptize the baby and come home to  
live unless I have it done." Her  
husband was in the service, and she  
was dependent on family assistance.  
"Certainly," the chaplain agreed.  
“Anyone else?" I was not even tempt-  
ed; none of us asked for an explana-  
tion, nor did he offer one. We were  
politely interested when the follow-  
ing morning after Holy Communion, he  
produced a candle and read some pray-  
ers in Latin. She relaxed, and we  
roommates solemnly assured her Mother  
that she had indeed been "cleansed."  

Recently, in searching for the  
origins of this cleansing rite, I was  
intrigued with the many explanations  
and variations in the custom. Our  
pastor said it was merely a continu-  
ation of the symbolic Jewish rite of  
purification at which the Virgin Mo-  
ther, whom we Catholics believe was  
conceived without original sin, also  
participated. He explained that  
since the 2nd Vatican Council, it has  
been incorporated into the baptismal  
ceremony and both parents receive the  
blessing with the candle -- an almost  
universal symbol of enlightenment.  

Further reminiscences with family  
and friends have produced mixed re-  
sults: a friend of Italian background  
had never heard of it. A sister-in-  
law of Irish extraction knew immedi-  
ately what I was referring to. "Yep,  
'churching,' it was called. I don't  
know anything about candles or such,  
but my Mother said 'go to church,’  
and I went." A neighbor of German  
background also recognized it imme-  
diately. "The cleansing.” She re-  
members it as being invited to the  
chapel in the Catholic hospital for  

a "blessing; but it was definitely  
the cleansing, she insists. A for-  
mer co-worker of Ukrainian heritage  
never heard of anything remotely re-  
sembling a cleansing rite.  

Whether a blessing or a cleansing,  
thousands of women in their 50's and  
60's will probably remember that their  
part in the beautiful experience of  
childbirth was somehow felt by their  
Church to be unclean. Such a percep-  
tion is as much our fault for not be-  
ing aggressive in seeking answers from  
more authoritative sources as well as  
on the part of the clergy for not pro-  
viding clearer, more comprehensive ex-  
planations.  

Whatever, I for one am glad to see  
that particular ritual vanish into  
oblivion. It is obvious that, since  
Vatican II, our Church is trying to  
more effectively communicate its li-  
turgy and customs. May it succeed.  

Reggie is currently assessing the first  
year of "Life in the Last Lane": she  
retired after 22 years at SUNYAB, most-  
ly as Assistant to Chairs in the Dept.  
She dabbles at writing but admits her  
most regular and/or enthusiastic  
acknowledgements come from two  
daughters in New England and her banker -- not necessarily in that order.  
Her hobbies are her husband and travel,  
in that order.