College Health Centers

BY Maria Ceraulo

Complete health services are avail-
able at women's clinics on campus at
Buffalo State College and the Univer-
sity of Buffalo for the women enrolled
there.

In 1972, a group of women at Buffalo
State wanted birth control but found it
was not available there. This is how
the Women's Health Clinic/Human Sexu-
ality Center (in the Weigel Health
Center) was formed. According to Alice
Sullivan, director of the Clinic,
"Although we still provide birth con-
trol services, our main concern is to
educate women about their bodies. We
emphasize self-help and self-health.
In this way women can take care of
themselves and make informed decisions
about their health."

"For example," she says, "if a woman
finds out she is pregnant, we never
push giving birth or adoption, or
anything. We present the patient with
all her alternatives, and then offer
support once she has made her decision.

A woman visiting the clinic for
gynecological examination is charged
a $10 fee (her first time) and $2 each
visit thereafter during the same semes-
ter. The first step to an exam is a
one hour patient information session.
Topics discussed include the menstrual
cycle, vaginal infections, sexually
transmitted diseases and birth control.
Women are familiarized with clinic
policy and philosophy and are encourag-
ed to take an assertive role in all
medical situations. These sessions are
held by a nurse or sexuality counselor
and offered three times weekly. An
appointment for an exam can be made
afterwards.

The clinic has four gynecologists
(3 male, 1 female), two nurse practi-
tioners, and all must have a Bachelor's
degree and Masters degree or be registered nurses in fam-
ily planning. "Unless a woman suspects
something is seriously wrong," she
explains, "she should feel perfectly
comfortable going to a practitioner. We
saw a tremendous increase in new
patients when our staff expanded to in-
clude practitioners.

Also, we publish a small pamphlet
on coping with all the possible side
effects of the pill, which we review
with her."

Free pregnancy counseling is pro-
vided by pregnancy counselors for women
and their partners. Both the urine
pregnancy test ($6) and the blood
pregnancy test ($14) are available.

The clinic offers free venereal
disease testing for women and men.
Also, it is one of only three clinics
in New York State which has a H.E.L.P.
(Herpetics Engaged in Living Produc-
tively) group, a herpes support group
open to the public.

This semester the Center hopes to
devote every Friday to men's sex rela-
ted concerns, including exams for sexu-
ally transmitted diseases. A urologist
should also be available.

The clinic apothecary fills prescrip-
tions at a reduction to students. If a
pharmacist suspects a student is not
fully informed about the drug she is
requesting, she is referred to a nurse
or sexuality counselor.

Funding for the clinic is provided
by the mandatory student fees collected
by the United Students Government (USG).
It is a student run operation. "By
using the expertise of the profession-
als," says Baker, "the students make
the decisions at our weekly meetings.
Alice only overrides us in cases of
medical judgment." All students at
the Center (about 50) are volunteers,
working at least four hours a week for
a full academic year.

The Center is open daily. For more
information, call 878-6715.

At the University of Buffalo, the
Sexuality Education Center offers long
and short term counseling services for
students and the community.

A gynecology clinic operates in
conjunction with the Center. This one-
room clinic, run by Bett, is primarily
for routine check-ups or minor problems. Procedures in-
cluding breast, pelvic and rectal exams,
pap smear, gonorrhea culture and herpes
test (if needed) are performed. A gyne-
cologist is also available one day a
week.

An initial visit is $11 (including a
pap smear), $10 for each visit there-
after. "My office is small," explains
Moran, "but it is advantageous in keep-
ing an informal and confidential rela-
tionship with my patients."

A patient is met by a student who
records medical information. These
"patient advocates" remain present
during an exam (unless otherwise
requested) to lend support to the woman.
"Since all our p.a.s are student volun-
teers," says Lisa Baker, a student
director, "they are most sensitive to
the fears and concerns of a younger
woman." A p.a. talks to the woman,
provides support which can help her
relax, and makes sure any of the
patient's questions (discussed while
writing her chart) are answered.

Says Ms. Baker: "Our doctors aren't
intimidated by women who ask questions;
they encourage it. When we see someone
for the first time, we are sensitive to
her feelings. We don't want any visit,
especially the first one, to be a
frightening experience."

Routine gynecological procedures including a
breast and pelvic exam, urine sample,
pap smear (once a year, or as needed)
and a gonorrhea culture are performed.
In addition, birth control devices such
as an IUD and diaphragm can be fitted.

According to Baker, "At the Human
Sexuality Center, women can speak to
our nurses or sexuality counselor about
any sexuality related concern. For
example, someone wishing to go on "the
pill" is thoroughly questioned and edu-
cated about the types of pills avail-
able and her feelings about the deci-
sion."

Many women visiting the Education
Center (D-415 Michael Hall and 206
Talbert) are interested in beginning a
birth control schedule, according to
Ellen Christiansen, the Center's Direc-
tor. All patients are required to have
a gynecological exam at the Center before any
birth control method is prescribed or
fitted.

"A woman meets with a counselor,"
explains Christiansen, "and they go over
birth control methods. When she makes
a decision, a nurse practitioner and
counselor go over her decision with her.
We want to prevent method failure due
to incorrect usage as much as possible."
Women must make return visits to re-
examine usage techniques and discuss
any side effects. Birth control
services are only available for students,
faculty and staff.

Pregnancy testing and counseling is
also available. If requested, referrals
to abortion clinics are made. The
Center also maintains a list of couples
interested in adopting a child. All
outside legal and medical fees from an
adoption are paid by the student, and
all legal action is referred to Surro-
gate Court.

A support group is available for men
whose partners have had an abortion.
Men are taught self-examination for
the breast and testicles. A V.D.
clinic is available for men and women.

The Center also provides counseling
for rape victims. The Anti-Rape Task
Force provides escort service for
women on campus in the evening.

The Education Center is funded by
Sub-Board I (mandatory student fees)
and Ms. Christiansen reports her pro-
gram has always been funded "very will-
ingly." However, the gynecological clinic is
state funded. Moran expressed concern
that university budget cuts could limit
her services because it is not manda-
tory to provide gynecological services on a
state college campus.

To make an appointment for counsel-
ing or an exam, call 831-2584.

Maria Ceraulo, A Common Ground
is a community
activations major at Medaille College.

A Women’s Health Issue:
Barriers to Health Care
for the Disabled

by Elisabeth Mann

The following is an analysis from
the writer's personal experience and
an interview with Maureen Deneke from
the Independent Living Project.

An able-bodied woman who is ill can
go to her health-care provider who will
get her the necessary diagnosis and
medication. But it is not always as
straightforward for a disabled woman.

Everyone, able-bodied and disabled -
and especially health-care providers -
need to be made more aware of the
rights and barriers faced by the dis-
abled woman in order to create a better
climate of support. A disabled woman
carries a double burden and health re-
lated issues are especially vital.

There are many barriers to adequate
health care for disabled people, many
of which go ignored by health-care pro-
viders, the general community, and,
sometimes by the disabled themselves
out of ignorance of their rights and
the services available to them.

"Health-care for disabled people is not
as good as for non-disabled people..."
- Maureen Deneke

Barriers include transportation,
accessibility to offices and labs,
attitudes of health-care providers, and
possible gaps in services if a woman
must go between two or more doctors.

There are two components of health
care for many disabled: medical,
therapeutic, surgical and orthopedic
care for treating the specific disa-
bility; and the health-care of the
whole person. The latter would in-
clude the prevention of sickness,
maintenance of good health and atten-
tion to ailments common to everyone.

It is important to differentiate these
two areas because many disabilities
are not diseases, and often a dis-
abled person's general health may be-
come secondary to the attention given
to the disability.

A woman with a specific disability
or disease usually has a specialist, a
physician who sees her on a regular
basis to monitor medication, therapy,
progress of the disease if it is degen-
erative, and generally provide specific
health-care related to the disability.
Many general practitioners, whether in
clinics or private practice, cannot be
expected to have the latest information
on the specific disability.

COMMON GROUND - Page G-3