MARCH ON WASHINGTON

REPORT ON MARCH ON WASHINGTON  
AUGUST 27, 1983  

By Judith Geer  

When Harry Truman stepped down as  
President of the United States in  
1953, he contended that to revert to  
private citizen after having been  
President was actually a promotion  
in position. He had always felt  
that the people were the boss and the  
President and other elected officials  
were their employees.  

I was one of the 300,000 "bosses"  
(some 500 of whom - 10 busloads -  
were from Buffalo) who went to Wash-  
ington on Saturday, August 27, 1983,  
to deliver a warning to many of our  
“employees" who work there: those  
of them not committed to bettering  
economic and social disparities among  
racial and cultural groups and be-  
tween the sexes are just not “cutting  
the mustard". They must shape up or  
prepare for a November eviction no-  
tice back to wherever it is they  
came from - especially that guy from  
Hollywood (what’s his name again?).  
If the assembled masses in Washington  
on August 27th were any indication  
of the national mood, that dude's in  
real trouble!  

The day's events were divided into  
two rallies. The first one was held  
in the morning as the crowds gathered  
in front of the Washington Monument.  
The second one was held in the after-  
noon, following the march itself, and  
was conducted in front of the Lincoln  
Memorial where Dr. Martin Luther King  
Jr.'s historic “I Have a Dream"  
speech was delivered 20 years ago on  
August 28, 1963.  

For the morning rally, my travel-  

ing companion, an aggressive sort,  
was able to slip both of us through  
the crowds until we were situated di-  
rectly next to the media barricade  
to the side of the stage. The rally  
was emceed by actors Ossie Davis and  
Ruby Dee and Ms. editor Gloria Steinem.  
The speakers for this part of the  
program included Dr. Ralph Aber-  
nathy; James Farmer; Maggie Kuhn; a  
representative of the El Salvador  
liberation front, the FNOC (El Sal-  
vador's Dr. Reuben Zamora, it was an-  
nounced from the podium, was not al-  
lowed to attend because the US State  
Department had denied his visa); and  
Mrs. Coretta Scott King. Kristen  
Lems, Graham Nash and Gil Scott-  
Heron, among others, provided musical  
interludes between the speakers.  

The actual march on Washington  
itself was conducted by popular  
comedian-activists Bill Cosby and  
Dick Gregory. Gregory gave a short  
but powerful speech reminding us to  
"remember why you are marching".  
“When we were here twenty years ago,"  
he said, “we were scared. But we're  
not scared anymore." His speech  
was so impassioned that when Cosby  
said, “We are now ready to march",  

a roar of assent went up from the  
crowd which now stretched back to  
The Mall,  

Although the march had been or-  
ganized so that people could march  
with those who also shared their  
pet causes (civil rights, elderly  
and disabled, women, peace, etc.)  
there were simply too many bodies  
for this to be efficiently carried  
out, so we ended up stepping into  
the line wherever we could. My  
recollections of the march itself  
include: a tall Black man just in  

the back of us proudly striding out and  
leading everyone around him in sing-  
ing the old Freedom Rider songs of  
the 60's; a sign held by a bystand-  
er painted on a huge cut-out of a  
whale reading "Save the Humans"; a  
sign dangling above a sleeping baby  
in a stroller reading "Munchkins  
Against Reagan" (an allusion to the  
recent White House flak over Barbara  
Honeggar); the number of babies and  
children marching with their parents  
-- this was a real family effort for  
many.  

We surrounded the reflecting pool  
in front of the Lincoln Memorial, but  
here not even my aggressive friend  
could get us to the front as the  
crush of the crowd and the oppres-  
sive heat were overwhelming. Even-  
tually we had to pass into the trees  
off to the side where the speeches  
couldn't be heard so well, but the  
shade and the running garden hose to  
cool hot, dusty feet and throats  
(perhaps left for us by James Watt  
in a moment of lunacy) were too  
much of a temptation.  

It was on one of our forays into  
the sidelines for shade and water  
that I chanced on the most moving  
sight of the entire day. The black  
V of the Vietnam Memorial became  
suddenly visible. Of all the people  
passing silently before it, I was  
most taken by a uniformed Green  
Beret marine staring at one of the  
shiny, jet-black panels. Finally he  
leaned forward and pressed his lips  
to one of the carved names before  
slowly walking away. As he did this,  
from the podium just beyond the knoll,  
Peter, Paul and Mary began singing  
"Blowin' in the Wind." Both the  
marine's gesture of tenderness and  
the song seemed to fit well together  

chotomy... {and one of] domination and  
subordination” and this is what these  
activists want to eliminate from our  
culture.  

Slavin agreed that regulation and  
laws were not of particular help be-  
cause they didn't get to the root of  
the problem, only the symptoms. She  
pointed out that many feminists be-  
lieve women are exploited by porno-  
graphy and ironically, feminist mate-  
rial is sometimes considered obscene  
(Our Bodies Ourselves comes immediate-  
ly to mind). Feminists run afoul of  
obscenity laws and should rightfully  
be suspicious of too much regulation.  

While not of the opinion that por-  
nography causes violence, she feels  
that violence in society is leading  
us to more pornography which degrades  
and dominates women and others. She  
pointed out that the content of some  
pornographic material is racist, and  
uses Blacks, Jews, Native Americans,  
the Disabled and others (such as homo-  
sexuals) as objects to be dominated,  
in the same way that women are de-  
graded and used. She said that this  
discrimination is part of our cultural  
violence.  

She said that if we can change the  
culture that permits violence and  
degradation, "we won't need to suppress  
pornography, regulate pornography, be-  
cause it is likely to end all by  
itself."  

Peter Murphy spoke briefly because  
the evening was running long. He was  
the first panelist to offer a defini-  
tion of pornography or at least a dis-  
tinction between erotica and porno-  
graphy. He defined pornography as  
life-denying and destructive, while  
erotica he defined as celebrating sex-  
uality and life, and focusing on what  
was good. He also said that, as a man  
who had been made to feel guilty about  
male participation in pornography, he  
could get beyond the guilt and on to  
the real issues after coming to this  
definition. It seemed he felt this  
way because this distinction allows  

for a positive attitude to male sexual  

response.  

Murphy felt the movie, however, did  
not really define pornography, nor  
make any distinction between it and  
erotica.  

He criticized the film for making  
assumptions about male sexuality, male  
fantasies and male interest in porno-  
graphy, by presenting male stereotypes.  
“The men in the movie mainly said two  
things, either: 'I love it, it's harm-  
less and it's none of your business and  
leave me alone" or, 'I'm guilty, porno-  
graphy is terrible, and if you make me  
feel guilty enough about it, I'll ir-  
radicate it from my consciousness.' "  
Murphy felt this was too simplistic  
and that other viewpoints were pos-  
sible.  

Murphy said "I personally believe  
that there is a correlation between  
(pornography and violence, but) I'm  
not convinced pornography causes vio-  
lence against women."  

He also made the point that it is  
within the feminist community that the  
debate about pornography is most im-  
passioned.  

OC... DISCUSSION  

After Murphy opened the floor to  
discussion, the issues raised were  
wide-ranging. A good deal of time  
was spent talking about the sex-  
industry workers themselves, and whether or  
not the conditions under which they  
worked were exploitative. It was also  
debated whether or not sex-workers  
could freely choose that kind of work,  
or whether class and social status  
would affect their decisions; and  
whether or not it was fair to claim  
those jobs were undesirable.  

People spoke to the issue of wheth-  
er or not the anti-pornography move-  
ment really stops any of it, or whether  

Continued page 17  

COMMON GROUND OCTOBER 1983 PAGE SEVEN