UNDER THE GATE...

tially absolute, and absolutely imper-
sonal power of the State.  
These feelings kept sweeping over  
me: the surface of bureaucratic bana-  
lity, the undercurrent of terror. I  
was shaken, and it wasn't until I was  
reunited with the women of my Affinity  
Group that I was finally able to ground  
myself in the present. I was here.  
It was now.  
After a time we were released; and  
after some confusion and anxiety; every-  
one in the Affinity Group was accounted  
for, and we were together again. We  
went for something to eat at the family-  
owned diner many Encampment women had  
frequented over the summer. As we ate,  
the proprietress brought over a note-  
book in which women had written their  
thanks for the family's kindness. Some  
women wrote of their experiences at the  
Encampment, and their passionate hopes  
for a better world. from the Russians; or no one would be what my action at the Seneca Army Depot  
At home, I was teased about being crazy enough to set off bombs that meant in the grand scheme of things,  
a jailbird. My life went on as before. would destroy the earth. I disagreed but I know what it meant to me. Some-  
Some weeks later I went to dinner at on all counts, but said nothing, never how, I'm no longer tied up in knots  
my “in-laws," a Sicilian family much having been able to engage in political of helplessness. Somehow, I feel  
like mine in that they considered police] debate. more determined and less afraid.  
and courts and governments things to When I got home I was annoyed at erences  
avoid. Getting arrested on purpose: myself. I think I felt that going This article was originally published  
it seemed crazy to them, I knew. They under should have changed me, made me in Sojourner.  
offered me their opinions: the world eloquent where I had been dumb.  
was going to blow up and there was Then I realized that my experience Ruth Geller is a local writer, whose  
nothing we could do about it; or we had changed me: not in the way I talk, new novel, Triangles, published by  
needed those weapons to protect us but in the way I feel. I don't know Crossing Press, takes place in Buffalo.  

Do you want to meet women in the community? Find out what organizations  
and resources are available in the Buffalo area? Get involved in the local  
women's community? Make contacts with other agencies working toward goals  

similar to yours?  

Yes, you can do all this, as well as enjoy a wonderful party and  
celebrate Common Ground's second anniversary, at one of the social  
events of the season, The Buffalo Women's Tea Party!  

Sunday, September 30th, at 7 p.m. is the kick-off of this  
reception, sponsored by Common Ground, The Western New York  
Women's Newsjournal, and EMMA, The Western New York Women's  
Resource and Cultural Center at the Downtown YWCA, 190  
Franklin Street.  

Women from a variety of local organizations will be  
there to answer your questions. Refreshments will be  
provided. (The reception is free, but the donation  
cans will also be present!) Mingling, networking  
and partying are the themes of the evening, as  

well as the chance for EMMA and Common Ground  

to tell you more about the operations of our  
volunteer collectives and show you how you  

might become involved.  

This is not only a reception for  
any interested individual in the  
women's community, but a chance for  

women to meet their counterparts  

in other local agencies and  
organizations.  

For more information, call EMMA  
at 885-2285. If your organization  
is interested in having a representative  
and/or display at the reception and we have not yet contacted you, please call us! We'd love to hear  
from you, and we are looking forward to a good time, productive evening and a large crowd!  

COMMON GROUND. SEPTEMBER 1984 PAGE FIVE