Cont. from Page 3

STRESS

In general, whether we perceive a particular stressful event to be positive or negative, the body will characteristically respond in three progressive steps:

1) the body will exhibit signs of alarm, in case a "flight or fight response" is warranted; this response results in a variety of physiological alterations, including increased levels of respiration, dilated pupils, increased levels of serum cholesterol and uric acid, slowed digestion, and increased brain wave activity;

2) the body will attempt to repair any damage that may have been done by the stressful experience;

3) finally, if the source(s) of one's stress becomes chronic, the body, in a sense, "gives up", as it reaches a state of total exhaustion; it is during the exhaustion phase that bodily discomfort and/or illness becomes manifest.

A review of the substantial literature on the topic of stress reduction reveals that only a handful of sources acknowledge the importance of a wholesome diet and adequate exercise. A well-balanced diet will certainly serve to enhance one's energy level, stamina, and sense of well-being.

A wholesome diet may be defined as one that is rich in whole grains, fruits, vegetables, and legumes, as well as some meat, fish or poultry and dairy products. Such a diet drastically reduces the intake of fats and sugars. Such a diet will also ensure a proper intake of nutrients that are especially helpful in reducing the negative effects of stress. These nutrients include the B-complex vitamins (found in whole grains, fruits, brewer's yeast, meat, dairy products), vitamin C (found in fruit, vegetables, sunflower seeds, and nuts), and magnesium and calcium (in dairy products, brewer's yeast, and soybeans).

A true concern for a healthful diet should lead us to consider replacing stress-inducing beverage products which contain caffeine and/or sugar with wholesome alternatives, such as coffee substitutes (like Caffix), carob, fruit and vegetable juices, and herbal teas. Moreover, we must be aware that the consumption of processed foods, which are high in salt, sugar, and additives, may even intensify our feelings of anxiety. Careful consideration of all aspects of diet choice is an integral part of understanding the dietary relationship to successful stress reduction.

There are two basic types of exercise that can be employed to reduce tension: the exercise of rhythmic motion, which includes such activities as running, swimming, walking, and bicycling; and the exercise of stretching.

Many people report feelings of deep relaxation after only 5 to 10 minutes of sustained exercise. However, one should bear in mind that exercise needs to be included as a regular activity in order for it to be an effective mechanism for stress reduction.

In addition, before starting any exercise program, it is probably wise to consult with your medical practitioner. Remember to start exercising gradually; don't try to do too much too soon.

The mechanical stretching of the muscles and connective tissues tends to reduce tension-induced swelling, due to the action of improved circulation. Consequently, muscular tension and pain are dramatically reduced. Likewise, the use of massage can also provide feelings of deep relaxation by enhancing improved circulation and metabolism.

New York City, northern New

Exercise has proven to be a successful stress reduction modality and, in concert with a sensible diet, the benefits to be derived from exercise will certainly be amplified.

It is important to take into account a woman's self-perception of her ability to achieve total relaxation and optimal health. We need to take the time to explore our "inner-most-self"; to determine our goals and prioritize needs. Women in today's world especially need to make an effort to nurture themselves. Remember, above all, we have a right to be healthy and to be happy.

Relaxation Exercise

This exercise combines deep breathing with biogenics and visualization:

1) sit quietly in a comfortable position

2) close your eyes; relax all your muscles

3) breathe deeply through your nose. Visualize your lungs filling completely with air. As you inhale, say to yourself "I am". As you exhale, say to yourself "relaxed". Visualize your anxieties leaving your body through the soles of your feet.

(Repeat the exercise 5 to 10 times)

Kathy Gaiser, M. Ed. (Health Education), has been involved in teaching and writing about health issues since 1976. She currently serves as Co-Director of the Women's Health Education Network (WHEN), a non-profit research organization. As a New York state certified stress-management instructor, she has taught stress-management courses and workshops in various settings. She is a contributing writer for New Women's Times, Rochester, New York.

Bibliography

Ballantine, Rudolph. Diet and Nutrition: A Holistic Approach. Honesdale, PA: The Himalayan Institute, 1978.

Benson, Herbert. The Relaxation Response. New York: William Morrow and Co., 1975.

Bermosk, Loretta S. & Porter, Sarah E. Women's Health and Human Wholeness. New York: Appleton-Century Crofts, 1979.

Bloom, Lyn Z., Coburn, Karen & Perlman, Joan. The New Assertive Woman. New York: Dell, 1975.

Bloomfield, Harold H. & Kory, Robert. The Holistic Way to Health and Happiness. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1978.

Giordana, Daniel & Everly, George. Controlling Stress and Tension: A Holistic Approach. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1980.

Herrigel, Eugen. Zen in the Art of Archery. New York: Random House, Inc., 1953.

Mason, L. John. Guide To Stress Reduction. Culver City, CA: Place Press, Inc., 1980.

Nuernberger, Phil. Freedom from Stress: A Holistic Approach. Honesdale, PA: The Himalayan Institute, 1981.

Pelletier, Kenneth. Mind as Healer, Mind as Slayer. New York: Dell, 1980.

Selye, Hans. Stress Without Distress. New York: J. B. Lippincott Co., 1979.

Shealey, C. Norman. Ninety Days to Self Health. New York: Dell Press, 1977.

Walker, C. Eugene. Learn to Relax. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1975.

Down to Earth. No preservatives. Purely natural. The trend is here in everything from potato chips to cosmetics. And now, fortunately for us, a woman's contraceptive method can be just as pure and simple.

Perhaps you've heard whispers or maybe you even know a few women who are using it. ‘Fertility Awareness’, ‘Natural Family Planning’, 'Sympto-thermal Birth Control.’ Whatever the name, the principles are basically the same. (Not to be confused with the 'old rhythm method' however.)

Women can have control over their fertility. How? By simply learning to perceive the numerous signs our bodies send out each day, every month, from the time of puberty to menopause. In learning to interpret these cyclic changes, one can successfully plan for or prevent a pregnancy. A woman can learn to predict that ovulation is approaching, to know when her fertile time is here, and to know when it is over for each month.

Sounds serious? Yes! Sounds time-consuming? Well, maybe. Really important? Definitely. It is basic information about a woman's body that she has a right to know.

It takes time to learn: approximately a three-hour session.

It takes a willingness to practice: about three months. In that time you will discover what certain vaginal discharge means, and what your basal body temperature is. Once you learn, the knowledge is yours forever. To do with as you wish.

Used alone for contraceptive purposes, it can be up to 99% effective.

Used in conjunction with barrier methods (diaphragm, condom, foam/cream), one can be more than 100% safe from pregnancy.

And, of course, using the principles in reverse, one can use the method to conceive.

THE AMAZING FEMALE BODY IS OURS TO LEARN

Classes for groups or individuals. Partners are more than welcome. For more information, contact: Julia Worczak, R.N., 633-5152.

GROUND

ee Pat

SEPTEMBER 196?