Not Merciful 9666

covers a sense of peace she has never
known before. When he finally dies,
she 'borrows' a girl with no family
of her own, to bring up. The tale
ends with her telling the girl of the
bowlegged man whom she buried, who
taught her about life and change in
the world.

It's refreshing that these women,
who so often are suffering emotionally,
are not so self-absorbed that the male
characters (be they relatives or the
white man) become the constant bad
guys. The stories acknowledge the
humanness of the men as well as the
women. In fact, there is just one
story in the book where the reader
feels unabated hatred for a man. A

woman takes her daughter on a rare
visit to the city department store.
While the mother is treated as a
virtual non-entity by the sales staff,
her daughter is molested, in another
section of the store, by a salesman
"helping her" try on shoes. Leaving
the store, the mother asks the daughter if
she wants to spend her fifty-cent
piece before they go back to the re-
servation. The coin then slips
through the girl's fingers. Neither
attempts to retrieve it, and they walk
back home in silence.

Through all the stories the sense
of ultimate aloneness is very pro-

Somerville and Ross

well established as unmarried daugh-
ters of genteel circumstances (Violet

by Mary Hess

was 24, and Edith was 28). That they
loved each other profoundly there can be

no doubt, and while it is unlikely that
they were actually lovers (given the con-
straints of their society and their own
relative innocence in matters of sex),
they were partners in every other sense.
They were very alike in temperament, and
very much Irishwomen who responded pas-
sionately to the beauty and charm of
their country. All their books, what-
ever their tone, reflect the gentle humor
and keen perceptions of their creators.
Unfortunately, only two of Somerville
and Ross' books are in print in the U.S.,
but what marvelous books they are! The
Irish R.M. is actually three short novels
in one volume, a delightful tale of a con-
fused Anglo-Irish Resident Magistrate and
his canny and loquacious neighbors. Fur-
ther adventures of Major Yeates are pro-
mised by PBS this Spring, and would be
well worth catching. If you can find
them in local libraries, there are books
of short sketches of Irish life and other
novels, but all pale before their master-
work, The Real Charlotte. Widely regarded
as their finest work, The Real Charlotte
is comic, with all the elements of their
other work, e.g., Irish life high and low
presented with sly insight and good humor, —
but with an increasingly sinister bent to
the plot. Charlotte, a creation of genius,
is monstrous and fascinating as a genial
villainess whose schemes bring down the
hapless heroine, her “niece” Francie
Fitzpatrick. It is a remarkable book,

There are few pleasures as great
as the discovery of a really original
writer, and it's even better when
that writer is a neglected or “lost”
woman writer. Last year's "Master-
piece Theater" offering, "The Irish
R.M.", led me to Somerville and Ross,
two most remarkable and engaging wo-
men. Like the Brontës before them,
Violet Martin ("Martin Ross") and
Edith Somerville ("E. O. E. Somerville”)
used noms de plume to conceal their
identities, a contrivance used to

sadly lacking in their lives are the
emotional connections found in friend-
ships which would strengthen and en-
rich them.

The stories in The Sun Is Not Mer-
ciful are beautiful and, despite their
somewhat oppressive tone, inspiring
in that the women who comprise them
are trying their best to make a decent
loving life for themselves and their
families. It's a book well worth
reading as enjoyable fiction as well

books in collaboration, some of it
from beyond the grave, as Edith was a
staunch believer in Spiritualism, and
felt that Violet's spirit guided her
to write. The seamless quality of
their literary partnership is quite
astonishing, as if indeed they were

a single individual. Much has been
made of the intimate friendship of
these two women, who were inseparable
companions until Martin's death in
1915. They were second cousins who

not well accepted at first by their public

and somewhat challenging to read, but
very satisfying.

It can be hoped that with a new edition of The
Real Charlotte arriving soon in the book-

stores that they will find new admirers.®

Mary Hess has taught Women and Film at
Women's Studies College, SUNYAB, and is
working on a book on women and silent

Somerville and Ross were
especially proud of this book, and it can

as getting a peek at what life is like only met each other when they were film.
in another culture. ®
PEGG MEER R ERE A i PE wd SIS POD) SH REL HY Bole AO IRE HR
by Judith Geer as Reo acne ea oe fs
Gage, Nicholas. ELENI. New York: NTT apie ce es : PP ner SRA ee

Random House, 1983,

husband lived and worked in Massachusetts,
sending money and material goods to his
wife, son and four daughters. Eleni re-
fuses to emigrate from Greece, believing
as an honorable daughter, that she should
stay and attend to her parents. When
World War II breaks out, Eleni and her
children are trapped in Greece, unable

to get money from the States. Through
stealth and thrift Eleni preserves her
home and children throughout the war

happen quickly as the communists begin
taking children of Lia away from their
parents, sending them into Eastern
Europe for "re-education." It is at
this point that Eleni begins to plot
her family's escape.

Their plan is thwarted when one of
Eleni's daughters is taken by the
guerrillas as forced labor in the wheat
fields. Eleni is taken next, but not

before she enlists the aid of other

responsible for Eleni's execution, the judge
at her "trial." Gage plans to kill the
man after forcing him to admit his com-
plicity in Eleni's death. But faced
with his mother's executioner, he finds
her legacy of love and sacrifice over-
powering and is able to transcend his
feelings for vengeance and come to a
final understanding of her life and
death.

ELENI is beautifully written and
reveals not only Gage's immense love

to be further tormented as the Greek

civil war breaks out in the late '40s.

The communist guerrillas occupy Lia and
because Eleni's husband is an American
and her father is a vocal supporter of

the loyalists (those on the side of the

Greek monarchy) she and her family are
targets of repression. Her house is
confiscated by the guerrillas and used
as their headquarters, so she and the
children move in with her mother.

villagers to get her remaining four
children over the mountains to freedom.
When the escape succeeds, Eleni is ar-
rested for her "conspiracy" and is
condemned to death.

Nicholas and his sisters eventually
are reunited with their father in Mas-
sachusetts and establish new lives for
themselves.
to Greece, Gage finds the one man he

and respect for his mother but also

a way of life in rural Greece which
was especially harsh for the women.
Anyone intrigued by the conditions in
which women in other parts of the
world live, would be well advised to
read ELENI. Gage has given us the
portrait of an inspiring woman; a

Years later when he returns portrait to tuck away in the mind

and pull out in moments when such

Events considers to have been the most respon- thoughts would bring comfort.®