COMMON GROUND.

January was the 13th anniversary of
the Roe vs. Wade Court decision.
Many women have heard of Roe vs. Wade, but
only a small number know the
specifics of what the decision involved.

In 1963, the Court ruling said that
according to the Bill of Rights, each
citizen had a constitutional right to
privacy. They concluded that abortion
was a private matter, and a woman
should have the right to decide for
herself whether or when to have
children. This includes the right
to abortion within certain limitations.

In the first trimester of
pregnancy, states could not
regulate this within medical
facilities. In the second trimester,
states could regulate abortion only
to insure the health of the mother.
They could prohibit abortion in
the third trimester, but must allow
it if it was to save the life of
the mother.

The Roe vs. Wade anniversary was
celebrated in Buffalo by a gathering
at the YWCA on January 22.
A spirited program was conducted,
despite pickets by about 30 anti-
abortionists outside the YWCA. In
the opening press conference,
the media questioned the organizers
specifically on Mayor Griffin's
remarks earlier in the day on the
abortion issue. Griffin, who had
other endorsements in the recent
Mayoral race, had the Right-to-
Life party backing, said that
abortion was a significant factor
which kept the population in
Buffalo from growing. Abortion,
he said, is a black mark on
society.

Kristina Young, executive
director of the local Planned Parenthood,
called Griffin's remarks "asinine."

Paulette Hammond, a representative
of the local Pro-Choice Network,
called Griffin's reasoning "crazy."

Hammond said, “I think he's ignoring the loss
of jobs because of the closing of
the abortion industry here."

When asked what political figures
had been invited to this gathering,
Hammond mentioned several Buffalo
Common Council members who were
known to have pro-choice views.
She was asked specifically if Mayor
Griffin had received an invitation,
and she replied, "I didn't want to
waste 2205."

The pro-choice rally included a
panel discussion, led off by Isabel
Marcus, speaking on the judicial
aspects of the Roe vs. Wade decision.
For the third time the Supreme Court
is reviewing the constitutionality
of this decision, said Marcus. Various
groups have lobbied for the inclusion
of a clause requiring a certain
waiting period to give informed consent
for the abortion, or to require parental
permission in some cases. Marcus
said that there would probably be no
changes this year but that we should
consider what might happen if the composition
of the Supreme Court changed
under the Reagan administration.

Kristina Young spoke of the
campaign of harassment conducted by anti-abortion
ists against Planned Parenthood
and medical clinics performing abortions
both locally and nationally.

"I have received personal threats,"
she told the audience, "that some of our neighbors...are not bound by ethics, I mean it."

A woman who went to the Crisis Pregnancy Center in Buffalo articulated
what her experience there involved. This
particular clinic was established by
"Right-to-Life" forces, and it counsels
women against abortion. Although she did
choose to have her baby, she did not
believe all the exaggerated propaganda
claims employed by the Crisis Pregnancy Center.

Margaret Snell's theme was the
"hidden agenda" of "Right-to-Life"
groups, one of forcing abortion out
of the clinics and into the back
alleys. Their goal, she said, is
that women—especially women of color—
will have to resort to sterilization
as a method of birth control. Snell
said that this "solution" will eventually
be forced upon them, as indeed it
has in the past with Puerto Rican women,
Native American women, women in institutions,
and others. It is a scheme, she said, to
create a majority of white middle-class
babies.

As a follow-up action to this rally,
the Pro-Choice Network invited those
present to their next meeting, Feb.
4th, at the Downtown YWCA, where
specific strategies will be discussed.
Among these strategies may be a
letter writing campaign to combat
the postcard protest organized by
the New York State Right-to-Life
Committee. This protest, which
has since been joined by Catholic
church leaders and some Protestant
and Orthodox Jewish leaders, urges
Cuomo to end Medicaid funding
for abortions.

Page 1

VOL. V No. 6

INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S DAY IN BUFFALO

Don't be shy—join us at International
Women's Day in Buffalo! The I.W.D.
committee is still looking for help
with the events on March
7th. Musicians, poets, performers and
artists interested should call 886-5385
or 834-0259. There will be a day of
workshops with many other events
happening on March 8th. Those interested
in participating should call 883-7606.

The I.W.D. march will be taking
place on March 9th. For information
on how you can participate as part of the event, call
385-5734.

A complete schedule of the events
of 1986 in Buffalo will be printed in the March
issue of this Newsjournal. Mark all times and places on your calendar in the meantime,
and look forward to this year's festivities!

MONEY

Have you ever wished you could
give CG a little extra financial
support, but your budget says no?
Well, if you shop at Tops, Bells,
or Super Duper, you can help us
without spending one extra cent!

As a nonprofit organization, CG
is eligible to participate in the
cash register tape rebate programs
at key local supermarkets. For every $300.00 in tapes from Tops, and
every $400.00 in tapes from Bells
and Super Duper that we turn in, we
will receive $1.99 cash for Common Ground.
To receive any substantial rebates
we need your help.

- Keep an envelope for your tapes
posted in a prominent place near
your grocery unpacking site.

- Give your friends, acquaintances
and family envelopes labeled
Common Ground to encourage them
to join the effort.

- Ask sympathetic groups (who may
not be eligible themselves) to
publicize our effort, and to
encourage their membership
to collect tapes for CG
that they can turn in at their
monthly meetings.

- Keep your eyes open for “bonus
tapes” that customers have discarded.
Please forward your tapes to
CG Newsjournal, P.O. Box 313,
716 Elmwood Avenue, Buffalo, New York,
14222, and turn your old paper into
gold for the women’s community.

COMMON GROUND FEBRUARY 1986