FAMILY LEGENDS: GRANDMA KAUFMAN

My father's mother played the piano  
for square dances  

I would watch while the tall upright  
seemed to rock back and forth  

on the floor; she stomped her foot  

to keep time and banged away at the keyboard  
it was a player piano with a mandolin  
attachment for honky-tonk tunes  

(when grandma and grandpa moved away  
from the farm, we got the piano  

I thought I was in heaven until my  
dad got tired of the noise  

took it all apart and stored the  
pieces in the barn)  

I loved that old piano  

Grandma was a hard-headed old bitch  
obstinate as they come with a voice  
that could peel wallpaper  

She was always getting into political  
arguments with the men; I would have to  
leave the room because my ears hurt  

I didn't like her then  

wondered how my gentle grandpa could  
ever have married her  

every day of her life she wrote in her diary,  
measuring her time in five-year segments.  

She wrote about the weather: date, time,  
temperature, precipitation, wind velocity  

once she made a scrapbook of her chorus trip to  
Washington, D.C.; a record of their  

comings and goings (and the weather)  

in “our capital city"  

I've always wondered what she left out as she  
recorded Indiana's vital signs. Did she ever  
radiate warmth or shine on anything? Did her  
blood pressure rise and fall like the  
temperature and her temper bluster?  

Did she rain and hail on her family and  
freeze each tender shoot?  

Grandma was a woman with iron in her spine and  
frost in her soul, who lived four days with a  

temperature of 107 degrees in the hospital ward of  

the institution she was committed to; that  
institution my father took her to as she  
cursed him for one hundred miles  

He nearly collapsed in the weeks  

after she died; going over and over the same  
set of "good reasons why....”  
wondering.... wishing they had let her do it  
her way; by her own hand; like her sister Pearl  
(she drank iodine the first time; the stain  
around her mouth and the empty bottle on the floor  
earned her a trip to have her stomach pumped  
made her more careful when she drank  
carbolic acid; threw the bottle out into  

the snow and had time to get back into bed  
before anyone came in)  

Grandma took sleeping pills and was taken to  

the hospital before they even made her drowsy; she had  
insisted so hard she “didn't want to be disturbed...."  

it was her token attempt to go along with the  
programming: when a woman is old and useless  

or otherwise a burden, she is obligated  
to take herself out of the way  
“for the good of the family"  

the doctor told dad she  

had a tremendous will to live  
I think she was just too damned  
stubborn to die  

DESCENDED FROM WALES  

Dear Mother,  
I hope there's no class struggle in heaven—  
you had enough of that down here!  

Why did you leave your generations  
of William Williams descended from Wales—  

to marry the dreaming son of a Portuguese whaler  

who dropped out of school to look at the sea?  
What a come-down; what a fall from grace!  

He brought us up Puritan; Anglicized his name;  

but you couldn't shut him up about his father  
who left the rocky Azores at 14  

to ride a New Bedford whaling beat  

around the world.  

He moved us from the white mansion,  

into a frame house by the lake—  

the outskirts of respectability—  

where he could put his elbows on the table  
and vote Democratic.  

From then on he chased the white whale  

of the establishment that had chewed off  

his self-respect. In the ebb and flow  

of his passions, he loved you; just hated  
what you stood for: Republican,  

mill management people high up in the Masons.  

His background gave you a house full of  
fecundity and fried linguica smoke,  
mixed with a lifetime of whaling stories.  

Rowing back from the ice house  

at breakneck speed, I asked him once,  
"Daddy, why are you rowing so fast?  
There's no whales in the lake.”  

"Got to get home before the ice melts,"  
was all he said.  

Before his final voyage, we took him  

to the whaling museum in New Bedford—  

he was like a little kid in a candy store;  
afterward to Horseneck Beach at high tide—  
salt tears fell into his clam chowder.  

I married a hard-working WASP,  

straight from England—  

regained a bit of Paradise for the family.  
It's so goddamn lily white here,  

daddy wouldn’t believe it!  

I'm writing you from your mahogany desk  
with the 1921 etiquette book poised on top;  
Marjie has the Victorian rocker;  

Carol the clock. All Georgie wanted  

were the whales' teeth—his kids  

keep taking them in for show and tell.  

Got to run now; I smell the codfish cakes  
burning on the stove.  
Love, Charlotte  

Charlotte Churchill  

Bonnie Johnson  

THE SPOT UNDER MY SWING  

The grass has grown beneath my swing  
I wish it still was bare  

The way it was long years ago  

When all my kids swung there.  

The spot under the swing  

Has grass as green as it can be  

But in my mind's eye I am sure  

There's a patch of mud, it pleases me—  

For that means children’s feet touched there  
And later after swinging's done,  

They race in to ask me for  

A glass of milk and sugar bun  

I s'pose the answer is that I  
Should have a swinging party soon,  
And hope that little scuffy feet  
Will set my life again in tune.  

Edna C. Neureuther  

inheritance  

She is old and withered,  
weathered by adversities, but  
comfortable now and satisfied  
to see her family surrounding  
her. They see dollar signs,  
not her white hair, thin and yellowed.  
"This is what I want.” "I will have this.”  
she nods agreeably as they  
divide up her belongings as if  
she were no longer there.  
Like wolves at a kill, not everyone eats.  
I want only to hear of brothers and  
sisters and school chums, all long gone.  
"During the war, the first one, I mean, . .”  
she begins. This is it. I am to have history  

fleshed out, made alive.  
"This is 198-," they scold her  

and force her back. She frowns, like one  
taken from enjoyment and led into captivity.  
She becomes quiet, then confused.  
Finally, she cannot answer when  
queried. So, I lose my inheritance.  
They will have their possessions while  
I am left with questions.  
“What was my grandfather like?“  

I will never know, for I did  

not receive my inheritance,  

I mourn alone.  

Sandy McPherson Carrubba  

PEN & INK BY RAZIA MUHAMMED  

PAGE 7 COMMON GROUND APRIL 1986