|Relationships

from page 5

trigger huge knock-down, drag-out
fights. Some simple rules can help:

- stick with the issue at hand and
don't bring up unresolved problems
from the past.

- take a problem-solving approach,
not an I-win/you-lose attitude. In a
fair fight, both people can win.

- do not hit below the belt - that
means no name calling and no nasty
cracks about relatives.

- try to schedule a time for the
argument - preferably not right before
bed, or first thing in the morning, or
during dinner.

- try to listen and understand what
your partner is saying and not just
rehearse what you want to say next.

- don't be stubborn. Learn to give
in when something is really not that
important to you.

The following suggestions are help-
ful if you are currently in an
unsatisfactory relationship.

1. Examine what your stated or un-
stated demands are, then go through the
process outlined above to rid yourself
of them. This will enable you to have
a more realistic view of the relation-
ship so that any decisions you make

can be well-thought out.

2. Try to talk with your partner
(preferably after doing step one) about
what you both want from your union. Be
specific. It is best to each list
goals and then compare the lists.
Don't forget that goals include behaviors,
emotions and values.

3. Practice self- and other-ac-
ceptance; if you are unaccustomed to
doing this, it may be difficult -
persevere, it's worth it! Accept-
ance has to do with not rating people
themselves, but rating their behav-
iors instead. An example of this
would be if your partner forgets to
pick up your suit from the cleaners
and you need it for work the next
day. Instead of rating him/her as a
totally inconsiderate, selfish and
forgetful person, you can simply

rate this behavior as inconsiderate,
selfish and forgetful. Remember that
one or two behaviors, or even 100, do
not a total person make; which is why
some people find themselves loving
others who do not act in the most
thoughtful ways. Simply put, the
person is greater than the sum of
his/her behavior.

4. Make sure that you are not con-
sciously or unconsciously expecting
perfection. Everyone, including you,
has faults. The question becomes:
Can I live with this person's faults?
The statistical proof here is that
while 52% of first marriages end in
divorce, 70% of second ones do. In
other words, people become more dis-
illusioned and set even more unreal-
istic goals for themselves and their
partners the second time round.

5. Do a little comparing. Are you
likely to find someone else who meets
more of your criteria? If the answer
is yes then look around a bit. If you
are a heterosexual woman, let me be
frank: there are not too many egali-
tarian-minded men out there and if you
have managed to find one, think seri-
ously before giving him up.

6. Examine the circumstances (finan-
cial, intellectually, socially and
emotionally) you were in when you be-
gan this liaison. Did you feel good
about yourself? Were you sick of liv-
ing alone? Did you give in to family
pressures to get married and "settle
down"? Or, were you feeling secure,
enjoying your work, and keeping so-
cially and physically fit? What was
your partner's situation? Sometimes,
looking back to when you first began
seeing someone can help you put the
relationship, in its present state,
into perspective. It's an old cliche
but people do change and can grow

apart. If that is what has happened, it
is best to face it rather than
remain in a relationship that fails

to meet your desires. (Notice that

I did not say "needs", since your

only real "needs" are for food,

shelter, water and air.)

7. Whatever you decide to do, there
is one caveat: do not feel guilty for
having entered the relationship in the
first place, even if you think it was
a big mistake. Guilt will never help
you choose a more appropriate partner
in the future, or change anything in
the past. What it will do is make you
feel resentful and angry at yourself,
which will lead to self-recrimination
and depression. Blaming your partner
is also a mistake because it will not
accomplish anything except to give

you the false impression that you are
not responsible. Again, accepting
yourself, your partner, and your mutual
mistakes will leave you calmer and
ready to get on with your life. 

Photograph by Julie Alane Simons