*From Page 1

al advocacy. (This rule is similar to
one that Planned Parenthood fought,
concerning the use of materials in
clinics and hospitals which also
provide abortions or abortion information
referral or counseling, and also re-
ceive federal funding. The regulation
would have forced clinics to set up
separate entrances, exits, telephones,
supplies and rooms for that portion of
complete health care that has anything
to do with abortion.)

Fortunately, according to an in-
formed source, the rules were with-
drawn February 14. "There is," the source
said, "every chance that it will come
up again, possibly in modified form.

OMB seems to hope if it resubmits it
later, the furor will have died down.”

INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S DAY
SUCCESS

The International Women's Day Cele-
bration, March 12, was a great success
by all accounts of the organizers and
participants alike. Approximately
300 women attended workshops, films or
browsed through merchants' wares and
information booths during the day, and
more than 80 stayed on through the pot-
luck supper and entertainment.

Attorney Linda Cleveland delivered
the keynote address, and Madeline Davis
did the honors as emcee, introducing
Bridget Radford, Susan Clements, Neia

vely, Ros Magorian, and Ann Marie

Szpakowska, the singers who provided 

the evening's lively entertainment.

A spokesperson for the organizers
said they will be forming next year's
committee in April, and will be looking
for direction and criticism, and
help from the community for the '84
event.

NEW YORK STATE RAPE LAW
UPDATE

The new rape law passed by the
N.Y.S. legislature in 1982, which was
first touted as a vast improvement by
women's groups and others attempting
to reform rape laws, and which was
subsequently discovered to contain
language which made prosecutions even
more difficult, will be revised again
this year, if all goes as Assembly-
woman May Mewburger of Great Neck
hopes.

The 1982 revision ended in the
provision that women had to give
"earnest resistance" to a rapist,
even though resistance can sometimes
lead to injury or death. The "earnest
resistance" clause also came un-
der attack because of the subjective
nature surrounding the determination
of what "enough" resistance to an at-
tacker is.

The new law stated that a woman
must prove she feared for her life or
serious injury. Unfortunately, since
most rapes are committed by relatives
or acquaintances, women would not
necessarily fear death or serious
injury from an attacker.

The 1983 revision, already passed
in the State Assembly, requires a
woman to prove fear of injury only. It
goes to the State Senate this year.
Assemblywoman Mewburger and D.A.
Elizabeth Holtzman, as well as other
feminists were principal in getting
the law revised.

CARASA VS. METRO

As reported in the January issue of
CG, The Western New York area chapter
of the Coalition for Abortion Rights
and Against Sterilization Abuse has re-
ceived a $3,800 grant from the Ms.
Foundation to mount a media campaign
in METRO buses to educate the public
about abortion and sterilization
issues.

CARASA, however, has received a
statement in writing from the NFTA
stating that they will not carry these
bus cards, because they deal with a
controversial issue, and it is their
policy not to get involved in these
types of issues.

CARASA has contacted the National
Lawyer's Guild who will be represent-
ing them in this matter, and the Guild
has contacted the NFTA, asking them to
reconsider.

The Ms. Foundation has also been
contacted, and they reported that
similar problems occurred in Boston
and Philadelphia. The Philadelphia
issue never went to court, because
the bus company reconsidered its
original stand. In Boston, however,
the case did go to court—and the
cards did go on the buses.

"SQUEAL RULE STOPPED"

The “Squeal Rule" proposed by the
Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices to inform parents if their teen-
aged daughters are prescribed birth
control, has been permanently blocked
by U.S. District Court Judge Henry F.
Werker. The judge ruled in favor of
the plaintiffs—including Planned
Parenthood and the State of New York
Attorney General Robert Abrams—who
attacked the bill as being unconsti-
tutional on the grounds it would in-
vade the privacy of the young women.

This permanent injunction bars the
Health and Human Services administration
from implementing this regulation
anywhere in the nation, and over-
rides existing State laws.

-NUN STANDS UP TO BISHOP

Sister Agnes Mansour, of the Sisters
of Mercy Order, and currently the head
of Michigan's Department of Social
Services, is under fire from Archbishop
Szoka for not vehemently denouncing
Medicaid funding for abortions. As the
new director, Mansour has control over
this aspect of the state's health pay-
outs.

While her own position is definitely
anti-abortion and has been repeatedly
and publicly stated, Szoka will not be
satisfied until she also states that
she opposes the Medicaid funding.

The Archbishop, as quoted in Time
Magazine March 21, contends this dis-
agreement is not a "man-woman issue",
but Mansour's superiors in her order
are refusing to force her to resign.
This position pits them against the
archbishop and perhaps ultimately
the Vatican.

Recently, a national nun's
association came out with a pro-choice
position which was vigorously denounced
by the Pope.

HOT FLASHES...HOT FLASHES

...the controversy surrounding video
games continues. The makers of Custer's
Revenge have taken their offensive pro-
duct off the market, but many see the
type of games that are more "mainstream"
as still unhealthy and violent.

Another side to this controversy is
the fact that so many more boys and men
than girls and women are attracted to
the arcade games. There are experts in
the fields of technology and psychology
that think familiarity and expertise
in these games will make it easier for
people to make the transition to the
new high-tech, computerized world of
tomorrow. Since boys are more likely
than girls to play the games, they
are obtaining an advantage in tomorrow's
job market that girls will never
make up.

Some attribute this lack of interest
in computers (video games) to an innate
inability by girls to do the kind of
thinking that they require, but Kiesler
Sproull and Eccles, writing in March
Psychology Today said, "there is nothing
intrinsic to computing that should
discourage girls....Indeed, computer
programming is more like following
a recipe or pattern than fixing a bike
(sic).

The games tend to be about wars,
killing or destroying things, rather
than straight skills per se, which
are psychological barriers to par-
ticipation for many girls, women and
some men and boys. It is for these
reasons that it is believed this
lack of interest is likely to have
unfortunate long-term and culture-wide
effects in the years to come...

...Nurses belonging to Nurses United
Local 1168 (AFL-CIO) are still trying
to get a contract from Buffalo General
Hospital and its Deaconess division.
The issues in question are about job
security, grievance procedures,
wage and working conditions, among
others. The Union also had a beef with
the Buffalo News over censoring an ad
they placed outlining their grievances
with the hospitals...

...The American Council of Life In-
surance recently released figures that
show that women are moving more and
more into non-traditional jobs. The
proportion, according to the UPI story
is about 2 in 5...

---Buffalo's own School Master's
Association, a private group made up
of male employees of the school dis-
trict—administrators, teachers and
custodians—is again under siege by
female members of the Board of Educa-
tion, who contend that the organiza-
tion is not purely social, but that
it is through this association that
men improve their careers and chances
for promotion. Last year, women
crashed their annual dinner with flo-
wers and a band.

This year, Judith Fisher, JoAnn
Skorka, Florence Baugh and Mozella
Richardson will seek legal action,
including an appeal to State Educa-
tion Commissioner Gordon Ambach to
open the group. (info from Buffalo
News)

COMMON GROUND © APRIL 1983

PAGE 3