Book Reviews:

THE ULTIMATE VIOLATION by Judith Rowland.  
Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday and Company,  
1985. 366 pp.

reviewed by Joanne Schweik

THE ULTIMATE VIOLATION should be read  
by every feminist in the country and the  
sooner the better. Why?  

Because the subject—rape—is important  
to us all. Because the book is well-  
written; Judith Rowland carries it  
through in a brisk, intelligent narrative  
style that captures attention on the  
first page and keeps the reader on the  
hook. Because the book is jam-packed  
with information that all of us should  
know in order to help deal with one of  
our society's serious current problems.  
Most of all, because the book is a case  
history exemplifying (1) the important  
work that feminist professional women  
are doing—for the benefit of all—  
these days; and (2) that—in spite of  
being well-trained, extremely competent,  
and hard-working, dedicated team players,  
professionals like Judith Rowland must  
still face and deal with, day by day by  
day, continuing effects of discrimination,  
with the result that frustration and  
rage—those eternal bugaboos for all of  
us who are trying to make things differen  
— in the end almost dominate. In short,  
for anyone with a feminist consciousness  
and who is actively involved in the  
current women's movement, Judith Rowland's  
book might well be a textbook in how and  
why to keep going.  

For more than eight years, Rowland  
was an attorney in the felony division  
of the San Diego County (California)  
District Attorney's office. THE ULTIMATE  
VIOLATION is the chronicle, in story  
form, of four rape trials, three of  
which she herself prosecuted, between  
1978 and 1980.  

The book's keynote is a quote from  
Elaine Hilberman, M.D., writing in the  
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF PSYCHIATRY in April  
1976: “Rape is an act of violence and  
humiliation in which the victim experiences  
overwhelming fear for her very  
existence, as well as a profound sense  
of powerlessness which few other events  
in one's life can parallel...Rape is  
best understood in the context of a  
crime against the person and not against  
the hymen. Short of homicide, rape is  
the ultimate violation of the self."  
(The term "ultimate violation of the  
self" first appeared in "Crisis Inter-  
vention: An investigation of Forcible  
Rape," POLICE CHIEF, 1974, by Katherine  
White-Ellison, Ph.D. and Morton Bard,  
Ph.D.)  

As Rowland explains in her preface,  
"In combination, these four stories re-  
present a broad selection of victims and  
offenders. Of equal importance, they  
encompass an even larger assortment of  
illustrative situational factors, coping  
and behavior patterns, personal and sys-  
tem reactions. In other words, the  
reader should come away with a much  
clearer understanding of what rape is and  
is not, of who rapes and why, of who  
becomes victims versus those who are  
able to avoid being victimized, of  
options for coping and strategies for  
prevention, and, finally, what should  

PAGE 10 COMMON GROUND NOVEMBER 1985  

be happening in a rape trial—as opposed  
to what is happening—in our nation's  
courtrooms."  

What happened in Rowland's four rape  
trials is that she was able to introduce  
the concept of rape trauma syndrome as  
a weapon in the consent versus rape con-  
flict so common in rape trials. By  
using expert witnesses to introduce  
evidence of a commonality of behavior  
in rape victims—a rape trauma syndrome—  
as a means of convincing a jury that  
the victim had not consented and the  
rapist had indeed committed a crime,  
Rowland was able to win conviction in  
her rape cases and, in the process, to  
write new law. Significantly, also  
in her preface, she thanks "the Honor-  
able Carlos Cazares, the late T. Bruce  
Iredale, and especially William Low,  
judges of the San Diego County Munici-  
pal Court and Superior Court...for their  
courage to accept new and innovative con-  
cepts into an old and traditional sys-  
tem."  

Details of what happened to Rowland's  
career and to her personal commitments  
flesh out the absorbing accounts of the  
trials. It is important to other fem-  
inist activists to know that in spite of  
disappointments and frustrations, Row-  
land has continued to work on the problem  
of rape victimization, first by writing  
this book, and now through conducting a  
study of rape attack effects. Feminists  
should first read this book, then join  
the effort by responding to the following  
word to our readers, which brings the  
book to a close:  

"More information on the long- and  
short-term effects of sexual assault  
on victims is desperately needed. Your  
help is valuable, whether or not you  
yourself have ever been a victim of  
such an attack.  

"Ms. Rowland is currently conducting  
a study of such effects, as well as on  
the effect of THE ULTIMATE VIOLATION  
on your life and experiences, and needs  
your help. Would you please send a card  
to the following address, giving us your  
name and address, so that we may send  
you a survey? All information on the  
survey will be held in complete confi-  
dence, and will be used only for research  
and educational purposes.  

"Please send your name and address to:  
The California Center on Victimology  
2441 “E" Street  
San Diego, California 92102"  

Joanne Schweik is Archives Supervisor at  
Reed Library at the State University  
College at Fredonia and a free-lance  
writer and reviewer who specializes in  
feminist concerns. As one of the  
founding members of the Northern Chau-  
tauqua County chapter of NOW, she has  
worked with her chapter on various rape  
problem issues in the area since 1970.  

A WOMAN'S QUEST FOR SCIENCE:  

A PORTRAIT OF ANTHROPOLOGIST  
ELSIE CLEWS PARSONS by Peter  
Hare, Prometheus Books, Buffalo,  
N.Y.  

reviewed by Deborah Jop  

It's always a joy to be intro-  
duced to a new and interesting  
person—whether in real life or  
through literature. I recently  
had this pleasant experience when  
I picked up the book A WOMAN'S  
QUEST FOR SCIENCE: A PORTRAIT OF  
ANTHROPOLOGIST ELSIE CLEWS PAR-  
SONS. Born in 1894, this woman  
was not only a prominent and  
widely respected social scien-  
tist, but also an ardent feminist  
who would not hesitate to voice  
her opinion on women's suffrage,  
trial marriage and the general  
subjugation of females.  

In her recently written biog-  
raphy (published, I might add, by  
Buffalo-based Prometheus Books),  
author Peter Hare brings this ad-  
mirable woman once again to life.  
Much of this book is comprised of  
her letters, and through them we  
get to know the woman who had to  
cope to establish herself as a  
working woman despite a mother who  
thought of work as "unhealthy for  
girls" (she once told Elsie that  
the best thing that could happen  
to her was to "fall desperately  
and completely in love").  

When Ms. Clews married, it was  
to Congressman and political re-  
former Herbert Parsons. Though  
her marriage was a strong one, her  
often unconventional ideas and out-  
spokenness (not exactly the ideal  
for a political wife) got this mild  
mannered man into more than one  
sticky situation with his cronies  
and constituents.  

Along with making us familiar  
with this woman's scientific en-  
deavors, the author also exposes us  
to her emotional frustrations.  
Through letters to her husband and  
friends, she describes the torments  
of jealousy that she experiences  
when her husband develops a platonic  
relationship with a certain woman—  
even though she advocates that very  
type of friendship as an enriching  
part of her married life. She her-  
self formed many friendships (by way  
of her profession), which her hus-  

band seems to have accepted.  
She evidently spent many years  
trying to reconcile her ideals  
with her all-too-human emotional  
insecurities.  

I would recommend this book  
if only because it’s always in-  
spiring to read about women in  
the past who have overcome the  
usual obstacles and have achieved  
out of the ordinary success.  
But more than that, it's an edi-  
fying look at a truly good wo-  
man's character.