*From Page 1

trition associated with improper use
of infant formula. But on May 16 the
United States announced its intention
to vote against the Code. By then it
was too late for WHO to undo the last-
minute concessions the U.S. had se-
cured as a condition of its support.
Besides destroying the ‘human rights
program cultivated by Jimmy Carter,
the new administration was sending an
explicit message to the international
corporate community: your interests
are our interests. Additionally, this
action illustrated the U.S. govern-
ment's tacit support of the marketing
of infant formula, regardless of the
consequences to the health and lives
of the children who subsist on this
food.

The aim of the Code is to give in-
fants the best nourishment available -
breastmilk - and to condemn the act-
ions of any person or organization who
interferes with this aim.

The most direct mandate of the Code
is to forbid multi-national food manu-
facturers from entering markets where
the population has a high likelihood
of misusing the product and using
sales techniques aimed at creating a
belief that their product is needed.
Breastmilk manufacturers operating in
poor, rural ghettos are not catering
to an actual need. They are trying
to create a need from which they will
profit, with little regard for the
added "price" consumers pay in infant
mortality.

The message that Mr. Magen trans-
mitted on May 15, 1981, was unmistak-
ably clear: we think infant nutrition
is important; it's heartbreaking that
women are being misled by formula
overpromotion, but we cannot let

Third World ignorance and backwardness
justify an interference with the
rising profits of the enterprising
companies.

That sounds dreadfully close to
saying that human rights are only
defensible when their defense doesn't
hurt big business. Interestingly,
this latter statement is not entire-
ly inconsistent with other “human
rights" positions taken to date by
this administration. Consider the
appointment of Ernest LeFevre to the
post of Secretary of the Human Rights
Division (which was unsuccessful, in
part, because of the publicity of Mr.
LeFevre's "Nestle's Connection"), in-
creased military and food aid to
right-wing repressive regimes, and an
economic policy that slashes food
stamps, welfare, Medicaid, and school
lunch programs in order to increase
defense spending and continue subsi-
dies for oil and tobacco producers.

This administration may be in er-
ror in concluding that health offi-
cials and human rights activists,
like the poor, have little political
clout. There was broad-based sup-
port and involvement in the formula
controversy during the Senate hear-
ings, and the Nestlé boycott in
this country has already grown pow-
erful enough to alter the Swiss cor-
poration's advertising schemes.

III THE DOMESTIC PROBLEM

Although the United States would

PAGE 8 COMMON GROUND FEBRUARY 1983

ins REJECTS INFANT PROTECTION CODE

Infant Formula in
Third World Nations

have shown compassion for all of the
world's children by voting for the
Code, it would have also been com-
mitted to the enactment of national
legislation to regulate marketing
practices of U.S. formula manufactu-
rers within the United States. What
remains understated is that problems
such as the lack of resources neces-
sary for the proper preparation of
formula, the inability to read in-
structions, and the alarmingly high
rates of fatal infant malnutrition
which were cited by Congress as
present in "a variety of developed
and developing nations," are also
affecting the users of formula in
this country. The domestic problem
dictates that a concerned effort to
fight growing commerciogenic malnu-
trition is necessary.

...Besides destroying the human rights
program cultivated by Jimmy Carter, the
new administration was sending an ex-
plicit message to the international cor-
porate community: your interests are
our interests...

The “Petition to Alleviate Domest-
ic Infant Formula Misuse and Provide
Informed Feeding Choice" was filed by
Lois Salesbury and Angela Glover Bla-
ckwell, attorneys for the Petitioners
on June 17, 1981. The various fed-
eral agencies named as respondents have
acknowledged receipt, but have
not yet made any decisions regarding
the procedures they will follow for
its consideration.

The 144-page petition contains
some startling facts. Domestically,
the medical/hospital channels are
nearly the exclusive focus of pro-
motion efforts. The formula manu-
facturers can rely on health care
professionals who have been well in-
formed by sales personnel (called
“detailmen") to suggest the use of
formula to their maternity and ob-
stetric patients. The suggestion
that breastfeeding is sometimes
"not enough” or "less convenient” is
extremely powerful when uttered by a
physician.

American doctors learn very little
about nutrition during their medical
training. The manufacturers take ad-
vantage of this void by providing
lecturers, seminars, and conferences
on infant health and nutrition. They
offer to subsidize the costs and to
pay the expenses of many physicians
whom they think would benefit from
the educational experience. The con-
flict of interest is obvious. Even
more striking, though, is the con-
flict of interest within the profes-
sional medical organizations.

The claims made by the detailmen,
who market the products directly to
the professional medical community,
and often transmitted by the physi-
cians are not scientifically inac-
curate, but it is easy to see how
they are designed to have the effect
of undermining breastfeeding. The
themes that are repeated include:

(1) formula is supported by medical
experts; (2) formula is supported by
science; (3) formula makes for heal-
thy babies; (4) formula fights moth-
ers' fears (about whether their
children are eating enough). (It is
worth noting that there is an ex-
tremely small number of women who are
not physiologically capable of nour-
ishing their children perfectly well
for several months.)

Public Advocates found that the
role of hospitals in pushing the use
of formula was at least as important
as that of each woman's physician.
Hospitals are architecturally design-
ed (often with the technical and fin-
ancial assistance of the industry) to
facilitate formula feeding; babies
are put in nurseries away from their
mothers and are routinely put on a
four-hour schedule. A child will be
brought to its mother at times other
than those chosen by the hospital
only if the mother is adamant in her
demands.

Additionally, the discharge packs
of free samples given to all mothers,
regardless of their choice of feeding
methods, provide subtle but very
effective advertising for formula
makers. The mother views this as the
hospital condoning, recommending, or
prescribing at least partial bottle
feeding. Some manufacturers even
provide special "gift packs" for
mothers who have chosen to breastfeed,
underscoring the necessity of formula
for even those women.

The goal is to keep women "hooked”
on what they are given at the hospi-
tal. Sometimes this convinces moth-
ers that ready-to-use formula (the
most expensive type) is the kind
their children need. When the moth-
ers receive little support for breast-
feeding from their physicians, see
formula advertising in doctors’ of-
fices, maternity clinics, and delivery
areas of the hospital, and then re-
ceive the gift pack in the hospital,
the temptation to question breastfeed-
ing is almost irresistible. Breast-
feeding is a learned response for
both mother and child. If no one as-
sists and supports a new mother, she
will almost inevitably fail and turn
to the bottle-feeding method.

The costs of growing infant formu-
la use in the United States is stag-
gering. It is particularly important
to bear in mind that the majority of
infant formula users in the United
States are lower-income, less-educated
women. According to a "crude but
conservative estimate" of Dr. Allan
Cunningham (based on 1979 births)
about five thousand U.S. infants
could be saved yearly if every woman
breastfed.

Also noteworthy is the fact that
WIC (welfare food program for women,
infants, and children) is the larg-
est single purchaser and distributor
of infant formula in the world. The
government picks up the tab for
children in this program to be formu-
la fed for up to two years, at the
full market price. Contrary to the
common presumption, the cause of the
increase in bottle feeding among low-
income women is not work outside the
home, but rather misinformation.

The subtle but crucially funda-
mental human rights issue underlying
the infant formula/malnutrition ques-

*Turn to page 9