Celebrate Hispanic Culture

by Olga Ortiz

Much Hispanic culture has entered  
the Western New York area with the  
numbers of Hispanics now living in  
and around Buffalo.

One of the favorite foods in many  
Hispanic households is rice and  
beans using pork feet that are cooked  
slowly with pink, navy or garbanzo  
beans. Potatoes and seasonings are  
added and served over rice. Rice is  
often served with chicken (Arroz con  
Pollo), ground beef (Picadillo) and  
pigeon peas (Arroz con gandules).  
Foods are mostly seasoned with garlic,  
onion, green pepper and tomato sauce.

Special holidays are celebrated  
mostly based on religious beliefs.

For example, Las Fiestas Patronales  
is a celebration honoring the patron  
saint of a town.

Most musical instruments are  
string instruments such as guitars,  
and the cuatro (a four-stringed  
guitar). Also used are drums, bongos,  
and guallo (which provides a grating  
sound). Common dances are the  
Rumba, Bolero, Danza and Merengue.

A special costume of some Spanish  
countries is a "Guayabera" which has  
a notched collar, tucks at the  
shoulder, with embroidery in front.  
The shirt is often made in cotton or  
linen. The "Sombrero de Guano" is  
a straw hat with a fairly wide  
turned up brim.

The Hispanic food, music, relig-  
ious beliefs and costumes have added  
to Buffalo's rich ethnic culture.

para Olga Ortiz

Mucha de la Cultura Hispana ha en-  
trado en el Lado Occidental de N.Y.  
debido a la cantidad de Hispanos que  
ahora viven en la ciudad de Buffalo  
y sus áreas.

Un plato favorito de muchos hog-  
ares Hispanos es arroz y habichue-  
las. Usándose patitas de cerdos que  
se cocinan lentamente en las difer-  
entes clases de habichuelas como:  
habichuelas rositas, habichuelas  
blancas o garbanzos. Papas y  
sazones son añadidos, sirviéndose  
sobre arroz. Arroz también es  
servido con pollo (Arroz con Pollo),  
carne molida (Picadillo) y gandules  
(Arroz con Gandules).

Las comidas son usualmente sa-  
zonadas con ajo, cebolla, pimientos  
verdes y salsa de tomate.

La mayor parte de las Fiestas  
celebradas son basadas en las dif-  
erentes creencias religiosas.

Por ejemplo: Las Fiestas  
Patronales es una fiesta que se  
celebra para honrar al Santo Patrón  
de un pueblo. Muchos de los  
instrumentos musicales son instru-  
mentos de cuerda como la guitarra,  
el cuatro, también se usan, el  
bongo, tambor y guallo. Los  
baile más comunes son Rumba,  
Bolero, Danza y Merengue.

Un vestuario especial de al-  
gunos países hispanos es una  
camisa llamada Guayabera, la cual  
es abotonada al frente con alforsas  
y bordados. Esta camisa es hecha  
de tela de algodón o de hilo. El  
sombrero de Guano, hecho de guano  
con el ala torcida hacia arriba es  
también popular en las Fiestas. Los  
Hispanos con sus comidas, música y  
creencias religiosas han añadido  
a Buffalo su rica cultura étnica.

a Colectivo Mate

The agonies and ecstasies of a col-  
lective: the agony of a group of women  
so diverse as Common Ground trying to  
reach and the ecstasy when  
we do!

We are some 30 women - and women  
the key word - it's our common ground.  
We have an incredible range of ages,  
backgrounds, education, sexuality....and  
opinions!

September 17's meeting was just a  
taste of what is ahead for us. The main  
topic of conversation (after normal busi-  
ness such as how much money we do/don't  
have, and how wonderful we all are to have  
actually published issue number one with-  
out too many mistakes) was our feelings  
about reader response to two items in the  
first issue: Assemblywoman Carol Siwek's  
ad, and the Catholic Diocese's Women's  
Health Services Hotline announcement ask-  
ing for ‘pro-life’ volunteers. Siwek  
because of her “ultra-conservative record  
on issues of abortion rights, Medicaid  
funding for abortion and parental con-  
sent-notification bills” and the diocese  
for their 'pro-life' stance. And, per-  
haps most important, Common Ground's  
part in publishing these items: Was  
there any prior screening? Were we  
giving implicit endorsement by printing  
them? Would readers assume Siwek and  
the diocese were pro-women because we  
accepted their ad/announcement? Were  
these items in conflict with our stated  
editorial policy?

The discussion opened up other issues.  
How should we respond to our readers'  
comments/concerns? How can we remain  
objective and yet stay within our edito-  
rial policy? Should we publish all  
viewpoints? How do we screen advertis-  
ers? By the text of the ad or by the  
person selling the product? Should we  
even sell space to politicians? Should  
we try to defend ourselves or should we  
see the 'Letters' page as an open forum?  
Where is that terribly fine line between  
censorship and 'discretion'?

We understood the concerns - and, in  
fact, had discussed the two items prior to  
accepting them (we even went to the point  
of making two 'test' calls to the hotline,  
one dealing with abortion, the other with  
lesbianism - in both cases, we received a  
positive reaction - no preaching but  
rather a helpful discussion of options).  
We accepted the ad and announcement on  
the basis that the text was not espousing  
views harmful to women. Perhaps we were  
in error. We were unable to reach a  
consensus on this.

It became apparent that two sides were  
developing - those that felt strongly  
that we should directly respond to our  
readers' concerns; and those that felt  
just as strongly that we should not  
editorially participate in the letters  
column. And, within these factions,  
there was more conflict: if we respond,  
how do we respond? If we don't, how do  
we let our readers know that we hear  
what they are saying?

And on and on it went. We tried a  
vote - it was almost 50/50 for and  
against. We talked some more. Another  
vote. More talk.

It became clear that we could not  
reach a decision that everyone could live  
with - and that this type of conflict  
would occur over and over again. A heal-  
thy but frustrating conflict, a process  
that would keep the collective alive and  
growing.

It also became clear that consensus was  
of utmost importance; that a majority vote  
was not satisfactory. And that we were  
not, at least tonight - nor perhaps in the  
future - going to reach consensus on these  
issues.

But there was consensus on one thing:  
we do not want our readers to think we do  
not listen to their concerns, their view-  
points, or that we do not take our philo-  
sophy and editorial policy seriously.

And thus this column. We will use it  
as a vehicle to let you know where we  
are; how we are evolving. To let you  
know that we care deeply about your  
response to the paper and that we are  
able and willing to admit our mistakes.

We will also use it, space permitting,  
to introduce ourselves to you over time.

Violence and  
Rural Women

BY JOAN DICKENSON

violence--1. exertion of physical force  
so as to injure or abuse  
2. injury by...distortion,  
infringement, or pro-  
fanation  
--Webster's Seventh New Collegiate

In Western New York's Appalachian foothills,  
violence is the medium women live in, the  
miasma we breathe. This is ironic, for one  
of the attractions of country life is that  
a woman can walk alone at midnight without  
fear. This violence isn't violent crime,  
though, but rather a state of mind, even  
a religion - a faith whose highest holy  
day is Opening Day, the beginning of deer  
season. (Hunting seasons dot our year,  
but deer season is the biggest.) For three  
late-autumn weeks, Allegany and Cattaraugus  
counties go mad with gunshots, blood, and  
swaggering males. Even the schools close  
on Opening Day so older students can hunt  
without missing classes.

Hunting does not necessarily fit Webster's  
definition of violence. Everyone who eats  
meat thereby condones and takes part in kill-  
ing; shooting the animal oneself is merely  
more direct. True, killing for sport and  
wasting the meat is wanton mayhem, but local  
hunters scorn those well-heeled city visitors  
who take a buck's head home for display and  
discard the meat. Allegany County has the  
fourth lowest per capita income in the state  
($5,994, compared to $8,476 in Erie County)  
people here hunt to supplement food-stamp or  
minimum-wage diets. Like wild leeks, berries,  
and apples, sixty pounds of free meat, range-  
fed without hormones or chemicals, is a bless-  
ing to the country poor.

Shooting a deer, then, is no more inherent-  
ly masculinist an act than picking a blackberry.  
In an ideal society, hunting would be nothing  
more or less than the humane killing of animals  
for food. But in this society, hunting is  
cloaked in patriarchal ritual: competition,  
braggadocio, drinking, exclusion of women.  
Always in a country man's mind is the know-  
ledge of his gun's potency. Women  
hunters tend to view guns as tools; not  
vehicles for domination, not extensions of  
their womanhood. A woman who shoots a deer  
is unlikely to participate afterwards in  
the traditional, beer-soaked re-telling and  
re-living of the kill.

The point is not that men don't let  
women hunt, but that few women even want  
to. It's no pleasure to join an all-male  
deer drive in which macho notions of tough-  
ness determine who's in charge, and in which  
we're welcomed patronizingly, if at all. The  
alternative, a woman-only hunting expedition,  
is attractive, but none of my friends has  
organized one. And that's just it: we don't  
want to.

Strangely, even the hunter who is primar-  
ily after meat values a buck more than a  
doe. Hunters boast of the size of the  
antlers, not the amount of meat: "I got an  
8-point buck"; "Huh--I got a 12-point." A  
large, meaty doe confers less prestige on her  
killer than an emaciated buck, even though  
it takes equal skill to kill her. A doe's  
antlerless head is not stuffed for wall dis-  
play.

I don't argue that country men use guns  
against women; they don't. They don't have  
to. When guns become a respected, ever-  
present part of family life (life in which  
males are people and females--still--mere  
property), violence becomes a thinkable way  
to deal with problems. The gun backs up a  
country man's power over women just as a  
mother's size backs up her authority over  
children, whether or not either weapon is  
ever used. Rural economics reinforce this.  
The jobs generally held by working-class  
country men--construction, oilfield, high-  
way--pay much better than the jobs women  
hold. Money is just another kind of gun.  
“Exertion of physical force so as to  
injure or abuse." If that's violence,  
then so is country marriage. Women here  
tend to bear children early. Males are over-  
valued and females undervalued, so male  
attention validates a young woman, some-  
times for the first time; love is irrel-  
evant. Public support of birth control is  
dwindling; for abortion (anathema in these  
conservative hills), women must go to Buffalo  
or Rochester. Many a young woman finds her-  
self locked in a box with a baby and a rarely-  
present male stranger. There, she is ex-  
pected (and expects herself) to be happy...  
fate.