WOMEN’S SAFETY

NEW TASK FORCE FOCUSES ON AWARENESS  
by Jill-Marie Andia

Sex crimes, self-defense, and  
public awareness are among the per-  
sonal safety issues being addressed  
by an increasing number of U.B.  
campus groups.

Two new groups have been formed.  
They are a Task Force on Women's  
Safety, formed by the Office of the  
President, and a Committee on Women's  
Affairs, established by the under-  
graduate Student Association (SA).

The efforts of the two new groups  
will add to the programs already  
established by Public Safety and  
the Anti-Rape Task Force (ARTF).

The Task Force on Women's Safety  
was established by University Presi-  
dent Steven Sample this semester.

The first meeting of the 14-member  
committee is scheduled for October  
1st.

The purpose of the committee, as  
outlined by its charge from Sample,  
"will be to advise the President on  
issues related to the personal safety  
and security of all members of the  
academic community...with particular  
emphasis on the personal safety of  
women."

The SA Women's Affairs Committee  
was established last year.

"A major effort of the Women's  
Affairs Committee will be in working  
with the Task Force on Women's Safety  
toward improving the level of safety  
on campus," said Susan Kirchheimer,  
coordinator of Women's Affairs for  
SA.

SA's Women's Affairs Committee  
is still in the process of estab-  
lishing its goals and objectives,  
and many ideas are under considera-  
tion.

Some issues will definitely be  
addressed, among them "generating  
a level of awareness of the reality  
of rape and sexual assault," Kirch-  
heimer said.

Kirchheimer is already developing  
a mandatory training program for  
Residential Advisors and other hous-  
ing personnel to make them aware of  
the issues of rape and sexual assault  
on campus.

"Not only do I want them to be  
aware of these crimes, but to be-  
come sensitive to the legitimate fears  
and concerns that women have about  
their safety," Kirchheimer said.

Kirchheimer is convinced of the  
need for such a program.

“Simply because Housing has not  
addressed these concerns does not  
mean that these crimes do not occur,  
nor does it mean that we cannot  
heighten knowledge and awareness in  
the residence halls and implement  
safety measures," she said.

Seminars and programs on safety  
have long been offered by the Depart-  
ment of Public Safety. Recently,  
officers Hazel Nichols, Bill Dunford,  
and Dave Chernega were assigned the  
task of updating and implementing  
a presentation on personal safety  
issues for dormitory residents.

The first portion of the program  
deals with rape and other sex crimes.  
"Our talk will be geared toward  

prevention, but we will focus also  

on what happens after a crime occurs,"  
Nichols said. The program will in-  
clude an explanation of the legal  
definition of terms, such as "rape"  

and the legal process for convicting  
someone of a sex crime.

"We'd like to educate people as  
to what really happens to the victim  
once they're assaulted," Nichols said.

This discussion will be followed  
by a self-defense presentation by  
officer Chernega. "This is to pro-  
vide an all-around knowledge," Nichols  
said.

Many physical attributes of the  
Main Street and Amherst campuses  
could threaten personal safety,  
Nichols said.

“Amherst is isolated; there are  
so many places to hide," she said.

On campus or off, the following tips provide a guide for increasing  

personal safety. (Source:  

Marcy Kucera, director of the Anti-Rape Task  

Force at UB, and Public Safety Officer Hazel Nichols.)

-WHEN WALKING ON OR OFF CAMPUS...  
-Never walk alone.  
-Walk aggressively.  
-Walk in a lighted area.  

Walk with someone else or in a group.  
Maintain a quick pace and know where you are going.

-If you feel that you are being followed, head for a place where people  

(dorm, store, etc.)

-Always let someone know where you are going and when you expect to  

get there.

WHEN APPROACHING YOUR CAR...  
-Have your car keys in your hand.  

-Check the back seat of the car before getting in.  
-Once inside, lock the doors and keep the windows rolled up.

IN YOUR DORM ROOM OR APARTMENT...  
-Keep the door locked.  
-Don't let a stranger in.  

Ask for his/her name and I.D.

-If you receive an obscene phone call, say nothing and hang up.  
-Never give your telephone number to someone who calls.

TIPS FOR OFF-CAMPUS...  

-Leave at least one light on at all times in your house or apartment.  
-Always have your keys out when approaching your door.  

-If you're being followed while walking home, bypass your residence  

and head for a store or some other populated place.

-If you're driving home and are followed into the driveway, honk the horn  

and stay locked in the car.

COMMON GROUND NOVEMBER 1984 PAGE 10

She also noted poor lighting condi-  
tions, barriers between parking lots  
and main roads, and the distance  
between the academic area and the  
dorms.

"Main Street is accessible to any-  
one," Nichols said. She added that  
there are many buildings which do  
not have adjoining parking lots.

The problems posed by the layout  
of both campuses, combined with the  
fact that classes are held every  
evening in scattered locations, make  
it difficult for Public Safety to  
look out for all of the individuals  
who are on campus at night.

"Given the size of our two campuses  
and decreases in manpower, we can't  
be everywhere at once...students have  
to look out for themselves," Nichols  
said.

The personal safety program devel-  
oped by Nichols, Dunford, and Chernega  
is designed to make students aware  
of the importance of that responsi-  
bility.

"We're not trying to tell students  
what to do, we're just basically lay-  
ing out the facts," Nichols said.

The thrust of the program is educa-  
tional.

"Hopefully, educating people will  
lead to valid reporting of sex crimes  
on campus," Nichols said. She empha-  
sized that "even if a person decides  
not to prosecute, reporting is impor-  
tant; Public Safety becomes aware  
of the problem and preventive mea-  
sures can be taken, and more impor-  
tantly, we can help the victim get  
any help he or she may need.”

For ten years the Anti-Rape Task  
Force (ARTF) has offered programs  
which attempt to overcome many of  
the safety problems on campus and  
off. ARTF is a student-run group  
sponsored by Sub-Board I, Inc. Cur-  
rent programs offer a range of ser-  
vices to the University and community.

A self-defense workshop, which  
is the only ARTF program offered ex-  
clusively for women, attempts to  
teach the basics for combating an  
attacker. The workshop is offered  
as a ten-week course which meets for  
three hours one night per week. Al-  
though sponsored by ARTF, the work-  
shop is taught by professionals.

Marcy Kucera, director of ARTF,  
said the self-defense workshop is  
offered to help women learn how to  
draw upon their own resources in a  
time of need. "We basically attempt  
to show what to do in a situation  
when you have nothing but yourself,”  
she said.

ARTF also offers a workshop which  
deals with the issue of sexual har-  
assment. "We want to educate UB  
students and professors about what  
sexual harassment is," Kucera said.

An ongoing lighting project is  
the joint effort of the Physical  
Plant and ARTF. Jeff Marshall of  
ARTF and an energy officer from the  
Beane Center tour both campuses at  
night and look for lights that are  
not on, lights which are broken,  
where lights could be turned off.

Perhaps the most well-known of  
the ARTF services are their walk  
and van services.

A number of walk stations are  

con't page 11