EMMA IS...

Beautiful! We have completed our  
re-modeling and we are eager for  
everyone to come and see the results.  
In addition to the new appearance, we  

are bringing in new titles and new  
items for the holidays. None of this  
has been easy and we wish to  
acknowledge the generous support of  

women in the community. Your patience  
while we were closed for remodeling is  

REVIEW  

SARTON  
AT  

SEVENTY  

May Sarton writes, in her recent  
book At Seventy: A Journal, "I do  
not feel old at all, not as much a  
survivor as a person still on her  
way." Indeed, this latest install-  
ment of her journal writing bears  
hearty testimony to the richness and  
excitement possible during the time  
of life once called "old age." Like  
her earlier journal volumes (Plant  
Dreaming Deep, Journal of a Solitude,  
House by the Sea and Recovering),  
this volume records May Sarton's  
attempt to live deliberately; pro-  
ductively; and with full concentration.  
Written for publication, the jour-  
nals are personal without being  
gossipy; and the entries often contain  
meditations on essential themes:  
friendships, a well-lived life, age  
and death, gardening, ethical and  
political issues, nature, women's  
changing perspectives. This progres-  
sive commentary on daily events illus-  
trates Sarton's belief that writing  
is "a way of understanding what is  
happening to me, of thinking hard  
things out." Enthusiastic readers  
of Sarton's journals are often inspired  
by her thought-provoking reflections.  
As with Thoreau's and Annie Dillard's  
works, you do not so much read  
them as bear witness to the writer's  
struggles at creating a life open to  
all experience.  

This book, as its title states,  
documents Sarton's seventieth year.  
It would be valuable simply as a  
continuation of the journals, but  
this volume also contains some sur-  
prises. For one thing, it is more  
packed with incident than any of the  
earlier volumes, as Sarton accepts  
the well-deserved fame and critical  
recognition that have come to her  
recently. She says herself:  

It is quite a joke that I  
conceived of this journal  
as a peaceful, reflective  
one, and instead it is the  
record of a runner who  
never catches up with her-  
self, although that self  
is the real goal.  

One surprise is the result of this  
very busy year: throughout the book  
are scattered fascinating, sometimes  
tantalizing glimpses of women's lives  
— artists and writers, of course, but  
also hospital workers, homemakers,  
scholars, carpenters. Notable are the  
women of Homemakers Organized for  
More Employment, a center for the  

appreciated, your attendance at the  
Kate Clinton performance was a real  
boost to our morale, and your continued  
support in shopping at EMMA is vital.  
We are now on a much more solid finan-  
cial footing and are beginning to be  
able to order more titles. As you  
think of books and other items you  
would like to see us make available,  
please let us know.  

by Pamela Clements  

rural poor in Maine (a photograph shows  
Sister Lucy perched atop a house she  
has just finished roofing); the vol-  
unteers chop trees, plow snow, teach  
women saleable crafts, and build  

solar homes for homeless families.  
Several times we hear of Sarton's  
friends Anne and Barbara, who combine  
herb farming, raising chickens,  
making ceramics, and sculpting.  
Examples of strong, courageous women  
appear throughout, from the sobering  
story of a woman who was arrested  
during the Greenham Common cruise  
missile protests, to an anecdote about  
a seventy-five year old friend who  
still pilots her own sailboat. These  
recurring examples of capable, vital,  
compassionate women are themselves  
worth combing the book for.  

One final aspect of At Seventy  
that will interest Sarton's readers  
is the growth of her philosophy; as  
a muscular spirituality becomes more  
apparent in her thought. Avoiding  
dogma, Sarton nevertheless emphasizes  
the importance of living according  
to the spirit, acting on one's own  
ideals. This type of writing is  
slower reading than an unbroken narra-  
tive, but Sarton's style is lightened  
by flashes of humor; beset by respon-  
sibilities, she sighs, "I am more  
driven than a Datsun!" At seventy,  
Sarton herself provides an embodiment  
of her own ideals, taking her place,  
however reluctantly, as a wise spokes-  
woman for a liberal, humanist (in the  
best sense of those words) way of life.  

Pamela Clements is a professor of  
English at Charleston College in  
Charleston, South Carolina. She is  

originally from Kenmore, New York.  

PAGE 12 COMMON GROUND OCTOBER 1984  

On October 12 at 7 p.m. we will be  
sponsoring a book-signing by Ruth  
Geller at the store. Ruth is a local  
resident of Buffalo and her new novel  
TRIANGLES published by Crossing Press  
is now available. Keep this date in  
mind, and join us for an evening of  
celebration.  

You may recall that we provided a  
mail-order form in COMMON GROUND  
several months ago. Once again, in  
cooperation with CASSANDRA: RADICAL  
FEMINIST NURSES NETWORK and COMMON  
GROUND we are making this opportunity  
available. This order features women's  
calendars for 1985 and a variety of  
books for the holidays and the new  
year. We will do our best to fill your  
order by the first of the year if we  
receive your order before November 1,  

but unfortunately we can't guarantee  
the postal service at this time of  
year. We have provided for a first-  

class postage option if you are eager  
to have fast delivery!  

We will have other calendars and  
books in stock as the holidays  
approach. We will also have jewelry,  

crafts and other gift items by and for  

women. So do come and browse.  
All of the books listed here are  
paperback. A brief description of each  

item listed on the order form is pro-  
vided here to assist you in making your  
selection(s).  

CALENDARS:  
Celebrating Women: 1985 Women's  
Health Calendar (Northampton, Mass.,  

The Family Planning Council of Western  
Mass. Inc., a non-profit health care  
corporation providing comprehensive  
family planning services, $5.00) This  
informative and attractive wall calen-  
dar provides historical information  
about women who have made a difference  
in health care, and 12 photographs of  
the past and present that celebrate  
women and health.  

The Strength of Women 1985 Wall  
Calendar (Nancy Bereano, ed., Crossing  
Press, $6.95) This popular calendar  
explores, both visually and verbally,  
the movement of women through the pha-  
ses of our lives: from infancy, young  
girlhood, and adolescence through  
adulthood, middle and old age.  
Includes 12 photographs by contemporary  
women, brief quotations on the theme,  
and an essay by the editor.  

Heroines 1985 Wall Calendar (Andrea  
Fleck Clardy, ed., Crossing Press,  
$6.95) Each month this calendar  
celebrates another remarkable American  
woman. Some are women we've always  
admired, some are women alive today  
whose achievements deserve our atten-  
tion. Along with each woman's pho-  
tograph, the calendar presents  
biographical information and a quota-  
tion. The 1985 heroines include:  
Louisa May Alcott, Lupe Anguiano, Sarah  

Bernhardt, Helen Caldicott, Althea  
Gibson, Mother Jones, Della Keats,  
Coretta Scott King, Maggie Kuhn,  

Henrietta Szold and Sojourner Truth.  

The Women Writer's Desk Calendar  
(Elaine Goldman Gift, ed., Crossing  
Press, $6.95) In its fourth year,  
this popular calendar shows each week's  
engagements at a glance. It is spiral  
bound to lie flat; closed the dimen-  
sions are 5.4 x 8 inches. Each month  
there is a photograph of a woman writer  
plus two pages of poetry or prose.  
Writers for 1985 include: Margaret  
Atwood, Emily Dickinson, Marilyn  
French, Marge Piercy, Ann Sexton, and  
Alice Walker.  

BOOKS:  
Peace and Power: A Handbook of  
Feminist Process (Buffalo,  
NY,  

Margaretdaughters, Inc., 1984, $4.95)  
by Charlene Eldridge Wheeler and Peggy  
L. Chinn. A much requested practical  
handbook for putting feminist ideals  
into action; a useful and necessary  
book for women trying to survive in the  
mid-'80s. Based on the authors'  
experiences of working in groups, this  
64-page handbook provides details of  
how to convene gatherings using a non-  
hierarchical approach, yet avoiding the  
tyranny of structurelessness. In addi-  
tion to philosophic and pragmatic  
guidelines, the handbook includes real-  
life situations to illustrate feminist  
process in action. Each part of the  
process of a gathering is described:  
Check-In, Rotating Chair, Consensus,  
and Criticism/Self-criticism.  
Daughters of Copper  
(Vancouver, British Columbia, Press  
Gang Publishers, 1981, $7.95) by Anne  
Cameron. Through the ancient myths of  
the Native American women of Vancouver  
Island, Anne Cameron offers “a shining  
vision of womanhood, of how the spiri-  
tual and social power of women - though  

relentlessly challenged - can endure  
and survive." The mythic qualities of  
the legends co-exist with a stark  

realism; the underlying vision of this  
book will linger long after the reading  

is done.  
Reclaiming Birth: History and  
Heroines of American Childbirth Reform  

(Trumansburg, NY, Crossing Press, 1984,  

$8.95) by Margot Adler and Mary  
Waldorf. Many women are familiar with  
the general history of increasing  

intervention by medical men in child-  
birth and early parenting, and the loss  
of women's traditional ways. This book  
introduces seven women who challenged  
that intervention in America:  
Elisabeth Bing, Margaret Gamper, Doris  
Haire, Lester Hazell, Sheila Kitzinger,  
Raven Lang and Niles Newton. Their  
stories fit into the context of public  
events such as midwife trials, the con-  
tinuing arguments over drugged labor  
and natural childbirth and the politics  
of obstetrical technology. The authors  
integrate contemporary coverage with  
interviews, current research and their  
own experiences, building a foundation  
for change.  

The Whole Birth Catalog: A  
Sourcebook for Choices in Childbirth  
(Trumansburg, NY, Crossing Press,  

$14.95) edited by Janet Isaacs Ashford.  
An impressive collection of material on  
pregnancy, childbirth and the postpar-  
tum period. The emphasis is on  
exploring alternatives to the medical  
model of pregnancy and childbirth.  

A Woman's Book (Trumansburg, NY,  
Crossing Press, 1983, $4.95) Interested  
in starting a personal journal for 1985  

but want more than blank pages to work  
with? This is a book for you! Every  
page spread has a quote for women,  
written by women, from Mae West to  
Simone Weil to Kaethe Kollwitz, and a  
small illustration taken from Japanese  
crests. The rest of each page is for  
you to write on. The book is 6 x 9  
inches for easy carrying, but big  
enough to sketch or write in.  

Mother Wit: A Feminist Guide to  
Psychic Development (Trumansburg, NY,  
Crossing Press, 1981, $7.95) by Diane  
Mariechild. A straightforward,  
engaging exploration of the psychic  
powers we all possess, this book con-  
tains practical exercises, affir-  
mations, meditations, and other psychic  
tools to aid personal growth, healing  
and spiritual awareness - an important  
book for feminist nurses who are deve-  
loping alternative approaches to health  
and healing.  

The Politics of Reality: Essays in  
Feminist Theory (Trumansburg, NY,  
Crossing Press, 1983, $7.95) by Marilyn  
Frye. From the introduction: “One of  
the great powers of feminism is that it  
goes so far in making the experiences  
and lives of women intelligible.  
Trying to make sense of one's own  
feelings, motivations, desires, ambi-  
tions, actions and reactions without  
taking into account the forces which  
maintain the subordination of women to  
men is like trying to explain why a  
marble stops rolling without taking  
friction into account. What ‘feminist  
theory’ is about, to a great extent, is  
identifying these forces.... The  
measure of the success of the theory is  
just how much sense it makes of what  
did not make sense before." Whether  
you are a long-time feminist or just  
beginning, this book makes sense - a  
theory book you will not want to put  
down!  

Sweet and Natural: Desserts without  
Sugar, Honey, Molasses or Artificial  
Sweeteners (Trumansburg, NY, Crossing  
Press, 1985) by Janet Warrington.  
This cookbook is primarily for diabe-  
tics, but is an exciting and  
challenging alternative for everyone  
who is interested in optimal nutrition.  
Exchanges are listed below each recipe.  
The sweetening is done with dried and  
fresh fruit; no other sweetening agent  
is used. You will find this book a  
gourmet's delight, as well as a  
necessity for anyone on a restricted  
diet. SEE BOOK ORDER FORM PAGE 14