NEWS

for Women can't Appearances Anymore Woman vs. Woman

A new law, that took effect
January 1, 1986, was passed in
New York State mandating physicians
to provide women with Breast Cancer
of non-surgical, alternative methods of treatment. Several established hiring goals for women
Alternative treatments have been approved by the medical community. This sort of attack on affirmative action has been common since Reagan took office.

Attorney General Edwin Meese is
still trying to repeal the 29-year-old executive order requiring federal contractors to hire women and minorities. This is an obvious effort to persuade Reagan to support his husband, Ferdinand Marcos.

By the time you read this, Christa
McAuliffe should be in space. She is the opposition leader Corazon Aquino, not wearing make-up and getting a manicure. Mrs. Aquino has been presenting just how the media was intent on criticizing her as a teacher because her husband was brought up by his father to argue with women. Apparently, Marcos feels Aquino's appearance to be a major campaign issue. It seems to be a case where women are set up against each other—Marcos using his wife to attack Aquino.

The Urban League reports the ratio of black to white income is greater now than 15 years ago. In 1984, Black women who used the Dalkon Shield contraceptive device in the 1970s and have incurred health problems as a result are being encouraged to submit claims for Dalkon Shield, P.O. Box 444, Richmond, Va., 23203 by April 30, 1986. A lawyer isn't necessary to file a claim; a postcard with name and address, stating that a claim is being filed will suffice. Women who submit claims will receive more information and a questionnaire that needs to be returned by June 30. Claims will not be accepted after April 30, 1986.

In the November issue, there is an article about the Women's Division. Some of the areas in which it is working are teenage pregnancy, job training for women, improving life for prisoners, child care, and poverty as it affects women and their families. The bill has been in committee for 15 years, but the 14 sponsors of the current bill believe this year it will be brought to the floor and gain the 18 votes necessary to pass it.

If you have questions concerning the Judy Chicago exhibition, the month of February will feature a Susan B. Anthony Birthday Party on the 15th. There will be gifts and prizes for all customers. 

The Gay Rights ordinance, sponsored by Mayor Koch, would ban discrimination in housing and public accommodations because of sexual orientation. The problems facing women in New York State, they would like to hear from you.

Thanks to the likes of Ride, Resnick, and McAuliffe, we have spruced up the store and are eagerly awaiting your comments. The store now has an answering machine and suggests you call to make sure of the hours when you plan to come in. The tape will also mention featured items or special events. The number is (716) 885-2285.

Look for updates on EMMA HAPPENINGS each month in COMMON GROUND.

WOMEN’S BOOKS & GIFTS

RE-OPENING FEBRUARY 3

New tapes, records, books,

jewelry, posters

and MORE

FEBRUARY CELEBRATION

10% off any purchase
Susan B. Anthony's birthday party

Saturday, February 15, noon to 5

With this coupon

Hours during February: Monday - Friday 2-6 p.m.
Saturday noon to 5 p.m.

PAGE 3 COMMON GROUND FEBRUARY 1986