PAGE 10

Defining Feminist Witchcraft

by Silversmith

A sister in the craft pointed out
to me recently that I have never de-
fined Feminist Witchcraft in these
columns for those readers who don't
already understand what we mean.
She's right. I haven't. I thought
it would be easy to do, but it's
not been the case. Here is an at-
tempt, however, and an open invita-
tion to other feminist witches to
contribute their own comments, def-
initions and beliefs.

The Oxford Universal Dictionary
gives us "witch" from Old English as
one who practices witchcraft, noting
the feminine, "wicce", being a woman
supposed to have dealings with the
devil or evil spirits. So much for
dictionary definitions!

So, let us backtrack to tradi-
tional, but contemporary, witchcraft.
If one defines religion as a system
of beliefs (faith) and behaviors
(worship), witchcraft is truly a re-
ligion. Some adherents maintain it

is the oldest, reflected in the term
Old Religion often used to mean the

craft (not to be confused with Old
Time Religion -- unless one is a fan
of Pete Seeger). The craft may well
be derived from traditions firmly

established long before any of the
other extant Western religions.
Others are not as sure of origins or
continuity of beliefs and rituals,
nor are they particularly concerned
with the historical facts of the
origin of the craft.

Now, about those beliefs. Tradi-
tional witchcraft recognized female
and male principles as of equal im-
portance. Magical work is felt to
be stronger and more effective when
sexual polarity exists in balance;
i.e. equal numbers of women and men
working together. In some groups
the female principle, or Goddess, is
of primary importance, but is still
envisioned as accompanied by a male
consort. Often the symbolism, rit-
uals and lore of such groups re-
flect a patriarchal philosophy in
spite of the importance of the God-
dess. Males are active; females
passive. The sun is male; the moon,
reflecting light, female. Muses are
female; the writers are male. Equal
but different? Maybe.

COMMON GROUND = JUNE 1984

Before going further, the Goddess
and God need to be clarified. They
are not external beings. The divini-
ty is within individuals and all of
nature according to traditional witch-
craft. When names of various Goddes-
ses and Gods are used it is for the
convenience of invoking specific
mythohistorical attributes and sym-
bols.

Since the natural material world
is held sacred, the focus of the
craft on the earth is obvious. The
Sabbats (holidays) align with the
Solstices, Equinoxes, and Cross-
quarter days between them following
the natural rhythm of all life.

Less obvious, but equally basic
to the craft, is the Invisible World.
This is the world of energy, of
spirits, to which witches are con-
nected and through which magic is
worked. We draw from the Invisible
World and send our directed energies
into it and through it to effect
change in the Visible World. Finally,
should talk of witches, spirits and
magic bring to mind the dictionary
definition which includes evil and
devils, the reader needs to under-
stand the Three Fold Law (or some
say Ten) of the craft. What we send
out or do, we get back threefold (or
tenfold). Change the golden rule
just a bit: as you do unto others,
it will be done unto you -- again,
and again. It would be ultimate
foolishness to work negative magic,
to hex, to bring about hurt or de-
struction.

With this very brief outline of
the traditional craft, let us turn
to Feminist Witchcraft. Feminists
have increasingly looked to the
Goddess as the primary -- perhaps
only -- focus. Sexual polarity is
viewed as not necessary and/or not
derived through including men in
craft ritual and work. That polar-
ity is viewed as being present in
each person. Feminist witches tend
to work in all-female covens though
some may also be involved with more
traditional groups as well.

Symbolism obviously shifts to the
Goddess and her attributes as known
by various Goddess names. She, not
he, is the active energy of creation.
Beyond that difference, we generally
share the holidays, a cyclical view
of time and life, belief in the
sacredness of nature, connectedness
of the Visible and Invisible Worlds.

Feminist witches are generally

politically active women. We are
likely to view the craft as a religion
of rebellion and many of us feel
close ties with the rebellious women
who lost their lives in the Burning
Times. Whether or not we have ex-
tensive formal education, many of us
through our interest in the Goddesses
and our herstory, have acquired back-
grounds in that mythoherstory. We
are healers of living creatures and
of Mother Earth herself. We are the
heretical tradition which patriarchal
medicine could never destroy. We are
found in all kinds of political
groups working for freedom of op-
pressed people, for peace, for a
world free of nuclear threats, for

a world where both the natural en-
vironment and a woman alone are safe.

While the feminist movement has
been accused of having no sense of
humor, feminist witches have fun. As
in the traditional craft, play, love
and joy are sacred. We please the
Goddess within ourselves with laugh-
ter, food, singing and dancing, and
through our sexuality. We do not
live with a concept of sin and a
list of "thou shalt nots". Our rit-
uals are often spontaneous, affirm-
ing our femaleness, our connectedness
to other women, to our mythoherstory,
to our Mother Earth.

We have come to feminist witchcraft
through our consciousness raising
groups, our study of women's mytho-
herstory, our rejection of patri-
archal religions, our study of oc-
cult phenomena and from the tra-
ditional craft. Our herstories and
our lives are as diverse as the di-
versity of women. Our commonality
is the commonality of all women.

We are free. We are strong. We are
political and spiritual. We are magic.
We are Goddess. Blessed Be.

Note: If there are sisters in the
craft reading this who want to add
to, comment on or argue with my at-
tempt at a definition, send your re-
sponses to me c/o Common Ground, and
we'll do another column on defining
feminist witchcraft. Please include
name and address or phone in case I
need to get back to you for editing,
etc. No names will be printed in
the article without your approval.