PERSPECTIVES

PORNOGRAPHY

“NOT A LOVE STORY”

by E.R. Mann and C. Van Veghten

{Ed. Note: Thursday, September 22, several groups connected with the University of Buffalo, including the U.B. Graduate Students Association, Tolstoy College, Women's Studies College and American Studies College, among others, presented one showing of the controversial and highly successful Canadian Film Board's "Not A Love Story", a film about pornography, and organized a panel discussion following this. In the interest of opening up a community discussion, Common Ground helped locate participants for the panel and covered this evening's events. This is a very controversial topic in the feminist/women's community. Women have spoken to both sides of this issue--some who consider themselves feminists support pornography (or at least do not support censorship) and some who do not consider themselves feminists still take an anti-pornography stance, which gives some indication of the number of differing views heard on the subject. There is much debate over what the real question is, and who will even define the issues: What is pornography? Who decides what it is? Is there a distinction between erotica and pornography? Is pornography distinguished by its violence? By objectifying women? By its sexual explicitness? By content of the scenes depicted? Does it also include advertisements which define women as sexual objects or subservient to the (male) viewer?

Whether or not the anti-pornography feminist response is ultimately beneficial.

“Not A Love Story" has been banned itself for being pornographic. It contains explicit examples of pornography. In writing about the movie, we have included some description of the material which readers might find offensive (some of us did too).

Common Ground would like to offer the following report on the proceedings in an effort to present some of these different viewpoints, and to generate more discussion.]

NOT A LOVE STORY

Conceived by Bonnie Sheer Klein, this film is a documentary of sorts--designed to educate the audience (from a feminist, anti-pornography point of view) about the anti-pornography movement, the pornography industry, and the effects of pornography on the porn consumer, the porn industry worker, on women and society in general. The audience for the show we saw (about 200 people) was about half men and half women, mostly white and (we think) mostly university connected. The film was structured as the odyssey of a female stripper, Linda Lee Tracy. It began with her viewpoint that her work, and pornography in general, is harmless, and at least what she was doing was honest. In the end, she accepts (with some reservations) the feminist anti-pornography position.

The film takes Linda and the audience on a tour of the different forms of pornography: "men's" magazines/print promo, strip joints, live sex performances, actors in porn films and peep shows. It also shows interviews with sex-industry workers, owners, producers and patrons.

Interspersed between scenes of the promo industry are portions of conversations between feminist movement "big names" such as Robin Morgan, Susan Griffin, Kate Millet, Kathleen Barry and Margaret Atwood; Linda Lee Tracy and others participate.

COMMON GROUND OCTOBER 1983 PAGE SIX

The film is full of information about Canada's porn industry. At the time the film was made, the six most popular magazines in Canada were "men's" magazines. Playboy and Penthouse alone outsold Time and Newsweek combined. Porn video cassettes outsold "straight" movies 3 to 1. There were 20,000 “adult" bookstores in North America--four times as many as McDonald's Restaurants, and the porn industry in Canada reached 5 billion dollars per year.

The film is constructed so that the audience will feel an emotional response as well as an intellectual one. It is also informative: it leads one on like a curious onlooker into aspects of the porn industry closed to the public. In interviews with a sex industry worker and a photographer, for instance, the clear message was that porn is a business, regardless of the fantasy aspects. Photographs and films are set up and shot in a very business-like way, in a non-sensational manner. Live sex show performers, strippers and other workers view what they are doing as a job--sometimes better than being a prostitute, sometimes a job they enjoy, or are bored or disgusted with, but as a job with little or no connection to the male patrons.

The film does not pity the sex workers it interviews. The individuals maintain their dignity through the questioning, but it is clear that they have bad and even dangerous working conditions with low pay.

The business-like atmosphere of the porn industry was sharply contrasted with film clips and still photos of some of the product, edited together to startle the audience.

There were photographs from the front covers of magazines such as Hustler and Playboy which subtly or explicitly showed women as objects. Calvin Klein billboards were shown. The men's jeans picture had the man standing upright, thumb in pocket, staring directly at the viewer.

The woman model was on her stomach, buttocks in the air, hair blown over her face. S & M scenes were shown, with women tied up, gagged, hung upside down or otherwise subjected to pain. There were women, legs spread, photographed as if bleeding from cuts or rape, or dead. There were photos or film clips of women bound, afraid, being threatened with death and in one case, having sex with a pistol while a man held the trigger. A Hustler cover showed a drawing of a woman's body being put through a meat grinder with all but her legs consumed. The combination of segment editing and music was effective on a persuasive and emotional level.

Analysis of pornography and its connection to violence and degradation of women was provided in interview segments where feminists and others conversed.

David Wells, an owner of 5 porno magazines:

"Vagazines have become more explicit...because of women's lib. Men feel emasculated and would like to see these women [put back in their place]. They would prefer to dominate women. The greatest turn-on for a man is to have a woman on her knees before him performing fellatio."

An ex-actor in porno films said: "It was so mechanical. What...turned me off was recognizing it degrades women. There's so much pressure on male performers too. The camera never gets the love."

The film also examines male anti-pornography sentiment in the context of a men's anti-violence support group. The members express their feelings about the dehumanizing effect that porno has on both women and the men who patronize it. Even men who do not support pornography are culturally encouraged to live up to the fantasy male standards set by it.

A speaker from the group: "How can [a man] go from fantasy to the real world? Men are victims of the violence [in porno] too...it is one symptom of a death-oriented culture. It teaches men to hate themselves, women and children, and makes intimacy difficult."

The movie also attempts to show that the model of female subjugation and objectification in pornography is similar to the way people of color (and by extension, others) are treated in this industry. These attitudes come from the same source: patriarchal white male conceptions of ownership and control; which is supported and encouraged by the society in which we live.

A white female sex performer who does a show with her black husband: "Your average white man likes to see a white woman [having sex with] a black man because it degrades women...I hear it all the time...a white guy in the audience shouting..."

Kenneth Pitchford (Robin Morgan's husband): "The more women can be made as objects, the easier it is to forget about seeing women as people."

Illustrating the contention that violence in pornography translates into violence perpetuated by men against women in society, and leads to the acceptance of violence as "normal", several people spoke of "desensitization".

Robin Morgan: "Pornography benumbs normal sexuality. You need greater and greater stimuli. When the Nazis [invaded] Poland, they [created a] proliferation of pornography. Sex without real commitment is isolated and violent--it isolates people in other areas, including politics. It is a myth that those who want to rape women go to pornography instead. Should any population of women be assigned to take all the violence and perversion...in order to protect the rest of us? The image will stay with the viewer and be transformed into later behavior."

PANEL DISCUSSION

After the film, about seventy women and thirty men adjourned to a lecture hall for the panel discussion. Peter Murphy, vice-president of the U.B. Graduate Studies Association, chaired the proceedings, as well as participating in the discussion. Also speaking were Ellen Du Bois (Historian, American & Women's Studies Colleges, U.B.), Madeline Davis (Lesbian activist, and Librarian), and Sarah Slavin (Political Science, Buffalo State College).

Murphy set up the discussion, in part, with these remarks: "Critics of the anti-pornography movement take it to task for its sensationalism, moralism, and emphasis on female sexual victimization. The movement's assertion of a causal relationship between pornography and violence against women is being challenged. The convergence between the anti-pornography movement and the New Right is of interest also. The issue of freedom of speech...is the issue that has been talked about the most.”

What follows is a synopsis of their remarks. [We apologize to the panelists for the necessity of condensing their remarks because of our space limitations, and for any errors we may have inadvertently included.]

HISTORICAL ANALYSIS

Ellen Du Bois offered an historical analysis of 19th century anti-smut movements. She felt that "interest in pornography is complicated by fear and curiosity. Women's movements coming together on the issue of women's degradation...have always organized [into] a political movement. It is not hard to get women to feel enraged about sexual subordination.”

She went on to describe two women-led social movements, the Moral Reform movement of the 1830s to 70s and the Social Purity movement of the 1870s. "These movements did not create substantive change - but that change did not do anything to liberate women's position. Indeed, they created more oppression for women with laws designed to 'protect' women--which resulted in repressed sexuality and ignorance."

Out of one of these movements came the Comstock Laws which forbade using the mails to get contraceptive information or devices because the material was defined as obscene. Margaret Sanger spent a good deal of her life fighting these laws. These movements opposed divorce and contraception because (it was thought) they took away men's responsibility surrounding their sexuality. Age of consent laws were another device to supposedly control male lust; fines were increased for prostitutes, and oftentimes whole new categories of crimes, including homosexual acts, were created. Often these only served to make women criminals.

Du Bois pointed to the dangers of the anti-pornography movements which “tried to fight male lust with laws. [You] cannot always determine the results," she said.

She went on to say, “In developing a feminist movement to improve women's sexual [condition], one must not make conclusions about male and female sexuality. [Defining] pornography as a male sexual image of the world...makes it impossible to discuss women's sexual imagery... You cannot protect women from danger; you must also encourage women to pleasure. It is easy to develop a feminist movement around pornography. It generates rage and anger in women. [But it is] dangerous to build a political movement on unexamined sexual feelings. [It could take us] down a path [which follows the] Right Wing agenda [of repression.]"

Du Bois criticized the film, which she found manipulative. She commented that it followed a “religious pattern." Linda Lee Tracy was assisted by anti-pornography "big names" on the way to her "conversion". “Two things happen [in the film]: men are converted and the sex-worker, Tracy is rescued. The movie manipulates us, “It appears to be the truth, but is really an interpretation," Du Bois stated.

Continued next page