COMMON GROUND

Vol. 1 No. 6

W.N.Y. Women’s Newsjournal

WEA REJECTS INFANT PROTECTION

by Colleen A. Brown

Infant Formula in

Third World Nations

The horrors we associate with the
"bottle-babies" of the Third World are
much closer than most Americans would
like to believe. The use of formula
by informed consumers is often the
best alternative a family has avail-
able to it. However, the vast majori-
ty of women who bottle-feed their in-
fants - both nationally and globally -
do so out of ignorance, and suffer the
gravest possible consequences. With-
out accurate and sufficient informa-
tion about the realities of breast-
feeding versus formula feeding, there
is no "choice" for many mothers today.

I BACKGROUND

The marketing of infant formula to
poor, uneducated women follows the
same pattern as the marketing of other
types of "First World" products in
"Third World" environments. The grow-
ing populations of the underdeveloped
nations have been seen as new, large
markets for trans-national food

The difficulties of
marketing modern technology in these
countries are numerous and complex.
The use of promotional techniques
which instill a belief that infant
formula is better than breastmilk has
led to the devastation of an alarming
number of infants through malnutri-
tion.

The typical sequence of events
leading a rural, uneducated woman to
"choose" to bottle-feed her infant is
as follows: She may have noticed
signs and posters advertising infant
formula which depict a loving and
well-to-do woman bottle-feeding a
very healthy-looking child. Since she
has always seen members of her com-
munity and family breastfed, she may
become somewhat confused. Yet she
also knows that many of the children
born around her die before reaching
their first birthday. When she goes
to the community clinic to give birth
to her next child, she sees more
bottle-feeding publicity. After
the child is born, a woman dressed
in a white uniform comes into her
room with a baby bottle filled with
formula. The woman explains how to
use the bottle and reassures her that
mothers in the modern countries feed
their babies formula and virtually all
of those children grow up to live long,
healthy lives. The woman tries feed-
ing the formula to her child and dis-
covers that he likes it. When she
leaves the hospital, the nice woman in
the white uniform gives her some free
formula.

It is only when the free formula is
gone and she has to buy the formula
herself that she realizes that it is
extremely expensive. If the mother
has bottle-fed exclusively for more
than three days, she is probably no
longer lactating and, thus, has no
alternative to the formula. The eco-
nomical, concerned mother "stretches"
the formula by diluting it. No one
has told her that the water must be
sterile and the bottle clean. She
may have no access to clean water.
Some mothers believe that it is the
bottle, not its contents, that brings
health to the child and, thus, just
fill the bottle with (dirty) water or
with the gruel the rest of the family
eats. The diluted, contaminated form-
ula causes the child to have severe
diarrhea.

Due to the absence of proper medi-
cal attention, thousands of infants
die each year of malnutrition con-
tracted in this way. The appalling
irony of it all is that the mothers do
not understand why their children have
died. They have done just as they
were told. Mothers have been known to
place packages of infant formula upon
their children's graves to let the
world know that the child died despite
their best efforts to nourish him in
the modern way.

On May 21, 1981, the United States
was the only nation in the 125 member
WHO to cast a vote against the adoption
of the International Code of Marketing
Breastmilk Substitutes.

Thousands of women have become
"hooked" on breast milk substitutes
in this way. The hospitals have
brought so many new ways of helping
and saving children to these poor
communities that the women would
not consider questioning a product
promoted by hospital personnel.
(It was not until very recently that
these "milk nurses" were required to
identify themselves as being employ-
ees of the formula industry and not
of the clinic.)

When government experts on infant
nutrition began to notice the sudden
and steep increase in formula use
alongside a continually rising rate
of infant morbidity and mortality,
some studies were begun. The studies
culminated in a UNICEF-WHO conference
held in Bogota, Colombia, in 1970.

A follow-up meeting was held in
1972 under the auspices of the Pro-
tein Advisory Group (PAG) of the
United Nations. It was here that a
statement was drafted setting forth
the belief that continued promotion
of infant formula in the Third World
threatened infant health.

In 1974, the World Health Assembly
(WHA), the governing body of WHO,
unanimously adopted a resolution
which blamed misleading marketing
practices for the precipitous decline
in breastfeeding. This decline was
identified as being directly related
to the rise in infant malnutrition
and death.

The United States' direct and con-
tinuing involvement in the controversy
was highlighted in 1978 when the U.S.
Senate held hearings on the marketing
practices of the infant formula indus-
try. Pediatric, obstetric, public health, corporate policy, and industry groups were heard.
As a result of the hearings, Senator
Kennedy requested the Director-Gener-
al of WHO to convene an international
conference where all concerned parties
could discuss what could be done to
eliminate infant malnutrition related
to the use of breastmilk substitutes.

II THE WHO CODE

At the October, 1979, WHO confer-
ence, the participants decided to draw
up an international code of conduct
for the industry, a code that would be
general enough to stand a reasonable
chance of being adhered to by the
manufacturers and be strong enough to
reduce the malnutrition problem.

It is apparent from its provisions
and history that the Code was not dir-
ectly aimed at forcing the industry
out of Third World markets. Neverthe-
less, it was meant to underscore the
necessity of breastfeeding to good in-
fant nutrition and to signal to the
manufacturers of breastmilk substi-
tutes that nations would now begin to
enact statutes to limit marketing
practices that health experts believed
were responsible for "baby-bottle syn-
drome." A unanimous international
statement, even if not threateningly
strong, provides a very important
standard.

On May 21, 1981, the United States
was the only nation in the 125-member
WHO to cast a vote against the adopt-
ion of the International Code of
Marketing Breastmilk Substitutes (the
Code). The U.S. government had long
been involved in the process of devel-
oping the Code and had led the Assem-
bly to believe that it fully endorsed
the movement to prohibit marketing
practices which caused “baby bottle
syndrome," a serious type of malnu-

*Turn to page 8