Preserving the Past:  
Women’s Oral  
History  

[Editor's note: the January issue of  
Common Ground carried a report describ-  
ing part of the work of the Buffalo  
Women's Oral History Project. This  
project was instituted in an attempt  
to reclaim and preserve the history  
of Buffalo's Lesbian community, how  
that community formed and identified  
itself, and how those community mem-  
bers made the transition from the  
lesbian world to the straight world.  
The following is an interview with  
the project's founders, Madeline  
Davis and Liz Kennedy.]  

COMMON GROUND: Can you tell us how the  
Buffalo Women's Oral History Project  
started?  

LIZ KENNEDY: In 1978, Madeline [Davis]  
was teaching the "Woman Plus Woman"  

course at the University of Buffalo.  
She thought that for [a] course pro-  
ject she would have everyone do an  
interview with an older lesbian. Part  
of the reason she chose to do this was  
that she herself was interested in  
what kind of information was available.  
She was also a graduate student in  
American Studies at the time, and I  
was her instructor. Afterward, when  
she got the tapes, we listened to them  
and realized there was a story to be  
told. So that's how we got started.  
Madeline had always been interested  
in the subject, and so had I. I had  
been impressed with the number of  
older lesbians in Buffalo; the fact  
that they clearly had their own cul-  
ture, that even though some of those  
in the women's movement who came out  
in the 70's thought they were the  
only lesbians in the world, it was  
very clear from living in Buffalo that  
there were lesbians who were out at  
least as far back as the 1930's.  

CG: Why did you choose the oral  

history format?  

LK: You don't really have any other  
choices! If you want to capture the  
lesbian community in the 30's, 40's,  
and 50's, how else can you do it  
besides talking to people who have  
been through it? It's not like you can  
go to diaries; these women did not  
keep diaries [as was fashionable in  
more educated, upper-class circumstances].  
I think that's another thing that  
interested us both about this project.  
There had begun to be stories about  
"famous lesbians," but we were aware  
that there was a working-class lesbian  
community. “The only way you're going  
to capture this is by oral history  
interviews. These women aren't going  
to write their memoirs or become  
famous artists; they're just ordinary  
people. But we'd like to find out  
what their lives were like too—and  
oral history is the way to do it.  
MADELINE DAVIS: I was very excited  
about doing this. I remember how  

when I first started this work and  
started doing my own interviews, I  
thought "Oh, this is going to be a  
cinch. I'll just sit down with a  

few of my friends, and we'll have a  
book real soon!" But it turned out  
through study, then going  

back to the tapes, learning more...  
it was not easy, not easy at all.  

CG: How did you locate people to talk  
to?  
MD: Our first narrators were friends.  

They led us, one or two at a time,  
to other people. Sometimes directly,  
sometimes indirectly. Some contacts  
were easy, some more difficult.  

LK: It is still hard. One woman I  
called every month for a year. Fin-  
ally she and a friend agreed to it...  

MD: But the reason why is so inter-  
esting! They saw a copy of one of our  
first papers on bars, with information  
on the 40's and 50's. They found so  
many mistakes they thought we made in  
one section, that they did get inter-  
ested and came to talk to us to cor-  
rect these errors!  

LK: They also told us in the third  
interview...how they remembered the  
first picket of a gay bar in Buffalo—  
that was in the 1940's!  

This story also tells you something  
about the process of oral history. We  
did have many mistakes in this section  
on the 1940's, but we had only inter-  
viewed one woman at that point on  
this era, and she was much younger than  
these other two we talked to. The more  
women you are able to interview, the  
more you can capture a pattern, see  
the whole picture of what the time was  
like. One reason I'm most excited  
about doing this interview is that  
hopefully some woman will see this  
article and find it interesting enough  
to want to contact us, contribute, and  
help get this history correct.  

CG: What kind of historical patterns  
or trends have you found in the Buffalo  
Lesbian Community?  
MD: One thing that was interesting  
to us had to do with the war. We  
felt that the [Second World War] was  
probably quite significant to the de-  
velopment of the community because it  
opened up jobs for women. We found in  
our research, however, that in talk-  
ing with women who were out in the 40's,  
they had worked before the war. Most  
of their friends had [already] had jobs.  
It was not, in fact, the opening up  
of jobs that changed life for lesbians.  
But what the war did was create an at-  
mosphere in which women could go out  
in the evenings, could be in the  
streets, could wear pants more.  

It was not unusual for women to  
go out and spend money. So the im-  

portant fact is that the war created  
a social climate for women in general,  
that made the growth of the lesbian  
community more rapid.  

LK: We had a hunch that these women  
were conscious of creating a lesbian  
community at the time. The image  
people often have is "Oh, these poor  
people, these lesbians, they were  
forced to band together." But our  
hunch was the opposite—that people  
wanted to get to know each other,  

and wanted to build something togeth-  
er. It was wonderful—this was a  
hunch that was confirmed, more than  
in our wildest dreams! These women  
were fighting for lesbian space.  

CG: Lesbian space?...Were there ex-  
clusively lesbian bars in the 40's and  
50's?  

MD: There were a variety of bars  
that lesbians frequented in the 50's.  
There was one bar that was almost ex-  
clusively lesbian. The owner was a  
man, and occasionally a friend of his  
would come in, but it was primarily  
women's space.  

There was another bar that was  
mixed in the front room, but all-  
lesbian in the back room. And then,  
there's what we call "street bars"—  
bars that were frequented by lesbians,  
but also pimps, hustlers, and pros-  
titutes. In the 40's we had one mix-  
ed bar and one all-lesbian bar.  

CG: What kind of community was there  
outside the bar—or was it mainly  
the bar scene?  
MD: In the Black community, we find  

a double center. The social life  
centers around a couple of bars, but  
also [around] a system of house-par-  
ties. That system of house-parties  
did not exist in the white community.  
LK: They would have parties among  
friends, but this was an institution.  
Parties would run entire weekends,  
and people would come in shifts.  

Another thing we discovered is the  
tone of bar life in the forties was  
quite different. It was quite a ro-  
mantic and genteel image. In the 50's  
you have the "street dykes," which is  
the image so many of us have of the  
past...  

CG: What kind of presentations have  
you done [of your research], and how  
have they been received?  

LK: There have been a variety. In  
Chicago...Albany...Boston...in both  
academic and non-academic settings.  
But we have made a priority that the  
first presentations of our work  

go to the Buffalo community.  

CG: And you have plans for a book?  
MD: We wrote a prospectus last spring  
and sent it out to different publish-  
ers. We have had some responses [but]  
we are not at the negotiating stage yet.  
We have been too busy writing to think  
about finalizing [plans about a book!]  
CG: About how much time have you and  
other women who have worked on the  
project spent, just to give people an  

idea?  

MD: Now, I'd really have to figure  
that out!...A minimum of 4,990 woman  
hours...  

LK: Will that really mean anything?  
At least six hours a week...for four  

years...a lot of work!  
CG: How have you been funded?  
LK: There have been some small grants,  

and donations when we have given talks.  
The Gay Professionals Organization has  
been particularly generous. These  
grants have paid for the transcription  
of [interview] tapes, some specialized  
research, etc. We have paid for things  
like travel expenses from our own pock-  
ets. For some [presentations] we  

have been paid. This has gone to pay  
for transcriptions [too].  

MD: All other things—xeroxing, paper,  
the plane to Chicago—are paid for  

out of pocket.  

CG: What other things about this  
project would you like to emphasize?  
LK: ...We are still interested in mak-  
ing contacts—particularly [with] Black  
lesbians, and lesbians over 50—to  
further develop our research. They  

can contact us at: The Buffalo Women's  
Oral History Project, 255 Parkside Ave.,  
Buffalo, New York 14214. Also that  

we completely guarantee anonymity.  
Women have the choice of using a pseu-  
donym. This is often so effective that  
we forget the person's real name also!  
All references to names are edited  

from the tapes. No link exists in  
writing to the person's real name.  

We are extremely careful of pro-  
tecting everyone.  

MD: These are the people, though not  
famous, who set the tone for a social  
movement. Without these women, living  
the way they did in the public commun-  
ity, there would have been no lesbian  
liberation movement as we know it to-  
day. That's exciting; that's wonder-  
ful. Both we and the women we have  
interviewed have come to a conscious-  
ness of that, sharing the beauty and  
the pain.  

LK: These women were our forerunners.  
They are sometimes looked down upon as  
kind of "low-life alcoholics," but  

they were the predecessors, the ground-  
breakers for lesbians today.  

[This interview has been edited for  
length. CG wishes to thank Liz and  
Madeline for their generosity and  
time.]  

COMMON GROUND — MARCH 1983 PAGE 9