CAN WE REALLY CHOOSE TO LOSE?+

by Janet Chassman

Why are some women fat and others average or thin? We are told it is because fat women eat too much, more than their body needs to function. Why do they eat so much? Fear of intimacy? Poor impulse control? Perhaps they use food to fill some emotional need. Or is it a form of self-destructive behavior?

One popular myth has it that average size people eat only when they are hungry and fat people eat in response to external cues, such as when something looks good, time of day, or others are eating.

A study done at Northwestern University in 1974 looked at the factors determining our eating patterns, whether external or internal. Subjects were asked about eating habits, dieting, weight history and degree of weight fluctuation. Their height, weight and age were also recorded.

This information was taken after the participants completed the experiment so that they would not know that their particular eating habits were under scrutiny. Instead, they were told the study was trying to determine “the influence of one sensory experience upon another subsequent experience in the same sensory modality."

For these lucky subjects, female college students, the sensory experience involved drinking milkshakes as the pre-test and eating ice cream as the final test. No rats. No written tests. No group dynamics. But milkshakes and ice cream! Right place, right time, I suppose. Oh well. Back to our study.

The first group got no milkshakes, was told they were a control group and proceeded to the final test.

The second group was instructed to drink a milkshake. And the third group was given two milkshakes, a vanilla and a chocolate one.

In the final test, the subjects were presented with three 3-pint containers of ice cream, one chocolate, one vanilla and one strawberry. They were told to taste all three in a specific order and rate them according to certain qualities. They could taste as much as necessary to rate them and also could eat whatever was left after ratings were completed.

The experimenter then left the room for 10 minutes so as to avoid being an inhibiting factor and to give subjects plenty of time to eat as much as they wanted.

When the experimenter returned, the questionnaire regarding eating habits and attitudes about weight was completed. When the participant left, the ice cream containers were weighed.

The researchers, by using the pre-test and final test, could easily determine which subjects had internal or external eating patterns. The internal eaters in the third group (two milkshakes) ate less ice cream than the one-milkshake group. Those who had no milkshakes ate the most ice cream. For the external eaters, the third (two shakes) group ate the greatest amount of ice cream, obviously being driven by desire not hunger.

Internal and external eaters were represented in each of the three groups. 85% of the participants were considered to be of "normal" weight. There was an equal number of fat women in each group.

The findings of this study indicated a correlation between restrained eating (aka dieting) and external eating patterns (binging) and absolutely no correlation between eating patterns and body size. Rather, body size is determined by our set point, the number of fat cells with which we are born. These cells may become bigger or smaller, but the number cannot change. Therefore, there is no biological difference between the depleted fat cells of a fat woman who has been dieting and those of a thin woman who is starving. Both experience a “biological demand" to eat externally or excessively to restore them to their set point--their natural weight.

So if it is the hope of dieters to learn to control their eating habits, then this experiment, and others like it, suggest that they are doing just the opposite--that dieting causes binging. And regardless of whether or not you think it is ok to be fat, no one has yet come up with a successful weight loss program. In fact, 99% of diets fail when studied over a five-year time period even when coupled with physical exercise, counseling, and/or drugs.

Although there is a great deal of medical research indicating that there is no relationship between body size and eating habits, we continue to operate under the fallacy that dieting is the answer. Why? Is it because there are many more fat women than men and fat hating is simply another form of woman hating? Perhaps this is one more instance of victim-blaming. Or could the profit motive be at work: the diet industry (food, books, drinks, drugs, clinics) is a multi-billion dollar business in this country. Take your pick.

It is clear that diets should not be used because they work only temporarily, are unhealthy, and lead to unnatural, compulsive eating patterns.

Perhaps what we should choose to lose is our fear of fat and learn to accept diversity in body size as we do other individual differences.

Footnotes:

1. "Choose To Lose" is the name of a newly-formed local diet group.

2. Herman and Mack "Restrained and Unrestrained Eating" Journal of Personality 1975 (43) #4 pp 647-660.

3. “Restrained and Unrestrained Eating" p 647.

4. "Restrained and Unrestrained Eating" p 648.

5. Vivian Mayer “The Fat Illusion" Shadow on a Tightrope; Writings by Women on Fat Oppression 1983 p 8.

PAGE 5 COMMON GROUND JANUARY 1985