N.O.W. RESOLUTIONS PASSED

Fifteen resolutions were debated  
and passed at the 1983 "Women Make  
The Difference" N.O.W. National  
Conference in Washington, D.C. over  
September 30 to October 2, on a  
variety of issues. The scope of the  
resolutions is another example of the  
broad basic nature of women's con-  
cerns, and the determination of  
N.O.W. to clearly articulate its  
membership's positions.

Resolutions were passed urging  
the following:

--Not to support any third party  
candidates. N.O.W. has set as its  
#1 political goal the defeat of Ron-  
ald Reagan.

--Promote the gender gap, advocate  
a woman vice presidential candidate,  
and a balanced ticket.

--Examine anti-gay and lesbian  
legislation, and promote gay rights  
legislation.

Pat Press, a Washington writer,  
recently wrote an opinion piece that  
appeared in The Buffalo News on  
October 21.

Press’ article said that black and  
white women will never work together.

Ruth Sykes, formerly assistant to  
the president of the National Council  
of Negro Women, said, “feminists con-  
tinue to send the message that their  
agenda--sexism--is closed, and will  
not be expanded to include a further  
picture of the multiplicity of oppres-  
sion which includes racism and class-  
ism." Edith Parkdale Sloan, an  
attorney and member of the Consumer  
Product Safety Commission, said,  
"Black women are still struggling  
against a system that denies equality  
to Black men."

Press described some of the other  
differences that separate black and  
white women:

1) White women traditionally depended  
on black women to take care of their  
families, often at the expense of the  
black women's family. Time off for a  
domestic was and is systematically  
denied.

2) Black women remember hostile recep-  
tions from white women on college  
campuses and in professional organ-  
izations.

Several black women that Press  
interviewed said the gap between  
black and white women won't be easily  
closed. They indicated that whites  
must understand the double burden that  
black women carry and they must under-  
stand that the elimination of racism  
is the top priority for black women.

Equal pay for equal work is seen  
as a white woman's issue, for instance,  
while black women are more interested  
in seeing more jobs of any kind for  
black women. They would also like  
better jobs, and are not just compe-  
ting for better treatment in white  
collar jobs.

COMMON GROUND NOVEMBER 1983 PAGE FOURTEEN

--Maintain Medicaid funding for  
abortion, abortion coverage in  
Federal and State employee health  
programs, fight laws requiring  
separate abortion riders on health  
insurance, fight the "human life"  
bills.

--Fight the deployment of MX, Cruise  
and Pershing missiles and seek  
mutual, verifiable nuclear freeze.  
--Increase minority women's parti-  
cipation and candidacy in political  
campaigns, and oppose Simpson-  
Mazzoli Immigration Bill.

--Oppose tuition tax credits.  
--Support education equity preserving  
Title IX and other Civil Rights  
Laws.

--Support state laws making spouse  
abuse, spousal sexual assault, child  
abuse and incest crimes.

--Encourage support for AIDS re-  
search, and oppose legislation limit-  
ing gay civil rights.

The issues that the feminist  
organizations choose to promote help  
keep membership by Black women in  
them low. Both N.O.W. and the  
National Women's Political Caucus,  
for instance, are 95 percent white,  
says Press. "Black family, educating  
its children, reducing teenage pregnancies and  
employing Black youth are the over-  
riding goals of the Black women's  
organizations in this country."

--Eliminate racism within N.O.W.,  
support minority outreach programs,  
and more effectively integrate  
minority women into N.O.W. plenary  
sessions.  
--Hold the insurance industry responsible  
for anti-women, anti-union practices  
and monitor employer compliance with  
Title VII prohibition of sex-based  
insurance payroll deductions.  
Promote federal and state legislation  
to raise insurance and pension  
credits and payouts to sex-neutral  
levels, eliminating discrimination.  
--Adopt the “Reagan Truth Squad"  
publicizing Reagan's record, demon-  
strating, picketing, circulating  
petitions, unity letters and raising  
the connection between Reagan and  
the "feminization of poverty."  
Proposals scheduled to be acted  
upon by the N.O.W. National Board  
at their next meeting were on U.S.  
intervention in Central America,  
Pornography and Pay Equity, among  
others.

Dear Common Ground:

Sex education is crucial for teen-  
age women today because they are facing  
increased sexual exploitation before  
they have developed their own sense of  
identity or priorities. Sexual stim-  

ulation from advertising and media is  
at an all-time high. “Sexual Libera-  
tion" has decreased the impact of re-  
ligious teachings as an acceptable  
basis for sexual abstinence, but not  
eliminated fear, shame and misinfor-  
mation connected with sex. While  
readily available female contraception,  
legalized abortion and increased ac-  
ceptance of teenage pregnancy have  
increased women's choices regarding  
childbearing, they have also decreased  
social pressures on young men to take  
responsibility for the consequences  
of their sexual activity. These sexual  
pressures fall most heavily on poor  
women who perceive few employment or  
educational options and have little  
encouragement to assume control over  
their lives.

But young women still bear the  
heaviest physical and emotional con-  
sequences for early sexual activity.  
Sexually transmitted diseases that are  
asymptomatic in men may cause persist-  
ent vaginal irritation in women, or  
pelvic infections that lead to long-  
term abdominal pain and infertility.  
Frequent abortions increase later in-  
cidence of miscarriage; long-term use  
of contraceptives increases the poss-  
ibility of undesired side effects.  
Teenage pregnancy carries increased  
health risks to both mother and fetus.  
Young women need accurate information  
and help in clarifying their values  
and priorities so that they can make  
responsible choices regarding their  
sexual activities. Sex education in  
the public schools is a necessary but  
very limited means of achieving these  
ends.

Bonnie Richardson, Buffalo