~|Halloween: The Witches’ New Year

By Silversmith

It was the most fun holiday
imaginable when I was a child.
Costumes! Parties! We could go trick
or treating then and not worry about
what we were given. We played in the
dead leaves. Made bonfires. Roasted
marshmallows.

My mother taught me to read the
cards and Halloween was my time to do
that. Hidden away in my costume I
could change my form and be anyone or
anything. Out in the darkness --
and how exciting it was to be out that
late -- I could wander up and down the
streets with the witches, ghosts and
black cats. I didn't ask why certain
symbols were associated with this
holiday, nor if it was a serious re-
ligious festival for some.

I didn't know then that Halloween,
which is also called Summer's End,
November Eve, All Hallow E'en, Hallo-
mas, Samhain, to mention just some of
the names for this holiday, is New Year
for Witches and the remnant of ancient
festivals of the dead. The Greeks and
Romans knew it. The Celts knew it.

In the Celtic world the entrances to
burial caves were opened on this night,
allowing the spirits of the dead to
walk the earth and celebrate with the
living. Candles lighted the caves and
bonfires burned on the hillsides until
the first cock crow of November 1. Or,
if I knew, I had forgotten...

"In the witching hour,

You come to your power,

You feel it deep inside you

And it's rising, rising,

You think it's a dream,

Until you hear yourself scream
"Power to the witch, and to

the womyn in me'..."1

As I lay in the dead, dry leaves be-
fore lighting them as a bonfire, I never
thought of the earth as dead. Nor did
I wonder that the time when harvesting

is over and the trees are bare is a
time to celebrate New Year. I saw the
cycle of the seasons, but thought the
year began on January 1. Now I see a
different year. The Pagans or Wiccan

(Witch’s) year is characterized by

eight major holidays: the two
Solstices and the two Equinoxes, days
when we experience the extremes of
light and dark, and the balance points
between these extremes. Between the
Solstices and Equinoxes are the four
cross-quarter days: Hallowmas, when
the earth is dead, still and waiting;
Candlemas, when the first stirrings of
spring and new life occur; Beltane,
when the earth is in blossom, fertile
and full of promise; Lammas, the
first harvest, a time of joy and
thanksgiving. Time to Witches and
Pagans, is cyclical spiraling, not
linear. Beginnings and endings merge,
whether monthly with the moon phases,
or yearly. Death is not static,
merely a quiet time before new begin-
ning. The same perspective applies
to human death and rebirth, thus it is
not contradictory that the same
holiday celebrates New Year and Death.

"Hecate, Cerridwen
Dark Mother take us in
Hecate, Cerridwen
We are reborn"2

I didn't ask, forty years ago, why
witches were accompanied by cats,
didn't know of the Egyptian Cat
Goddess, Bast, Goddess of Joy and
Protector of Wimmin (who now protects
my home). Now I know that Greeks and
Romans believed that the Goddess,
Hecate, chose as her priestess a womyn
who turned into a cat. Black cats
were sacred to the Druids. Over time
the black cat came to be seen as the
Witch's companion or perhaps the Witch
herself, the priestess of Hecate, in
cat form.

Halloween, as it has come to be
known, probably came to the U.S. with
Irish immigrants. Fragments of Celtic
and Druid rituals became children's
games. Instead of religious pro-
cessions from door to door, we went
trick or treating. We put our candles
into carved pumpkins, not burial caves.
We wore our costumes as witches,
ghosts and black cats. Our bonfires
were for marshmallows and hot dogs.

But some of us, Feminist Witches,
Pagans, Goddess Worshippers, have re-
membered or learned the old ways
hidden in our Halloween customs.

We claim Hallowmas, Samhain, as our
New Year and invite the spirits to
celebrate with us, knowing that on this
night our worlds are open to each other.
Feminist Witches will celebrate Hallow-
mas, whether with candles in a one-room
apartment or bonfires on mountain tops;
alone, in covens, in larger rituals.
Last year my celebration was in ritual,
with other Witches, at the grave of a
favorite person (yes, I am still out

in the darkness with the Witches and

the Ghosts)
"Together
we dance her dance

we do the work of the Mother

of the Mother."3

My mother taught me well. My fore-
mothers, better. Myself, as before,
best. Blessed Be.@

NOTES:1. “Witching Hour" from Willie
Tyson's record, Debutant Ball
2. chant published in Womanspirit
magazine, Fall Equinox, 1981
3. from Elsa Gidlow poem,
"Creed for Free Woman" used as
a chant by K. Gardner in setting
the Gidlow poem to music.

Silversmith. Witchself of before.
Herbal healer. Victim of Burning Times.
Mother, Sister, Teacher.

Daphne’s Tree

by Sarah Slavin

Few who garden or farm herbs are
likely to overlook the spiritual nat-
ure of these soft-stemmed plants.
Simply running the thumb and index
finger along a single leaf, better to
appreciate its scent, expands the sen-
ses - texture and color are at hand,
and much more. Each leaf, each blos-
som, the fruit, the turn of a stem, the
inclination of a branch, and the spread
of the roots tell a tale in themselves.
That tale is an aesthetic one, to be
sure; above all, it is living testimony
to giving and enrichment. I like the
way Adelma Grenier Simmons says it:
“Herbs are Forever - and For All."

Specifically, consider rosemary,
known to most as the herb of remem-
brance. It has symbolized for many
the path of life's beginning and end-
ing; the role of memory in perpetu-
ating a life whose presence no longer
graces the world of the living; the
protection of the living from illness
and evil. Rosmarinus officinalis comes
from ros maris, meaning “dew of the
sea", in recognition of its profusion
along the Mediterranean coastline,
within reach of the salty sea spray.

No stretch of the imagination is re-
quired to realize that life sprang
first from just such an environment,
and that water is one of women's ele-
ments. The ages-old practice of en-
twining the bridal wreath with rose-
mary virtually speaks for itself.
Little need be said about the distort-
ion, by clergyman Roger Hacket in 1607,
of rosemary's power as "boasting man's
rule." Accurate on this point is the
Treasury of Botany: "we have more than
once had reason to suspect (the lords
of creation) of privately injuring a
growing rosemary in order to destroy
this evidence of their want of author-
ity."

Rosemary became known to the western
world in the fourteenth century, when
it was introduced to England by Queen
Phillipa, who had married Edward
III. The plants came into Phillipa's
hands by way of her mother, the Count-
ess of Hainault. Always and everywhere
rosemary had been the sign of friend-
ship and fidelity. We can only imag-
ine now what the Countess meant to con-
vey to her daughter through this gift.
The message may have been in code, os-
tensibly bespeaking marital fidelity
and even piety, but truly referring to
the connection between mother and daugh-
ter which no marriage vow or stretch of
geography could break, and which de-
served to be committed to memory over

and over again.