me aesfeeteafoete teateatoete oleate stoeteete

by Sharon Przepasniak

Tonight I began working on my in-
come taxes, and in the space marked
"Occupation," I found myself writing
"unemployed." And I cringe as I do
so (and yawn at the same time) be-
cause I have just put in a full day's
work.

My day started at 6 a.m., and
ended about 10 p.m. I had no lunch
or supper break; instead I ate while
working. My work was lonely, in that
I had no contact with adults outside
my place of work, with the exception
of a brief visit from one friend and
a 5-minute phone call from another.
All my work today went unacknowledged
and uncomplimented; it was, for the

most part, either unnoticed, or ex-

pected, or immediately consumed. I
never get a day off, and in the future
weeks, I won't receive a paycheck for

this work. Worse, I have almost
nothing tangible to show for my efforts
(except wet towels in the bathroom,
some leftover pork roast and carrots,

a coloring book picture I helped color,
soiled diapers and an over-
flowing garbage can.)

Yes, I am one of those workers
who don't really work; no doubt you
have guessed by now that I am a
"housewife."

I put that word in quotes because,
as the Women's Movement so dutifully
reminded us over a decade ago, we are
not married to our houses; rather,
we should refer to ourselves as
"homemakers" or “housekeepers” (would
you believe "domestic engineer?").

But for me, these terms don't carry

PAGE 4. COMMON GROUND MARCH 1984

with them the same connotations as

the word "housewife!" “Homemaker" and
“housekeeper” sound so sterile, per-
haps because they conjure an image

of tasks related only to the structure
itself, such as dusting, vacuuming,
washing windows or cutting grass.

On the other hand, "housewife"
suggests someone who does these tasks
for people, and I picture a housewife
not only waiting on a husband but
also children. Nearly all of her
work is done because of the needs of
others (rather than just herself) or

because of the mess made by others.

Actually, when I must label the
work I do, I prefer to call myself
"parent," because it is the needs of
my children that keep me at home,
rather than the home itself. How-
ever, this term doesn't as vividly
suggest all the work involved in the
same way as the word "housewife"
does.

At any rate, no matter what label
is used, the job of working at home,
especially with infants and pre-
schoolers, is no easy one. Yet,
because we receive no wages for our
work, it is often not even thought
of as work. Because the bulk of our
chores comes under the heading of
"serving others" (indeed, others
whom we care about), we often look
at these chores as “labors of love."
But that doesn't make them any less
difficult or demanding or tiring or
noteworthy than the daily tasks of
someone who works in an office, in
a classroom, in a courtroom, in a
store or in a factory.

The very word "work" itself is
equated with paid work. Nowadays,
one of the most frequently asked
questions of a pregnant woman is
"Are you going back to work after the
baby is born?" (as if to suggest that
caring for a newborn at home is not
work!) Of course, we all know that
the well-intentioned questioner is
referring to her paid employment, but
the limitations of our language leave
us with the false impression that
paid work is the only true work.

Since I've had children, I've
often been asked, "Do you work?" If
I reply, "Yes," then it is assumed
that I have a salaried job outside
the home, in which case I must explain
and qualify my answer if I do not.
Yet I would feel dishonest and even
a traitor to the others doing this
same work if I replied, "No," because
then the work that we do at home is
devalued.

The lack of acknowledgment and
lack of respect for the work of a
"housewife" is perhaps an even great-
er burden than the lack of a paycheck
or the lack of weekends off. One of
the most difficult transitions for me
when my job as a parent began was the
disappearance of feedback and en-
couragement from others. For a year
before my first baby, I worked in a
job where I received not only consider-
able praise but also three substantial
raises. But now, no one compliments
me on my ability to give safe and
pleasant baby baths, on my breakfasts
of hot cereal on cold mornings, on my
efforts to teach social skills and

manners, or my ability to do laundry
one-handed while carrying the baby, to
name only a few of the innumerable
tasks I perform at my work.

Two years ago, I ventured back to
the world of paid employment (part-
time, of course, since I already had
a full-time - albeit unpaid - job!).
As I updated my resume, I realized
that I should somehow account for my
two years of being “just a housewife."
I decided to include, in terms fam-
iliar to the "business" world, the
tasks that I perform daily.

So my resume now states that the
skills employed during this period
include "Coordinating" (after all,
all tasks have to be juggled around
the needs and moods of my children,
or else you get halfway through, say,
grocery shopping with a diaper that
needs changing, or a tired, contrary
child), “Scheduling” (even babies
who don't keep to the same routine
every day do take naps, and this is
the only time you get anything ac-
complished), "Managing" (there is
so much of this that it could be the
subject of an entire column), "Teach-
ing pre-schoolers" (everything from
talking to toilet training to spell-
ing), and "Considerable physical la-
bor" (carrying a 35-pound sleeping
child from the car seat, up the
driveway, through the house and up
the stairs to bed will require anyone
to stop and catch a breath!)

As long as our society continues
to profit from women's unpaid labor
in the home, our work will never be
called work or valued as such. But
on a more individual level, we women
can begin to enlighten others as to
the nature of our work.

Let us never apologetically state
that we are "just a housewife." And
instead of complimenting each others'
neat houses, each others' decorating
schemes, and each others' newest
purchases (as so many "housewives"
do), let us instead compliment each
others' nurturing and raising of
our children, if they are the main
reason for our working at home.

When during pregnancy, we are
asked about future job plans, we
should readily reply "Oh yes, I'll
be working - at home, caring for my
newborn," and when we are asked if
we are employed, we should answer
with a resounding "I sure do!" Only
when "housewives" cease to think of
themselves as unemployed will their
work begin to gain credence and
respect from others.