Book Reviews  
VVUVVYVVUVVUVVUVVUVVUVYVY  

“WHERE FANTASY AND FANATICISM MEET...  

"  

The Turner Diaries  

The Turner Diaries, Andrew Macdonald  
(William L. Pierce.) National Alliance  
Washington, D.C., 1978, 1980  

REVIEW BY Jane Doe  

Newsweek magazine in an article  
entitled "Violence on the Right"  
(March 4, 1985) described it like this:  
"The right-wing revolt is modeled  
after a crusade in the fantasy novel  
‘The Turner Diaries', written by Am-  
erican neo-Nazi William Pierce, a  
former physics professor. [In it]...an  
army of white supremacist superpatriots  
overthrows a tyrannical American gov-  
ernment and -- after a murder spree  
against Jews and other non-Aryans,  
followed by the nuclear destruction  
of Israel -- ushers in a ‘Christian  
paradise'."  

We could leave it at that. But  
let's not. Turner Diaries is an ugly  
book, a violent book, a book that makes  
one wonder if there is not some merit  
in book burnings. It is also an im-  
portant book because it does seem  
to be providing the model for right-  
wing violence in our society.  
It is a skillfully written book playing on  
historical fact although written as  
futuristic fiction, calling up all  

the stereotypes and prejudices which  
lurk in the corners of American cul-  

ture. It is a book which should re-  
mind us how important it is to know  
what those we don't agree with are  
thinking, and how their beliefs  
guide their actions.  

The diaries are those of Earl  
Turner, electrical engineer turned  
activist, revolutionary on his way  
to martyrdom. The diaries cover  
two years in Turner's life, 1991 -  
1993, or 8 - 6 BNE (Before the New  
Era) in the chronology of the For-  
ward and Epilog. Turner, of course,  
does not live to see the ultimate  
worldwide victory of 1999. He  
gives his life for the cause and  
dies a martyr's death.  

Turner Diaries is not strong on  
plotlines in the usual sense.  

There is a romantic theme. Turner and  
Katherine have a relationship, he  
would like to have children by her, he  
misses her when he's off on his var-  
ious assignments. In true romantic  
fashion, she dies at the hands of a  
Black mob shortly before his martyrdom.  
But the personal and interpersonal  

is not the point of the Turner Diaries,  
the point is the Revolution.  

It is immediately apparent that  
Blacks and Jews are the scapegoats  
being used by the Organization in its  
battle against the System. The Cohen  
Act has just been passed outlawing  
private ownership of guns. "Gun Raids”  
to locate illegal weapons follow --  
allowing Blacks to search White homes.  
Within the first 50 pages Macdonald/  
Pierce skillfully plays on real events  
of the past few decades and racist  
stereotypes and feelings: school in-  

PAGE 4 COMMON GROUND — MAY 1985  

tegration is the beginning of the end  
--- after that Americans don't deserve  
freedom; taking guns away -- a Jew-  
ish plot -- will result in the loss  
of everything; media slants news to  
the left -- remember Angela Davis,  
Black Panthers, Vietnam protests?  
Where was the media sympathy for  
widows of white police officers?  

The violence initially is aimed at  
Blacks and Jews and at whites who  
are 'liberal' such as a Washington  
Post editor. Violence is also directed  
at property, for example a computer  
center, which serves to support the  
System. While no mention is made of  
abortion, the strategy of the Organi-  
zation in attacking leaders and  
property would logically extend to  
the bombings of abortion clinics, and  

*to the threats, followed by an assassin-  
ation attempt, on the life of Justice  

Blackmun. One is also led to think  

about recent concern expressed on  

the right about news media being  
leftist and the hopes of various  
right-wing groups regarding the pur-  
chase of media networks.  

Turner compares the media approach  

to the Organization with the anti-  

Hitler media campaign in Germany prior  
to Hitler's taking power. He feels  
the media can and should be used to  
convince people of the "rightness"  

of the Organization. Although the  
Organization is a fiction, it sounds  
remarkably like the KKK and American  
Nazi Party. In reality, such groups  
have almost no access to mainstream  
media to present their views, convert  
and recruit.  

By the end of the book, strategies  
have changed from attacks on liberal  
leaders and scapegoated people to  
violence aimed at causing shortages  
and hardships for all people. The  
former strategy gave the Organization  
credibility, the latter is used to  
destroy the credibility of the Sys-  
tem in that it can no longer protect  
and provide for the citizens. Per-  
sonal violence is directed at all  
Jews, people of color, and whites  
suspected of liberalism culminating  
in the Day of Rope in which whites  
are hanged from any available post  
or tree and non-whites "and that in-  
cluded all the Jews and everyone who  
even looked like he had a bit of non-  
White ancestry" are started on a one-  
way march out of town.  

How did the Organization know who  
to hang? "Organization members here..  
...have been building their dossiers  
of System toadies, Jew-fawners, equal-  
itarian theorists, and other White  
race-criminals, along with their  
street directories of all non-Whites  
residing in predominately White  
areas."  

Macdonald/Pierce uses all the  
strategies. Although the reader is  
not provided with the early history  
and beginnings of the Organization,  
by the beginning of Turner's diaries  
we know members have infiltrated  

politics and various groups. The  
Organization has carefully organized  
legal and illegal or underground  
units. Discipline in the movement  
is absolute and death awaits those  
who disagree or do not follow through  
on orders. There is a secret organ-  
ization, the Order, within the Organ-  
ization characterized by uniforms,  
ritual initiation, the Book (secret  
to the Order) which contains the  
truth and the plan. Being in the  
Order is compared to being “born  
again", and members see themselves  
as "instruments of God in fulfillment  
of the Grand Design." The Christian  
right is seen as sympathetic while  
mainstream Christianity is liberal  
and has perverted Christianity.  
Conservatives, in general, are  
viewed as having sold out to the  
System and are too comfortable for  
revolution.  

The otherwise skillfully presented  
model for right-wing revolution  
breaks down when Macdonald/Pierce  
deals with women. He is confronted  
with an impossible dilemma: women  
are, of course, part of the Organ-  
ization and to be included in the  
revolutionary activities. Feminism  
is an anathema as is the women's  
movement. He tries valiantly to  
reconcile these views--and fails.  
Turner describes Katherine as "very  
feminine beneath her cool and pro-  
fessional manner." Katherine makes  
it clear that she has no intention  
of being merely the cook and house-  
keeper for the revolutionary boys.  
Turner describes her as becoming  
"shrill, almost like a women's  
libber." This is followed by a  
note to define "women's libbers:  
""Women's lib' was a form of mass  
psychosis which broke out during  
the last three decades of the Old  
Era. Women affected by it denied  
their femininity and insisted that  
they were 'people' not 'women.'  

This aberration was promoted and  
encouraged by the System as a means  
of dividing our race against itself."  

It is made clear that women do  
not execute those who have disobeyed  
the Organization. Although three  
women make up a jury to judge such  
an individual along with eight men,  
when it is time to decide who will  
carry out the execution orders only  
the men are involved. The reader is  
informed that for married couples in  
the Organization the husband has  
ultimate veto power over any orders  
given his wife. Women are said to  
be “cherished and protected" in the  
Organization.  

In a discussion of rape, which  
critiques the current view of rape  
as a crime of violence and returns  
rape to a sexual crime with racial  
overtones, Turner manages to con-  
clude that ‘liberal' white women  
want to be raped by Black men. By  
becoming the rape victim the woman  

turn to page 5