NOW Candidates’ Night

The 1983 Buffalo N.O.W. Candidates' Night, Wed., October 21, produced the biggest turnout of candidates the chapter has ever seen. Buffalo N.O.W. sent detailed questionnaires to all candidates in Buffalo and Erie County, asking them to state their viewpoints on a number of women's issues. They also used the questionnaires to introduce new topics or to educate candidates on issues not currently "hot topics," but of concern to women.

Candidates were also invited to come and speak to the audience of community members, and thirty agreed to come, more than had ever responded before. N.O.W. organizers stated that they felt that the issue of the gender gap was a large reason for the increased turnout. They felt that greater media and political attention to women and women's issues would make would-be elected officials recognize that women's support can make or break their election.

Twenty candidates appeared that Wednesday (not all who would have liked to come were able to) and they were each given two and one half minutes to present their views to the audience. Except for judicial candidates, who are not allowed to express views on issues, each was also asked two questions: "Do you support and will you work for the Equal Rights Amendment?" and “Despite any personal convictions, do you support and will you work for a woman's right to choose an abortion, regardless of her ability to pay for one, that is, will you support Medicaid funding for abortions?" All candidates said they supported both of these issues.

Candidates who came were seeking the endorsement of N.O.W.'s Political Action Committee in the November election. The Coalition of Labor Union Women also sent representatives to hear the positions of the candidates.

Two questions from the audience were also allowed each candidate. Not all were asked questions, but there did seem to be particular interest in the speaker's views on prostitution. Mary Davis, from the Minority Coalition of W.N.Y., asked several candidates what they would do to combat vice and prostitution moving from the Main Street/Chippewa area into the surrounding neighborhoods. Davis stated that these neighborhoods are alarmed by the number of men in cars cruising the streets, looking for prostitutes and whistling at or harassing women, including those who are not prostitutes, women coming from church or trying to walk in their own neighborhoods. Her group is particularly interested in seeing the names of the "johns" published, stiffer fines and jail terms for the men, and utilization of statutory rape laws when men pick up under-age girls. She felt that other negative elements move in right along with prostitution, such as drug traffic, and wanted to know what approach various candidates would take to this problem.

All candidates questioned thought the problem of prostitution was not one easily resolved, because if you chase prostitutes from one area, they just move to another.

George Arthur created quite a stir when after suggesting the answer was to "pick up the girls," he also suggested that legalizing prostitution should be given a closer look by lawmakers.

Clifford Bell also thought the emphasis should be on picking up and prosecuting prostitutes. Candidates LoVallo, Collins, Rutecki, and Robinson all generally agreed that at least equal (if not more) emphasis should be put on stiffer penalties for the johns and providing alternatives for the prostitutes, who according to Davis, are young, poor, and with little or no resources. Collins said, "The issue is greater than picking up the johns. There are the things that cause women to go to the street in the first place...every woman should have the opportunity to live without selling her body."

However, Davis said later she felt that most candidates missed her major point, that the issue involves men who come into an area and make it unsafe for women to walk there, and about the other vices that come into a neighborhood with prostitution, making the quality of life there suffer. She had great compassion for the prostitutes, especially the young ones, twelve and thirteen years old, who are being used by pimps and johns.

The disparity in possible sentencing for johns and prostitutes is great. For prostitutes, it is a class A misdemeanor, and maximum punishment is 12 months in jail and a $1000 fine. For the johns, it is a class B misdemeanor with 90 days in jail and a smaller fine.

Other hot topics were Public Power, the establishment of an Erie County Commission on the Status of Women, provision of municipally supported day care facilities in downtown Buffalo, support for establishing a second battered women's shelter in Erie County.

Bell and LoVallo came out against public power, the concept of the municipality taking over running the electric company. Bell pointed out how wasteful governments are with money; and LoVallo brought up the issue of "what happens when something goes wrong?" He felt it was too much responsibility for the city to undertake. Rutecki was in favor, with some reservations, and Pitts was in favor.

Lenihan, Robinson, Bozer, Weir, Werner, and Britteno all favored the establishment of a Commission on the Status of Women, to identify women's needs and concerns, raise issues with the legislature, and advise on matters concerning women.

Ciurczak, Rutecki, Robinson, Bozer, Pitts, and Butteno all favored day-care facilities downtown.

Whelan, Lenihan, Robinson, Bozer, and Weir all favored another women's shelter for Buffalo. Whelan also favored this, but said he felt that it would happen only if women make an issue of it and follow through with support.

There were other questions asked of individual candidates. Of interest is that Swartz does not approve of polygraph examinations of employees. Arthur was questioned about notification of parents when minors seek birth control information/devices, even if such notification might endanger the minor. He is in favor of such notification.

Sheila Murphy spoke in favor of the New York State Bond Issue. She pointed out that no money has been put into road and bridge repair in the last twenty years. The 1.25 billion dollar bond issue she said, would cost about 1¢ per day per taxpayer, that is approximately $3.15 per year for 30 years. Passing the bond issue would free up an additional $1.9 billion of New York's 5¢ per gallon gas tax in matching funds. This money for reconstruction is not for new building.

Murphy stated that the project would employ 36,000 people state-wide, and 8 to 9,000 in Western New York over the 5 years the project is to run. She said that waiting even 5 years would increase the cost ten times.

Kathy Jackson asked what percentage of the jobs would go to women. Murphy said that Department of Transportation regulations would be in effect, but Jackson pointed out that the administration has not been enforcing current requirements with regard to hiring women. Murphy's reply was that the state would be mandated to enforce the federal regulations.

Several candidates also had questions about the bond issue. Arthur and Collins both spoke about their concerns. Arthur wasn't “sold yet on the bond issue." He said he wasn't quite sure how it would benefit the Buffalo area.

Collins specifically opposed the bond issue, because, as he pointed out, most of the jobs are going into construction in unionized jobs. Most of his constituents, and other minor-

continued on page 13