COFFEE GROUNDS

The High Cost of Not Knowing

by Diane C. Prochownik

"It wears out, lady," he said of the pistons, or whatever the thingamajigs were that held up my small car's hatchback. The speaker was an auto mechanic, justifying the shocking prices he had just quoted me for minor repairs. At least, I had thought they'd be minor.

"The car is less than three years old," I protested to make my point. "I don't understand how that could happen."

"It wears out, just like headlights. And your rear defogger needs a new switch...and we won't know about that sticking door latch until we get in there."

"Wait a minute. Just a minute." I was calculating in my head; the parts prices quoted did not include labor. "I've never had a worn-out headlight and I've owned cars for a good many years."

"Lady, take my word for it." The mechanic's face was already disgruntled. "Look, do you want it done or not?"

I had taken the morning off from work and two hours were already gone.

"I guess I can put it on and pay it off from there."

When I ransomed my car an hour later, I felt I was paying on the national debt, with all my installments jacked up by interest. Yet I'd had little choice. My hatchback had fallen on my head; without the defogger, I was steam blind in rainstorms; and the faulty door latch had trapped passenger friends, who then had to climb over the stick shift.

But I didn’t realize how very common my communications problem with the mechanic was until the subject came up for discussion with several of my female friends.

One had left her car for inspection and wound up with a new set of brakes; not even her boyfriend, driving the car, had noticed anything wrong in that area. Another, troubled by a sluggish engine, had found herself buying a rebuilt transmission; her husband, too busy to take it in himself, had told her that she should have called him instead of letting herself get conned. Then there was the friend who took her car in to have a faulty muffler replaced. She ended up with new front brakes and a wheel alignment. The new muffler fell off three blocks away.

In garages, gas stations, and auto repair shops, the buyer beware adage seems to stand firmly, particularly if you're female—more particularly if you're over thirty. Younger women are more astute. Many have tinkered around with cars, and some are very serious about it. Those of us over thirty were raised to believe that mechanical things with moving parts are, officially, man's territory. In all the cases mentioned above, our rights had not been infringed upon. Each of us had been quoted prices before the actual work was done, and there had been nothing illegal in the way costs were calculated or bills presented. We'd each had the option to refuse, or to shop around.

But we were duped all the same. Duped because, in our ignorance, we never did know if what we were quoted was necessary or not. We accepted the expertise of others who might or might not have taken advantage of our lack of knowledge. And how could we argue with the high price of labor if we didn't know what that labor involved?

I think I'll sign up for a course in automobile maintenance. There seem to be a few around. I'm sure that whoever teaches it won't much care that I'm over thirty. Then I'll know if that thingamajig does wear out.

COMMON GROUND

APRIL 1983 PAGE 7