CALENDARS

Accessible Art

A great way for people to bring
artwork into their lives and homes or
offices is through calendar art. Or-
iginal art is expensive and often in-
accessible to everyday people who
do not enjoy wandering around galler-
ies and museums. There are a variety
of calendars for 1983, which specific-
ally bring women's works and women's
lives to well-deserved attention.

You can enjoy each month with a poem,
heroine, offering of local or nation-
ally recognized artist, or inspir-
ational depiction sure to please.

Good places with great selections
of calendars are EMMA, Talking Leaves,
and Harambee Books.

(Pictured are: Bravo Buffalo; WNY
Women Artists (benefit Simple Gifts);
Lunar Calendar, Women's Work,
Heroines; Dreaming of Herself; Sara
Steele and Earth's Daughters; Women
Alone/Women Together; Women Writers
Calendar -- in no particular order.)

BOOK REVIEW:
THROUGH THE

Through The Flower:
My Struggle as A Woman Artist.
Garden City, New York/Anchor Press,
1982, 219 pp. Introduction, Index.
$8.95 paper. Courtesy EMMA Bookstore.

by the EMMA Collective

Through the Flower is the autobio-
graphy of Judy Chicago, an artist in

many different media, who is most fam-
ous for her creation of The Dinner
Party. This monumental work of art,
which took a total of four hundred
women six years to create, is meant to
symbolize a history of women's achieve-
ments and struggles in Western civi-
lization. The work has had its criti-
cism from within the women's community
and does have some shortcomings. It
is, however, the most large scale and
recognizable contemporary work of
woman-identified art, and is magnifi-
cent in its workmanship. It is
easier for us to forgive its faults
when we realize the ground-breaking
work done in uncovering women's
history and legitimizing traditional
women's artmaking and culture.

A similar impression is formed
about Judy Chicago in reading her auto-
biography. The woman does have her
shortcomings. One receives an im-
pression of a somewhat arrogant, ego-
tistical woman who is still working
through her identification with some
male values. However, it would be a
mistake to let this tone detract from
the value of many of her ideas.

Perhaps the most important of these
is the way she has encouraged herself,
the women she has worked with, and
perhaps by inspiration, other women

reading this book, to develop for
themselves a woman-centered artistic
expression. By recognizing tradition-
al women's craft work as true art
(such as china painting and embroid-
ery), by recognizing the creative
inspiration of the birth process and
the power of women's images, and by
sharing the skills and development of
art in a participatory fashion, she
encourages herself and others to focus
and draw from women's experiences and
celebrate them in art.

The chapters describing the lessons
to be learned from women's art in
history (including literary art) are
particularly interesting:

"My investigation into
women's art brought me to
realize many facts that I
had never learned, that
there have probably always
been woman artists. ...all
Navajo blankets...Peruvian
pottery...nuns worked on
medieval manuscript illumin-
ations side by side with
monks. There was even a
sculptress...in the 13th
century who worked on the
facades of Gothic cathe-
drals..."

She goes on to detail many more
women artists working through the
centuries who have now been "dis-
covered" and criticizes popular
mythology for the theory that these
women - writers and artists - could
have emerged singly, especially in the
face of the tremendous oppression of
women in their times - the “if you're
good, you'll make it story." She
contends that in each case, a support

system was necessary - active feminist
struggles in the society, the support

of a small group of women, or even the
companionship of one other woman.

It is here that there is something
of a conflict between Chicago's con-
ception of the woman as artist and her
presentation of herself in her own
childhood and growth as an artist.

Her early inspiration is definitely
her father. She admits having identi-
fied strongly with her male instruct-
ors in her schooling, and absorbing
many of their values. She offers this
past as an example of the pervasive-
ness of male determination of atti-
tudes in art, which she is now at-
tempting to change. However, she also
sees herself as working through this
dichotomy ("through the flower”) by
means of her own irrepressible confi-
dence, drive, determination, and the
past inspiration of her father. It
sounds a bit too much like the "if
you're good, you'll make it" story

to sit comfortably with this reader.

Despite this detraction, one cer-
tainly does have to have a strong ego
to be a woman artist. Certainly there
is a struggle to come "through the
flower" and be yourself and express
your own point of view, both artisti-
cally and personally. And most
assuredly, Judy Chicago's work, and
her story, can be a valuable lesson
to us as women.

Through the Flower, as well as other
books by Judy Chicago about her work

(The Dinner Party and Embroidering
Our Heritage) are available at EMMA,
the Buffalo Women's Bookstore, 168
Elmwood Avenue, Buffalo, N.Y. 14203.
Phone: 716/885-2285.

COMMON GROUND © JANUARY 1983 PAGE 5