their brief affair, we learn of  
their past lives. Merle tells of  
her marriage 10 or 12 years earlier  
in London to an African man, who  
left her with their infant daughter  
upon learning of an earlier relation-  
ship that Merle had with another  
woman. And Merle reminds Saul of  
his first wife, Sosha, who died  
following a miscarriage while they  
were in Honduras when he had delayed  
taking her to a hospital because he  
was at a critical point in his re-  
search.  

It is political in that Merle,  
who is an integral part of the  
culture of Bourne Island as well  
as a link between its elite and  
the "little fella," finds herself  
at loggerheads with Saul over  
solutions to the island's economic  
problems. Outsiders like Saul have  
suggested many ways to develop the  
island, but Merle bemoans them all  
for fear of "turn[ing] us into  
another Bermuda with everybody  

bowing and scraping for the almighty  
dollar."  

Even though this is the most po-  
litical of all the stories in this  
collection, it remains as wonderfully  
descriptive as the others. Full of  
sounds, colors, flowers, high-class  
parties and encounters with the poor  
natives, the novella left me feel-  
ing as though I had stayed at Merle's  
guest house. Also, the novella is  
quite cleverly crafted; many situ-  
ations come full circle (the story  
begins and ends in a car en route to  
the airport, for instance), there  
is considerable development of minor  
characters, and both Merle and Saul  
lose much and gain much as a result  
of their relationship.  

Well, I managed to finish this review  
in time. Although I lost a bit of  

sleep this week, I enjoyed this read-  
ing so much that I hardly minded.  

So I recommend this book as a source  
of both engaging reading and powerful  
writing, as well as a place to find  
woman (and women of color at that)  
as major characters.  

Witch Hunt  

witch hunt  

if this be that  
which you call wickedness  

then let my wickedness shine forth;  

if this touching  
this creation of one from two  
whose power becomes far greater  
than their sum,  

if this be a sin, a spell  

my breasts float like islands  
in the bath water, my belly  
a continent above the furry main,  
my sensuality is an incantation  

and if mine be a stronger voice  
by your chant of wickedness  

this healing, this soothing spirit song  

then I am a sinner, a binder of spells;  

of ripeness that you dare not decipher;  
you call me witch with trembling and lust,  
I call myself woman from deep within  

then I will let my wickedness shine forth.  

Bonita Penfold Raquet  

Book Review:  

In a Different Voice  
Examines Moral Issues  

by Charlene Eldridge Wheeler  

IN A DIFFERENT VOICE by Carol Gilligan.  
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University  
Press, 1982. (174 pp., $5.95 paperback)  

Daily we encounter logic that seems  
unreasonable; we are given reasons that  
seem illogical. Ronald Reagan tells us  
that but for the moral sense of women,  
men would still be wearing skin suits  
(who can tell when a politician or an  
actor is serious?!). Reagan also -  
logically - appointed a woman to iden-  
tify federal laws which discriminate  
against women, then reasonably explains  
his ill-logic for making only cosmetic  
rather than substantial changes in the  
more than 48 laws that she identifies.  
In view of these and other mind-  
boggling events that confront us, IN A  
DIFFERENT VOICE by Carol Gilligan is  
welcome and enlightening reading.  

Gilligan, the MS 1983 Woman of The  
Year, is an educator and psychologist.  
For more than a decade, Gilligan has  
been listening to the voices of people  
as they speak about morality and their  
own lives. She began noting the dif-  
ferences between how men and women  
speak about moral problems; how men and  
women differently describe the rela-  
tionship between "self and other."  
Gilligan critiques the prevailing  
psychoanalytic theories of identity and  
moral development and finds them, not  
surprisingly, lacking in their ability  
to account for the moral development of  
women. Rather than viewing woman as  
"mysteriously flawed" for failing to  
measure up to the standards espoused by  
the masculine bias, Gilligan moves  
beyond the theories to examine moral  
development as it is represented in  
actual life-decisions made by the women  
in the three studies she draws from.  
She documents in this timely book the  
distinctly different voice of women as  
they examine critical moral issues in  
their lives.  

Gilligan carefully reports and ana-  
lyzes the differences between how males  
and females define and apply concepts  

about relationships, rights and respon-  
sibilities; separation and attachment,  
violence and intimacy, and the resolu-  

tion of conflict. Suggesting  
complementarity of the two views,  
Gilligan notes that: "The moral  

imperative that emerges repeatedly in  
interviews with women is an injunction  
to care, a responsibility to discern  
and alleviate the ‘real and recogni-  
zable trouble' of this world. For men,  
the moral imperative appears rather as  
an injunction to respect the rights of  
others and thus to protect from inter-  

ference the rights to life and  
self-fulfillment." (p.100) She  
suggests that men and women may,  
indeed, speak different languages while  
assuming they are the same. Gilligan  
illustrates that women and men use  
similar words to reflect disparate  

experiences of the self and of social  
relationships. Gilligan urges us to  
listen to the silences of women and to  
the differences of our voices as we  
speak. She provides insights that make  
it possible to understand our Selves  
and other women.  

IN A DIFFERENT VOICE is relevant  
reading for all women for a number of  
reasons. By listening to the different  
voice of which and in which Gilligan  
speaks, we become more aware of some of  
the fundamental flaws in the theories  
we have been taught - and continue to  
teach; we become more aware of some of  
the fundamental motivators that bind us  
to our life-choices. As we strive to  
exert our feminist sensibilities in a  
patriarchal system, we begin to better  
understand why that feels so futile,  
yet compelling. As we struggle with  
language in our attempts to depict a  
woman-centered reality, we begin to  
further appreciate the significance of  
words and of silences as we listen to  
the spoken and unspoken voices of other  
women and of our Self.  

This review provided through the cour-  
tesy of CASSANDRA: RADICAL FEMINIST  
NURSES' NEWSJOURNAL. P.O. BOX 341,  
Williamsville, NY 14221  

f  

~~  

COMMON GROUND FEBRUARY 1984 PAGE NINE