Interview African-American Cultural Center

By Shukriyyah Hawkins

The African-American Cultural Center was the first Black educational/cultural institution in the city of Buffalo. Founded in 1962 by Malcom Erni, primarily to give the Black community first-hand knowledge of their ancestral heritage of Africa, to cultivate, promote and develop, particularly among the Black youth, an appreciation and understanding of the mores and folkways of Africa.

Over the years, under the direction of such fine individuals as Ed Lawrence, Professor Celes Tisdale and, succeeding Prof. Tisdale in 1978, Ms. Agnes Bain, the center has established itself as a precursor of cultural awareness. From not only offering art and crafts classes to instructional classes in drama, dance, sculpture, ceramics, African and African-American History, Reading and Math tutorial services, Drum class, the Center houses an African World Studies Archives, The Paul Robeson Theatre, and the African-American Cultural Center's Dance and Drum Troupe.

I asked Ms. Bain to elaborate on the dance and theatre extensions of the Center. She states of the theatre: “The Paul Robeson Theatre, founded by Mr. Ed Lawrence and named by Prof. Tisdale after Paul Robeson, the first recognized Black actor, is the first and only Black theatre in Buffalo, producing four major productions per year. In the past, we have produced in the Theatre District, such as "Raisin", “Purlie", and "Runaways". The Paul Robeson Theatre brings in artists-in-residence to direct our productions." Such acclaimed professionals Ms. Bain begins to name are: Margaret Ford-Taylor of "Karamu House” in Cleveland, Ohio; Richard Grant, of New York City who played in the movie "Attica"; Meachie Jones of New York City; also local Buffalo talent such as Ed Smith, Leverne Clay, George Freeman and Lorna Hill.

Last said Ms. Bain: "The drama workshop was inspired from a cast of young people from our production of "The Me Nobody Knows", the object being to present a training arena for aspiring actors and actresses providing them with the necessary basic acting skills to move into our Paul Robeson Ensemble. These students have performed in several Paul Robeson Theatre productions, catering to a wide variety of audiences and participants.

"In 1981 their first major production, "Black Girl", which was also a movie, was attended by the author, J.E. Franklin. "For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide When the Rainbow Is Enuf" by Ntozake Shange, was a repertory piece performed by the young peoples' workshop for colleges, organizations and festivals. Ms. Shange visited the Center in 1981 to present excerpts of her writings. “Runaways" was attended by its author Elizabeth Swados, so here we see the young people have an opportunity to receive, on a one-to-one basis, first-hand knowledge of the theatre world.”

PAGE 18 COMMON GROUND

The Dance and Drum Troupe of the African-American Cultural Center performs at the Ethnic Heritage Festival at the Buffalo Convention Center.

——

Next Ms. Bain continued her elaboration on the African-American Cultural Center's Dance department. She states: "...with positive involvement and reception of our four-phase dance program, our students are prepared psychologically as well as physiologically for a more positive attitude towards self when mutual appreciation of self and dance are applied positively into harmony of movement. The other extension of the Dance department is the performing troupe, comprised of eighteen dancers and four drummers, ranging in age from 14-25 years.

"In their workshops they have worked with such pros as Rod Rogers and Pearl Reynolds. The company has won second place in the Molson Folklore Dance Festival, the first time a group from outside of Canada has won. They have performed for President Carter and Governor Hugh Carey in the "I Love New York" Art Festival in Albany, and were requested to perform and represent Buffalo at the birthday party for the International Year of the Child in New York City. The dance troupe also performed for Kitty Carlisle Hart, Chairman of the Board of Directors of New York State Council on the Arts and numerous organizations, clubs, festivals and schools, averaging about 80 performances in one year.

"The Center is located in the heart of Buffalo's inner city at 350 Masten Avenue and operates Monday through Friday, 10:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., and Saturday and Sunday for theatrical productions, 8:00 - 12:00 p.m. The clientele of the center covers the age range of six years to senior citizens, although," explains Ms. Bain, "we do not house a senior citizen program. We do present workshops and visits to the senior citizens."

In asking Ms. Bain about the funding for the Center, she explained that the United Way, The NYS Council on the Arts, and the NY State Division of Youth were the funding sources.

And finally, I asked Ms. Bain, as a Black woman, what were some of the challenges and oppositions she had to face being in an executive position. Here's what she says:

"The position of Executive Director is a challenge in itself for anyone male or female, especially of a Black organization. Upon my incorporation the field was open as far as Black women executives in the area, because most non-profit organizations in the inner-city were directed by females. My greatest challenge therefore is keeping the Center afloat and keeping it successful. In terms of opposition, I think the only one would be in hiring a male and in dealing with his interpretation of what a female executive should be like. But," she adds, "it depends on the man's stability in the area of females."

Ms. Bain continues, "I feel my position has made me a stronger, better woman in terms of making concrete decisions, and in dealing with problems, solving those problems in light of controversy (about) whether women can really make decisions, and in making those decisions produce successful results."

Shukriyyah Hawkins is a mother of two, wife, and full-time working woman. She would one day like to publish her own publication.