TO THE MEMBERS OF BUFFALO  
N.O.W, who are reading this issue  
of Common Ground;  

CONTENTS  

April 1983  

Approximately every three months,  
you receive this publication, courtesy  
of Common Ground, and in cooperation  
with the Buffalo Women's  
Health Network. CG and the WHN  
are working together to disseminate  
valuable information for women on  
health issues. CG gives space to  
WHN and prints their newsletter  
within the pages of this paper, and  
then gives copies back to WHN,  
which they send to you and to  
other WHN members. CG is very  
pleased to be able to offer this  
service, as it is in keeping with  
our goal of better community  
information and networking.  

1 News  

2 Contents, Policy,  
The Collective Meets  

3 News  

4 Letters, Hot Flashes  

COFFEE GROUNDS  

5 Revenge of the Fatwoman  

6 The Collective Eats,  
Car-asha, Diet  

7 The High Cost Of Not Knowing  
Crossword  

8 April Fools Awards, News  
Hot Flashes, G-Spot Detector  

9 Daffy's Tree,  
New Uses For B.P.C. Towers  

10 Calendar  

11 Calendar  

We are asking you, the reader,  

to recognize that Common Ground  
cannot continue to publish without  
your support too. Please consider  
purchasing a subscription to CG,  
which will get you 11 issues a year  
of the best news, information,  
analysis, and features from all  
over western New York,  

12 Healthy Mother/Healthy Baby  
A Good Gyno Exam  
13 Birth Issues  

Infertility: The Male Factor  

14  
15 Community Speakout  
16 Uncommon Careers  
17 Small Presses  
18 Announcements  
19 Tax Information,  
Emma Is, Ads  
20 Advertisements  
21 Back Cover,  
Subscription Info  

a regular subscription, or $6 for  
a low-income sub, then consider  
sending $4 to us for the four issues  
you are currently getting per year.  

We need strong and solid support  
from area feminists to keep on  
doing our work,  

Sincerely,  

the Common Ground Collective  

The Collective Meets...  

Taunt  
: am  
{ NGEE, MARGE, I KNEW THAT THE “X! Aig  
i COMMON GROUND SELECTIONS sae  
— MEETINGS WERE ROUGH, BUT...  

I NEVER DREAMED THEY WERE  
THIS BAD!  

PAGE 2, COMMON GROUND, APRIL 1983.  

BUFFALO WOMEN'S HEALTH NETWORK  

Facts for Women About Herpes  

PHILOSOPHY — Common Ground is potentially, with  
help from Western New York women, a forum to  
celebrate the rich diversity of our community. We view  
the paper as a ribbon that may connect our  
commonalities, our intersection points. We are inviting  
you to participate actively in the building of a support  
system for WNY women. We affirm our commitment to  
enhance the lives of women on physical, educational,  
spiritual, psychological, social and economic levels. We  
want to present, fair-mindedly, the issues that concern  
women, and information of value to women. We offer  
Common Ground as a place where women can display  
their art and personal literature, and review the  
tapestries of their experiences.  

EDITORIAL POLICY — Common Ground is especially  
looking for articles which address the needs and  
interests of local women.  

1. Common Ground is a publication of news, culture  
and dialogue from women’s perspectives.  

2. News, Opinion, Analysis and Commentary will each  
be clearly labeled as such.  

3. We are seeking to provide accurate, straightforward  
information of value to women.  

4. The collective will not intentionally print or support  
materials or viewpoints which will harm women  
because of color, sexuality, religious or ethnic  
background, physical disability or economic situation.  

5. While opinions expressed in Common Ground are  
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the  
collective as a whole, we do accept responsibility for  
choosing what we print.  

SUBMISSIONS — We welcome articles, letters,  
information and announcements of interest to women.  
Graphics, cartoons, art and photography will be  
gratefully received. We especially invite women who  
do not usually have access to traditional media —  
women of color, differently abled, economically or  
educationally disadvantaged, and those for whom  
English is a second language — to write. Suggested  
length of letters: 250 words. Letters must be signed to  
be printed. We will, however, respect your privacy and  
withhold your name if you request. Suggested length of  
articles, commentary, analysis: 500-750 words. Please  
type and double-space your work, 40 characters across.  
If you do not have access to a typewriter, please print  
clearly. In time we hope to have a typewriter, paper,  
etc., available for those who request it. Include a  
stamped, self-addressed envelope and work and home  
phone numbers. Because we want to hear your voices,  
if your piece needs to be edited for length or clarity, we  
will call you/ask you to do it. Keep copies of your work.  
We will try to notify you within three (3) weeks if we  
intend to use your work. If we print it, we will give you  
five (5) copies of the issue in which it appears. Artwork  
should be black and white copies only, and  
title/describe your work. We will copyright the entire  
issue, but the copyright on each piece reverts to the  
author/artist, so that she may decide where her work is  
printed. Please request a style-sheet for further  
information and guidelines if you want to write.  

COMMON GROUND  
Women’s Studies Academy  
Rockwell Hall  

Buffalo State College  
1300 Elmwood Avenue  
Buffalo, New York 14222  
(716) 688-7831 (9 a.m.-7 p.m.)  

© 1982 WNY Women’s Newsjournal  

WOMEN WHO WORKED ON THIS ISSUE  
Diane, Laura, Sue, Esther, Bonnie,  
Heather, Maria, Beth, Chris, Gerri,  
Linda, Sarah, Karen P., Karen K.,  
Barb, Marilyn, Holly, Cathy, Donna,  
Roberta, Lisa, Julie, Joan, Sharon,  
Shukriyyah, Peggy, Frigid, Bridget,  
Mouse, Diane, Cherin and  

Wanda Wyneau.