COFFEE GROUNDS

APRIL FOOLS

CHOCK FULL O' NUTS... The COFFEE GROUNDS Collective, led by
Wanda Wyneau (second from right, top row) take a brief respite from

a strenuous brainstorming session. The girls have been busy grinding out
copy for this special edition all month. Uniforms for Coffee Grounds were

designed by Mrs. Olsen with help from Cora.

surprised, shocked, enraged by the
follies of public figures. Common
Ground takes this opportunity to

recognize those who have excelled in the arena of foolishness
this year. We encourage you to send us your nominations of deserving fools

for future awards. The 1983 winners of the April
Fools Awards include

MAYOR MICHAEL O'LAUGHLIN of
Niagara Falls for encouraging
people to return to an endangered
we address on the Love Canal. Celebrity supporters of the Center
include G. Gordon Liddy, Edward G.
Robinson and E.G. Marshall.

PHYLLIS SCHLAFLY for her sense of
humor in giving quiches to male
legislators who supported the ERA.
Belt concludes, "We are in the

business of helping women get in
touch with themselves and we aren't
going to stop here. We plan on
really spreading out."

PRESIDENT REAGAN and his administration (yes, the possibilities for
awards to this group are limitless,
but we have our favorites) for de-
claring ketchup to be a vegetable in
the school lunch program and for
declaring Canadian anti-nuclear and
environmental films to be dangerous
propaganda which could only have a
limited showing in the U.S.

Common Ground salutes the 1983
April Fools.

NEW RESEARCH INDICATES
"MENSTRUATING WOMEN
SHOULD NOT GET PREGNANT"

Dr. James Strong has recently pub-
lished the results of an exhaustive
study, claiming that menstruating women
are imperfect mothers, and so should
not be allowed to get pregnant.

"This research," he was quoted as
saying, "is a logical extension of
previous studies which have shown
that women who menstruate are subject

HOT FLASHES...HOT FLASHES...

---G.L.C.C. looking for new center,
approaches Hyatt-Regency

---Earth's Daughters accused of being
sticks in mud are in this year
---EMMA makes windfall profit, buys
Twin Fair tomatoes in Provincetown
---Greenfield Street Restaurant
reopens in old Denny's location with
Olivia Newton-John
---Woman’s Dance Rotation incorporates
new events to be held at Club 747
---Common Ground mailing committee
protests, not into labels

At a recent Buffalo news conference, Dr.
Strong was asked if his own mother
menstruated, and what alternative
birth method he suggested. He
offered no comment.

---North Buffalo Co-op gets control-
ling interest in Bell's Supermarkets
---Common Ground makes bid on old
Courier-Express Building

Page 8 Common Ground April 1983

€ 3049 ESOT THIS GAO VCAFAMG2