Book Review

Hiroshima 1945, Earth 1984

in that ina Bomb was gc

would

to me,

at Har a’ medi cans: of global nucle spoken widely re appeared in t Last

About to Ask."

To my surprise and pleasure, I found Missile Envy to be not only readable, but quite fascinating. Not saying that I felt like for joy when I finished, I did feel r under z arms Fy Own: eee reactions to

my Responses tery. to end i Bowe? gesame source 4s a peter as “sr-her passionate commitment Pcontinual concretizing and ps Dizing of what the arms race, an our lives.

Winnicott states in the Introduc-

makthat she writes the book "with who tremendous sense of urgency as a ser, as a pediatrician, and as a Gwoman--aware that we live on a planet that is terminally ill, lethal macrobes (nuclear weapons) that are metastasizing rapidly, ti way a cancer spreads in the body. Those three perspectives--mother, doctor, and woman--merging together give the book a cohesive voice that makes most of the information readily available to even a reader such as myself who often falls asleep over anything non-fiction.

The chapter titles of the book- “Prognosis: How Long Will the Earth Survive?", “Case History", “The Terminal Event "-~are suggested by Caldicott's medical experience, and initiates the analogy she makes between the planet Earth and a sick patient.

For me, one of the most disturbing parts of the chapter titled “Prognosis" was Caldicott's description of a recent meeting with President Reagan. My own impression of Reagan was unfortunately confirmed, especially when he quotes material stating that the Nuclear Freeze Campaign is orchestrated by Russia and that the Freeze advocates are K.G.B. dupes. This information, he says, is from his intelligence files, but Caldicott recognizes it as having been copied directly from an October '82 article in Reader's Digest. She concludes: “I was shocked by this interview. He is not a man of great intelligence, and he lacked both empathy and a deep understanding of the complex subject of nuclear weapons...Furthermore, he is an old man, and old men are prone to obstruction of cerebral vessels...causing small strokes, which, without producing obvious damage, may affect the thinking process."

There are, we learn in the same chapter, 30,000 nuclear weapons in the United States, stored in more than 200 locations in 40 states, and that Stockholm International Peace Research Institute estimates that between 1945 and 1976, there were 125 nuclear weapons accidents in the U.S.

The weapons have been ac- ment for over

I am ashamed to admit that I have been controlled virtually. The Pershing II is a rapid intercontinental missile that can reach the targets. According to what the U.S. government says, it is prepared to initiate a nuclear war.

In the years from 1984 to 1988, the Reagan Administration plans to spend from 1.8 to 2.5 trillion dollars on defense. (America spends trillion dollars on defense last 37 years.)

It is, Caldicott maintains, a “system of socialism for the rich and capitalism for the poor.

And the one who suffers the most is, and will be, nature. Nuclear bombs are being tested continually in the Nevada Desert at the dry Yucca Lake site seventy miles north of Las Vegas. About every three weeks a bomb is lowered into a hole ten feet wide and one mile deep, and exploded in the earth. As of September 1982, 380 underground tests had been conducted. The Administration no longer announces such tests.

We are in fact, especially given our production of first-strike weapons, preparing for nuclear war. And the logical consequence of the preparation for nuclear war, Caldicott writes, “is nuclear war.“ In “The Terminal Event" she describes the effects of nuclear war (describing, as well, the Administration's ludicrous evacuation plans) and ends with a description of the Nuclear Winter, which would occur after a major nuclear exchange. Because of dense smoke clouds, the Northern Hemisphere could be plunged into sub-freezing dark conditions, and the earth's biological support system could well be destroyed.

As I was writing this section of the review, a friend came to visit. She lives down the block and came to spend some time with me and my friend, because she was “bored out of her skull," sitting home with her two small boys. She is a sweet, unpretentious person. Her husband works in a local factory with my friend. She is 29 years old.

The boys went into the kitchen to see my friend while she and I chatted for a few moments outside my study door. She asked what I was doing and I told her about the review,

PAGE 12 COMMON GROUND DECEMBER 1984

joined WAND, Women’s Action for Nuclear Disarmament: "The with it," I’d say, “it's going to happen, there’s nothing I can do to stop it." But I thought about it tantamount to passive suicide.

And this repression of fear takes more mental energy than accepting the grief. It is only if we experience that grief and acknowledge the realities of war, can we be moved to action.

Women must rapidly degetona their power so that they can move out into local, national, and global arenas—taking with them the urgency to save the planet.

If we don't stand up and rapidly become elected to the highest offices in the country and change America’s national policies from those of death to life, we will all be exterminated. Women should use our nurturing, caring emotions to become guiding moral principles in politics.

It is not impossible. And it is essential, and urgent. We have been psychically damaged in this country, brainwashed to believe that we are isolated, alone. We are all afraid, and rightfully so. To not feel afraid in this day and age would be insane. But our fear can motivate us, move us, and save us.

In a sense, it is July 1945, and we all live in Hiroshima. What will you do? Will you put down this paper and go on about your life? Or will you move? If the earth is Hiroshima, there is no place to move--except to action.

This article was originally printed in Women's Times. Ruth Geller is a local writer, author of a new novel from Crossing Press, entitled Triangles.

From page 11

Purses do not last very long. So follows: Why does a vinyl purse that is inked go to rip or crack while the leather lasts so much more? I thought I had us eventually g a durable purse for only $10.

Consciously; assiduously and securely; no doubt you know the pain for fun, for now women who have something to carry away from their kids or family paper their stress or depression.

Purses are just one more thing to shop for (as if we don't have enough already), and eventually I think we come somewhat immune to $25.00 prices on purses, needing more discrimination than one purse that one loves. A purse fashioned as silly as it may sound, such dictates are, nevertheless, still important to women in positions of power or in the public eye. People are often more aware of appearance than one's abilities.

Even though we are not all corporate politicians (or politicians' wives), many of us, myself included, were taught with proper middle-class values that our handbag always matches our shoes. In fact, as a child and a pre-teen, my mother saw to it every Sunday that my hat, gloves, purse, and shoes were all coordinated. To this day, the notion that all my garments and accoutrements must go together sometimes overrides my sense of practicality, safety, and budget.

Finally, a purse is a symbol of femininity, and as such, it serves as just one sore delineation between the sexes. Yes, a few American men in the recent past, finding their own pockets overflowing, challenged the limiting custom that purses are for women only. Purses for men? Well, except for the hippie-type men with pouch-like sacks, the only men's bags I've seen were large enough to resemble an over-the-shoulder briefcase, and then only in chic cities like Toronto. (I have yet to see a man carrying a purse in Buffalo!) Not only are such bags quite expensive (and probably out of the price range of a woman who earns only 59¢ to that man's dollar), they were, in effect, "de-feminized" in appearance. After all, it's now OK for women to borrow masculine styles (remember last year's “sartorial look?), but it's still taboo for men to imitate feminine styles.

So the next time you either consider buying someone a purse, or automatically grab your own as you prepare to go out, think twice. Will there be a safe place to put it when you arrive at your destination, or will you, like me, eat your whole meal in the restaurant, for example, with the abominable thing on your lap rather than leave it exposed on the floor or flung over the back of your chair? Can your clothing possibly accommodate the necessities in that purse, and if not, how can you make clothing store owners and manufacturers more aware of this problem (especially makers and sellers of oversized and maternity clothing)? And finally, will the presence of that seemingly innocent purse under your arm or over your shoulder make you susceptible to loss, trauma, or worse, physical harm?