Resource  
Directory  

Below is a list of the material I  
read that led to my deci-  
sion to have a home birth.  

However, there are many  
other sources of information, and most  
of the works below contain lengthy  
bibliographies. The first book item-  
ized was, for me, the most influential  
and convincing; the second was the text  
that we used in our class.  

1. Arms, Suzanne. Immaculation: A New Look at Women  
Childbirth in America (1975, Houghton Mifflin).  

2. Baldwin, Rahima. The Complete Guide to Informed Birth.  

3. Boston's Women's Health Book Collective, Inc. Our Bodies, Ourselves (1973, Simon & Schuster).  

4. Haire, Doris. Birth Book. (1976, Inscape).  

5. Sousa, Marion. (1976, Bantam Books).  

6. Ward, Charlotte & Fred.  

7. Malecki, Maryann Powell, R.N. Mom and Dad and I are Having a Baby!  

Available at Emma Bookstore  

For more information on birth alternatives in the Buffalo area, contact:  
Buffalo Childbirth Coalition  
724 Delaware Avenue  
Buffalo, N.Y. 14209  

For information on prepared childbirth classes geared toward both hospital and home births, contact: Theresa Epstein, 881-3585.  

GAY AND LESBIAN COMMUNITY CENTER  

The Gay and Lesbian Community Center, recently relocated in a beautiful three-story building at 647 West Delevan Avenue in Buffalo, is seeking all interested people to help with their Founders’ Fund Drive to raise $11,000 by January 2, 1984 to purchase the house.  

So far, response to their fund drive has been encouraging. They have started a Founder's club of people and organizations who have donated $100 each to the building fund. The building they are purchasing is a three-story house, with 5 separate conference rooms, a full kitchen, and a third floor that could be developed into meeting space. Many local groups are already using the space to meet, such as the AIDS Taskforce, Gay Youth Advisory Board, Metropolitan Community Church, 5th Freedom, the Buffalo Gay and Lesbian Library, and others.  

The G.L.C.C. is also looking for other people to donate $5 - $10 - $15 - whatever they can - to help realize their dream of a community center.  

Common Ground agreed to assist G.L.C.C. in publicizing their fund drive, and to that end, we will give up to one page of space in our paper to list the name of, or a message from, each person who gives $5 to the G.L.C.C. Fund Drive. $5 buys you one line (36 characters and spaces). This can be a visible way of showing your support for the Center.  

If you would like to participate in the fund drive, send your check (made out to G.L.C.C. Friends Fund), and indicate the number of lines you are purchasing, one line, $5, two - $10, three - $15 etc., and  

Special Delivery:  

The Cultural Warping of Childbirth (1972, International Childbirth Education Association). Childbirth at Home.  

STATE UPDATE ’83  

by Ronnie Swartz  

This past summer has seen some crucial gains, as well as some setbacks for the women of New York State. Of four cases presented by Attorney General Robert Abrams, half were decided in favor of women. Two new laws brought good news not only to women but to tenants and tenant seekers.  

Female bus drivers now have an equal chance to be promoted to bus dispatchers. According to the unanimous decision in People of the State of New York v. the New York City Transit Authority, the Transit Authority has not only violated the Human Rights Law but has perpetuated past discrimination by relying solely on seniority to advance its employees. Women were first allowed to take the drivers test in 1971 and were not hired until 1978. (It wasn't until 1976 that all applicants were no longer required to be 5'4".) Thus women, being too far down the seniority list, were effectively barred from promotion. The Transit Authority's policy must now include other criteria, such as merit, besides seniority.  

Ruling in favor of women again, the courts judged that the United States Power Squadrons, the nation's largest boating safety organization, could no longer exclude women from becoming members.  

In separate but similar cases, the battle against sex discrimination lost momentum. Two wills established college trust funds for males only in Croton-Harmon High School of Westchester County and Canastota High School near Syracuse. The NOW Legal Defense Fund and the Attorney General's Office contested the wills claiming each should be gender neutral so that scholarships be awarded on the basis of worth, not sex. The Court of Appeals concluded that discrimination by private trusts was not illegal. As long as the rules of the wills were revised to ensure that no public school official participate in the application and selection process, boys could remain the sole recipients of these scholarships. Writing for the majority, Chief Judge Cooke felt that many groups target their funding programs to particular groups. Private funds for women are increasing. Prohibiting such private monies could work against girls as well as boys.  

NOW IS THE TIME  

Please join NOW by filling out this coupon and mailing it to: NOW Membership, 31 Hodge Ave., Buffalo 14222  

Dues are $45 to $15 a year. If you cannot afford the $45, you can choose an amount between the two figures that you feel you can afford. (If you can give more, please do.) Membership in National, State and local NOW is included in the $45 to $15 fee, and it entitles you to a year's subscription to the National NOW Times, State newsletter and Buffalo NOW's Feminist Observer.  

If you do not wish to become a member of National, State and local NOW at this particular time, please join Buffalo NOW as an Associate Member (non-voting) for $5.00 a year. This membership entitles you to a year's subscription to our publication.  

I wish to become a member of National, State and Buffalo NOW. Enclosed is my check for $  

I wish to become an Associate Member of Buffalo NOW and receive a subscription to the Feminist Observer for $5.00.  

While considering an appeal to the Supreme Court,  

While July brought rising temperatures, it also brought welcome relief for women as well as parents. By amending the Real Property Law, the New York State Legislature has given potential tenants the right to sue real estate agents and landlords for denying them an apartment because they have children. Furthermore, if the parent wins the suit, all attorney's fees will be paid for. Prior to this, violations of the Real Property Law, punishable as a misdemeanor, could only be pressed by district attorneys or the Attorney General as a criminal action. Abrams stated: "There has not been one criminal prosecution of such a case. Landlords, managing agents and real estate brokers violate existing law with virtual impunity."  

Child discrimination has risen dramatically. Today a parent with children is more likely to be discriminated against than a minority. Housing Opportunities Made Equal (HOME) estimates that in 1982, 38% of its complaints were of child discrimination, accounting for 13% more than race discrimination complaints. (HOME: Insight, Vol. XX no. 1, Feb. 1983) As mothers and single parents, women are usually the victims of housing violations.  

There was yet another victory for women and fair housing. According to a Court of Appeals decision, landlords could evict tenants who share apartments with "persons to whom they’re not married to or otherwise related." Assemblyman Pete Grannis (D-L Manhattan) feared this could lead landlords to "declare open season evicting many tenants unjustifiably." The court, he continued, is “blind to the realities of the acute apartment shortage and today's changing lifestyles." At the request of the Attorney General's Office, Grannis and Senator Roy Goodman (R-L Manhattan) introduced the Joint Occupancy Protection Act to overturn this judgment. The passage of this bill protects thousands of New York tenants who are unmarried, can't afford or are afraid to live alone.  

Neither the courts nor the legislature, however, have made a dent in an issue still high on women's agendas everywhere: equal pay for equal work. Today's familiar 59¢ button would have read 64¢ in 1955. And women must work 9 days to earn the same gross income as men to in 5 working days. The problem, says Abrams, is that equal pay for equal work laws don't work: equal pay for comparable work laws will. Women who do work which is comparable but not identical to their male counterparts do not get paid the same wage. Women who work in traditionally segregated jobs are paid less than a traditional male job of comparable value to the employer. Wage disparity will remain until the laws are changed to accommodate this difference. Legislation is needed to ensure the economic survival of women.  

While the summer of '83 gave New York State a boost for people's rights, there's much more work to be done - and not just on the legislative and litigative fronts.  

FEBRUARY is Black history month, and we are looking for articles and personal her-stories on the Black Woman's Experience. We also need women to work on selections for this issue, and to generate ideas for timely articles. For more information, call 688-7831 or write to Common Ground. The deadline for material for this issue is January 1.  

Common Ground is always looking for material, and we are inviting you and your friends to write. Please! You can write articles, cover events, conferences, review books and/or music. We want both informative articles and personal points of view. Style sheet is provided upon request.  

Some upcoming topics for the months ahead:  

MARCH is "Women and Work" - personal experiences, women in traditional and non-traditional jobs, child-care, women in unions, and many other related topics. Deadline is Feb. 1.  

If you want to write, but don't have any specific ideas, let us know. We can cook up a few. Hope to be hearing from you!  

The National Women’s Hall of Fame is growing... with your support.  

Add your name today to the growing list of NWHF members and patrons by contributing to our Expansion.  

In the heart of the birthplace of women’s rights in Seneca Falls, New York, the National Women’s Hall of Fame is a landmark to women of achievement. The Hall is presently doubling its space and expanding its programs to serve our members, our visitors, and above all, our educational goals.  

Tax deductible contributions of $10 or more qualify you for one year’s full membership.  

Print exactly what you would like printed in the paper. You must sign your name, even if you wish to remain anonymous. Send it today.  

MAIL TO: National Women’s Hall of Fame, P.O. Box 339, Seneca Falls, N.Y. 13148  

G.L.C.C., P.O. Box 1595, Ellicott Sta., Buffalo, New York. Indicate on your check and on the sheet with the lines you are purchasing, that it is for Common Ground publication.  

NOW PHONE 885-3475  

Name  

Address  

City  

COMMON GROUND DECEMBER 1983 P.