Daphne’s

by Sarah Slavin

The first residents of what became  
the U.S. arrived over 25,000 years ago.  
These early immigrants are today  
justifiably considered native peoples.  
They were ill-treated by the English  
and the Spanish, who colonized most of  
what is now the continental U.S. Lest  
we forget, “Daphne's Tree" this month  
focuses on selected herbal remedies  
used by certain of the native tribes.  

Although institutional racism in  
the U.S. has tended to "homogenize"  
native peoples, the identification  
of most Native Americans stems from  
their particular tribes and tribal  
cultures, which are often tied closely  
to the land. There are 350 distinct  
tribal groups, speaking 150  
languages, in the U.S. (Two hundred  
eighty of these are federally recognized.)  
Consideration of native herbal remedies,  
then, needs to be tribe-specific.  

At one time or another, The Pharmacopeia  
of the United States has listed more  
than 200 botanical remedies long known  
to the various tribes (see Virgil J. Vogel,  
American Indian Medicine, Ballantine Books,  
1970, p. 3, passim.) Even so, botanical  
medicine in the tribes has frequently  
been regarded by Anglo commentators as  
scientifically suspect.  

Many regards suspect has not entered  
into the proposition. Nonetheless,  
the accounts of those availing themselves  
of native knowledge and aid indicate  
the extent to which non-natives relied  
upon, and respected, that knowledge  
and aid. Unfortunately for those without  
access to this curative botanical medicine,  
western science has had to reinvent the  
medicine wheel.  

As an aid to menstruation, the  
Arikara—who possessed vast agricultural  
knowledge—have used infusions of big  
wild sage and roots of little wild sage.  
The Arikara were originally found in the  
Southwest, migrated to the upper Missouri  
River region, and were relocated on a  
reservation in North Dakota. The wild  
sage used by the Arikara is not to be  
confused with water germander, sometimes  
known as wild sage or sage-leaved  
germander. Nor is it the sage discussed  
by “Daphne's Tree" in November and January.  
The big and little wild sage used by the  
Arikara is a common shrub found widely  
in the Southwest. Rather than a teucrium  
(germander) or a Salvia (sage), it is  
an artemisia, related to mugwort and  
wormwood, which is sometimes known as  
big sagebrush.  

Big and little wild sage is seldom  
listed in conventional herbals and  
materia medicas. It is deleted from  
these collections because their focus  
is ethnocentric—in this case, on  
European artemesias. This particular  
ethnocentrism may be partly traceable  
to a cultural bias about menstruation  
that is quite negative—especially  
compared to the Arikara's desire to  
aid it. In fact, for many native  
women, menstruation has been the  
source of positive female bonding  
rather than a "curse."  

PAGE 18 COMMONGROUND MARCH 1983  

The Rappahannocks have used pennyroyal  
tea to relieve menstrual pain. This is  
an old-fashioned remedy known,  
coincidentally, the world over—  
wherever there's enough dampness and  
loam to support the plant's growth.  
Pennyroyal is a species of mint. Sometimes  
it has been called “squaw mint,"  
a designation not necessarily meant  
to be complimentary! The essential  
oil of pennyroyal is highly poisonous.  
But, pennyroyal tea is not dangerous.  
It is made by steeping one ounce of  
the dried herb in one pint of boiling  
water.  

Stoneseed or “desert tea" was used  
by the Nevada Shoshone and seemingly  
the Comanches—who are plains' natives—  
as a birth control measure. At least  
one study has revealed that stoneseed  
does work to suppress ovulation in  
laboratory mice. The dried root chips  
were taken in both hot and cold infusions;  
the dosage and its frequency seem to  
have varied with the heat of the infusion.  
Stoneseed is, however, VERY DANGEROUS;  
and its use is not recommended for  
any who have not grown up in a culture  
accustomed to using it.  

While this constraint may appear inexplicable,  
and perhaps it is, Jeannine Parleii  
states that "the cultural belief system  
sustains the efficiency of the herbal remedy"  
(A Freestone Collective Book, 1978, p. 61).  
In other words, the receptivity and  
recognition of the Shoshone and perhaps the  
Comanche may "sustain" stoneseed's  
efficiency as a birth control measure  
without undesirable side effects. The  
rest of us are not so culturally blessed;  
and an overnight change of heart will  
not protect us from the danger  
stoneseed poses to us.  

Finally, the practice of the Meskwaki  
and Chippewa tribes has been to  
draw upon the wild yam to relieve labor  
pains. The wild yam has also been used  
to reduce nausea in pregnant women.  

The basis for most antifertility drugs  
on the commercial market today is diosgenin.  
The greater share of available diosgenin  
is extracted from the wild yam's dried  
rhizome, or subterranean root-like stem.  
The developers of oral contraceptives  
were aided in finding diosgenin by the  
practices of these Native American tribes.  
Oral contraceptives have their burdens  
as well as their benefits. The native  
rule of thumb is “like cures like."  
Clearly, our own health care delivery  
systems still have something to learn.  

Diosgenin is not the only contribution  
of native tribes to pharmacology and  
medicine. Curare and cocaine are but  
two more "discoveries" traceable to  
Indian practices, these in the Caribbean  
and South America. Curare, or wourali  
in the language of the Macusi Indians of  
(British) Guiana, was used to tip the  
deadly, poisonous arrows of the Amazons.  
Among other places, it is found in  
Strychnos toxifera in Guiana. It is now  
used by doctors to combat atonic dyspepsia,  
various digestive disorders, and in  
the event of surgical shock and cardiac  
failure. Cocaine or cuca, in the  
language of the Incas found in Peru,  
is forthcoming from the Peruvian Coca  
(the word coca is a Spanish adaptation)  
and also from Bolivian Coca, or Erythroxylon  
coca. Western medicine "certified"  
cocaine as a local anesthetic in 1884,  
and contributed to the hopeless addiction  
of countless individuals (observation based  
on research-in-progress of Claudine  
Schweber, Criminal Justice Dept., SUCB).  
The majority of those addicted to cocaine  
were women. Native peoples had known  
cuca's narcotic properties and used it as an  
appetite suppressant for hundreds of  
years. They were starving, not looking  
for kicks. The coca shrubs grown today  
in India and Ceylon were exported to  
those lands.  

Significantly, the native practices  
here referred to, and many others,  
were forthcoming from the efforts of  
women as well as men. Women have, for  
example, been found with men among the  
Midewiwin, or medical societies, of  
many northern tribes in the continental  
U.S. The Mide are herbalists with  
recognized tribal status. They also  
fill the shaman's herbal needs. Tribes  
with Midewiwin are generally sedentary  
(agricultural) or semi-sedentary, and  
those such as the Senecas and Menominees  
are matrilineal. Tribes with Midewiwin  
like the Zunis have kept their ancient  
religion, complete with healing rites.  
These rites encompass the spiritual as  
well as pharmacological. We do indeed  
still have much to learn.  

Sarah Slavin is assistant professor of  
political science at State University  
College at Buffalo, and a member of  
EMMA.