COMMON GROUND

WOMEN  
IN PRINT  

NEW PRESSES FOUNDED/  
OTHERS FOLD  

by E. R. Mann  

The newspaper you are reading is  
produced by a very small feminist  
press. Even though we only assemble  
a monthly newspaper, Common Ground  
is among a nation-wide network of  
presses and publishing houses, print-  
ers and binders and typesetters who  
specifically desire to get works by  
women, and information for women, into  
print because women have always been  
systematically denied access to the  
major media. While some women get  
into print, are regularly published,  
sought after, adequately rewarded for  
their work, and receive well-deserved  
respect, most major publishing houses,  
journals and papers are reluctant or  
outright hostile towards women, wo-  
men's works and women's analysis.  
Women are oftentimes not taken ser-  
iously (remember "women's pages" in  
the newspapers?)  

The picture has been even grimmer  
for women offering radical political  
analysis. Or women of color. Or  
working-class women; the list is familiar  
and much longer. The so-called second  
wave of feminism encouraged women to  
go off and create their own media to  
get ideas and works into print (on  
records, on stage, in art galleries,  
in bookstores, in concerts, etc.)  

One of the most prominent pub-  
lishers, Persephone Press, went out  
of business last May. It joins  
Diana Press and Women In Distribution  
in sad demise. Persephone Press's  
“ability to conceive of books that  
didn't yet exist and to recognize the  
importance of a book that existed  
only in proposal form, or only in  
someone's head" were components of  
these women's vision that empowered  
them to publish some of the most time-  
ly, important and vital work, says  
Carol Seajay in September '83 Femi-  
nist Bookstore News. In her opinion,  
"their books raised issues, revealed  
racism, anti-Semitism, and at their  
best, gave positive images where  
there were precious few before. Part  
of the loss is the loss of what Per-  
sephone might have brought into pub-  
lication in the future and now won't.  
What they did publish will continue  
to affect and influence our commun-  
ity for years to come."  

Persephone published an impres-  
sive number of books which were  
“best sellers"—which sustained sec-  
ond printings, were widely acclaimed,  
widely read and which no (main-  
stream) publisher would be likely to  

Lesbians,  

con't page 3  

December 1983 Volume 2 No. 4  

WOMEN'S MUSIC/WOMEN'S CULTURE  

RECORD COMPANY DISPUTE  

by Chris Van Veghten  

(New York City) Manhattan Muse, re-  
gional record distributor for Olivia  
Records (among others) has ceased carry-  
ing records from this company. Accord-  
ing to Manhattan Muse, there is a dis-  
pute with the record company over ter-  
ritory and distribution rights.  

Olivia is the largest women's recording  
company and they recently celebrated  
their 10th anniversary. They produce  
such artists as Cris Williamson, Meg  
Christian, Teresa Trull and Barbara  
Higbie. Olivia belongs to a distribu-  
tion network called W.I.L.D. (Women's  
Independent Label Distribution).  
W.I.L.D. has territory rights set up  
across the country so that record and  
bookstores who wish to carry Olivia  
records (as well as those of women  
artists whose companies are a part of  
W.I.L.D. such as Woody Simmons, Mal-  
vina Reynolds, Winter & Rose, etc.)  
must order from a specific regional  
distributor, usually a woman-run busi-  
ness. The distributor for this area  
has been Manhattan Muse, based in N.Y.C.  

W.I.L.D. distributors have always  
refused to sell to stores out of their  
area in order to let each other have a  
clear field in which to operate. Ter-  
ritories were made large enough so that  
distributors could economically survive.  

A spokeswoman from Manhattan Muse  
said that Olivia is moving to distrib-  
ute products through other networks,  
and this will merely serve to "dilute  
the market" for these records and make  
it harder for the women's distribu-  
tion network to survive. Olivia plans  
to use some of the traditional folk  
networks for its records, according to  
Manhattan Muse. They say they will not  
carry Olivia products because their use  
of other networks threatens the women's  
distribution network and this is un-  
fair.  

She said that Manhattan Muse itself  
may not be as economically threatened  
as they carry a variety of women's re-  
cords besides those produced by Olivia,  
but some smaller companies may be more  
severely hurt.  

According to Olivia, when contacted  
by EMMA, the Buffalo Women's Bookstore,  
"as of Nov. 16, Manhattan Muse is no  
longer the distributor for your area.  
By Nov. 21, we will either have a new  
distributor, or we can ship you the  
records directly." When questioned  
further about the nature of the dis-  
pute, the Olivia representative said,  
"I'm leery about spreading rumors.  
This has all come down in the past  
three days, and I would like to make  
sure everything is clarified before  
we talk about this." When asked if  
they were considering a distribution  
network involving men, she responded,  
"We are and have been distributing  
with organizations which include men  
in other parts of the country. This  
is not the nature of our dispute with  
Manhattan Muse. It is a specific is-  

W.N.Y. Women’s Newsjournal  

‘See "THE ARTS"  
pages 6 & 7 for  
record and book  
reviews, —  

sue involving Manhattan Muse and no  
other distributor." Does this mean  
they are pulling out of W.I.L.D?  

"No, we will distribute through them  
as well as other places." Beyond  
this, she wished to delay any further  
comment.  

EMMA is also awaiting further  
clarification on the nature of this  
dispute. "There will be no problem  
with prepaid orders which have been  
submitted for Olivia records," said  
an EMMA collective member. "These  
are on their way now, after only a  
short delay. But before ordering  
further stock for the store, we need  
to know more about why, how, and from  
whom. We expect a decision can be  
made on this soon."  

Recent Olivia recordings include  
"Meg and Cris at Carnegie Hall", a  
double album with a live recording of  
Olivia's 10th anniversary concert last  
year; "Unexpected" by Teresa Trull and  
Barbara Higbie (see review this issue)  
and "Portrait", a collection of Cris  
Williamson favorites. Due out in 1984  
are "The Complete Cris Williamson Song-  
book", “From the Heart", a new album  
by Meg Christian, and a new album by  
Tret Fure.  

ANALYSIS  

Olivia has made several moves of  
late which seem to some members of this  
women's community to mean expansion and  
diversification; to some, tactics born  
of economic necessity; and to others, a  
disturbing tendency to "go mainstream".  
Last year's historical concert at Car-  
negie Hall can be viewed as a break-  
through in women's music, a fundraiser  
to put out their new album, or a break  
with traditional presentations of wo-  
men's cultural events.  

Other moves include a special  
"Friends of Olivia" membership, which  
women can join for $25, $50 or $100  
and receive certain free items and a  
discount on future products ordered.  

Olivia is going with a "pre-pay"  
system of sorts with their membership  
campaign, but they are not the first  
to do so. Prepaid record ordering has  
helped ease some of EMMA's financial  
pressures locally. Other artists such  
as Alix Dobkin, and most recently Fer-  
ron, as she plans her new album for  
1984, have asked women to prepay so  
that they could have the money for pro-  
duction.  

Meg, Cris, Tret, Barbara and Teresa  
recently completed a four-city tour,  
ending in Boston on November 12. 2800  
women packed the Orpheum Theater to  
hear a rousing concert by these dynam-  
ic musicians, but some women present  
were surprised by the lack of politi-  
cal content in the songs. "The word  
‘lesbian' was never mentioned," said  
one listener, “and seldom even the  
word ‘woman'."  

con't page 3  

TEKKRKERHRHKREKR ERK ED