NEWS

Conference

by April Hamlin

The National Women's Studies Association held their annual conference in Champaign-Urbana, Illinois during the month of June. Women came from as far away as Bangor, Maine; Seattle, Washington, and Bombay, India, and as near as the Champaign-Urbana community.

Being surrounded by women devoted to improving women's lives has the ability to affirm and rejuvenate any feminist! The conference was five days in length, with seminars, plenaries, and caucuses going seventeen hours every day, and plenty of entertainment for those who still had energy left after the rigorous meeting schedule.

Child care was available at no cost, coinciding with the programs; this made it possible for mothers to attend the meetings, partake of the extracurricular activities, without worrying about children or their care.

The theme for this year's conference was “Women Working for Change" and the speakers addressed such issues as women fighting nuclear weapons build-up to women fighting to be free of colonialism.

Although the conference was physically exhausting, emotionally it was quite rewarding. Those who attended felt it to be a uniquely worthwhile experience; in fact, some women just returning home are already looking forward to next year's gathering in Atlanta.

The reports of rape and abuse of women have been on the rise recently in the Buffalo area. In a little more than two weeks, the BUFFALO NEWS reported 9 instances of rape or battery of women in June.

The current issue of the American Journal of Psychiatry reports that wife-beating (as well as all violent crimes) peaks in the summer months, rising with the temperatures.

Curtor—

Eggertsville author Gabrielle Burton, noted for her feminist classic I'm Running Away From Home, But I'm Not Allowed to Cross the Street, has been awarded the prestigious Maxwell Perkins Award for her new novel about six women living in a tour guide residence, entitled Heartbreak Hotel, to be published by Charles Scribner and Sons in November 1986.

Ten years ago, Burton's first book Running Away..., on women's struggle with depression was a major feminist success and one of the first books completely produced by women.

5-4
Roe v. Wade

The U.S. Supreme Court, in a 5-4 decision, has overturned a Pennsylvania regulation that would require "informed consent” including "detrimental physical and psychological effects” of an abortion; a week-by-week description of a developing fetus, pre-natal and post-natal care available to pregnant women, two doctors to be present for third trimester abortions, and that doctors file various reports on their abortions, available to the public, among other specifics.

Justice Blackmun, writing for the majority, said that the Pennsylvania regulations "wholly subordinate constitutional privacy interests and concerns with maternal health in an effort to deter a woman from making a decision that, with her physician, is hers to make."

The Court's 1973 decision, Roe v. Wade, affirming a woman's right to privacy and abortion was a 7-2 decision. In 1983, the Court reaffirmed Roe v. Wade by 6-3. Thus, this current decision narrows the bench's margin of decision.

The majority of the oldest members of the Court (Blackmun, Brennan, Marshall, Powell, and Stevens) all voted to strike the Pennsylvania regulations.

The new ruling says the states do not have powers to regulate a woman's right to abortion, especially when it violates her right to privacy.

NEWS FLASH: TWO MUSIC FESTIVALS SCHEDULED FOR THIS SUMMER HAVE BEEN CANCELLED. FURTHER INFORMATION ABOUT SISTERFIRE AND THE NEW ENGLAND WOMEN'S MUSICAL RETREAT CAN BE FOUND ON THE ANNOUNCEMENTS PAGE.

PSYCHIATRIC LABELLING

“Women's Problems" or the “Woman's Disease" used to be the 19th-century euphemism for anything having to do with women's reproductive capacity.

If a woman was depressed, angry, tired, busy, bored, happy, sad, over or under-sexed it was obviously because there was something "wrong" with her -- not possibly that she was her own normal self, or responding appropriately to her situation. What was "wrong" was also determined to be due to her possessing a womb and a hormonal cycle which could "rage." Men, who determined what constituted normal, of course, had neither. The treatment of choice for these male-defined ills was often debilitating "bed rest" and isolation, and the removal of the offending uterus. Countless middle and upper-class women were crippled and maimed, physically and psychologically, by this practice...

In 1986, the American Psychiatric Association is embroiled in a controversy about three particular diagnoses: Pre-menstrual Syndrome (PMS), "Self-defeating (masochistic) personality," and “Compulsive Rape," to be included in the standard diagnostic reference book.

The new proposals are for PMS to be given a purely psychiatric diagnosis implying no biological/gynecological etiology; for those who are habitually taken advantage of or who put others' needs ahead of their own to be labeled with a personality disorder and termed mentally ill, and for some rapists to be diagnosed with a "paraphilic-coercive disorder" - leading the way for rapists to claim they are merely sick, not violent, anti-social criminals.

Dr. Paula Caplan, a clinical psychologist at the University of Toronto, states: "the inclusion of these categories will be the single most damaging act psychiatrists have ever taken against women...If [they] are successful the average woman will have a high probability of being diagnosed as mentally ill. And the average rapist will be seen not as a criminal, but as a person who needs our help and compassion."

- Info Buffalo News

COMMON GROUND JULY 1986 PAGE 3