NEWS

A Buffalo man, Mario Liperta, petitioned the state's highest court to overturn his conviction as the state's first man to be sentenced under the New York State marital rape law.

Mr. Liperta's attorney, Barbara Howe, of the Legal Aid Society, is appealing the conviction on the grounds that the rape law is not "gender neutral"—meaning that there is no provision to convict women for the crime of rape. Therefore, the state’s law, they allege, is unconstitutional. Miss Howe also said that to carry out the fundamental idea of the law—that is protection from sexual assault—it should make no difference whether one is married or single.

Liperta was convicted of first degree rape/sodomy after attacking his estranged wife in a motel room in March of 1981. They were living apart under Family Court orders.

Here are some of the highlights from the Republican National platform for 1984:

On the ERA—"The Republican Party has a historic commitment to progress for women...President Reagan believes—as do we—that all members of our party are free to work for women's progress. As a party, we do not condone any detriment to women's progress or inhibition of women's rights to full opportunity and advancement within this society. (They did not say anywhere that they endorsed the idea of the Equal Rights Amendment.) 

Abortion—"We...reaffirm our support for a human life amendment to the Constitution, and we endorse legislation to make clear that the 14th Amendment's protections apply to unborn children. We oppose the use of public revenues for abortion and will eliminate funding for organizations promoting this.”

Erie County District Attorney Richard J. Arcara has issued a comprehensive nine-point plan for combating crimes and protecting victims of rape, sexual assault, child abuse, wife battering, and family violence. The plan urges that there be a concerted effort made by area police departments, local criminal courts, and citizen organizations to act upon the recommendations made for each.

As part of the plan, there is a new bureau to coordinate the investigation and prosecution of cases involving crimes of interfamily violence. It is called the Comprehensive Assault, Abuse and Rape unit, or CAAR unit (pronounced "Care"). It will be staffed by three assistant district attorneys and will become operational on July 2, 1984.

Birth control pills for men? A natural male-produced protein, called inhibin, may be available soon in pill form, which can halt sperm production without adversely affecting male libido, appearance, or health.

A synthetic version of this substance may be soon on the market.

At the close of the State Legislature in July, the State ERA had been tabled by members of the Conservative Party. The earliest it will be brought before the State's voters is 1987.

Governor Cuomo signed a bill that bars employers from forcing pregnant women into maternity leave while they can still do their jobs.

He also signed a bill that authorizes the expenditure of $5 million to agencies that deal with pregnant teenagers. “The measure will help agencies establish links with the private sectors and fill in the gaps in existing services to prevent unwanted teenage pregnancies and assist those who do become pregnant.

There was also a bill passed, sponsored by Assemblyman William Hoyt of Buffalo, that will provide start-up money for programs that deal with child abuse and domestic violence.

An Oneonta librarian is winning kudos as a woman who upholds the rights of the borrowers of the books in her library. Ms. Bruce, the librarian, told a Secret Service agent that she would not release borrowers' records without a subpoena. The agent was interested in the borrowers' book that contained a hand-written threat against President Reagan.

Ms. Bruce says that the agent harassed and threatened her, but that she didn't give in to his pressure. Instead, she refused him and locked the records in a safe-deposit box.

The small-town librarian has become a popular figure with her fellow librarians and has been nominated for several awards.

In 1978, five women employees of Service Systems Corp. filed a sex discrimination suit against this employer, claiming that their salaries were $1.43/hour less than their male co-workers. The suit, which was filed through the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), has now been settled and will result in payment of benefits of over $400,000 to 103 former employees of the now closed-down vending division of Service Systems.

Patricia Hejmanowski of Buffalo, along with Joanne Whitney, Josephine Gigante, Carol Gajer, and Dawn Bauer, who joined in the original complaint, will each receive checks of up to $20,000.

The above info from the Buffalo News, June 25, 1984.

On July 1, Liechtenstein decided to enter the 20th century by granting their women the right to vote. Determined by a national election (in which, of course, only men voted), the women of this tiny European monarchy won their victory by a vote of only 51% to 48%. This is the last European country to approve women's suffrage on national issues; however, a few of the villages in Liechtenstein did not grant women the right to vote on their local issues.

BLUEBERRY MUFFINS

MAYBE SHE CAN RUN THE COUNTRY, BUT CAN SHE BAKE?

Geraldine Ferraro, the Democratic nominee for the vice presidency, has been under intense scrutiny and pressure from the media. Recently she was asked if she could bake blueberry muffins. Her reply was "Yes, can you?"

We thought we'd include this recipe for our readers. After all, if it's a criterion for being the vice-president, we all should have it!

½ cup butter or oleo  
½ cup honey  
½ cup sugar  
1 egg  
4 cups flour  
2 teaspoons baking powder  
½ teaspoon salt  
1 cup milk  
1 cup blueberries  

Cream butter, sugar, honey, add egg and mix. Sift together flour, baking powder, salt and add to mixture along with the milk. Fold in berries. Bake at 375 for 20 minutes.

——WOMANEXPRESS

CALL FOR MATERIAL

Common Ground has applied for an Arts Development Service grant to produce a special Arts Issue of Common Ground in March of 1985. The ADS grant will enable us to give a small honorarium for submissions we accept for publication in that one issue, and to produce a performance night of selected authors/artists whose work we publish, to be held in mid-April, 1985. A panel of local writers and artists will help select the material and performers.

WomanExpress will be the name of this March 1985 issue of the newsjournal. We are calling for material from Erie County that captures the essence of women's various perspectives. We are looking for material that actively expresses women's participation in the world.

Deadline for submissions is December 31, 1984. We are looking for original essays, short stories, excerpts from longer works, fiction, humor, poetry, arts criticism (dance, music, visual art, performance art, reviews), musical lyrics, black and white photographs, dramatic works, graphics (high contrast black and white) never previously published.

We will also consider a prospectus for an article on an arts event/review which would be impossible to complete due to the earliness of our deadline.

We are also looking for artwork for the cover of the issue which best conveys the theme of the issue.

Material not selected for this special issue may be held for publication in another issue under our regular selections/submissions policy.

In addition, we will select several authors/artists to be invited to read/perform/exhibit at a special evening of entertainment in mid-April. Those selected will be offered an additional honorarium.

COMMON GROUND SEPTEMBER 1984 PAGE THREE

WOMANEXPRESS MARCH 1985, SUBMISSIONS POLICY

Written work (except poetry) should be typed, double spaced, 4-6 pages.

Put your name, address, work and home phone number on each page. Please suggest a title for your work. Include a sentence or two of biographical information, and a self-addressed, stamped envelope.

Poetry/Musical lyrics—submit 3 to 6 poems only. Poetry should be typed exactly as it should appear printed. Put your name, address, and phone numbers on each page. Include a S.A.S.E., and a sentence or two of biographical information. We would prefer to print no less than three poems from a single author. If you wish to be considered for the mid-April performance night, please indicate this in a separate cover letter, accompanied by a collection of performance material of 20 minutes in length. Songwriters/singers will be contacted separately.

Photographs/Graphics—send no original work, expendable copies only! They should be high contrast, preferably black and white. Place your name, address, and phone number on the back of each submission. Tell us the medium used, and title your work. Send S.A.S.E. if you want your work returned. Include a sentence or two of biographical information.

Deadline: December 31, 1984  
Send submissions to:

Common Ground Woman Express  
c/o EMMA Resource Center  
168 Elmwood  
Buffalo, N.Y. 14201  

Our selections panel reserves the right to accept or reject any material submitted for this issue. They may also choose to hold over any material for another issue unless the author/artist indicates she does not find this acceptable in a cover letter at the time of submission. The selections panel will edit for spelling, grammar, and punctuation. The panel may also ask the author/artist to edit her own work, with the panel's suggestions, but in this case, it is the author/artist's responsibility for changes in her own work.