HOW TO VOTE...

From Page 1

your Board of Elections through  
Monday, November 1.  
***Ballots postmarked Nov. 1  

may be received until Nov. 12****  

In addition, if an illness con-  
fining you to home or hospital begins  
within 10 days of the Primary or  
General Election, you may apply for  
an absentee ballot through Monday,  
November 1.  

WHEN YOU VOTE  

Give your name and address to the  
election inspectors. Sign your name  
on the card in their book. If you  
believe you are properly registered  
but there is no card for you in the  
book, you may request a paper ballot.  
Your vote will be counted after the  
Board of Elections has verified your  
registration.  

If you feel unsure about the use of  
the voting machine, ask for help  
before you close the curtain: Two  
inspectors, from different parties,  
may help you. If you are disabled,  
ask for further assistance.  

You may take written materials into  
the booth to help your memory, but  
do not leave them there.  

You have three full minutes to cast  
your vote. Once you have closed the  
curtain, do not open it until you  
have finished voting. If you change  
your mind, change levers. Once you  
are certain of your vote, leave the  
levers in place and pull the handle  
to open the curtain.  

YOUR VOTE IS SECRET  

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION:  

ERIE COUNTY — call the League of Women  
Voters (716) 884-3550. Erie County Board of  
Elections, 134 West Eagle Street, Buffalo,  
N.Y. 14202, (716) 846-8891.  

NIAGARA COUNTY — Niagara County Board  
of Elections, 59 Park Avenue, Lockport, N.Y.,  
14094, (716) 439-6122.  

(We gratefully acknowledge the help  
of the League of Women Voters - the  
Buffalo Metro Area Chapters, and the  
New York State Chapters, for their  
assistance. The above is excerpted  
from their voting information  
pamphlet. We recognize that, depending  
on when your copy of Common Ground  
gets to you, some of the dates  
included in this summary may have  
passed. The information is still  
useful for an understanding of the  
local post meet.)  

—_"*  
_ The League of Women Voters is a nonpartisan  
volunteer organization working to promote political  
responsibility through informed and active  
participation of citizens in government. The League  
does not support or oppose any political party or any  
candidate. It does support or oppose legislation after  
serious study and substantial agreement among its  
members. Membership is open to any citizen of voting  
age.  
* The League is supported by membership dues and  
by contributions from those who believe in its  
cause.  

COVER ART THIS MONTH: "Moondance"  

CONTENTS  

October 1982  

Chisolm on Reaganomics  
Policy  
Letters  
Diary of a Music Festival  
Diary (cont'd)  
Halloween: The Witches  
New Year  
Daphne's Tree: Herbs  
Celebrate Hispanic Culture  
La Cultura Hispana  
The Collective Meets  
Violence and Rural Women  
Review: Politics of Women's  
Spirituality  
Women and Political Action  
Interview: League of  
Women Voters  
Working for Equal Rights  
Calendar  
Calendar  
Community Speakout  
News  
Review: The Cinderella Complex  
How to Get a Bill Through  
Congress  
Where to File Discrimination  
Complaints  
Women's Action for Nuclear  
Disarmament  
Psychiatric Disabilities  
Interview: African-American  
Cultural Center  
'81-'82 Voting Records  
Announcements  
Women's Resource Directory  
Advertisements  
Advertisements  

TO CLEAR UP ANY CONFUSION:  
COMMON GROUND is not associated with,  
funded, organized or published by  
Women's Studies Academy at Buffalo  
State College. Women's Studies  
Academy has graciously made office  
space available to us for layout  
and meetings, and allowed us to re-  
ceive mail there. Women's Studies  
Academy, Buffalo State College,  
are not responsible for content,  
decisions or activities of Common  
Ground or its collective members.  
Common Ground gratefully acknowledges the generous gift of space  
for our work by the Academy and the  
College, without which we could not  
publish.  

CORRECTIONS  
Dr. Sarah Slavin is assistant pro-  
fessor, not associate professor, as  
was erroneously listed in the bio-  
graphical information to her article  
in September's issue.  

The dates for the Meg Christian Con-  
cert and Simple Gift's Dance should  
have been Sept. 17, not 16, as listed.  
Woman Harvest was Sept. 24-26. We  
regret these errors.  

is from a woodcut by Marilyn Bell - local  
frustrated artist/printmaker (never enough time for artwork), who, in her  
other life, teaches Sociology and Gerontology.  
Numbered, signed originals are available at EMMA, the Buffalo  
Women's Bookstore. They retail for $10 in black and white, $15 in gold or  
silver ink on colored paper. Proceeds to benefit EMMA and Common Ground.  

“Moondance” is in an edition of 30 copies.  

POLICY  

PHILOSOPHY — Common Ground is potentially, with  
help from Western New York women, a forum to  
celebrate the rich diversity of our community. We view  
the paper as a ribbon that may connect our  
commonalities, our intersection points. We are inviting  
you to participate actively in the building of a support  
system for WNY women. We affirm our commitment to  
enhance the lives of women on physical, educational,  
spiritual, psychological, social and economic levels. We  
want to present, fair-mindedly, the issues that concern  
women, and information of value to women. We offer  
Common Ground as a place where women can display  
their art and personal literature, and review the  
tapestries of their experiences.  

EDITORIAL POLICY — Common Ground is especially  
looking for articles which address the needs and  
interests of local women.  

1. Common Ground is a publication of news, culture  
and dialogue from women’s perspectives.  

2. News, Opinion, Analysis and Commentary will each  
be clearly labeled as such.  

3. We are seeking to provide accurate, straightforward  
information of value to women.  

4. The collective will not intentionally print or support  
materials or viewpoints which will harm women  
because of color, sexuality, religious or ethnic  
background, physical disability or economic situation.  

5. While opinions expressed in Common Ground are  
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the  
collective as a whole, we do accept responsibility for  
choosing what we print.  

SUBMISSIONS — We welcome articles, letters,  
information and announcements of interest to women.  
Graphics, cartoons, art and photography will be  
gratefully received. We especially invite women who  
do not usually have access to traditional media —  
women of color, differently abled, economically or  
socially disadvantaged, and those for whom  
English is a second language — to write. Suggested  
length of letters: 250 words. Letters must be signed to  
be printed. We will, however, respect your privacy and  
withhold your name if you request. Suggested length of  
articles, commentary, analysis: 500-750 words. Please  
type and double-space your work, 40 characters across.  
If you do not have access to a typewriter, please print  
clearly. In time we hope to have a typewriter, paper,  
etc., available for those who request it. Include a  
stamped, self-addressed envelope and work and home  
phone numbers. Because we want to hear your voices,  
if your piece needs to be edited for length or clarity, we  
will call you/ask you to do it. Keep copies of your work.  
We will try to notify you within three (3) weeks if we  
intend to use your work. If we print it, we will give you  
five (5) copies of the issue in which it appears. Artwork  
should be black and white copies only, and  
title/describe your work. We will copyright the entire  
issue, but the copyright on each piece reverts to the  
author/artist, so that she may decide where her work is  
printed. Please request a style sheet for further  
information and guidelines if you want to write.  

COMMON GROUND  
Women’s Studies Academy  
Rockwell Hall  
Buffalo State College  
1300 Elmwood Avenue  
Buffalo, New York 14222  
(716) 688-7831  

© 1982 WNY Women’s Newsjournal  

WOMEN WHO WORKED ON THIS ISSUE:  
Maria, Peggy, Esther, Mary Ellen,  
Iris, Gerri, Bridget, Cathy, Karen P.,  
Sarah, Karen K., Bobbie, Sue C., Beth,  
Sue G., Marion, Mouse, Sharon, Beth,  
Chris, Lisa, Bonnie, Heather, Donna,  
Shukriyyah, Annette, Roberta, Connie,  
Joan, Laura, meet hyn s Linda, Holly,  
Barb.  

OUR DEEPEST APPRECIATION GOES TO  

PEGGY L. CHINN FOR USE OF HER TYPE-  
WRITER AND WORD PROCESSING EQUIPMENT.  
HER KINDNESS AND GENEROSITY MAKE THE  
WORK FLY AND OUR HEARTS SOAR.