by Sarah Slavin

Let us assume you want an herb garden. If you do, you will be interested in site generally. The good news is that herbs grow without difficulty; if there is bad news, it is not known to Daphne. Soil preparation is, however, important, above all to assure good drainage. After danger of frost, dig the soil well to around one foot down, pulverizing any large clods. (Think of your least favorite patriarchal practice...) Singly or in combination, sand, peat, vermiculite, and small pieces of broken clay pots may then be worked into the soil as required to enhance drainage, and also ventilation. To check your drainage needs, drench with water the plot of land you have in mind for an herb garden, until the water stands in deep pools -- or observe the land after a heavy rain. If the water drains away within one hour, it will not hinder the healthy growth of herbs.

To check the composition of your soil crumble into a quart jar a little less than one-quarter cup soil. Add one cup distilled water, cap tightly and shake until the particles of soil disperse in the water. Let the particles settle. Do not move the jar. Clay will tend to stay in suspension. The width of resulting layers of gravel, sand, and silt will give you an idea about proportions. This measurement will be inexact, especially for fine sand and silt, but sufficient for determining existing levels of drainage enhancers in your soil. You may leave large rocks in the garden, plant herbs in a rock garden proper, or even on rock ledges with a unique degree of success, because herbaceous plants anchor themselves with little difficulty.

After digging, if you have an aching back, you can mash mullein leaves and heat in a little water for use as one poultice. To digress—one of Daphne's favorite habits—mullein grows in many a wasteland and as a wayside herb. Its fuzzy large grey-green leaves form a readily identified rosette on a young stalk up to five feet tall, and grow rather randomly up an older stalk. If you have no mullein leaves on hand, then

Women of the world - Unite! You have nothing to lose but your poverty, Your long, ill-paid or unpaid hours of drudgery Your veils, your bruises, your illiteracy, Your child-bearing beyond desire, Your belief in the myths surrounding your sex, Your hunger, your hopelessness, your isolation, Your vulnerability to exploitation.

Eleanor Rudolph

before digging you may want to make an appointment to see your chiropractor after digging!

Unless the soil you have dug is spent, inorganic fertilizer and commercial topsoil are not of interest, contributing little to a thriving herb patch. In any event, compost may be applied to help remedy spent soil, or after growth of soil-depleting crops such as dill, which should not grow two years in the exact same place. Probably everything you will ever want to know about compost is found in part II of The Basic Book of Gardening, ed. Robert See, pp. 59-86. But, to generalize about soil in herb patches—those herbs preferring rich soil will grow reasonably well in light soil; herbs preferring light soil, e.g., lavender, will not necessarily prosper in rich soil. Also, although fertilizer may induce masses of foliage in some herbs, it will not necessarily enhance fragrance and taste and may in fact diminish them. The better part of wisdom (it seems to Daphne) is to err on the side of less fertile, meaning ordinary but not infertile soil in your main garden bed. Ordinary soil also contains a moderate amount of water in its capillary spaces. Dig compost into the ground on which dill and also basil will be sown.

Overall, soil may be kept basically neutral respecting acidity or alkalinity. How will you know if your soil has a neutral potential (Hydrogen), meaning a pH of 7.0? Contact your local U.S. Department of Agriculture extension agent for a soil-testing kit. (To find him/her, look under U.S. in the phone book.) The agent can help you read results and decide on any ‘additives'—e.g., garden lime to decrease acidity or ground sulfur to decrease alkalinity. If you resent federal intrusion but want to stay on the safe side, short of purchasing a testing kit, add a layer of garden lime every two years and be pretty much done with it. The lime is especially important if it rains more than 20 inches a year in your area: This rain may lead to a hydrogen concentration in the soil that can block the absorption of nutrients by plant roots. Yellow or brown leaves, malformed leaves, or stunted growth will notify you if the soil is otherwise short on nutrients.

A mulch of peat moss after planting will keep the ground warm at night and help with weed control. A thick planting among the other herbs of marigolds also will help control

Wild

Many herbs are soil binders. Marjoram as opposed to sweet is one of these. The thymes are excellent for this purpose, as are the salvias (sages). Yarrow and wormwood (an artemisia) will serve the purpose, and so will mint, although each may best be left to bind soil on its own, preferably in separate plots; otherwise, any of the three may take over the main garden. Roofing shingles may be sunk on end into the soil as reasonably effective plot dividers to contain roots. The Time-Life Encyclopedia of Gardening Herbs (1977) even shows a garden in Philadelphia with a three-feet deep, concrete-filled trench for a divider. (Talk about extremism:) The encyclopedia also suggests planting soil binders individually in pots sunk into the ground, and includes tarragon and bergamot (bee balm) as candidates for in-ground planting—which means they will not be doing much soil binding. By not planting your herbs on the downhill side of the land, you will protect them from water run-off and soil erosion, enhancing the work of the soil binders.

by Sharon Green

“When feral relationships are inconsequential, women are all the more vulnerable to male exploitation." from Kiss Sleeping Beauty Goodbye by Madonna Kolbenschlag (p. 34)

Recently I got a permanent. My hairdresser was a young woman dressed stylishly in white, with flamboyant blonde hair. While she was rinsing off my perm solution, a male customer at the next sink remarked, "Your hair looks really good."

Without my glasses, I can see next to nothing, so I assumed it was she he was flirting with. After he left, she wondered why I had completely ignored his remark. Initially I was surprised. Why would a man flatter a woman whose curler-laden head was hanging backwards in a sink and whose body was hidden under a baggy smock?

Yet I wasn't surprised that I misinterpreted his comment. Lately I'm finding myself more and more oblivious to men around me. In my younger days, I was much more attuned and attentive to men. And I certainly never ignored a man who said anything the least bit flirtatious.

In the last few years, I have become much more interested in both new women I meet and the women I've known for a long time. I can hardly remember that man at the next sink, yet I vividly recall much of what my hairdresser told me, in our three hours together, about herself and her life.

In my teens and 20's, other women were competitors. Oh, I had many close female friends, but we usually put our boyfriends first. We would often postpone seeing a friend or would leave a roommate here alone if we got a date.

Still, my "girlfriends" were always important to me, and I realized just how important when some of them got married and gradually eased me out of their lives. When one of my dearest college friends married and severed her relationship with me, and some other friends, I suffered a great loss.

I vowed never to do this. Throughout my marriage, and even since becoming a mother, I have always struggled to maintain old friendships from high school and college, even though some of us don't have as much in common anymore.

My woman friends are a diverse lot. They vary in age, in lifestyles, in class, and in interests. Some are long-distance relationships, kept alive by occasional late-night phone calls or cassette tapes made when children are asleep. But even though I haven't seen some of these women for years, I think of them often and I care for them deeply.

PAGE 5

COMMON GROUND FEBRUARY

Thoughts on

Friendship

Feminism has influenced the amount of energy put into my friendships. I used to consider friends primarily as someone to go out with, someone to have fun with, someone with whom to talk over problems (often concerning boyfriends). Now our sharing goes much deeper. I feel a strong bond with other women, especially those women whom I've had fun and shared things with over the years. However, I also feel a bond with new women I meet, be they salesclerks, librarians, cleaning women, or hairdressers. If anything, feminism has enabled me to place the utmost value on my interactions with women.

I also view women differently than I used to. I now find myself listening more intently to what other women have to say, and wanting to know more about their lives. I feel less intimidated by women different from me, especially women of color and older women. I am curious about their thoughts and their experiences. Perhaps it is because I have become so curious about what other women have to say that I have little attention left for the men I come in contact with.

Women often see other women as a source of exchanged gossip, child-rearing tips, and household hints. For me, friendships go much deeper. We should consider friendships with other women as primary, just as important as relationships with husbands and lovers. We all need to be able to enjoy and appreciate an evening out with a woman friend just as much as an evening out with a man. We need to feel bonded to other women, to share our feelings and our lives, just as much as we share recipes or laughs.

Finally, as the quote above suggests, there is strength and unity in friendships between women. We have so much to learn from each other, so much to share with each other. We can send a clear message that women are not second-class citizens if we do not treat other women that way, be they old friends, or just passing acquaintances like