BRS NN Ze  
De, a wees  

WOMEN’S ACTION FOR  
NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT, INC.  

by Esther Roblin  

The members of WAND held their  
first meeting of the Fall at the  
WNY Peace Center, 440 Leroy Avenue  
on September 9. WAND is a political  
action organization committed to end-  
ing the nuclear arms race. To accom-  
plish this goal, the members work hard  
to educate themselves and the commun-  
ity to the dangers of nuclear war, and  
to translate their concern into effec-  
tive political action.  

More than thirty women attended the  
meeting at which summer activities were  
reviewed, suggestions were made on how  
to increase public awareness of the is-  
sues, and plans were made to contact  
congressional candidates about their  
stand on disarmament. During the last  
part of the meeting, Diane Imhoff, a  
WAND member, gave a moving account of  
her participation in the blockade of  
the Pentagon on August 6 through 9.  

Throughout the summer small groups  
of WAND members, organized according  
to congressional districts, met reg-  
ularly to study and discuss in depth  

the book Freezet: How you can help to  

prevent nuclear war. FREEZE was wri-  
tten by Senators Edward M. Kennedy and  

Mark O. Hatfield as a manual for the  
ordinary citizen on how he or she can  
play a role in the "movement to save  
mankind." These same Senators drafted  
a congressional freeze resolution call-  
ing for “a permanent U.S./Soviet  
freeze on nuclear weapons as a neces-  
sary first step toward reduction in  
the nuclear arsenals of both nations.  
(On August 5, after intense lobbying  
by the White House and the Pentagon,  
this resolution failed to pass in the  

House by only two votes!"  

The second part of the meeting was  
devoted to making suggestions on how  
to gain more local public involvement  
in the movement to end the threat of  
nuclear war. Some of the suggestions  
that received support were to partici-  
pate in and leaflet at public events  

CALL FOR MATERIAL/SUBMISSIONS  

Common Ground is planning two special  
issues for 1983. An ARTS ISSUE is  
planned for January, and an issue  

on WOMEN AND THE IMMIGRANT EXPERIENCE  
for March.  

DEADLINE FOR JANUARY ARTS ISSUE IS  
NOVEMBER 15.  

We are looking for poetry, prose,  
essays, reviews, photography,  
drawings, prints, graphics, etc.  
Written work: No more than three (3)  
typed pages, double spaced. Poetry  
should be presented exactly as it  
should appear in print if accepted.  

PAGE 16  
COMMON GROUND  
ROC) AUG  

OCTOBER 1982  

as parades; to develop a speakers  
bureau from among the members of WAND;  
to hold letter-writing skills work —  

shops to aid people in writing effect-  
ive letters to political leaders; to  
publish a list of recommended reading  
materials; and to create a telephone  
chain which could alert interested  
people to community events, radio and  
television programs and up-to-the-min-  
ute news and news articles concerning  
disarmament.  

Members next broke up into small  
groups, according to congressional  
district, to discuss strategies for  
contacting the incumbent in each dis-  
trict. Some of the strategies adopted  
were to write letters, to make person-  
al appointments and to send one or two  
delegates to constituent meetings  
which are now being planned throughout  
October by the Peace Center. Repre-  
sentatives from a wide range of com-  
munity organizations are expected to  
attend these meetings, one for each of  
the five incumbents: Kemp, Nowak,  

La Falce, Moynihan and D'Amato. Each  
congressman will be presented with  
signatures of constituents in his dis-  
trict who supported the bi-lateral  
nuclear freeze. Delegates from WAND  
also planned to attend an elections  
workshop, Challenge/Election '82, on  
September 18 at Daemon College.  
Challenge/Election is being sponsored  
by Network, a religious/social justice  
lobby, together with many other groups  
and institutions.  

The last part of the WAND meeting  
was highlighted by Diane Imhoff's ac-  
count of her experience this summer in  
Washington, D.C. as a participant in  
Blockade Pentagon. Blockade Pentagon  
was a series of three actions of civil  
disobedience intended to dramatize the  
reality of the nuclear arms race.  
Diane is the teacher who recently  
gained notice (Buffalo Evening News,  

April 1) for  

a solitary  

vigil, for one hour every weekday after  
school, in all kinds of weather, at  
Niagara Square. She and her husband  
joined other citizens from around the  
country in Washington to carry out the  
actions of the Blockade. On August 6,  
the 37th anniversary of the bombing of  
Hiroshima, the group met on the con-  

Written work need not be in English,  
but a translation should be provided.  
Art work: Send black and white copies  
only, not originals.  

Material will be selected on the basis  
of excellence, and ability to convey  
the experience of being a woman, in  
its infinite variety. We are looking  
for material that reflects the diver-  
sity among local women.  

DEADLINE FOR MARCH IMMIGRANTS ISSUE  

IS JANUARY 15.  

We are looking for personal histories,  
historical analysis, family oral his-  
tories, reviews of books dealing with  
immigration, history of the settlement  
by Native Americans and Europeans of  
this area, the Black experience, the  

Native American experience, etc., reasons  

for immigration, the "new immigrants"  
from one part of this culture to  
another, or from one part of this  
country to another. Also preservation  
of ethnic identity, culture and lan-  
guage, resolving native and "adopted"  
cultures, political analysis of  
immigration and immigration laws.  
Material should be no longer than  
six (6) typed, double-spaced, 38  
characters across pages.  
Self-Addressed Stamped Envelope with  
sufficient postage must accompany sub-  
missions if we are to return your  

work. Always keep copies of your work.  
Include your name, address and phone  
number. Include a few lines of bio-  
graphical information to print with  
your work.  

Please respect deadlines, and format  
requirements. We will do our best to  
inform you as soon as possible if we  
will print your work. If we print  

your work we will send you five copies  

of the issue as consideration.  

COMMON GROUND needs women to report  
news/informational events to us. Is  
there an issue of local importance,  
that has been missed by the major  
media? What are women doing that  
needs greater attention? We would  
like to expand our "news" sections.  
If you would like to report on what's  
going on, send us the who, what, when,  
where facts, and your phone number.  
We do not have any full or part-time  
staff members - we are all volunteers  
and therefore we must rely on our  
readership. We are especially look-  
ing for topics of interest to Third  
World women, and working-class women,  
as their interests are most often  
unmet. If you come across an article  
or clipping in another paper or  
magazine that is of interest, please  
send it to us. Note the date and  
publication name.