COMMON GROUND

From Page 1

Nicaragua Today ...

the same country. The Sandinistas had said that they had made many mistakes there and we asked her what did she feel were their mistakes, and she hedged. There's no other way to put it, she hedged. She said it wasn't up to her to say and we were going to be talking to a Sandinista later in the day and we could ask her. We asked her what did she think were the mistakes and she said that well, that wasn't really her place, etc., etc. We really got on her about it. Finally somebody said directly to her, "Do you feel that you can't speak your mind?" and she said if she really thought that she would leave the country. But she never did tell us what she thought were the problems. The only person who hedged about anything.

We spoke with the leader of the Liberal Party and he told us that the problem with the Sandinistas was that they were very young, and they hadn't learned diplomacy. He had a point. He mentioned that right after the revolution when Carter made some gestures toward the Sandinistas and said let's forget the past and be friends, and the next day Daniel Ortega [now the President of Nicaragua, then leader of the ruling junta] came out and said the Americans are the cause of all our problems. He said that wasn't a very diplomatic way to behave and he was right. He said the Sandinistas were very young and untried and that's also true, they are very young. The whole country is very young. Fifty percent of the population is under the age of 15. The Sandinistas themselves, the government people, it's incredible, they're in their 20s and 30s. Some of them are much younger than that. It's a very young group, and perhaps he's right, they are untried. He didn't suggest they were evil in any way. He was worried about them. He thought that they had a tendency to provoke hostility from the United States. That was interesting because he was a different party and he was trying to get them out, but he was not suggesting that they were the monsters that we were portraying them; he just felt that they were foolish.

They have three newspapers in Nicaragua. There used to be two newspapers, NOVEDADES, which was Somoza's paper and LA PRENSA which was the opposition press. Somoza had the editor of LA PRENSA [Pedro Joaquin Chamorro] murdered. Pedro Joaquin Chamorro's brother, Jaime is now the editor of LA PRENSA which is the right-wing paper, the one that the U.S. likes. Pedro Joaquin's other brother, Xavier is the editor of EL NUEVO DIARIO and Pedro Joaquin's son is the editor of BARRICADA which is the Sandinista paper. This is very amusing because they have three main papers in Nicaragua and they all belong to the same family, and they're all at arms with each other.

When we spoke with the guy at LA PRENSA he gave us the straight State Department line. We asked him what was his view of the Contras, and he said as far as he was concerned there were two systems in the world, there were the Western democracies and there was Eastern Communism. He thought the Sandinistas were Eastern Communism and the Contras were Western democracy. While he was talking about all this he was talking about censorship because LA PRENSA is censored. Every day they have to send a copy of their paper to the government to make sure they aren't printing something they shouldn't be. LA PRENSA, understandably though, feels very bitter about that. In the midst of all this he was talking about other countries having trouble and he mentioned EL Salvador as an example of a country fighting communism so I asked him if he considers El Salvador an example of Western democracy. Even he had a little trouble with that one, but he said, "Well, at least they're anti-communist."

I asked him if he believed El Salvador had freedom of the press, and he said, “Well, they don't have to send their paper to the government to have it checked every day." Which was a little more than I could handle because they've managed to kill off the opposition press. And I said, "But, they've killed them all." And he said, “Well, yes, and they smashed the presses." He didn't argue about it, he agreed. It was really very funny.

We talked to a women's group. We talked to a group where they're trying to re-teach the prostitutes. They're teaching them to sew. The thing that was very obvious to me was that the prostitutes we saw were old and unattractive and one wondered if the pretty young ones were still out earning their keep in the time-honored fashion, and when they got to where they couldn't earn a living that way they retired to learn how to sew. Prostitution is not outlawed in Nicaragua. It is outlawed in places like Cuba and the Soviet Union, but it is not outlawed in Nicaragua. We asked about prostitution in Corinto, which is a port city and has a large number of blonde children—the children look like the sailors—and he said they have tried re-teaching the people but they have not outlawed it because there are not enough jobs and they do not wish to punish people for doing something to live. I think that was kind of broad-minded, actually.

JG: Talk about the foreigners you saw there.

RB: We saw a lot of Canadians, a lot of Scandinavians. The Scandinavians acted as if we were the troublemakers and the Canadians acted the same way. The Canadian government has sent down groups to work.

JG: They're still doing that, even under Mulroney?

RB: Yeah, in fact this Canadian I met was very amusing. He mentioned that Mulroney when he got elected went down to Washington as fast as his hands and knees could carry him. The Canadians have something similar to our Peace Corps and they send brigades down there. We met a group of Canadian farmers in Managua who were working in Rivas teaching people how to weld; how to fix broken farm machinery.

There was a young West German couple who had come up from Bolivia. They had worked in Bolivia for two years in health care. We had in our tour a lot of nice, comfortable middle-class people who had never seen real poverty before. The truth of the matter is Nicaragua is a poor country. Their housing situation is absolutely horrendous. A large number of people live in little one-room shacks. Since the earthquake they have been unable to rebuild housing and they have a total housing shortage. I was not overly horrified at this because Nicaragua looked a lot like Arkansas did when I was a child and used to visit my cousins there. But, the children in Nicaragua looked to be well-fed and I consider that to be the whole point of how healthy a country is. So we asked these young Germans how did Bolivia compare with Nicaragua, and they said there was no comparison at all. They said there was no health care in Bolivia; the babies die of diarrhea, there's a terrible infant mortality rate, there's no health care for the poor, period. It takes a whole week to make enough money to visit a doctor. This doesn't count how much it costs to be treated for various ailments. They thought the health care in Nicaragua was fantastic.

Nicaragua has three vaccinations a year which wiped out polio which is really incredible because it used to be a big killer. We asked them [the Germans] what they were doing in Nicaragua and the woman said something that really got to me. She said, "In Bolivia we have heard that wonderful things are happening in Nicaragua and we came to see." And I thought Reagan is right; there really is a domino theory. But I don't think you can stop it with guns. I don't think you kill ideas with guns. You slow it down but I don't think you'll stop it. It is really incredible how much they [the Sandinistas] have done. There are things wrong; I don't want to suggest that Nicaragua is heaven, it's not. I don't like the censorship at all. There's no question that the Miskitos are not happy.

JG: Talk about the Miskitos a little.

RB: The Miskitos don't like the Sandinistas, and they don't like conscription. They don't see the war as having anything whatever to do with them, and there is some truth to that. Under Somoza nobody ever visited the Atlantic

Continued on Page 11