NOW Sponsors

Candidates Night

The annual Candidate's Night,  
sponsored by the Buffalo Chapter of  
the National Organization for Women  
was held at the North Buffalo Community  
Center on October 17, 1984 with  
a number of local politicians in atten-  
dance. 

William B. Hoyt is the Democratic  
candidate for the 144th State Assembly  
District. Among the bills and items  
he stated that he sponsored and/or sup-  
ported in his past term were: a grant  
to the local Salvation Army to open  
a battered women's shelter, $15,000  
for the local Displaced Homemaker  
Centers, the civil rights bill for  
gays and lesbians, increased child  
support enforcement, expansion of  
child care systems with improved regu-  
lation and anti-child abuse legisla-  
tion.

Robin Schimminger, Democratic  
candidate in the 140th State Assembly  
District, said that he would support  
a “clean” (unamended) State ERA bill,  
supports extended claims for DES vic-  
tims, anti-child abuse legislation,  
but is against Medicaid funding for  
abortions.

Both candidates for the 57th Dis-  
trict of the State Senate were in  
attendance. Ron Ignasiak, running  
on the Republican endorsement, stated  
strongly that he is against any in-  
crease in state taxes, and that state  
spending should be cut by avoiding  
duplication of services. He is  
against abortion "on demand" and  
Medicaid funding for abortion.

His opponent, with the Democratic  
endorsement, William Stachowski,  
stated he supports legislation  
for Displaced Homemakers, is against  
Medicaid funding for abortion, and  
further stated that he is morally opposed  
to abortion. He is against civil rights  
for homosexuals, and is undecided on  
the State ERA, but would vote in favor  
of a pro-abortion rider to this.

Anthony Masiello is the incumbent  
Democrat in the 58th District of the  
State Senate. He is in support of  
pro-choice legislation, for Medicaid  
funding of abortion, supports and  
co-sponsored the State ERA, and has  
co-sponsored child-care legislation.  
He also co-sponsored a teen-age preg-  
nancy counseling bill.

The results of the candidate poll  
conducted by the Coalition for Equal  
Rights was also distributed to those  
attending. Their answers to questions  
on the state ERA are printed here,  
and in addition, several candidates  
also enclosed the following responses  
to the question: If the ERA put be-  
fore you is encumbered with amendments  
that limit its application, what ini-  
tiative will you take to ensure the  
passage of a “clean" ERA?  
Martinelli-31st U.S. Congressional  
District: While I will not obstruct  
passage of the "clean" ERA, the thrust  
of my affirmative effort will be  
in the direction of statutory reform.  
I question the logical nexus between  
ERA and its goals.

Nowak-33rd U Congressional District:  
The only limiting amendment should be  
one to assure abortion neutrality in  
ERA. I've supported ERA and will  
again. Full House debate on potential  
ramifications of present language  
will affect my decision on wording  
and language change necessary. Legis-  
lative history clarification or per-  
fecting language could improve rati-  
fication prospects--after thirteen  
futile years’ efforts.

Ignasiak-New York State Senate 57th  
District: I try to clean all riders off  
so the bill would become less conflic-  
ting.

Masiello-New York Senate 58th District:  
I would work with other sponsors and  
the Democratic leadership in the Senate  
in putting together a strategy which  
would force the opposition to limit  
the amendments to the original ERA  
bill. An aggressive floor debate would  
also help to convince other legislators  
to support a “clean” ERA bill.

Montgomery--New York Senate 58th Dis-  
trict: To ensure the passage of a  
clean ERA, I would actively lobby my  
colleagues in advance so that when  
amendments were presented, I would  
have enough votes on my side to defeat  
any additions or deletions.

Effer-New York State Assembly 143rd  
District: I voted in support of the  
State ERA when presented, possibly  
earlier this year. I believe  
very strongly in equal rights for  
women and all Americans and I believe  
it is important for officials to back  
up their stated beliefs with their  
votes.

Stronski-New York State Assembly 143rd  
District: ERA must be amended since I  
believe that life must be protected and  
abortion is contrary to procreation.

Hoyt-New York State Assembly 144th  
District: I will continue to speak  
for a clean ERA in Albany, where we  
defeated hostile amendments. I am  
committed to campaigning for voter  
approval of a clean ERA once enacted by  
the Legislature.

Keane-New York Assembly 145th District:  
As the ERA presently stands, there  
is no clear definition on the issue of  
abortion. Until an amendment is  
added providing for the uncoupling of  
this issue with regards to the ERA,  
I will not support it.

Frank-New York State Assembly 148th  
District: I personally will not vote  
for any ERA Bill before the Assembly.  
I believe the Bible and the Lord gave  
all the Equal Rights to women and  
men that they need.

SHOWS MEN

GOVERNMENT STUDY

AN

TI-SOCIAL,

WOMEN DEPRESSED

A study  
found that  
women are at least as sane  
as men. A  
major U.S.  
door-to-door survey in 3  
cities found that women have  
more trouble with anxiety and depression  
while men have more problems stemming  
from addictions and anti-social behavior.

The result of the study indicates that  
one in five adults in this country are  
affected by mental disorders in any  
given six-month period.

CANDIDATE POLL

Regarding the Equal Rights Amendment:

1. Will you vote to pass an unamended ("clean") ERA,  
i.e., “Equality of rights under the law  
shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any state on account of sex"?

2. Would you vote for an ERA that is amended to limit its application?  
U.S. CONGRESS QUESTION NEW YORK ASSEMBLY QUESTION  
1 2 1 2  

31st Jack Kemp (R) 140th Robin Schimminger (D)  
31st Peter Martinelli (D) yes no 140th Raymond E. Sinclair (R)  
141st Arthur Eve (D)  
32nd John LaFalce (D)  
32nd Anthony J. Murty (R) 141st Manuel J. Bledsoe (R)  
142nd John Sheffer (R) (see comments)  
33rd Henny Nowak (D) no yes 142nd William B. Evens (D)  
33rd David Lewandowski (R) 143rd Dennis Gorski (D)  
NEW YORK SENATE 143rd Edward Stronski (F) no yes  
144th William B. Hoyt (D) yes no  
57th William Stachowski (D) 144th Daniel Ryan (R)  
57th Ronald Ignasiak (R) yes no 145th Richard Keane (D) no yes  
58th Anthony Masiello (D) yes undecided 145th Richard S. Gregor (R)  
59th Dale Volker (R) 146th Francis Pordum (D)  
59th Kevin Montgomery (D) yes no 147th L. William Paxon (R)  
60th Walter Floss (R) open  
60th Janet MacDonald (D)  

VOTING RECORD  
1983 Federal ERA Kemp-NO LaFalce-YES Nowak-NO  
1984 State ERA Schimminger-YES Eve-YES Sheffer-YES Gorski-NO Hoyt-YES  
Keane-NO Pordum-NO Paxon-NO  

A study found that women are at least as sane as men. A major U.S. door-to-door survey in 3 cities found that women have more trouble with anxiety and depression while men have more problems stemming from addictions and anti-social behavior.

CONTROVERSY IN CONNECTICUT

New Homemaker Kits distributed  
by Connecticut town clerks along with  
marriage licenses are drawing fire from  
both feminist and conservative groups.  
The kits contain laundry detergent,  
tampons and mouthwash, a coupon for  
film development, and feminine products,  
saying that those items can cause a bride  
to feel that women still stay at home and  
do laundry. Diane Goldsmith, director of the Women's  
Center at the University of Connecticut,  
had her own suggestion for wedding gifts for the bride  
on the equity; harassment job and safety  
on the streets.

WORKING WIVES DO ALL THE HOUSEWORK

According to a study done by two  
sociologists for a book titled “American Couples,” working wives still  
bear all the responsibility for  
housework. They worry that job success  
threatens their mates.

A surprising finding of the survey  
is that the balance of power changes  
when women bring money home. They are  
using that power in ways they didn't  
use to. The study says, "Because  
working wives bring money into the  
household, their work helps equalize  
the power in their relationships.  
Their work also brings them greater  
respect from husbands.

ARE WOMEN BECOMING MORE MACHO?

More American women now feel that  
they could defend themselves in a fist  
fight than they did in 1975, a Glamour  
magazine survey reports. Over the  
last few years, drastic shifts have  
also occurred in women's feelings  
about consumption, which led to the  
study's authors' conclusion that the  
"gals" in the U.S. are becoming more  
macho.

Goldsmith contends that in the  
administration, she felt that in the  
debate the previous evening, Vice-  
President Bush was "frivolous and flip,  
and did not treat the people of this  
country with respect." Furthermore,  
she said he lied to the American pub-  
lic about how this administration has  
advanced civil rights, when, in  
reality, it has turned down the Civil  
Rights Act of 1964.

Commenting on the Equal Rights  
Amendment, Goldsmith believes that  
“support for the ERA is at least as  
strong as it has always been." Ronald  
Reagan is against such an amendment  
to our Constitution, claiming that  
instead, individual states should  
decide on adopting their own ERA's.  
According to Judy Goldsmith, such a  
plan is akin to "abolishing slavery,  
plantation by plantation."

A few months ago, Reagan stood  
next to the victorious women athletes  
at the Olympics in Los Angeles.  
Goldsmith scorned this appearance as  
an action of "terrible irony,” in  
light of the fact that he had just  
killed the law that would have  
given women more access to sports  
programs. However, the existence of a  
national ERA would have prevented such  
an action.

Despite President Reagan's poor  
record, women have made strides in re-  
cent years. As an example, she cited  
statistics from medical schools in  
this country. Today, after a few  
short years ago, women comprised only  
7% of medical students, whereas now  
students are women.

Finally, Goldsmith, who was elected  
National NOW president 2 years ago,  
earned her master's degree under a  
fellowship at U.B., and taught English.  
Her warm reception in Buffalo  
certainly must have made her feel  
right at home.

COMMON GROUND NOVEMBER 1984 PAGE 3