getting  
good info  

Picture these problems:  
You are divorced, with children and  
don't have enough money for regular  

dental check-ups. You are recently  
unemployed and have few dollars to  
spend on your regular dental needs.  
You are a widow, have to watch your  
pennies and want a few tips on what  
really is needed to save your teeth  
or restore what you have left. Help  
is only a phone call away.  

The Erie Community College Den-  
tal Hygiene program (Main and Young  
Rd., Williamsville) provides free  
dental cleanings and evaluation,  
and X-rays at a nominal fee. Anyone  
may use this service. In fact, more  
patients are always needed and there  
is little to no waiting period.  

There is simply one fifteen minute  
preliminary interview. If you have  
never used this program before, even  
this is waived. The phone number for  
the clinic is 634-0822.  

If you need routine fillings,  
Children's Dentistry, or Orthodontia  
(braces) at nominal fees you can con-  
tact the University of Buffalo Dental  
School (3435 Main St.). There is a  
waiting period of three months to  
three years depending on the students'  
needs for specific types of work. A  
one hour preliminary interview is re-  
quired. For routine fillings, call  
831-2720. For Children's Dentistry,  
call 831-2723. For Orthodontia  
(braces), call 831-2845.  

Dentures and Surgery requires sen-  
ior students and has a backlog of two  
to three years. If you are in extreme  
pain there is an emergency clinic but,  
due to overcrowding, you may have to  
wait several days for an appointment.  
The phone number is 831-2732.  

There are a few things to keep in  
mind when using these services. Because  
you are working with students each pro-  
cedure is meticulously checked by in-  
structors. All medical histories are  
to be carefully and correctly filled  
out. These histories are for your pro-  
tection. Each student will explain  
procedures thoroughly more than you  
would normally receive in an average  
office and you will have excellent  
care. These all require time, so make  
sure you allow three and one-half hours  
for appointments, “just in case.”  

If you are in extreme pain, need  
immediate attention or are unable to  
contact your family dentist, the Erie  
County Dental Society provides an emer-  
gency number--876-2117 and will help  
you to find a dentist.  

Worldly  

Women,  

by Sarah Slavin  

DITTANY, CYPRESS AND MYRRH  

To humans, herbs are many things:  
sustaining, protective/preventative,  
delightful. Over the centuries herbs  
have also become communicative--of ideas,  
of the world of nature to which we our-  
selves belong, however tenuously, and  
of the 'civilization' created around us.  
Many writers, among them the poet H.D.  
(Hilda Doolittle, 1886-1961), have known  
and drawn on the sense of things present-  
ed by herbs.  
“Acon" (Selected Poems,  
Press, 1957), H.D. wrote:  
I choose spray of dittany,  
cypress, frail of flower,  
buds of myrrh,  
all-healing herbs,  
close pressed in calathes (p. 19)  

In "Acon" as elsewhere, and as did  
the Greek lyric poets including Sappho,  
H.D. shuns detail. The dittany, cypress  
and myrrh themselves expand outward beyond  
the calathes, evoking bold, brilliant  
ideas, relationships to nature, and  
awareness that shuns discontinuity be-  
tween nature and life as we live it.  
Dittany of Crete, as it is known,  
gives us a context, a 150-miles wide  
island off Asia Minor in the Mediterran-  
ean. This rocky and only sparsely pro-  
sperous island was once productive and  
fertile. In "Acon" H.D. also states:  
Bear me icteus,/ and to the steep  
is mek ‘  

slopes.... T =4  
Crete, specifically to eastern Crete and  
Mt. Dicte. From Dicte, which rises over  
6000 feet, the goddess Rhea in her mother  
aspect, Dictynna, gave forth endlessly law  
x fate as the law was known. (Centuries  
later, these laws were misconstrued as  
“Saynges or dictis," from the root word  
Dictam--of which dittany is an obsolete  
form.)  

An Auction  
of Their Goods  

To Benefit the Seneca Falls National Women  
Center and Educational Institute, Inc.  

SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 23, 1985  
FROM 1 to 3 P.M.  

VIEWING OF ITEMS TO BE AUCTIONED  
FROM 12 to 1 P.M.  

We'll be auctioning some sought-after articles such as BELLA ABZUG’S HAT  
and MARTINA NAVRATILOVA’S TENNIS SHOES!  

THE HOLIDAY INN/GENESEE PLAZA  
120 MAIN STREET  
ROCHESTER, NEW YORK  

In the prehistoric period, evergreen  
cypress grew thickly on Dicte's slopes  
along with common juniper and evergreen  
oak and perhaps with tamarisk and willow  
as well. Virgin forest has nearly disap-  
peared from Crete. Deforestation has  
confined the growth of cypress to 2%  
of the island's surface where once it  
extended to 50%. Prehistorically, cypress  
was a sacred tree and a resting place  
for doves, the goddess Aphrodite's sacred  
bird. Cypress also mulched the soil for  
rock cress, forget-me-nots and alyssum,  
and sheltered wildlife such as deer.  

It cloistered precious soil and with its  
shade encouraged retention of equally  
precious moisture--not much water runs  
on Crete as river beds dry up readily  
and springs come and go. Unfortunately,  
where contemporary shoots of cypress  
appear, they are gobbled down by goats,  
who will eat almost any plant. Besides  
overgrazing, these herbivores (herb eat-  
ers) trample with their hooves and snouts  
the earth's fragile surface and leave  
wallows where they rest.  

H.D. chose rocky surfaced Crete as well  
as dittany and cypress with clear eyes.  
Dicte's law giving had become complicated  
by the growth of her son, Zeus, whom a  
goat reared as an infant on Crete in  
the cave, Psychro. Some speculate the  
cave too lay in eastern Crete; its loca-  
tion is obscured by time and possibly  
even Rhea's wish. For, Zeus subsequently  
raped this goddess and subjugated her  
as his wife. With the coming of the  
lone god, pater Zeus, came also the birth  
of Hellas, of Greece, and the subjugation  
of the matriarchy by the patriarchate --  
rocky going indeed.  

Still, in "The Wise Sappho"  
Light Books, 1982), H.D. wrote:  
We are inclined to visualize these broken  
sentences and unfinished rhythms as rocks-  
perfect rock shelves and layers of rock  
between which flowers by some chance may  
grow but which endure when the staunch  
blossoms have perished...(p. 58).  

(City  

or, when the blossoms are “close pressed  
in calathes."  

And, by no means has Crete become a  
barren isle. Along with dogrose and ivy,  
aromatic herbs such as thyme, sage,  
marjoram and mint bank its lower hills;  
and pepper and mustard spice its valleys.  
Oleanders, arbutus and myrtle grow up the  
hillsides, persisting as the altitude  
heightens as knotted shrubs. In  
the art of Crete, myrtle is shown grow-  
ing with the reeds of the island’s few  
salt marshes and with  

crocuses, too.  
The Cretans seem to have  
liked their flora interwoven, as did  
Sappho in fragment 42 (Mary Ber-  
nard, University of California Press,  
1958):  

"If you forget me, think  

of our gifts to Aphrodite  

and all the loveliness that we shared.  

(trans.  

“all the violet tiaras,  
braided rosebuds, dill and  
crocus twined around your young neck  

"myrrh poured on your head  
and on soft mats girls with  
all they wished for most beside them...  

Although myrrh often is associated  
with death and even embalming--Rhea the  
crone was Mother Time reaping with a  
moon sickle--myrrh is nonetheless ten-  
acious, capable of growth in the most  
forsaken of environments. And, its  
applications for healing purposes are  
many--gastroenterological, gynecological and  
pulmonary; myrrh has likewise been used  
for skin and mouth care and in the  
treatment of anemia.  

Myrrh also has conjured an image of  
menstruation by the flow from its broken  
thorny stems of a liquid that sets up  
as a reddish brown aromatic gum. Fur-  
ther, where myrrh appears, it seems to  
be associated with spiritual expression.  
It reminds that even as the goddess dwells  
within us, she-within-us focuses outward  
on life: This is a life force. In  
"Acon," like myrrh's, H.D.'s assertion of  
authenticity invokes the goddess, following  
the ways of Aphrodite and of Rhea.  
This assertion by H.D. is no more dog-  
matic than myrrh's: To be sure, the  
shrub is sturdy, but its origins are  
shrouded with uncertainty and its several  
species still not well sorted. Myrrh's  
invocation of the goddess even carried  
over into the Christian period, symbolic  
of the virgin mother, Mary or Myrrha.  

The inhabitants of Crete focused out-  

wardly, too, in their worship of nature  
and tendency to worship outdoors in un-  
called sanctuaries. Their goddesses  
were the life and nature goddesses Rhea  
and Aphrodite, and Cybele--Rhea Lobrine--  
whose symbol was the labrys. The remains  
of ancient Crete display numerous and  
great double axes on tall shafts. The  
goddess of caves, Cybele came forth from  
Mt. Ida on Crete.  

A people who also worshipped trees  
such as the cypress, and their sacred  
groves, the Cretans knew of the many  
opportunities for consecration present  
in nature. Then doom befell them--per-  
haps this same disaster buried Knossos  
and the house of the double axe--whatever  
and whenever, the Greek god Zeus was as  
relentless in the destruction of ancient  
Crete and a spirituality that included  
Rhea as were the Christians in their  
destruction of Sappho's work.  

That might have been the end of it,  
too. Fragment 42, however, prophesied:  
While no voices chanted  
choruses without ours,  

No woodlot bloomed in spring without song....."  

All groves of cypress and oak and of  
grey-white olive still appear on Crete;  
birds, especially doves, continue to  
sing. Lavender flowered dittany is  
grown widely in flower pots, favored for  
treatment of stomach aches but no doubt  
yet capable of treating the greater  
wounds to which the Ancients applied it.  
The cave Psychro still must lie beneath  
this olive and myrtle consecrated  
ground; and even now, offerings of  
white flowered myrrh doubtlessly burn  
faintly...good, not as the “old" saying  
goes, “for old people who are dull and  
without courage,” but as H.D. has it, for  
"dryads/haunting the groves,/nereids/who  
dwell in wet caves..." and for “fleet-  
footed nymphs” (pp. 19-20). At least,  

this is the sense of things conveyed by  
dittany, cypress and myrrh.  

compiled by Julia Pericek Gorman,  
Legal Assistant  

Custody for Adoption  

Domestic Relations Law, Sec-  
tion 115-b was found "facially  
unconstitutional." It is not  
required that the statute inform  
the natural parents, via the  
consent form, that if they re-  
voke their consent, properly and  
in a timely fashion, custody of  
the child would not automatically  
be awarded to them. Depending  
upon circumstances, a determin-  
ation based upon the “best in-  
terests" of the child could be  
made.  

Matter of Sarah K., Aug.  

Collection-Child Support Awards  

It was determined that a se-  
paration agreement functions as  
a contract and thereby falls  
under the statute of limitations.  
Claims under the statute of  
limitations must be brought  
within six years, therefore if  
child support payments are owed  
from a period prior to that  
6 year period, they cannot be  
collected via court action.  

If the separation agreement has  
been “incorporated but not  
merged" into the divorce decree,  
action cannot be taken based on  
the divorce decree either.  

Tauber v. Levow, Sept.  

19, 1985  

17:2 TSB  

Searching Juveniles  

A juvenile who has been de-  
tained in police custody relative  
to the Family Court Act, Section  
718 (protecting and returning  
runaway children) may be searched  
("pat-down" search.)  

Matter of Terraence R.,  

July 25, 1985  

RAGE 14..COMMON GROUND. OCTOBER 1985