A Personal History

by Veena P. Kasbekar

On March 3, 1982, I finally got my immigration papers after anxious years of despair and longing for that little, life-changing card. I hadn't been able to go home since 1977 for fear that the stringent U.S. immigration laws would not allow me back on my student visa. Yet my first thoughts on getting the card were ambivalent. I felt a peace I'd never known before in this country, a sense of belonging, even if only on the periphery; mixed, however, with a feeling of pain at taking the first step in giving up my beloved India. I consoled myself that now I would have the best of both worlds—I could live and work here (in the U.S.) and vacation "at home" (in Bombay). Most important, I could see my family again, especially my dear, ailing grandmother, aged 95. Three days after I received my card, grandmother died. Full of grief and furious with fate for taking her away just when I could finally plan a trip home, I wrote the following essay, seeking to understand the intensity of the relationship I shared with grandmother and mother, although we were women of such differing times, climes, and opportunities. I want to share this experience with American women, fully remembering that "American" includes not just white and black but also brown or whatever color we minor minorities come in.

Matrilineage: A Personal History  
My grandmother, Ajibai*, aged 95, died in Bombay on March 6, 1982, after a long period of ill health. My mother, Chichi*, 60 and living in Bombay, misses her enormously. Thirty-two myself, and living so far away in the U.S., I miss them both. I reach into my memory box and relive the last three decades, recalling facts I have known and heard about the three of us, trying to understand how, in spite of generational differences and long distances, we had become such friends. Both mother and I were the youngest in our families; both seem to have grown closer to our own mothers in our young adulthood. In each case, the older of the pair was too busy mothering in the younger one's early childhood for an intimate relationship to develop then. Looking over my life, I am both intrigued and pleased at the interconnections I see, connections that I know will keep Ajibai, Chichi, and me together until the last of us dies. Physically, all three of us shared certain tastes, notably a fondness for Kasbekar blood. Ajibai was a brown-skinned Kasbekar who married a light-skinned Nadkarni. My light-skinned mother, a Nadkarni, then married a brown-skinned Kasbekar (a matter of circumstance, not all Kasbekars are brown and neither are we denied marriage with other family names within our own clan and caste). With two quotas of Kasbekar blood and one quota of Nadkarni, I naturally became brown like my grandmother. Ironically, it was only after I came to America that I fully accepted my browness. Perhaps being an "alien" (as we are so graciously called by Immigration) helped—an alien, I figured, could get by with anything physically; including a brown skin.

It was also in America that I finally came to terms with my height. I think my real shock on landing at Kennedy, way back in 1970, was not at the rush of white and black people I was around for the first time in my life, but at the short and the fat people. I had honestly imagined that all Americans would be tall and slender and that I would be hopelessly out of place. For, like my mother and grandmother, I had ended up short, although mother, with her half-Nadkarni blood, turned out the tallest, the Nadkarni being tall and fair-skinned, characteristics much admired in India.

Fortunately for me, the upper middle class in India also values education. Thus, while the tall, fair Nadkarnis had their looks and wits to thrive by, we Kasbekars banked on being more intelligent and more academically oriented. As a Kasbekar, and, I must admit, owing to greater opportunities, I am more highly educated than my mother and grandmother were (a Ph.D. in English). At the time of my mother's education, education for girls was considered somewhat immoral; my grandmother did not finish school; my mother, marrying in her final year in college, got as far as a B.A. in English with a minor in Marathi. (To the credit of her brothers, who paid her tuition while themselves forced to work, my mother became the only college graduate in her family.)

Starting out as a child-bride, grandmother went on to bear ten children, only five of whom survived infancy. Before her fortieth year, however, she had suddenly to turn to single parenting: her husband died when my mother was about three. Living as they did then in their native village, the family found it just possible to subsist off their land (worked, of course, by laborers). Working for a salary was unthinkable at that time for a high-born Brahmin woman, even in straitened circumstances. Years later, and now living in a big city, my mother, too, paid her respects to childrearing. With a difference—when my two brothers and I were finally in school, she keenly desired to work. But my father gently but stubbornly denied her this right: she was a doctor's wife; his status forbade her a place outside the home. At this point, the home, for Chichi, represented only kinder and kirche; she rarely had to cook a full meal in the kuche until very recently, when our beloved cook died and trustworthy female cooks (with the right background) were not to be found for love or money. Mother had devoted her young married life to her husband and three children—although we three had personal maids when we were very young—and to some religion. Significantly, when the three of us left home, she began to devote more—about 70%—of her time to religion, a fact which now annoys my father immensely since it takes time away from him when he's home. Mother is not to be blamed; she stayed home, as required, with one important role model, her mother—who also stayed at home, devoted 70% of her time to religious ritual (Hindus have their altars at home). From my mother's and grandmother's extreme piety and preoccupation with ritual, I too have developed a strong need for religion, very consistent with my feminist spirituality, for we Kasbekars are a Mother-Goddess-worshipping family. (The Nadkarnis are affiliated to a Father-God.) Incidentally, my grandmother, Parvati, and I, second name Durga, because both born on the Goddess' birthday, were both named after the supreme female deity, the Goddess of a Thousand Names.

Unlike Ajibai, and to some extent Chichi, I was not trapped at home; rather, as a good, upper-middle-class Brahmin child of the fifties, I was sent to an excellent English school in Bombay. And then to an excellent college—not, however, the one of my choice. I wanted to go to a frivolous one and have a good time, especially since my parents denied my wish to become a doctor or psychologist. Instead, at my brother's insistence, they first sent me to a "charm class" and a dance class to develop my dormant femininity. After these preparations, they enrolled me in the college my mother had coveted in her own less fortunate youth.

There I graduated in a suitable field—English, of course—for a young, upper-class Indian woman whose parents desired her to make an eligible match. (A B.A. or an M.A. are very good credentials in the marriage market; a Ph.D., however, is definitely a minus.) At this point, I finally came to my senses in my nineteenth year and outwitted my family's plans: I came to the U.S. on a student visa and a scholarship, got a Master's from Mt. Holyoke and a doctorate from the University of Cincinnati, became a career woman, and remained single. By sheer self-determination (or more likely cussedness), and with initially ambivalent emotional support from my family, I became a "doctor" at last, but only my grandmother, in one vague conversation, ever accepted my rejection.

Continued on page 6

COMMON GROUND MARCH 1983 PAGES