COMMON GROUND

by Jeanne Keefe

After reading CG's recent articles on the state of health of feminism in Buffalo, and another previously published in The Buffalo News, one doesn't know whether to feel consoled that "We're not the only ones," or disturbed that

there seems to be some question about the longevity of feminists

as activists.

When National NOW President Judy Goldsmith visited the Dunkirk-Fredonia area last year, she referred to the Northern Chautauqua County Chapter as "one of the oldest, smallest chapters" in the country. She was right. The Mon- @ale-Ferraro rally at which she was appearing drew a nice crowd of the people we can usually count on for support (we were the sponsors and organizers). But our core, the few of us on whom falls the responsibility for any projects undertaken, remains fairly constant.

As with other feminist groups (or any other kind that women join) the amount of time that can be given is limited as much by other responsibilities as by intensity of commitment. If we gain a new member or two, just as many others have to restrict their participation because of time pressure somewhere else.

Because most of us already need a 25-hour day to complete what we've pledged to do, the chapter is committed to three regular projects we know we can handle, with others taken on as necessity demands and energy allows.

In the past few years, there have been several in this "emergency" category. One was ERAmerica, which involved intense weekly phoning for support and then sending much mail into states about to vote. The most recent was the "84 campaign. The chapter participated in voter registration drives at the County Fair, and rented booths at local "festivals." It may sound impossible to staff a booth for three days when there are only 4 or 5 already busy women to tap, but it can be done, especially if you have a determined chapter president, who takes more than half the shifts herself. We registered several hundred people, and individually also put in volunteer time for some re-election campaigns.

Of our regular activities, the year-round one is being available to help area women suffering sexual harassment or discrimination on the basis of their sex in employment. We are involved in an interminable harassment case brought by one of our members, which has made our president, Delores Bolling, experienced enough to advise other women how to file complaints with the proper authorities. When a woman contacts us for assistance, Delores provides her with information, guidance and support to the extent of talking to employers and accompanying the victim to Buffalo to file.

Many of these cases are settled to the satisfaction of the victims.

JUNE 1985

PAGE 12

CHAUTAUQUA NOW.

It's somewhat unfortunate that part of the settlement generally is a stipulation that confidentiality be maintained, because public announcements might instruct unaware victims how the situation should be handled, as well as making examples of the offenders. (However, when announcing meetings, we sometimes state that the agenda includes a report from that committee, so victims know who to contact.)

Our second regular commitment is to the Lakeshore Women's Services Coalition, profiled in the April issue of Common Ground.

NCCNOW membership implies Coalition membership and much of our time and energy from January through March is devoted to work on the awards ceremony/fundraiser. This entails nearly-weekly meetings of the group, plus committees and whatever errands are involved.

As soon as we all recover from that event, the NOW chapter starts having weekly meetings for its individual big public project, Equality Day. Because the end of August is crowded with other community affairs, NCCNOW chooses an early July Saturday, which also lets us commemorate the work of Alice Paul. This year, to avoid conflict with the long weekend of the 4th, we're moving back to the 12th.

Many chapters have Equality Day Walk-a-thons and Rallies.

When we decided in 1983 to resume this type of public activity, we also added an Equality Run, to appeal to the many area runners and to broaden our community contact. The Run, like the Walk, is 3.8 miles symbolizing the 38 states needed for ERA ratification. Most of it is on the Fredonia State campus' sidewalks, with a portion on grass to complete the distance.

The first year, which was the toughest because we had no idea what we were doing, we had 21 runners. No profit, obviously, but we had organized it well enough for the runners to be pleased. We awarded trophies (engraved "Equality") to male and female winners in age classes 0-14, 15-25, 26-39, and a man over 40 - no female entrant. Last year we were confident enough to add a new division, called Dynamic Duo. Mixed gender teams, average age over- or under- 25, competed for trophies based on average time for the pair. We gave NOW Equality Day T-shirts to the entrants, which kept our profits again, low. But the event was a PR success. There were about 33 runners, including Congressman Stanley Lundine and Assemblyman Bill Parment. Both were running, as well, for re-election, and someone, probably in Mr. Lundine's office, got TV coverage. Channel 4 showed the start of the run twice that day, as well as a bit of the rally. We did have an entrant in the female-over-forty class, who said she'd finish if it killed her. (She walked part of the way.)

Having this run at 9 a.m. requires our getting ourselves and all the stuff we need for all day, organized and moving very early. When we're finished on campus, we load all of it up again and tear over to the Gazebo at Fredonia's Barker Common for an Equality Rally, which starts at 10:30. Speakers for the 1985 rally aren't set yet, but we've always had public officials who are women and/or supporters of feminism. Our president, (and once Buffalo NOW's president) Carol Adams, pretty much a walking library of feminist history, traditionally M.C.'s.

Immediately after the rally, (we aim for 11 o'clock) the walkers head up Central Avenue toward the plaza. By this time, the NOW members can pretty well relax after the successful completion of the two earlier events, and enjoy what's always been a pleasant walk. We're convinced that God, if not a female, is at least a feminist, because we've had wonderful weather for Equality Day, both years.

At the Plaza, the walkers make a brief stop for refreshments - our contributed sandwiches and McDonald's drink. Then we return to our starting point in the Common.

All of May and June seems to be dedicated to organizing this one day. We have to get pledge-sheets and race-registration forms printed and distributed, previous participants contacted, this year's Rally Speakers invited, sister chapters contacted, posters made, publicity written, trophies ordered, gift for high pledge-getter purchased, etc., etc. (I, for one, always swear at least a dozen times that I'll never do it again.) But Equality Day itself always erases the memory of the struggle involved in putting it together. There's a "high" involved in having it all come together, matched, I think, with a lessening of the loneliness of being feminists in a conservative era, in a fairly conservative area. The Walkers carry per-mile, or per-walk pledges from a decent enough number of people; maybe our pessimism isn't completely warranted.

The elation lasts for a couple of weeks - through the potluck/pledge collection party at which the money is turned in and the prize awarded. Then there's a slight lull, brought on by exhaustion, and then on to the next crisis or emergency or campaign - the reality of being a member of “one of the oldest, smallest chapters in the country." If it weren't for the real support we give each other, I doubt if any of us would make it.

SEE RUN REGISTRATION FORM ON PAGE 14.