RECORD COMPANY DISPUTE

CONTINUED

A certain confusion on all the issues involved here is quite understandable. Olivia, for example, has represented itself in the past as a "feminist business," which is in itself a contradiction in terms to some feminists. "How can feminism be identified with capitalism and making money?" they say.

One clear fact is that many feminist organizations who need to make money are facing a hard task in these times, and are trying new methods to keep themselves alive financially. However, it is sad to think that some of these organizations may choose to sacrifice content for commercialism, a feeling that many long-time followers of Olivia's artists have about the recent Carnegie concert and four-city tour.

WOMEN IN PRINT CONTINUED

Among these titles are: This Bridge Called My Back: Writings by Radical Women of Color (Moraga/Anzaldúa), Claiming an Identity They Taught Me to Dispose (Cliff), Nice Jewish Girls (Beck), Black Feminism: An Anthology (Smith), Wanderground (Gearhardt), Lesbian Fiction Anthology, Lesbian Poetry (Bulkin/Larkin), Keeper of Accounts, Zami: A New Spelling of My Name (Lorde), and a dozen others.

They re-printed Woman Church & State by Matilda Joselyn Gage, a 19th-century radical feminist, a work long out of print, and thought to have been suppressed by Susan B. Anthony and Elizabeth Cady Stanton for being too radical. Persephone's resurrection of Woman Church & State is significant because it is a clear example of the importance of women-controlled media: without Persephone, Gage's work would have been doomed to obscurity.

Fortunately, not all is lost. Other publishing houses are taking over certain titles, and new homes for prospective books have been found. However, some of their books may be permanently out of print.

Why did Persephone fail? Speculation is endless and no one really knows. The September Feminist Bookstore News listed 17 or so possible reasons (rumors) including unsound business practices, too much debt, cash flow complications, burn-out, and too-rapid growth. An article in the Gay Community News said Persephone had lost $22,000 per year for the last two years. While many businesses operate at a loss, a small business can hardly sustain that great a drain.

The Feminist Press, another major publisher of children's books, Women's Studies material, and works by and for women is in trouble too. Last year they sustained a major fire. They had to ask for contributions and loans from women to get by. In a letter to their readers in October 1983, Florence Howe and Maxine McCants, co-Directors, outlined their continued struggle with recuperating from the fire, insurance companies, and monetary shortfalls. 40% of the contributions and grants they had counted on for 1983-84 fell through. They have had to reduce their fall publishing schedule from 6 books to 2.

Their Disabled Women's Anthology and book on Reconstructing American Literature risk going uncompleted. (They say they need $100,000 before the end of the year to partially cover expenses already incurred.)

In their letter, Howe & McCants ask, “If you who read our books and appreciated our work do not support us now, who will?" Some of their books include: Lesbian Studies, I'm Like Me, Cassandra, Daughter of Earth, I Love Myself When I'm Laughing, Life in the Iron Mills, Lilith, Ripening, Tatterhood & Other Tales, Witches, The Yellow Wallpaper, The Boy Who Wanted a Baby, and All the Women are White, All the Blacks are Men, But Some of Us Are Brave.

Clearly, the quality of the material is not directly related to the success of the publishing house. The commitment of women to producing works by women as their #1 priority makes women's presses our best bet for empowering ourselves and others.

But the local bookstore franchise around the corner from you probably now carries some literature by and for women, and some larger companies like Harper & Row and Bantam have realized it is a good idea to publish this literature. Women's issues are in the public eye, and that is good. But, while we want Bantam and Ulbrichs to continue these policies, women are still passing the same few dollars (which now buy less) among ourselves. We need to make choices about what we are going to do with our money. So—should we go to Walden Book Store to buy that book Random House just published? Or should we make an extra trip/phone call to see if EMMA carries it? Should EMMA carry it? Or should they pay a little more to stock something on the same topic put out by a woman's publishing house? If you have to pay more, would you then still shop at EMMA? This is only one example....hard times create hard questions. Although we cannot attempt to answer them in full, or even to present here all their ramifications, we want to raise them—and urge you to think about them.

Women-controlled media makes sure that women's needs and women's voices are not muted.

It is not unusual, therefore, that Kitchen Table: Women of Color Press should emerge to make the writings of women of color their #1 priority. Even though the other (mostly) white women's presses published books by/about women of color, they were never the sole business of the company. Sometimes, if you want something done right, you have to do it yourself.

Kitchen Table has recently published Cuento: Stories by Latinas edited by Alma Gomez, Cherrie Moraga, and Marina Romo-Carmona; and Home Girls: A Black Feminist Anthology edited by Barbara Smith.

Newly organized publishers include Varied Voices, three black and three white women who will focus on third world, working class, rural, and southern women; Blazon Books (see article Nov. issue C.G.); Acacia Books, a group of 4 women of working-class origins in their 40's and 50's who want to publish works of women who have been traditionally denied access.

IN CONCLUSION

In these hard economic times, books seem to some to be a low priority item. EMMA bookstore has been hanging on by her collective fingernails for the last eight years and so have many of the publishers which supply her. EMMA's survival and that of women's presses depends on women who will go out of their way to make preservation, expansion, and celebration of women's culture a main priority.

COMMON GROUND DECEMBER 1983 PAGE THREE