“Ey S RRAKAAN SS xAD 3

OKRY

NEW CHILDREN'S

LITERATURE:

Stories for Young

Readers

All literature for children has come a
long way since Grimm's Fairy Tales and
the treatment of Dick and Jane in the
primers school children learned from
in the mid 1930s through mid '70s.
Substantial changes in style and sub-
ject matter, as well as renewed ap-
preciation of the potential for at-
titude shaping that literature pos-
sesses, have helped create a demand for
children's books which are not sexist,
racist or classist, and are supportive
of the child's real life experiences.

Those who wonder what the fuss is
all about must recognize the unique
agreement between the conservative New
Right and feminists that what children
read does influence their beliefs and
attitudes, although the extent of in-
fluence and choices about what is ac-
ceptable are, of course, not agreed
upon.

Stories for children of previous
centuries were meant to teach; they
were often warnings against succumbing
to the devil. Many were preachy and
one-dimensional; they were also not
effective literature.

Good children's literature bears
the same hallmarks of quality as
"adult" fare. Children like to read
about interesting characters with whom
they can identify. Quality literature
includes plot development, well-drawn
three-dimensional people, in settings
which are believable, and clear re-
lationships between a character's mo-
tivation, action and the plot. Merely
action or suspense, as in comic books
or some television, is unsatisfying
beyond the moment, and does not make
good fiction.

Louisa May Alcott, in Little Women,
was one of the first American authors
to portray characters -- especially
girls -- in a realistic manner. She
broke with established traditions of
stereotyped, idealized children's
characters. She realized that young
readers did not have to be limited to
cardboard symbols of ideals, but in-
stead they wanted well-rounded, be-
lievable people in their books.

In breaking with stereotyping, es-
pecially in "minority" group litera-
ture (which includes women and girls),
well-rounded characters in non-fantasy
contexts are essential. It is often
through books that children explore
their own fears and dreams, as well as
experience their first introduction
to the world beyond their family and
community. It is identification and
sympathy with characters that make the
story convincing. Some traditional
children's tales -- Grimm's Fairy Tales
and certain cultural and religious
literature -- are positively gruesome
when dealing with death, loss, sep-
aration, cruelty and differences be-
tween people. Feminists approach
this same material in a much different
way.

PAGE 4 COMMONGROUND — JANUARY 1983

by E.R. Mann

The Buffalonian author Wendy
Lichtman, (The Boy Who Wanted A Baby
and The Death of Mag), speaking
about feminist/non-sexist books
for young readers, sees the potential
for children's literature to take
deeply repressed emotions and feelings
and explore them in non-threatening
ways.

The Boy Who Wanted A Baby is one
of a growing number of offerings for
children which specifically bridge
the gaps between didactic, teachy/
preachy and escapist literature.

They have a message, but the message
is one of exploring differences in a
deliberate attempt to depict the lives
of children ignored by traditional
white male writers who have carried
their own values to their writing
for children.

Lichtman, in an interview while she
was in Buffalo for a book-signing,
spoke about her motivation for writing
The Boy Who Wanted A Baby. The book,
she said, was partly in response to
girls' supposed “penis envy." She
wondered if boys, in contrast, ever
wished to be girls, or wished to have
babies. (This is something never
started asking in books for
boys if they ever had that fantasy,
and found that indeed some boys did
wonder about pregnancy and childbirth.
She said, discussing her book: "It
validates emotions and feelings un-
expressed [by boys], and makes it safe
to talk about it. Giving boy children
validation for doing 'girl-stuff' is
parallel to...giving permission for
girls to climb trees and boys to cry."

The Boy Who Wanted A Baby, by Wendy
Lichtman, Feminist Press, 1982

In Lichtman's book, she places the
protagonist, Dan, and his friends Cory
and Marny in realistic settings, and
employs dialogue which is very
straightforward -- exactly the way
young people talk with each other. She
uses language which is direct, and in-
troduces in one chapter, the names of
body parts -- penis, clitoris, vagina,
and breasts -- which de-mystifies and
de-fuses them for the young reader.
These passages almost prevented the
book from being published because
there was so much resistance to them.
Young people are not supposed to
know these things, one publisher de-
cided.

Dan has fantasies about having a
baby. His friend Rosie, an adult
neighbor, is pregnant, and he is
drawn to her changing body and the
baby moving inside. Lichtman's book
explores his fantasies, their social
implications, his friends’ reactions
and ideas about sex, birth and sex
roles in a convincing way.

While the book is brief (78 pages),
it has well-conceived characters and
there are no feminist Huckleberry Finns
or Little Women, or other lengthy novels yet; (although
Andre Norton, who writes wonderful
adolescent fiction and is also an
award-winning novelist, could approach
this length, as well as perhaps Judy
Blume). The Boy Who Wanted A Baby is
a well thought out, intelligently
written, and the content is accessible
to young readers because of its style.

When asked if she thought feminist
children's books like hers would re-
place other kinds of children's lit-
erature, Lichtman expressed some doubt.
She doesn't see any permanent or deep
changes in the way material will be
presented to children in the future. 
"Books [for students] are being banned,"
she said, and had experienced censor-
ship problems herself with one poten-
tial publisher. She continued, "I don’t
feel that [non-sexist] books are a fad,
but they are not the coming genre,
either." We can only hope she is
mistaken.

Check out what the young people in
your life are currently reading, then
look at some of the new books, mostly
by small presses, which offer alter-
natives. Many of these books could
assist you, as a parent or helpful
adult, to approach children and open di-
alogue on difficult subjects such as
divorce, aging and death. You can
also find books which will help vali-
date the child's lifestyle.

You will probably be pleasantly
surprised.

Elisabeth Mann re-discovered "child-
ren's" books ten years ago. Her fav-
orite is the Velveteen Rabbit, which
convinced her that good "children's"
books were those from which only
adults really got the most enjoyment.