by Sharon Przepasniak

“Women in business"...the phrase conjures up many images:  
who has been allowed to break into the upper ranks of a formerly all-  
male-run corporation,  
a woman who can afford to wear the kind of  
fashion magazines,  
a woman who the media would have us believe  
is superwoman because of her ability to gracefully manage her job, her  
family and her household with ample time to spare,...the list could go  

on and on.  

Yet, there are many women  

in business who do not fit these stereo-  

types hyped by the media. Those that have ‘made it’ in Big Business  
come in all shapes and sizes; they have diverse personalities. As with  
men in business, some are to be respected, some not; some cope with  

all the pressure incredibly,  

Furthermore,  
and work in their businesses,  
and, as such,  
they have their  

own distinct problems.  
In addition,  
many women are in business either  
employed by large companies, and because they are women,  
they often do not fit the popular  
(and often misleading)  
images of “women in business”.  

These problems are the focus of my column this month.  

I found the interviews with these women particularly interesting and  
enlightening, and I hope readers will notice and appreciate the common-  

alities these women in business  

share.  

I would like to acknowledge the help of Kay Patterson and Chris Van  

Vechten for the interviews they conducted for this column.  

BARB MORRIS  

Barb Morris, Rhinoputamus (Barb and  
Michelle Clody are co-owners of Rhinoputamus):  

"Since we are new in business, we've  
had to learn a lot of things by trial  

and error, not only because we're women,  

but also because we're new. We've had  
to learn how to purchase our merchandise properly. Although Michelle and I  
balance each other out in terms of our  
individual talents, we work well together. We feel that there have been  
times that our inexperience has been  
taken advantage of by salespeople.  
Other women in the sales business  
seem to be more sympathetic to our  
needs, whereas many of the men (though  
we're not anti-men by any means) have  
taken advantage of our inexperience  
in purchasing.  

As for financial backing, I feel  
that it's not what you know, but who  
you know. We were able to deal with  
our bank because the manager was a  
friend of ours as well as a woman.  
We've also gotten a lot of help  
from our friends; both male and fe-  
male, who are also in business, and  
they have given us good advice.  
Finally, you really have to work at  
instilling confidence and giving  
satisfaction to your clientele by doing  
a good job of providing them with the  
services that they need."  
PAGE 6  

COMMON GROUND JULY 1983  

JOSH INGRAM  

Josh Ingram, member of the Yeast-  
West Bakery Collective:  
"I don't think we run into prob-  

lems as women collective  

members. The situation becomes more  
balanced. It consists of 3 men and 3 women. As a  
collective, since there is no one boss,  
we have weekly meetings to discuss bus-  
iness, and this also includes criticism  
and self-criticism. During this time,  
we discuss problems that have come up  
during the week concerning our rela-  
tionships with each other, any mis-  
understandings, etc. Thus, we are  

able to work out any problems, and we  
are able to help each other and sup-  
port each other as human beings.  

We find that the men here have just  
as many health problems as the women,  
back problems, which affect our abilities to lift. So we all  
have to help each other out.  

Finally, I think that women who  
work in business and have to deal with  
men have to be strong enough and as-  
sured enough in themselves to deal  
with the men who still see people in  
stereotyped roles. Rather than put  
them down, we need to help them change  
their way of thinking about women."  

MELANIE COIRO  

Melanie Coiro, member of the Yeast-  
West Bakery Collective:  
"I think that we are pretty good  
about sharing jobs in this collective.  
We do try to avoid stereotyping when  
determining who does what job. Also,  
because we are a collective, our prob-  
lems as women are not the same as wo-  
men in other more traditionally run  
businesses.  

Most of the problems that we run  
into are in the back rooms of super-  
markets, when we deliver. There it's a  
real male world, with sexist jokes and  
comments. On the one hand, the men  
apologize for swearing in front of you  
and then they turn around and make a  
sexist remark about you.  

Also, we run into some of the typ-  
ical problems. For example, when bus-  
inessmen or insurance people come into  
the bakery, they go directly to the  
men in the collective. Yet the men  
who work here try to redirect some of  
these people, in order to avoid these  
stereotypes.  

So, in a sense, we are  
able to teach some of these men that  
stereotypes don't apply here."  

MARLENE WAY  

Marlene Way, owner, The Bean Sprout:  
"I think there's a lack of credi-  
bility, for instance, from men such as  
salesmen, bank officials and financial  
institutions. Sometimes salesmen have  
a patronizing attitude, especially the  
first few times they deal with you.  
Once you've dealt with them a few times  
then a respect develops for your capa-  
bility, your intelligence and your  
judgment. So it seems that you have  
to prove yourself more than a man does.  

When I first opened my business, I  
was younger, and so again I encountered  
people coming in the store who did not  
think that I was the owner. Again, you  
have to prove yourself."