Pills: The Non-Solution to Women’s Stress

By CAROLYN MORELL

These are challenging times for women.  
The profound transformations taking place  
in women's social roles are creating ex-  
panded possibilities and increased expect-  
ations—as well as extraordinary stresses.  
Some women experience the agreeable stress-  
es that accompany positive changes. Those  
contending with isolation, poverty, racism,  
old age, disabilities, and/or discrimination  
and contempt because of sexual orientation,  
face pressures of a distinctly negative  
sort. No matter how strong we are individ-  
ually, the social changes and social prob-  
lems confronting us require adequate per-  
sonal, institutional, and economic supports.  
At a time when we need them the most, women's  
support services are dwindling and disappear-  
ing, leaving us to fend off stresses alone.  
One source of aid, however, is all too avail-  
able to us: pills, this culture's non-solution  
to stress.

The short-term relief offered by pre-  
scription drugs may and often does lead to  
long-term dependency. Historically, women  
have become addicted to legally prescribed  
drugs at a rate twice that of men. The  
danger of dependence on mood-altering drugs  
—tranquilizers, sedatives, painkillers,  
alone or in combination with alcohol—is  
a women's issue. How can we avoid or re-  
verse the process of pill dependency? First,  
by becoming conscious of the social forces  
that operate to promote women's drug use;  
second, by learning to distinguish use from  
abuse; and third, by seeking human rather  
than chemical support systems to assist  
with problems and pressures.

PUSHING PILLS TO WOMEN: THE SOCIAL CONTEXT

As we search for relief from the stresses  
we feel, our choices are circumscribed by the  
availability of options. And with the growth  
of multi-national pharmaceutical companies,  
chemicals have been promoted as the easiest,  
quickest, cheapest relief available. These  
companies intentionally encourage the prac-  
tice of drugging women as they search for  
ever expanding profits. Drugs which are ser-  
ious, complex, often perilous, are  
pushed on women for the normal stresses of  
everyday life; for the benefit of other peo-  
ple, usually men; to alleviate the oppressive-  
ness of women's assigned role. One among  
many drug advertisements illustrates the  
point. The ad shows a woman imprisoned be-  
hind a dust mop, broom, sponge mop, and iron-  
ing board, and the ad for Serax proclaims,  
"You can't set her free, But you can help  
her feel less anxious." The message is that  
women's lives cannot be changed, and as the  
drug companies encourage us to adapt to  
oppressive situations, their profits soar.

Mood-altering drugs are promoted for our  
stresses; they are also thrust upon us simply  
because we are women. In the drug companies’  
search for new markets, normal female exper-  
iences are turned into pathological states  
needing chemical solutions. If you are  
anxious because you can't "fit in," a “new-  
comer in town who can't make friends," "sad  
or unhappy about the future,” "easily tired  
and have difficulty making decisions," suf-  
fering from the empty nest syndrome," the  
message is clear: you need drugs. Actually,  
in every situation mentioned above, women  
need to take action, not to be tranquilized  
into passivity. The above quotations from  
advertisements illustrate the way in which  
women who are not perpetually happy, tranquil,  
anxiety-free, are portrayed as weak and help-  
less patients—sick people who need medicine.

The pharmaceutical companies push; the  
physicians supply. Medical journals are  
filled with impressive and expensively pro-  
duced drug commercials targeted at physicians.  
These ads, in combination with the thousands  
of detail men who daily visit doctors' offices  
promoting drugs, have the desired impact. The  
message that women need sedation is received  
and acted upon by physicians. Figures from  
the National Institute on Drug Abuse (April,  
1978) indicate that women are given almost  
twice as many psychoactive prescriptions  
as men, and are almost twice as likely to  
end up in emergency rooms with problems re-  
sulting from the use of these drugs.

The problem of over-prescribing and in-  
appropriate prescribing is graphically il-  
lustrated by Linda Murray in an article on  
Valium and Librium that appeared in the Aug.  
1978 issue of New Woman:

I have been given Librium by a derma-  
tologist for hives, by a gynecologist  
for anxieties, by an internist for  
marriage, and by a general practition-  
er for the divorce trauma when the  
marriage didn't work out. A friend  
of mine was prescribed Librium for  
a broken toe.

So the drug companies push; doctors  
supply; and women use. Many of us know  
from personal experience the perceived de-  
sirability of using drugs to alleviate stress.  
Drugs produce immediate sought-after physio-  
logical and mood changes—we feel more re-  
laxed, can get to sleep sooner, our sense of  
well-being increases. Indeed, we may end up  
pursuing drugs, and thus completing the vi-  
cious cycle of the drug non-solution. The  
principle acting parties here are the drug  
companies and doctors, and the common prac-  
tice of focusing on a woman's "weakness" as  
the primary cause of her drug use and/or  
abuse misdefines and distorts the issue.

With an awareness of the social forces  
operating on women to promote the use of  
drugs, we are better able to assess when  
a drug is really necessary—and when better  
left untaken.

DISTINGUISHING USE FROM ABUSE

Not all use of tranquilizing drugs ends  
in addiction. Using these drugs in low  
dosages for short periods only (no longer  
than a couple of months) may be useful if  
stress is severe. However, over the long  
haul, relying on legal drugs will produce  
changes not bargained for. As well as  
robbing us of our power to act effective-  
ly, our bodies may adapt to the drugs and  
require increased doses to get the desired  
effect. Various danger signals can help  
you evaluate your own use of drugs.

* Have you used a mood-altering drug daily  
for more than a couple of months?  
* Do you always have good excuses for  
taking a pill?  
* When you are under pressure or feeling anx-  
ious, do you automatically take a tranquil-  
izer or a drink, or both?  
* Do you take drugs regularly to help you  
cope?  
* Are you sometimes embarrassed or frighten-  
ed by your behavior under the influence  
of drugs?  
* Are you defensive if a friend or relative  
mentions your drug use?  
* Do you worry about your prescription run-  
ning out before you have another on hand?  
* Do you find you have to take increasing  
amounts of pills to achieve the same effects?  
* Do you feel you can't get through the day  
without pills?  
* Have you made promises to yourself to stop  
taking pills and failed in your efforts?  
* Do you take a pill in anticipation of a  
stressful situation?  
* Are you concerned about your use of drugs?  
* Do you think you have become dependent?

If you answer “yes" to a number of these  
warning signals (adapted and supplemented by  
Womanfocus staff from lists compiled by the  
Committee on Prescription Drug Misuse and  
the National Institute of Drug Abuse) you  
may be in danger of dependence, or already  
drug dependent. As Marian Sandmaier points  
out in her book, The Invisible Alcoholics,  
"the ability to turn away from a drug to  
which one is physically and psychologically  
addicted requires uncommon courage and de-  
termination." Help is available for women  
in the greater Buffalo area. (For your  
information, substance abuse resources are  
listed on page 18.)

Two warnings must be asserted: Do not  
stop taking pills without medical supervision.  
Many of the mood-altering drugs must be slowly  
weaned away from your body. Sudden abstinence  
after long-term reliance can cause serious  
withdrawal problems. Second, pregnant women  
should avoid all psychoactive medications.

A pamphlet published by DO IT NOW Foundation,  
“Drugs, Alcohol, and Pregnancy," points out:

Nearly everything an expectant  
mother takes into her body...can  
have an effect on her developing  
child. And not every effect is a  
good one. Drugs of all types pose  
varying degrees of danger to both  
mother and child. And many times  
drugs don't have to be ‘abused'  
in order to pose a threat. Some-  
times even infrequent use during  
a critical developmental phase can  
have disastrous consequences.

The decision to use a drug is your deci-  
sion. If a doctor offers a mood-altering  
prescription, you have the right to say  
"No," question the reason for the decision,  
or ask for more information. If your doctor  
is not responsive to your choice of non-drug  
care, you have the right to seek help else-  
where. Remember, you are buying an expensive  
service, and if you are not satisfied, shop  
around until you are.

PEOPLE AND PROGRAMS: NOT PILLS

The stresses confronting women are all too  
real; we need non-drug ways of managing the  
inevitable pressures that accompany change.  
Other people can act as "buffers" for stress.  
One of the best ways to tranquilize without  
drugs is simply to talk to someone. Accord-  
ing to Marty Jessup, a counselor at the Iris  
Addiction Help Project in San Francisco:  
“The best alternative to Valium, especially  
for those trying to quit taking pills, is  
human contact. Talk to anyone: a friend,  
relative, counselor, psychiatrist—anyone  
who can provide support." Find someone to  
whom you can make yourself vulnerable. Phys-  
ical contact is highly nourishing and neces-  
sary to well-being. If you are not getting  
enough physical contact, ask for what you  
need, ask for hugs—everyone benefits. Peo-  
ple can provide each other with emotional  
sustenance, assist with resources, listen,  
provide physical affection and care.

We must not overlook the support we can  
give ourselves. Since stress puts a strain  
on the body, we can equip ourselves to handle  
stress by nurturing our physical health. Reg-  
ular exercise (approximately 30 minutes of  
strenuous activity three to five times a  
week), healthy diet (reduction of dietary  
stressors such as caffeine, sugar, refined  
white flour, salt) and plenty of rest and  
relaxation are all ways to strengthen our  
bodies' ability to withstand stress.

It is essential to take care of ourselves and  
to build strong support networks; yet when  
problems transcend the personal, so must  
the solutions. Women play a special role  
in absorbing stresses from others and from  
society. There are few persons or instit-  
utions that perform for women the functions  
we perform for others. We must continue the  
work of the Women's Movement, which has  
historically pushed social institutions to  
respond to women's needs; we must organize  
for adequate funding for quality day care,  
women's shelters, humane and welcoming  
nursing and retirement homes, women's health  
clinics, pensions, half-way houses, resource  
centers, maternity and paternity leave, and  
more. An action-oriented approach to stress,  
to get our needs met, is as necessary as  
learning how to cope with bodily symptoms.  
These are challenging times for women.  
One of our greatest challenges is to find  
positive, effective ways to cope with and  
confront the stresses in our lives. To-  
gether, using our strengths, our brains,  
our resourcefulness and creativity, we can  
replace pills with people and programs, drug  
dependency with human interdependency. The  
task is difficult—but the rewards irresist-  
ible.

Carolyn Morell works as a Group Counselor  
at WOMANFOCUS, a state-funded prescription  
drug abuse prevention program in Buffalo.  
She has been a social worker and activist  
for eighteen years, and enjoys writing  
about issues affecting women's lives.

DISABLED cont. from G-4

INVISIBILITY

There are statistically fewer dis-  
abled women than men. This is partly  
due to more injuries suffered by men  
in car, motorcycle and workplace acci-  
dents. It is also due to military-  
related injuries. This can render  
disabled women invisible, even within  
the context of the disabled population,  
and make it harder for women to get the  
attention to their health needs they  
deserve.

Elizabeth Mann is a member of the  
Common Ground collective. Both  
her mother and sister are disabled.