AN AN JAS AN AS AN AN ZA AS /AS AN AN ZA AN ZA AN A AN O

DER-STORIES

CBDEEDEEEECECEEECEREEEEEES

By Cherin Silverstein

Women's lives have often gone un-
recorded, obscured behind the accom-
plishments of husbands, brothers, and
fathers. Generations of daughters
have lost the opportunity to learn
and gain courage from the lives of
their predecessors. We offer Her-
Stories in an effort to recover infor-
mation about those who have gone before
us. The women of Her-Stories are all
connected to Western New York.

ANNA KATHERINE GREEN

If you look for Anna Katherine Green
in the biographical dictionary, "Amer-
ican Authors, 1600 - 1900" or the "Con-
cise Dictionary of American Biography"
or in the "Dictionary of the American
Biography," you will not find her.

Even though Anna was the author of

more than 35 detective novels, predating

Sherlock Holmes by ten years, and the

author of two volumes of poetry, history has seen fit to bury her in an-
tiquity. Fortunately, the Buffalo His-

torical Society has seen fit to sus-

tain her memory in its files on "Wo-
men." After much sifting through
mountains of biographical references,
the only place I found Anna was in

the three-volume "Notable American
Women" from which the following infor-
mation was taken.

Anna Katherine Green was born on
November 11, 1846, in Brooklyn, New
York. The second daughter of five
children, Anna credits her step-
mother, Grace Hollister, for encour-
aging her in the pursuit of her wri-
ting career. Her mother died when
she was three years old.

Anna attended schools in New York
City and Buffalo, to which the fam-
ily moved in 1857. She attended
Ripley Female College in Poultney,
Vermont, where she received a B.A.
degree in 1866. She was very active
in the college's literary society and
it was here that Anna met Ralph Waldo
Emerson with whom she corresponded in
later years.

Anna's best-known work was

"The Leavenworth Case," which was published in the 1870s.

It sold more than half a million cop-
ies and established her as a popular
author. Over the next fifty years she
wrote thirty-five more detective stor-
ies. She also published two volumes
of poetry, "The Defense of the Bride
and Other Poems" (1882), and "Risifi's
Daughter" (1887), a drama in verse.

Although students of detective
fiction favor "Lost Man's Love" (1898),
Anna's favorite story was "Hand and
Ring" (1883). She believed that

by Sarah Slavin

"the essences of a good detective story
were a tightly constructed plot with a
unique turn of events, a step-by-step
revelation of the story line, and a
climax that in no way was a disap-
pointment to the reader."

At the age of 38, Anna married
Charles Rohlfs, an actor, on November
25, 1884. They settled in Buffalo
where her husband designed ornamental
iron and managed a foundry for the
next six years. Returning briefly
to the stage in the early 1890s, he
played the lead role in the drama-
tization of Anna's "The Leavenworth
Case."

Anna gave birth to three children,
a daughter, Rosamond, and two sons,
Sterling and Roland. She passed away
on April 11, 1935, in her Buffalo
home after a six-month illness. Anna
is buried at the Forest Lawn Cemetery
in Buffalo.

Cherin Silverstein,
currently majoring

mother of 2, is
in Humanities/

Writing at Medaille College, Buffalo.
She was formerly a writer for Burge

Publishing where she compiled hist-
orical research.

Her poetry has ap-
peared in Prelude and the American

Anthology of Poetry. 

COMMON GROUND NOVEMBER 1983 PAGE SEVEN