PAGE.6

SD eee a edoatetondenroade ated cdeentectontectn ds

Oe Reh eerie >

by Sharon Green

Recently, I and my two children spent a week in the Southwest, to sightsee and to visit family. At the time, I was reading the novel Germinal by Émile Zola. Throughout the trip, thoughts of the extreme poverty and deplorable working conditions of the 19th century French coal mining families pressed into the back of my mind.

While visiting the homes of two women in New Mexico, I was struck by the similarities between their world and the bleak world that Zola depicted.

Both my hosts are single mothers. One has four young children; the other, two. In addition to the rigors of caring for young children, both women work at low-paying jobs while attending college. Because both women had children before completing college, their earning power right now is minimal. They are living on the fringes, hand-to-mouth.

It is a century after Germinal, I wonder if the lives of the women I visited are all that different from that of Maheude, the coal miner's wife with seven children? All live in small dwellings without sufficient furnishings. Children share beds and have irregular meals. Families must tolerate messiness and substandard conditions.

Common Ground, the Western New York Women's NewsJournal is Proud to Announce the Publication of

The Road is Long, But Failure is Impossible: Conversations With Our Foremothers 1848-1988

Limited

But for me, the most striking parallel was the seeming lack of control over their destinies. The destitute coal mining families had no control over their workplaces, which were owned by bourgeoisie who lived a pampered life. The miners were not able to improve their lives or their working conditions; they faced a desolate existence until death finally freed them. Finally, they decided to strike. However, the only result this produced was the starvation of their families.

Single mothers, whose limited education hampers their earning power, seem to face the same desolation. Children and their needs do not cost less as time goes on; if anything, their needs become more expensive. A single mother only able to work as a salesclerk or a waitress is never going to be able to get ahead. She will continue to have little control over the destiny of her family.

My trip also took me to Juarez, Mexico for a day. Once again, I was taken aback by substandard living conditions and poverty. Bundled old women, leaning half-asleep against storefronts, half-heartedly held begging cups.

Young children, absent from school, canvassed the market area, hawking trinkets and candy. Unkempt men slept in doorways, covered with newspapers, or tried to strike up conversations with us gringos.

The open market in Juarez was most striking. Food scraps and other garbage littered the streets. Tired-looking Indian women, wearing wide multicolored skirts, had toddlers on both hands and infants strapped to their backs in wool shawls. I'm not quite sure how they even managed to carry home the few parcels they were able to purchase.

In Zola's novel, those characters who did have a job—both adults and older children—mined coal, in the damp underground darkness. Yet they earned so little that meat once a month was a special treat. Their houses were tiny, overcrowded, and impossible to keep clean because of coal dust. With so little money, one of the few diversions in their lives was sex. As a result, childbearing began at an early age, and most families had more children than they were able to feed.

What little I saw of Juarez was not unlike the surroundings of Zola's Montsou coal mines. People seemed to have little control over their own destinies. Many seemed bound to a life of just barely making it, at best, or poverty, at worst.

Unlike most vacations from which one returns refreshed and relaxed, I returned sobered and enlightened. I came to realize just how privileged my life is.

Although I live in a poorer neighborhood of Buffalo, I own a sound, warm, and roomy house. And I am able to afford most minor repairs that are needed to maintain this home for myself and my children.

And although I am a single mother, I was privileged enough to be able to complete my education before having children. Thus, I am able to support my children without constantly worrying about the freezer emptying or the gas bill using up most of my paycheck. Indeed, a second part-time job even allows me to save enough to take my kids on one trip a year.

I am by no means rich; we live simply, and I spend money frugally. However, after reading Germinal, and after my observations in the Southwest recently, I realize just how fortunate I am. Many people in this world have much harder lives than I do—and many of them are women, whose lives are not all that different from mine. I feel privileged to have some control over my own destiny as a woman.