Book Reviews:

THE MOTHERS' BOOK: SHARED EXPERIENCES. Edited by Ronnie Friedland and Carol Kort, Houghton-Mifflin (1981), 363 pp. $8.95. (available through Buffalo and Erie County Public Libraries)

Reviewed by Sharon Green

We mothers rarely get to do things when we want to. So in typical fashion, I finally managed to read a book that has been on my list for several years. Despite the fact that this book was published four years ago, it's still worth reading for those of you—mothers and non-mothers alike—who may not have stumbled upon it yet.

This is a collection of 74 heartfelt essays and poems, all written by mothers. Editors Friedland (of Cazenovia, N.Y.) and Kort solicited pieces from mothers across the country who shared their feelings and experiences about being both mothers and women.

I was drawn to this book for two reasons. First, the wide variety of topics is both engaging and current. There are essays on such timeless issues as fears during pregnancy, remaining sane with a colicky infant, coping with triplets, combining motherhood and sexuality, life after a Caesarean, and the grief of miscarriage. Yet they are casually interspersed with topics rarely elaborated on in books about motherhood or childcare, such as living with a Down's Syndrome child and life as a lesbian mother.

Wisely, some very timely issues were included. Deciding whether or not to return to paid employment, choosing to bottle feed when everyone else is nursing, and choosing to be a single mother are just a few issues facing today's mothers.

Secondly, I was touched by this book. Many essays validated my own feelings as a mother and a feminist, a combination that often seems paradoxical to me. After all, most feminists I know either have no children, or have grown children who no longer tie them down. And most mothers I know would not call themselves feminists.

However, The Mothers' Book bridges this gap. Many writers openly mention their feminism in relation to their mothering; many others have been clearly influenced by the women's movement. I find it comforting to know that somewhere out there women are caring for babies and young children and thinking thoughts similar to mine. I'm delighted that women incorporate nonsexist principles into both their childrearing and their lives.

Some essays and poems are heart-wrenching; many are enlightening. All express feelings that any mother or caregiver can relate to. Kort and Friedland, both mothers themselves, have their fingers on the pulse of today's mothers.

Sharon Green is the mother of a 2-year-old and a 6-year-old.

PAGE 4 COMMON GROUND OCTOBER 1985

THE VIEW FROM WITHIN

With the Power of Each Breath, edited by Susan E. Brown, Debra Connors, and Nancy Stern. Cleis Press, 1985. $9.95, 354 pp.

Review by Caissa Willmer

With the Power of Each Breath, a collection of articles, poems, stories, and autobiographical accounts "by, about, and for disabled women" challenges "the able-bodied world to examine their perceptions of ‘the disabled’ and their role in the social construction of disability."

More than sixty women have come together in these pages, some with the aid of tongue-operated computer, recording tape or dictation, all using words incisively, often angrily, insisting that the abled community must see in the disabled community a metaphor for the interdependency of the whole human community.

Tough threads of determination and courage keep taut the personal stories, but these are the warp of the life-fabrics, not the whole cloth. One motif, woven in many variations, is that "...disability is a social construct..." and that disabled people are more “handicapped" by abled people's prejudices, misconceptions, and denials than by their disabilities.

Four academic articles provide valuable analyses of systematic structures that deprive the disabled of full participation in the mainstream, and that inhibit the disabled from exercising and developing their talents.

The women's movement is taken severely to task for some insidious forms of discrimination. Anne Finger asserts in "Reproductive Rights and Disability" that arguments for abortion that focus on fetuses with disabling conditions "are highly exploitative and prey on fears about disability." Equally discriminatory is the movement's failure “to address the denial of reproductive rights to disabled men and women.”

In addition, Rebecca S. Grothaus points out that many programs for abused women are not equipped to cope with the abused disabled woman, and shelters have refused to take in a disabled victim because "the other women find her depressing."

The majority of pieces in this often rough and rugged, always articulate collection are fierce personal bids for a compassionate restructuring of society—not for pity or for charity but for structures that will allow maximum self-fulfillment and self-determination.

One essential structure is adequate, affordable attendant care—analogous as a need and right to daycare for working mothers. The disabled woman can direct such care to suit her own imperatives of time and rhythm to gain a significant measure of self-determination not present when she must wait on the favors and convenience of well-meaning family and friends.

The demand for adequate attendant care is not a special plea, for as Debra Connors insists, "Independence does not truly reflect anyone's reality. As a species we are emphatically interdependent. Disabled people cannot be independent, not because we are pitiable, or helpless, but because we are human."

Fundamental truths flash out repeatedly in these writings—truths that abled people seldom fully understand until a moment of catastrophe. Disability puts people on the cutting edge of perception as JoAnn Le Maistre demonstrates in “Parenting": ...I've come to realize that we may give our children something which is uniquely the result of our physical disabilities. If we are self-accepting, our children will learn not to be afraid of disabled people...and will accept...the simple...fact that there are no perfect people, perfect lives...

In a similar vein the editors maintain that disabilities "are an integral part of our identities... [But] our disabilities need not dominate our lives and identities if the individual differences of all people are valued and accommodated."

Anne Finger dramatizes this in her very skillful short story "Like the Hully-Gully But Not So Slow” where the adolescent protagonist's confinement to crutches is one of many ingredients in a humorous and painful broil of precocious collisions with parents and peers.

Pam Herbert's "Dear Nanci," is an unforgettable account of a family where three children were born to a woman who has helped each to the fullest possible participation in this society. We have access to Pam's story via a tongue-operated computer.

Similarly, we get the story of Elaine Robidoux from the transcription of Bobbie-Jo Goff who says at the outset:

Elaine has been my major source of understanding and humanization in my work with people labeled retarded. She keeps me very much aware of how very much "professionals" do not know about the people they are intended to serve.

And Elaine explains,

...I don't mind being retarded...I used to mind...the more you talk about it the less it hurts...--Life has to go on...We all have special needs of one kind or another and it's the truth.

All the writers here, even when expressing great anger, are inventive and sharp-seeing spirits who move the reader continually to flip back to the biographical notes to know each one better.

Each piece is evidence of Anne Finger's assertion that "...disability in and of itself [is] much less of a problem than social structures and attitudes toward disability..."

Caissa Willmer is a writer, teacher, and critic who joined the disabled community in 1982 in an accident that wreaked havoc on her spinal cord.