Advertisement  
Policy  

§ COMMON GROUND ACCEPTS ADVERTISING  
S FROM INDIVIDUALS AND BUSINESSES  
§ UNDER THE FOLLOWING CIRCUMSTANCES:  

§ Advertisement in Common Ground is on  
) a pre-paid basis only.  

Common Ground specifically en-  
courages women in business,  

) small and alternative businesses,  
} and employers looking to fill  

§ vacancies, to advertise.  

‘ Display advertisement costs $6  

y per column inch.  
\  

Business card advertisement is $12  

per insertion.  

Other rates are as follows:  

1/8 page - $29 1/2 page - $313  
1/6 page - $38 1/3 page - $75  
1/4 page - $57 2/3 page - $150  
Full page - $225  

There is a 10% discount for four (4)  
insertions.  
¥ There is a 10% discount for women  
® in business.  
® There is a $7 fee if we must alter  
the size of or typeset your ad.  
For a rate card, mechanicals and  
contract, write Gerri Bayer,  
c/o Common Ground, or call  
688-7831 between 9am-7pm, M-F.  

» Common Ground will not intentionally  

? print or support materials or view- .  
@ points that will physically or :  
psychologically harm women because  

of color, sexuality,  

x eco We reserve  

R the right to reject or cancel any  
advertising which is incompatible  
with this policy.  

PROBLEM WITH THE MAIL?  

Problems with getting your copy of CG?  
Or, do you know someone who isn't get-—  
ting her (or his) copy?...Well, you  
should be getting your copy on or be-  
fore the first of the month (we mail  
them about a week before to make sure  
all the info arrives in time to use  
it). Sometimes out-lying or out-of-  
state subscriptions will take longer.  
If you aren't getting your copy, here’s  
some suggestions/explanations of what  
to do ('cause we don't want you to  
miss a single exciting issue)  
1. It may take a month to get your  

sub started and in our computer  

so be patient.  
2. If your check hasn't been cashed  

in four weeks or more, call and  

find out if it's been received.  
3. If it's been a while, and your  

check has been cashed, give us  

a call & we'll take care of it.  

CONTENTS  

February 1983  

1 Infant Formula and Third World  
Nations  

2 Policy, Contents  

3 Letters  

4 Buffalo: Big Town for Small  
Presses  

5 How Relationships Flourish  
6 In Search of a Non-Sexist  
Therapist  
7 Non-sexist Therapist con't  
8 Infant Formula con't  
9 Infant Formula con't  
Singles Support Group  
10 Daphne's Tree — Herbs  
Tax Information for Women  
11 Poetry  
12 Calendar  
13 Calendar  
14 Relationships con't  
15 Equitable Distribution in NYS  
16 How to Get Married  

EMMA IS  
17 Community Speak-out  
18 Poetry  
19 News  
20 News  

21 Announcements  

22 Resources, Contributors, Ads  
23 Advertisements  

24 Back Page  

Ana Hidalgo  

PHILOSOPHY — Common Ground is potentially, with  
help from Western New York women, a forum to  
celebrate the rich diversity of our community. We view  
the paper as a ribbon that may connect our  
commonalities, our intersection points. We are inviting  
you to participate actively in the building of a support  
system for WNY women. We affirm our commitment to  
enhance the lives of women on physical, educational,  
spiritual, psychological, social and economic levels. We  
want to present, fair-mindedly, the issues that concern  
women, and information of value to women. We offer  
Common Ground as a place where women can display  
their art and personal literature, and review the  
tapestries of their experiences.  

EDITORIAL POLICY — Common Ground is especially  
looking for articles which address the needs and  
interests of local women.  

1. Common Ground is a publication of news, culture  
and dialogue from women’s perspectives.  

2. News, Opinion, Analysis and Commentary will each  
be clearly labeled as such.  

3. We are seeking to provide accurate, straightforward  
information of value to women.  

4. The collective will not intentionally print or support  
materials or viewpoints which will harm women  
because of color, sexuality, religious or ethnic  
background, physical disability or economic situation.  

5. While opinions expressed in Common Ground are  
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the  
collective as a whole, we do accept responsibility for  
choosing what we print.  

SUBMISSIONS — We welcome articles, letters,  
information and announcements of interest to women.  
Graphics, cartoons, art and photography will be  
gratefully received. We especially invite women who  
do not usually have access to traditional media —  
en..of color, differently abled, economically or  
educationally disadvantaged, and those for whom  
English is a second language — to write. Suggested  
length of letters: 250 words. Letters must be signed to  
be printed. We will, however, respect your privacy and  
withhold your name if you request. Suggested length of  
articles, commentary, analysis: 500-750 words. Please  
type and double-space your work, 40 characters across.  
If you do not have access to a typewriter, please print  
clearly. In time we hope to have a typewriter, paper,  
etc., available for those who request it. Include a  
stamped, self-addressed envelope and work and home  
phone numbers. Because we want to hear your voices,  
if your piece needs to be edited for length or clarity, we  
will call you/ask you to do it. Keep copies of your work.  
We will try to notify you within three (3) weeks if we  
intend to use your work. If we print it, we will give you  
five (5) copies of the issue in which it appears. Artwork  
should be black and white copies only, and  
title/describe your work. We will copyright the entire  
issue, but the copyright on each piece reverts to the  
author/artist, so that she may decide where her work is  
printed. Please request a style-sheet for further  
information and guidelines if you want to write.  

COMMON GROUND  
Women’s Studies Academy  
Rockwell Hall  
Buffalo State College  
1300 Elmwood Avenue  
Buffalo, New York 14222  
(716) 688-7831 (9 a.m.-7 p.m.)  

© 1982 WNY Women’s Newsjournal  

DISTRIBUTION: EMMA, Marrakesh,  
Talking Leaves, The Book Revue,  
Southtown's Women's Resource Center,  
Langston Hughes Boutique, North Area  
YWCA, Hertel News, Latin Gallery,  
SUCB Bookstore, UB Amherst Campus,  
Women's Studies College Winspear  
House, Everything in Fabrics, WNY  
Peace Center, Planned Parenthood  
Niagara County, Aquarian Bookstore,  
Screen Sister, The Printed Page  
Bookstore, The Buffalo Bookstore  
and Sunshine Supermarket.  

4. Let us know if your paper arrives  
much past the 7th of the month,  
(that helps us pinpoint where the  
trouble is.) Delivery of bulk mail  
is up to the individual letter  
carrier. Speak directly to your  
carrier and call your local post-  
office and tell them you want your  
paper sooner. We don't think your  
paper is any good to you for  
information if it arrives too late.  
5. CG will do whatever we can to  
keep you coming back for more!  

WOMEN WHO WORKED ON THIS ISSUE  
Diane, Laura, Sue, Esther, Bonnie,  
Heather, Maria, Beth, Chris, Gerri,  
Linda, Sarah, Karen P., Karen K.,  

Barb, Marilyn, Holly, Cathy, Donna,  
Roberta, Lisa, Julie, Joan, Sharon,  
Shukriyyah, Peggy, Frigid, Bridget,  
Mouse and Wanda Wyneau.  

PAGE 2 COMMON GROUND FEBRUARY 1983