IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Rules:
1. Fix obvious OCR errors (like '0' instead of 'O', '1' instead of 'l')
2. Preserve the original line breaks and text blocks.
3. Preserve the original meaning and historical context.
4. Do not add any additional text.
5. Do not delete any text.
6. Process EVERY line - do not skip any content.

Corrected text:

' discourages many

To be a woman today is to be a
virtual living political statement.
Everything from our ova to our orgasms
are subjects of debates, and although
it is granted we have souls, our
rights are still a matter of discus-
sion. Each one of us has found our-
selves in the situation of being
expected to be the "Authority on
Women's Views" by the mere fact of
not being a male, just at the point
where we are beginning to feel com-
fortable with our own diversity.

I have no doubt we are under siege.
The defeat of the E.R.A., in its 24
word simplicity, the drastic cuts in
day care funding, the attempt to deny
us the right when and if to have
children, the ultimate threat to
legislate our lives as inferior to
our eggs certainly define an arena
where we are on the defense in a
hundred directions. But there is
also certainly a measure of truth in
the statement that the best defense
is a good offense. Witness Ms.
Schlafly's excellent defense against
both progress and logic.

I have come to believe that there
are several key impediments to
women's entrance into and influence
on the political arena, and these are
separate and distinct external factors.
First is the basic assumption that
there is not really a way to affect
change, and it is this crippling
assumption of imminent defeat that
undermines not only activism in the
Women's movement, but also the political
arena at large and the most basic
exercise of power—voting. A second
roadblock to a more direct influence
has been the lack of broad-based
coalitions that are not dependent
solely on the E.R.A., but rather on
a more inclusive issue platform that
does not demand absolute coincidence
between separate groups with distinctly
different aims. In addition, women
have found themselves handicapped by
a lack of coherent, long-range
strategy, partially the result of a
lack of mainstream political skills,
partially the result of a lack of
confidence in the skills we do have,
but most significantly the by-product
of a lack of coalition between groups
that could catalyze the abilities of
individuals. We are now at a crossroads
where these three factors can be
forced into obsolescence, so long as
the individual woman does not alien-
ate herself from her own power.

I recently worked in the Democratic
organization on a special election
in Suffolk County, a heavily
Republican and Conservative area
where our mission impossible was to
elect a Democratic-Liberal Assembly-
man. We were outfunded, outregistered
and a number of us were from
out of town, including virtually all
the women volunteers from N.A.R.A.L.
(National Abortion Rights Action
League) who had pitched in their
efforts to back our pro-choice candi-
date. A minimum of 10 women, most of
them with no prior political experi-
ence, contributed the equivalent of
one work week per night "womaning" the
telephones, not to mention the door-
to-door work. We never discussed pro-
choice unless asked, we always wore
skirts, we were always pleasant and—
we won. N.A.R.A.L. worked against

My Personal View. An Article of Faith

or an Ode to Ms. Liberty

by Hope H. Hoetzer

the Democratic candidate in Rochester
who had previously accepted Right-to-
Life backing: he lost by about 500
votes. The result of their efforts
was not only two new pro-choicers in
the State, but a major re-evaluation
within the Democratic Party in the
N.Y. metropolitan area of the value
of pro-choice candidates. To quote
one political leader: "If these
girls come with choice candidates, to
hell with the right-to-lifers." I
forgive the draconian phrasing and
embrace the sentiment.

The political arena is the arena
where ideas are translated into
action. We have only begun to recog-
nize our power and abilities as we
have teethed on a myriad of women's
groups, ranging from social clubs and
church groups to C.A.R.A.S.A. and
N.O.W. We are speakers, writers, mana-
gers, researchers, publicists, and
are even possessed of diplomacy, that
practiced art of survival that is no
more than the skill of domestic
compromise bonded to hard-nosed
reality. We have office skills, bud-
get skills, artistic skills and
sales skills. And we are a majority
of potential voters who hold under
10% of elected political offices.

Recent articles in the newspaper

COMMON GROUND

have highlighted the defeat of the
E.R.A. and the push for a Human Life
Amendment, but have not discussed how
the crunch affects the oft last-hired
woman, the new baby boomlet that will
affect the need for flex time and day
care, and the aging population base
that will include a high percentage
of women. But also in the press were
articles projecting that women's
voting patterns might outstrip those
of men within a decade, and that the
Right-to-life line is viewed as a
growing liability for candidates
(39% of likely voters react negative-
ly, 12% positively). Out of the
ashes of the E.R.A.—defeated as much
by our late arrival at direct poli-
tical action as anything else—came a
new, tougher, more confident and
more skilled era of women's political
action.

Every woman is, in some capacity,
a role model for all women—we are
past the point of first, but we are
only beginning to become part of the
many. Every action we take as indi-
viduals ripples into the world for
better or worse. Each woman who
performs "good work" in the home, in
the business world, in politics, is
proof that women are capable. Each
woman who is informed on the issues
and talks about them to others is
a lobbyist for all women. What are
women's issues? For me, any issue
that affects women is a women's
issue. Our action is the affirma-
tion that no effort is worthless, but
the future is clearly in the exercise
of our combined clout. For many
years, the women's movement—used in
the loosest sense—has primarily empha-
sized education and lobbying as its
main tools. The Woman's Political
Caucus threw itself more directly
into the fray, and it is no coincidence
that the National Organization
for Women is establishing a Political
Action Committee within two years of
N.A.R.A.L.'s shifting gears in the
identical direction. A few years ago,
when I asked a friend who works in
Albany how he moved to mainstream
politics from the peace movement,
his answer was simple: "Well, I was
in Chicago on the outside of the
Democratic convention, and the next
thing I knew, someone picked me up
and pitched me through a window. I
decided to stay inside—there was more
action." Key women's groups are
literally at a point of pitching them-
selves through the windows into the
mainstream, which is perfectly logical
considering that we are a majority.
Leadership comes from inside, and
whatever group forms the majority
creates—or at worst overwhelmingly
influences—the leader.

Political Action Committees have
been the salvation of the right, and
I have no doubt they will be ours as
well, if for no other reason than
they offer the outlet for flexible
coalitions, grand-scale fundraising
and coordinated application of group
and individual labor as a direct
influence on politics, especially the
election (and in primary races the
selection) of candidates. In other
words, VOTES, MONEY AND POLITICAL
ACTION. I have yet to meet a poli-
tician who has a healthy respect for
all three.

Cont. on Page 15

OCTOBER 1982 PAGES.