Journal Keeping

Oct. 25, 1983

"

List some of my mandates: "I will never" or "I must..."

I will never give my children reason to feel that I think them bad
or unattractive or unlovable. With such a serious, heartfelt pro-
mise I spoke to the growing infant still sheltered in my body, de-
termined to move before it in its years, protect it from any influ-
ences that would diminish its sense of worth. Such impossible goals
I set—yet, is that child not the better for my efforts? I look to
this thought for comfort as I consider how far short I fell in my
desire to avoid betrayal, and how hopelessly my will lay snared in
the nets of my own childhood's betrayals. Such a conflict rages as
the clarity of consciousness presents me with a new interpretation
of behavior and decisions that I once viewed as generous and self-
less and wise. How to atone for unintended harm, misguided choices—
how much restitution necessary or possible? Perhaps it is suffi-
cient to hold to my heart the knowledge of this child's independent
spirit, her tenderness, her joy in living, her trust in humankind,
to know that I am a contributor to these things in her too, and that

in these she will in time find reason and strength to forgive my
human shortcomings. Perhaps the day approaches when I can do the

same thing for myself.

The Shadow Watcher

The Shadow Watcher listens...

with a finger pressed against her lips,
For the sounds of...

footsteps on the stairs.

Perceived sounds of...

footsteps in the hall.

Met by silence, she is answered

by a question she is never asked.

Long shadows dancing on the wall laugh

at the Shadow Watcher as she listens...
straining every muscle to hear the rhythm of
the dance.

Missing the beat, she listens to her heart
to understand.

Night steals in taking its stance
eating shadows on the wall.

The dancers surrender now moving as one
caught in a trap.

Afraid of the dark,

Afraid of her past,

Alone with her thoughts,

she calls the shadows back.

Pulling her now, called to dance,
The Shadow Watcher struggles inside,
steps back.

Should she let herself go?

Should she take the chance?

At last, reaching out

she joins the dance.

Now freed from the dark!

Now freed from her past!

Now one with the shadows,

She embraces the dance.

— Carol J. Kuehfus

— Camille Cox

Pen & Ink Drawing
— Camille Cox
Junior High

We are fourteen. Your father has beaten you,

so you stay at my house. We don't discuss

this hardness; I don't write in my journal.
Instead we grope towards loving, knowing nothing.
We hand-dance to my records, sitting, listening.
We trade our school clothes for my old pajamas.
You are asleep as soon as we have finished pledging
love and loyalty forever to each other. I wonder
if you'll live. The moon burns through

the window and then wakes me: you have one arm
around me, your blonde head on my shoulder.

I hold and protect you through the night.

I was in love with you, and running scared;

my body burned with edges your look smoothed;

I feared that smoothness, as you feared your death;
I couldn't see the distance I might go.

You said, "I feel so safe when you are near."
I said, "I can't go on, and can't stay here."
And half our junior high said we were queer.

— Bonnie Morris

DECEMBER 1988 COMMON GROUND PAGE