« In Search of a Non-sexist Therapist

by Fay Terris Friedman

Because psychotherapy is not a mag-
ical, inscrutable process, but a pro-
cedure based on coming to terms with
oneself and society, it behooves a
woman in search of a psychotherapist
to seek out someone who will help her
identify and understand the social,
as well as personal, causes of her dis-
comfort. She doesn't want someone to
tell her that she is depressed be-
cause it's "that time of the month"
but to take into consideration the
total social context of her life.

Therapy is sometimes the means by
which a woman learns to understand
what makes her unhappy and why she
can no longer feel comfortable doing
the things that others tell her she
must do. A good therapist can help
her explore the sources of unhappi-
ness and support her in trying out

new options based on her unique needs. 

Before considering individual psy-
chotherapy, group "therapy" experi-
ences might be tried, for example,
consciousness raising, assertive-
ness training, a well-run encounter
or Arica group. Or a combination of
group and private consultation might
offer a solution. Much depends on
individual needs and how much time
and effort you are willing to put
forth to create changes in your life.

Here are the reactions of two wom-
en in therapy, which may give you

some insight into what is involved in
the psychotherapeutic process:

"I thought therapists were
“magicians" - knew the right answers -
and if I just did what I was "sup-
posed" to, my life would be better. I
now know that the process of therapy
is difficult work demanding honesty
with yourself as well as with the
therapist.

A second: Originally I joined some
weekend groups mostly out of curios-
ity. Later I became aware that I
needed help sorting out some scary
and confusing feelings. Now I view
therapy as a means to help me grow
and become more alive and solidly
myself. Therapy has highlighted some
important issues for me, such as re-
claiming my power, being more as-
sertive and emphasizing the impor-
tance of feeling capable and self-

sufficient.

So, first of all, therapy is hard
work and a commitment in time and
money. Second, it is a way in which
you can learn to take hold of your
life (and of course, there are other
ways than therapy to do this). Each
person has to decide for herself if
this is the kind of help she needs
and then go on to find someone who
can support her growth experiences.

Every psychotherapist should have
a sign prominently displayed - "Warn-
ing: it has been determined that
psychotherapy may be dangerous to
your mental health." Let the buyer
beware. The therapist who may be
helpful to one person may be harm-
ful to another, because it succeeds
or fails on the basis of how client
and therapist are able to build a
relationship of trust and respect.
It doesn't always happen, but when it
does, it is a great opportunity for
support and growth.

PAGE 6 COMMON GROUND FEBRUARY 1983

All other things being equal, it
is highly recommended that a woman
in search of a therapist seek out
one who subscribes to non-sexist
standards. Here are some of the ways
in which you can determine whether
she or he is non-sexist.

A non-sexist therapist....

- takes into consideration the so-
cial causes of a person's malaise.
Since no therapy is "value-free", we
find that people who engage in psy-
chotherapy also hold values, espe-
cially in terms of what the healthy
male and female are like. Freud
told us that the well-adjusted person
is one who is successful at "lieben
und arbeiten", that is, love and work,
but apparently it has been interpreted
as important only for the male of the
human species. Other standards, that
is, standards which are closer to the
"sick" role are reserved for women.
The celebrated Inge Broverman study
showed that therapists and counselors
invariably associated male character-
istics with those of the healthy adult
and the so-called "well-adjusted" fe-
male resembled the portrait of a per-
son ill-equipped to function in our
society - dependent, overemotional,
not interested in math and science.
Since Broverman's original study in
1970, there has been some enlighten-
ment in attitudes toward women's
mental health, but not to the extent
that we can assume that all psycho-
therapists have abandoned the double
standard.

- does not reinforce stereotypical
female behavior and outcomes. For
example, she or he would not look
with approval upon a woman working
for less pay because "that's how it
is" and it may represent a “second
paycheck anyway." On the contrary,
a non-sexist therapist would encour-
age a woman to be aware of her worth
and would applaud any attempt on her
part to "stand on her own two feet."
Neither does a good therapist expect
these healthy signs to take place im-
mediately, but sees the process as a
gradual unfolding of self-confidence
and a step away from what psycholo-
gists call "learned helplessness."

- usually does not tell a client
that she "looks good" because she is
wearing a skirt, or lipstick, or other
signs of approval for doing the "fem-
inine thing."

- does not expect special "favors"
from the client "for the good of the
client's mental health," such as
sexual favors, nor does s/he exploit
the client in other ways, taking ad-
vantage of a client's vulnerable
emotional condition.

- is not a "guru" or one who plays
the role of an authority figure who
dispenses precious knowledge to the
"student." The therapeutic relation-
ship is one of a partnership of sup-
port and help, and encourages the
feeling that the client is a person
with opinions worthy of respect. This
is part of the process which fosters
growth toward independence, an impor-
tant goal of therapy.

- does not tell a lesbian client
that her "problem" is caused by an
unresolved identity problem stemming
from the phallic stage (a male term)
of development, but accepts her pref-
erences and helps her deal with the
difficulties which societal arrange-
ments have engendered.

- does not try to drug the client
into tranquillity. Granted, chemical
methods are sometimes called for in
helping a client to cope, but they
are far too often used as a panacea
in treating psychological symptoms.
Again, let the buyer beware. The detail men and advertise-
ments in medical journals aid and
abet the "raging hormone" theory of
women's problems.

- is not always a woman, but a far
greater number of women therapists
are aware of the stereotyped roles
in society which lead to specific
psychological problems. One advan-
tage of having a woman therapist is
that she can serve as a competent, re-
sponsible role model which many women
need. Another reason is that very
often a woman can be less inhibited
in talking with a person of the same
sex, especially where it involves a
frank discussion of feelings of fear
and anger toward men.

- encourages women clients to be
assertive and autonomous, just as she
or he would encourage male clients to
be sensitive and nurturant. There is
an attitude on the part of the non-
sexist therapist that the best adjust-
ed person is one who is psychological-
ly androgynous - sees no conflict be-
tween being loving and nurturant to a
child, for example, and being compet-
itive in the world of work.

- above all, is aware of being
non-sexist in outlook.

If you interview a therapist and she or he does
not know what you are talking about
when you use the term, chances are
that s/he is not non-sexist!

Parting Shots..or Other Considerations

The matter of fees. Don't be afraid
to frankly discuss fee schedules and
what you personally can or cannot af-
ford to pay for services rendered.
Remember, quality of therapy is not
always correlated with price. Also
check possible insurance coverage.

The matter of "school" of therapy.
The question of whether the therapist
is a Gestaltist or Behaviorist may or
may not determine the therapist's
effectiveness. Much depends on how
the principles of various therapeutic
approaches are used, that is, what
the goals of therapy are, and how
skillful the therapist is. Most ther-
apists happen to be eclectic, that is,
they use the method most suitable to
the client's needs.

The matter of reading about therapy.
The most useful single work for the
person contemplating psychotherapy is
Getting Help: A Woman's Guide to
Therapy by Elizabeth Robson and
Gwenyth Edwards (Dutton Publishers).

A book which goes into possible abuses
of therapy is called Betrayal by Lucy
Freeman and Julie Roy (Stein & Day)
which tells you what to look out for
in the therapeutic situation. There
are many others, but this should be
a good start.

*Turn to page 7