On Visiting Willa Cather

by Sarah Slavin

August 16, 1986 -- Having awakened  
in Brush, Colorado, Karen Peterson  
and I drove East along Interstate 80  
to route 281 South to Red Cloud,  
Nebraska. In 1884 at the age of 11,  
Willa Love (later Sibert) Cather  
moved with her family from Webster  
County, Nebraska, and the year before  
from Back Creek Valley in western  
Virginia, to Red Cloud, an ethnically  
diverse railroad town on the prairie.  
Cather lived there until she turned  
19. Driving onto Webster Street an  
Opera House materialized before us.  
No time machine ever worked better:  
The Opera House was built five years  
before Cather graduated there with  
a high school class of three on  
June 13, 1890.

Willa Cather (1873-1947) was a  
Pulitzer Prize-winning novelist --  
a storyteller, social commentator,  
historian, naturalist and poet --  
in all, the author of 12 novels.  
Her first book, published in 1903,  
was April Twilight, a collection of  
poetry; her second in 1905, a col-  
lection of short stories titled The  
Troll Garden. Cather's first novel  
was Alexander's Bridge (1912); her  
second 'first' novel, O Pioneers!  
(1913). One of Ours (1922) received  
the Pulitzer Prize; Shadows on the  
Rock (1931), the first Prix Femina  
Americaine. (For those interested,  
“Joan Crane has prepared an extensive  
bibliography published in 1982 by  
the University of Nebraska Press.)  
Cather was elected to the American  
Academy of Arts and Letters in 1938,  
— and in 1945 received its fiction  
medal.

Karen's and my first stop in Red  
Cloud was the Willa Cather Historical  
Center in the Garber Bank Building  
at 380 Webster. The tall, narrow  
red brick and carved sandstone build-  
ing -- constructed by and named for  
Red Cloud's founder and later gover-  
nor of Nebraska, Silas Garber -- opens  
into an air-conditioned, tiled vesti-  
bule. (Garber was characterized by  
Cather in A Lost Lady, 1923.) The  
building's narrowness makes it seem  
even taller than it is. Alternate  
tiles in the vestibule picture a  
double sunflower; most of the tiles  
have graffiti tapped into their glaze.  
Although jarring, the result of this  
vandalism is a kind of sparkly effect.  
And, the air-conditioning hit me just  
right for a day in the 90s.

Inside, a striking photograph of  
Cather reveals a woman with a slight-  
ly amused smile and intense yet far-  
away eyes. One description says "re-  
flective," and surely she was, but to  

— me her eyes spoke of conserving self  
from intrusion. This photo showed a  
severe hairstyle, the woman's arms  
locked at the elbows and hands folded  
in her lap. A pinky ring, possibly  
set with an opal, was on her left  

hand. My first impression of Cather  
was of an individual resisting either  
the portrait taking or “interaction”  
with unknown persons viewing the por-  
trait. In the picture, Cather wore a  

Mexican embroidered, dark, fuzzy wool  

coat with a shawl collar, very south-  
western, and in the neck, a light  
scarf, very eastern. Although it may  

not have been, the scarf seemed out  
of character.

On display at the Willa Cather  
Pioneer Memorial and Educational Found-  
ation (which is separated from the his-  
torical center by Ramblin' Rosies Bar  
and Grill), a photo shows a glamorous  
Cather in black fox toque and collar.  
Karen thought the picture looked like  
my mother! (I have not had the nerve  
to look in a mirror for a resemblance  
to Cather in me, too. In my attic,  
however, resides a 25-year-old black  
fox toque; digging it out might be the  
safest way to proceed.) At any rate,  
Cather often projected, in presenta-  
tions of herself that I witnessed, a  
fashionable, even glamorous image.  
This is interesting because apparent-  
ly she did not think much of fashion.  
A poster for a 1984 public radio  
series on Cather's life, times and  
legacy shows her clad in a gorgeous  
dressing gown -- a dress form stand-  
ing behind her left shoulder. In  
fact, less cursory examination of  
these depictions revealed another  
person ill-defined by the camera.

The photograph I liked best  
featured Willa Cather on a camp-  
ing trip in Wyoming, standing in  
front of a tent with her intimate  
friend, Isabelle McClung, for whom  
Cather said she wrote her books.  
Cather seems relaxed and expan-  
sive. Another favorite photo  
showed a 13-year-old Cather (who  
liked to be called Willie), in the  
role of a merchant father in a  
school play, “Beauty and the Beast."  
She was clad in tuxedo and top hat,  

a watch chain looped across her  
chest, a large mustache, almost  
curled at the ends, prominently  
placed beneath her nose. She seemed  
to be enjoying herself. A photo  
taken 24 years later shows Cather  

in a stout, dark hat with osprey  
feathers and dark velvet dress with  
matching satin collar and tie. Some-  
times she clearly had a penchant for  
elegant dress, usually selected by  
McClung. This particular ensemble,  
however, reminded me of nothing so  
much as the merchant costume! This  
1912 picture shows Cather wearing  

a tasseled jade necklace, a gift  

from Sarah Orne Jewett (1849-1909),  
a writer also much given to "local —  
color" and “country people," whose  
late life friendship gave outward  
direction to a younger Cather. The  
necklace is worn by Cather in the  
public radio poster, too.

Meanwhile, back at the bank, I  
ran my left hand along the edge of  
Cather's writing desk, or at least  
one of her writing surfaces; the  
poster for the National Public  
Radio dramatic series shows her  
seated at a table, pen in hand.

The Red Cloud desk is of schoolhouse  
oak, its writing surface folded up to  
reveal slightly separated planks; one  
may have been water damaged. The back  
of the writing surface is inlaid and  
attached by rather ornate hinges;  
drawer pulls below are elaborately  
similar. The drawer would not open.  
The wood was smooth to touch, feeling  
as the dressing gown looked on Cather  
in the public radio poster, silky and  

PAGE 12 OCTOBER 1986 COMMON GROUND  

elegant, albeit flowerless and fringe-  
less. It was a hard choice for one fond  
of both dressing gowns and desks, but  

I liked the desk best.

I wondered about the surface on  
which Cather wrote her high school com-  
mencement speech: 'We paid dearly for  
[investigation] at Eden; we have been  
shedding our heart's blood for it ever  
since." I imagine her putting the  
words on paper seated cross-legged in  
the middle of the orange, red and  
white quilt-covered cot in her bedroom.

Later, Karen agreed with this image,  
adding that the bed looked “pretty  
sagged out."

No other writing surface was ap-  
parent in Cather's bedroom under the  
eaves, set at right angles to the fam-  
ily home and to a dormer in which  
three of her four brothers slept.  
Cather's room was close by the open  
sleeping chamber of the family's  
‘girl’, and reached by narrow, paint-  
sparse stairs from an added-on kitchen.  
Cather's room now has no door; but a  
sheet of plexiglass barred the inter-  
ested observer from passing into the  
room and sitting on the cot to get her  
notes in order...! The original wall-  
paper was in place, if badly deterior-  
ated; strips of paper trim along the  
seams of the eaves had survived in-  
tact, the pink and brown pattern still  
clear and even bright, the roses like  
the wild prairie rose planted next to  
the front door. Cather called her  
room a ‘Rose Bower.”

As one professional who writes  
in bed, I found writing conditions  
at least favorable, although pri-  
vacy may have needed defending.

The single window in the room was  
a tall one. The cot's placement  
in relation to the window would  
have allowed the silver bright  
light to fall over the left  
shoulder of a person sitting on  
the bed, her back to the bed's  
head and the window, or directly  
onto paper held on the lap of a  
person sitting crosswise on the  
cot, parallel to the window wall.  
At the same time, this position  
would not have been comfortable  
enough to lull a writer to sleep.  
White gauze curtains little im-  
peded the light's flow and ad-  
mitted breaths of air, important  
in the attic's close heat. Cather  
described her family home in  

The Song of the Lark (1915):  
"everything a little on the  
slant--roofs, windows, and doors."  
I wonder if this perspective  
was not arrived at as much  
from an habitual perch on her  
cot as from looking outside in,  
and if it had not as much to do  
with her as with her home.

Karen and I had walked to the  
Third Avenue and Cedar Street house  
with Dorothy Hansen, a museum  
curator. Hansen was friendly and  
brisk. On reaching the house, she  
flipped her sunglasses up over her  
regular lenses and conducted the  
tour with them aglant. This state  
of affairs emphasized her briskness  
and also Cather's perception of  
the house. Nothing seemed to slow  
Hansen, although I dearly wished she