A Letter  
to My Sister  

BOOK REVIEW - The Color Purple  

by Alice Walker. New York, Harcourt  
Brace Jovanovich, 1982. Paperback edi-  

tion a Washington Square Press  
Publication of POCKET BOOKS, first  
printed in June, 1983, 253 pages,  

$5.95.  

Reviewed by Peggy L. Chinn  

(a letter to my sister Connie R.  
Hurd in Honolulu, postmarked Buffalo  
NY)  

Dearest C.R.,  

I just finished reading a book that  
I cannot wait to share with you. I  
would send you a copy, but since it has  
won a Pulitzer Prize and American Book  

Award I am sure you can pick it up  
easily in Honolulu - the paperback is  
only $5.95. It is The Color Purple by  

Alice Walker, I decided to read it  
because I wanted a really good book to  
read and figured it must be good with  

all the prizes and attention it has  
received in reviews. I don't like to  
read reviews before I read a book  
because they usually tell too much  

about the story, so I deliberately did  

not read any of the reviews - just  
noticed how many seemed to be  
appearing. Since I know you don't  

like to have the story spoiled for you  
either before you read something, I  
will try not to tell you too much!!  
But I do want to tell you what the book  
meant to me because it turned out that  
I could not help but think of you all  
the way through.  

The main theme of the book is the  
relationship between two sisters, and  
what you read when you read the book is  
their letters. Just like us, they had  
an extremely strong bond between them  
from early in life, and even though  
their lives were very different from  
ours, their letters sound like ours in  
many, many ways. That was what I  
noticed first - even though it is not  
apparent at first that both sisters are  
going to be central to the story (I  
seem to be giving some of it away  

COMMON GROUND DECEMBER 1983 PAGE SIX  

of the  

filled once again with the love,  

BOOK REVIEW  

already). The letters are somewhat hard  
to read at first for folks like you and  
me - they are written in black dialect  
and some of the experiences that they  
talk about seemed to be quite foreign  

to me, a white middle-class woman.  
We've talked about some of our  
struggles around racism what with  

growing up in Hawaii and all that - the  
book touched on many sensitive nerves  
and I felt almost ashamed that Walker  
was revealing some of the tragedies of  
Black experience - some of which I knew  
about but which I felt quite alienated  
from. But then, as the very soul of  
the letters began to emerge, I realized  

all that different from yours and mine  

(just different forms of grossness),  
but also the feelings and the attempts  
to sort through what it all means were  
very much our experience. It is so per-  
sonal, and so thoroughly revealing of  
what women experience, feel and think,  
that part of me felt as if I were  
intruding like a voyeur - I wanted to  
at least withhold the book from men's  
view because it so completely unveiled  
what really goes on in the inner lives  
of so many of us as women.  

The book is exquisitely crafted.  
At first I couldn't quite figure out  
what was going on. The language is so  
different, and certain details were  
missing in the letters - when you write  
a letter you know what the other person  

already knows and you don't have to  

include certain details. It's as if  
someone were to pick up one of our let-  
ters and try to make sense of it!! But  
then, as I kept reading, little details  
began to re-emerge, and the whole thing  
began to make sense - I began to know  
enough to make sense of the letters! I  
have never read a book so rich in  
detail, with so few "words", so  
thoroughly packed with deep emotion. I  
think anyone reading it would be moved  
deeply, but I must admit that because  
of the very deep common bond of  
experience between sisters that the  
book reflects, I was especially  
vulnerable to its message. Anyone  
would probably react when Celie and  
Nettie discover one another, but at  
that point of discovery I had to simply  
put down the book and sob - I was  
relieved by the joy of knowing you.  

Even now, thinking about it I get this  
big lump in my throat.  

One other detail I must comment on.  
Each of the sisters, in their own very  
different worlds and entirely separate  
from one another (except spiritually -  
I don't know of any other word to  
describe it) struggles with figuring  
out the meaning of "God" and Self - the  
meaning of life . . . just like you and  
me. To some "educated" folks, the  
lives of two black women portrayed here  
are "trivial" lives, full of just plain  
old struggle to survive. I know that  
many folks would wonder what on earth  
such women would know, or why on earth  
such "lofty" issues would concern them.  
The discovery and the knowing that  
Celie and Nettie come to is entirely  
significant, and probably more so than  
any of the "lofty" "educated" theolo-  
gians would ever be able to convey.  
The insight, the process, the meaning  
of Celie's and Nettie's struggles are  
so powerful. I certainly don't have to  
tell you how significant this struggle  
is for us - may the goddess bless our  
dear Baptist missionary parents!  

After I read the book I read some  

of the reviews. One reviewer commented  
on the talent of Walker in weaving  
together certain coincidences that  
would come across as too incredible to  
be believed if an author of less talent  

and skill tried to use them. Well, I  
agree, totally that Walker has  
demonstrated exceptional literary  

talent and the "believability" of the  
story is rightly credited to her skill.  
But also, I know that many of our  
experiences seem unbelievable!  
Ordinary "trivial" lives just seem  
beyond belief sometimes I guess.  
That's the heart of it - these  
seemingly lowly lives are believable -  
yours and mine included.  

I have more to share, but I must  
get on with the humdrum - I have to  
get the yard mowed and do some laundry  
before I go to Emma tonight. But  
please know how very much I love you.  
You are my dear, dear sister, you are  
part of my soul, and I miss you more  
than I can say. I will be so glad when  
the day comes that we can just sit and  
talk without this terrible distance of  
space. Remember that I already have  
two rocking chairs that we can put on  
the porch, and just rock and talk and  
reflect on what it has all meant!  

Love, P.L.