INTERVIEW:  
A Feminist Look at Women in Art  

By Marilyn Patterson  

Norine Spurling of Williamsville,  
an artist and 1982 winner of the NOW  
"Women Helping Women" Award, believes  
things are getting better for women  
artists, thanks to their own hard work  
to gain recognition.  

"Women have been making a lot of  
noise," Ms. Spurling said. "They have  
made enough noise that [art museums  
and galleries] can't ignore us. We're  
not being treated equally, but it's  
better than it was."  

The Albright-Knox Art Gallery in  
Buffalo, she noted as evidence, has  
been showing the works of women art-  
ists, which was unheard of one decade  
ago.  

She also recounted an overheard re-  
mark by a staff member of a downtown  
gallery. "He said 'I think it's time  
we had some male artists. All we've  
had lately has been women."  

Ms. Spurling speculates that that  
is because "in the last ten years,  
the work that women have been doing  
has been much more exciting. Women  
have something to say."  

Although galleries and museums are  
more likely to show some women's work,  
there are still many aspects of the  
world of art which have not opened to  
women, she said. Museums' permanent  
collections usually have little work  
by women, she continued, and the Al-  
bright-Knox has no women artists rep-  
resented in its permanent collection.  
"Magazines tend to review men's  
work rather than women's and the fac-  
ulty of university art departments are  
overwhelmingly male. At the University  
of Buffalo where she studied art five  

years ago, there were no women  
on the faculty, but the students were  
"at least 75 percent women."  

Ms. Spurling did not feel that wo-  
men students were taken seriously in  
those days. Again she quoted from a  
conversation she overheard when one of  
her instructors was showing a visitor  
around the classroom. The visitor  
commented on the proportion of women  
in the class. "That's ok," said the  
instructor, "they'll be able to use  

their art decorating their houses and  
taking care of kids."  

"By fighting for it, we have at  
least impressed upon people that 'you  
better be careful' because [a woman  
artist] might be serious." Ms. Spurl-  
ing serves on several boards of art  
organizations and noted that the men  
on those boards are starting to be a-  
ware of sexist attitudes and termin-  
ology. At least while she is in the  
room, she said, they now will correct  
themselves when they say something  
that puts down a woman.  

Ms. Spurling has been one of those  
women fighting for recognition for her-  
self and other women artists and it is  
for all of these fights that she has  
been awarded the "Women Helping Women"  
Award by the Buffalo chapter of the  
National Organization for Women.  

She is very pleased about that.  

"If there is any award to be gotten,  
that's the one. It's really neat,"  
she said with a big smile.  

Her work in helping women began ten  
years ago when she was a planner for a  
festival on women and the arts at  
Buffalo State College. The ten-day  
festival drew many important women  
artists and included a focus on the  
history of women artists. It was an  

inspiring event for Ms. Spurling.  

"It was exciting to find out about  
all these women who had been making  
their livings as painters back in the  
Renaissance."  

Ms. Spurling can't pinpoint the be-  
ginning of her own history as an art-  
ist. She does not remember a time  
when she was not an artist.  

"My parents kept me supplied with  
paints when I was a child," she said,  
"but I grew up in the years when girls  
had to get married before they were  
old maids."  

So she did get married and have  
three children, two daughters and a  
son. It wasn't until the youngest was  
in school that she pursued a career in  
art. She taught art while she and her  
family still lived in California when  
her children were young. Then when the  
family moved to Western New York, she  
studied art at the University of Buf-  
falo and earned a bachelor's of fine  
arts degree and a master of arts and  
humanities degree by 1975. Her pri-  
mary medium is charcoal drawings, her  
primary subject matter is women. She  
also does pastel drawings, lithographs  
and most recently, color xeroxes.  

Ms. Spurling's career in art has  
been a blend of her own creative work,  
teaching, directing art galleries, or-  
ganizing exhibits and serving on the  

boards of art organizations.  

In all of this she has been con-  
cerned with the image of women.  

As gallery director of the  
Artists' Committee Gallery in Buffalo,  
she organized a regional women's art  
show in 1977 -- a show in which all  
who submitted entries were invited to  
sit on the jury, the body which decides  
which pieces will be exhibited. As an  
aside, she noted that that show coin-  
cided exactly with the famous Blizzard  
of '77, so was not seen by as many  
people as she had hoped.  

In 1980 she served as exhibition  
coordinator for Womenworks, an art  
gallery at the YWCA. Among exhibits  
hosted during that year were an ex-  
hibit of Third-world women and a gen-  
erational show entitled "Sisters," in  
which each display included the work  
of several members of the same family.  

As a teacher she worked at St. Aug-  
ustine's School, St. Philip's Church  
After-school Program, and the women's  
division of the penitentiary in Alden.  
Currently, she teaches at UB's Black  
Mountain College and the Buffalo State  
College's Continuing Education Pro-  
gram.  

Marilyn Patterson is a therapist and  
former reporter who lives in Buffalo.  

by Norine Spurling  

COMMON GROUND JANUARY 1983  

PAGE 3