Sharon Green

I have been a mother for 9 years;  
the mother of a daughter, for the past  
five. Being a feminist has enriched an  
already rich mothering experience.

Ellen was special to me even before  
she was born, because during my sixth  
month of pregnancy I made a most  
difficult decision: to give birth at  
home, rather than in a hospital. I  
successfully orchestrated my own birth  
experience, and I beat the risks of  
home birth. So we were both off to a  
wonderful start.

Still, raising a daughter those  
first years did not feel very different  
than raising my little boy. As an  
advocate of non-sexist childbearing,  
I've always made a conscious effort to  
treat them both the same.

However, in the past few months,  
since Ellen has turned 5, I am  
increasingly aware that I, indeed, have  
a daughter. The differences between  
her and her brother - as well as my  
interactions with each of them - are  
becoming more pronounced. And I am  
enjoying the fact that I have a  
daughter more and more.

Perhaps, at the simplest level, I  
feel a sense of identity. I did not  
have sisters to grow up with, and so I  
am suddenly discovering someone to  
share "girl" things with. For example,  
Ellen loves to wear skirts with tights  
to school. In an effort to stretch the  
life of these tights, I showed her how  
clear nail polish stops runs. She was  
completely intrigued by this process,  
and so I told her, "This is a girls-  
only trick."

Nowadays she watches intently as I  
comb my hair, shave my legs or file my  
nails. She is thrilled when I offer  
her some of my perfume, or when I wear  
pantyhose and a skirt on the same day  
that she does. I enjoy teaching her  
the female things that I learned from  
my mother, even the ones that seem  
stereotypically feminine - and even  
antithetically feminist.

Yet, as a feminist, I can also share  
with her things that my mother never  
dared. Ellen has recently become very  
curious about how my body differs from  
hers. I have never undressed behind  
closed doors as my own mother did.  
Consequently, my daughter can't wait to  
have hair under her arms, or have  
breasts “like Mom's" so she too can  
wear a bra.

Although she is only 5, Ellen has  
some rudimentary sense of menstruation,  
simply because I do not hide it from  
her. I tell her not to jump on my  
stomach when I have cramps, and she  
sees me use sanitary pads. Feminism  
has enabled me to get past disgust for  
my body, and so by not hiding and by  
not using euphemisms for menstruation,  
I try to impart a positive feeling to  
my daughter. She seems at ease  
watching and asking questions.

Like many little girls, Ellen has  
already had one urinary tract  
infection, probably as a result of  
careless wiping. Rather than just  
explaining to her that she must wipe  
from front to back, as my mother once  
did to me, I have also decided to let  
her know her own genital area. I let  
her look in a large mirror, so she can  
see just where everything is in  
relation to everything else. No dark,  
used to think of it. Feminism got me  
past that, and I am proud to be able to  
hold the mirror for her so she can  
learn what and where her "vagina" is.

Having a daughter allows me to  
relive my own childhood. I feel this  
most forcefully when she has another  
little girl over to play. I often sit  
quietly outside her bedroom, listening  
to the two girls play records, play  
dress-up, or play Barbies. Despite  
non-sexist toys and play, they still  
like to hone in on the same old  
favorites that I played with 30 years  
earlier.

Finally, this child gives me  
enormous affection. I continually  
resist the urge to attribute her  
affectionate nature to her sex, any  
more than I would attribute other  
characteristics to my son because of  
his sex. It may just be coincidence  
and personality difference.

Nonetheless, my daughter showers me  
with kisses and hugs, scratches my back  
and rubs my neck when I am tired. Now  
that she is learning French, she often  
tells me "Je t'aime - beaucoup!"

As a feminist, I appreciate my  
daughter for the person that she is.  
And I am glad to be living in a time  
when I can encourage her to be and do  
whatever she is capable of doing. I  
thank God that I will never have to bind  
her feet, or watch her burn on a  
husband's funeral pyre, or even, tell her  
that she must be a virgin when she  
marries.

And I have a daughter who is bright,  
beautiful and loving. What mother  
could ask for more?

Why Can't Sharon Kowalski

by Betsy Gimbel

Those of us who pay attention to  
the myriads of cruel and unjust acts  
that routinely take place in our  
society may feel that we have seen it  
all. One more injustice to one more  
human being will just sink into our  
subconscious as yet another confirma-  
tion that there is no justice under  
capitalism.

But the story of Sharon Kowalski,  
a disabled lesbian held against her  
will in a nursing home, and the  
brave and heroic story of her lover,  
Karen Thompson, to free Sharon, is  
exceptional. It undermines any  
notions we may have that nobody would  
mistreat a defenseless patient in a  
hospital or nursing home.

Why Can't Sharon Kowalski Come  
Home? by Karen Thompson and Julie  
Andrzejewski, (Spinsters/Aunt Lute  
Book Company, P.O. Box 410687, San  
Francisco, CA 94141, 1988) gives the  
blow by blow story. From 1983, when  
Sharon is severely injured by a  
drunk driver, it details the long  
grueling years where Karen Thompson  
finds herself forced to take on the  
whole world in a battle for lesbian/  
gay rights, and disability rights.

Since soon after Kowalski became  
disabled, the courts have kept her  
separated from her lover against her  
wishes. A nationwide movement has  
grown up as Thompson fights to defend  
her loving relationship with Sharon,  
to get adequate medical care for her  
lover, and to overcome the many pre-  
judicial notions about people with  
disabilities.

The book also has a very honest  
appraisal of Karen Thompson’s evolu-  
tion from Midwestern college professor  
concerned only with career, to a per-  
son who now says, “But as my insights  
grew, I began to see the connections  
between all these issues. For the  
first time, I could see the system  
from the outside. It became clear to  
me how many ways I had been oppressed  
and how I had participated in the  
oppression of others. I could now  
apply this analysis to what had  
happened to Sharon and me...It gave  
me a new purpose. Even though my  
primary motivation was still to fight  
for Sharon, I could see a bigger  
cause.”

Thompson's book shows how lesbian  
and gay couples are oppressed by  
laws that criminalize or fail to  
recognize their relationships. It  
also gives practical suggestions on  
how couples can protect themselves  
from such assaults by the health  
care system, parents, judges and  
lawyers. Above all, the work gives  
everybody a lesson on perseverance in the  
face of adversity. As the authors  
put it so well, "we dedicate this book  
to Sharon Kowalski and other dis-  
abled people who have not been allowed  
to speak for themselves in determining  
their own lives or to fight for the  
rights they have been denied."

No one will be able to read this  
book without tears of inspiration  
and renewal of spirit.

Proceeds from the book's sales  
go to the Sharon Kowalski Defense  
Fund. The book is available at  
EMMA, Women's Books and Gifts,  
168 Elmwood Ave., Buffalo.