| REAGAN VISIT Coalition for Equal Rights |
WOMEN’S

VOTE PROJECT

by Judith Geer

I live only three blocks from
D'Youville College and I do have
Wednesdays off, I had reasoned. Be-
sides, a friend of mine (as rabidly
anti-Reagan as I) works at the college
and had an extra ticket to get us
through the metal detectors and at
least next to Fargo Ave. where the
procession would pass by. What the
hell. I might as well stick on my
"Out the Door in '84 - Dump Reagan"
button, scribble out a picket sign
and go let the old ("Old" is a state
of mind, not a chronological age.
Reagan's OLD!) guy know how I feel.

The day was cloudy and crisp at
first so I dressed for cool weather
and started out. I had to circumvent
the direct route to D’Youville via
Porter and walk down to Niagara then
up Porter to Prospect and on to the
D'Youville library where I was to
meet my friend. As I passed the BIF
building at Niagara and Porter, I was
thrilled to see workers outside tack-
ing up enormous Mondale-Ferraro signs.
I was so inspired by their fervor
(and my membership in NEA) that when
I met my friend at the library and
went upstairs to write my sign I put
“Teachers for Mondale-Ferraro." I
wanted to say something direct, posi-
tive and uncluttered with invective
and felt this would do.

We went outside the administration
building at first. The police and
secret service were wandering around
but no one bothered us. We were un-
sure where the best vantage point
would be so we stood in front of
Madonna Hall at Fargo and Porter and
talked with some nuns who had come to
protest. I wanted to check on the
protest groups supposedly gathering
in Prospect Park and on our way there
we wandered over to Connecticut Street.
It was at this point that we began
tasting the bitter hostility of the
pro-Reaganites. "Don't stand next
to me with that sign." "Get out of
here." “You're disgusting." Lovely
folks. Anyway, we remained good
Christians, turned the other cheek and
walked away.

There weren't too many protesters
gathered in the park, but I recognized
a couple of old friends and we chatted
for a while. One friend commented,
“This is a very uneasy coalition,"
indicating the groups in the park,
and I could see why! The Marxists
were next to the labor unions, the
Socialist-Workers were next to the
senior citizens and nuclear freeze
people. It was too fragmented a group
for us, so we walked back to Fargo.

We were now determined to get close
enough to the President with our
signs so he would have to know our
sentiments.

Reporters were everywhere trying
to garner controversy. Seeing our
signs, Mary Travers from WKBW radio
interviewed both of us and a NEWS
photographer took our picture talking
to a policeman. They kept asking us,
“Where's the protest?" When it fi-
nally happened, quietly but fiercely,
most of them missed it.

We went through the metal detectors
in the college parking lot and out
onto Fargo, finally making our way
down to the corner at Porter. There
were few people here so we could get
right up front and display our signs.
Actually, most of the people here
were school children bussed in from
the Southtowns who seemed thoroughly
bored by the whole shebang. Some of
them noticed our signs and one little
girl said, "Don't you like the Presi-
dent?" When my friend said, “No, we
don't," the girl shrugged her shoul-
ders and quickly replied, "My mother
doesn't like him either." My friend
complimented her on having such an
intelligent mother.

At this juncture, my friend stayed
on the Fargo side of the corner facing
Holy Angels rectory and I stood on the
Porter side so that if the President
looked toward our side of the street
as he went around the corner he'd be
looking at both our signs (hers said
"Another Catholic Against Reagan").

We heard the reverberating voices of
a number of Republican big-wigs in-
cluding Kemp, D'Amato and Rutkowski
before Reagan spoke. We couldn't
hear too much of any of their speeches
as we were too far away, patiently
lying in wait to zap our signs in
their faces as they walked by later.

In the meantime several people
asked us why we'd come and exhorted
us to “respect the President." Then
there was the ever-popular "You're
going to get arrested with signs like
that.” Is this Buffalo or Gdansk,
I kept wondering? It wasn't just
what they said that was so disturbing
but the hostility behind the words.
What were they afraid of? We were
nicely dressed, our signs were not
offensive, and we weren't yelling
evil things. After thinking about it
from some days’ distance, I've decided
they could possibly have been led to
believe (quite probably by Reagan him-
self) that those who question the
authority of the President question
the value of democracy and thereby of
America itself. How did he do this
insidious thing so completely? I do
not believe we have an intelligent
man here, nor, as some insist, a good
actor. What we do have is someone
who is easily led, easily used and
one who lives in an isolated fantasy
world of the past which he has made
very appealing to the masses. This
whole train of thought reminds me of
CABARET. The man loves to be inside
where “life is beautiful" while out-
side the world is crumbling. People
don't want to be reminded of what's
outside so they enter this delightful
Andy Hardy-type fantasy with this
fatherly fellow who keeps assuring
them it's okay not to learn to cope
with reality, until suddenly.... If
Reagan is re-elected I'm afraid our
“suddenly” is going to happen all too
quickly and I can already hear the
choruses of “We didn't know this was
coming." Who'll be singing the blues
then?

After the speeches the President
walked to the corner where my friend
and I were standing and at once a
forest of protest signs shot up
across the street. This is the part
none of the media I saw covered to
any extent. The entire corner in
front of Holy Angels was a wall of
signs from many groups and individuals.

The one I liked best said simply "A
Republican Grandmother for Mondale.”
One can only wonder why more of this
didn't get air time.

After walking half a block, the
President got into his car and drove
across the street for lunch. I left
to go to work, but as I did so, I
could hear a man saying to my friend,
“You're for Mondale? You must be
pro-abortion."

Yep -- I'm singin' the blues!

NOTES FROM

WAND

(A new regular feature of Common
Ground beginning this month, is
Notes From W.A.N.D.--Women’s Action
For Nuclear Disarmament. Contact
W.A.N.D. at the Western New York
Peace Center, 440 Leroy, Buffalo,
N.Y., 835-4073.)

W.A.N.D. has concentrated its
efforts on voter registration over
the past six months. We're working
hard to get Reagan out of office.

In October, our energy will be
focused on educating the public by
illustrating the connection between
Reagan and his issues. His ability
to disconnect himself from unpopular
issues he is responsible for must
be exposed once and for all and
turned into power at the polls.

Eileen Giarraffa and Audrey “Mang
have recently returned from a ten
day trip to Russia. The trip was
under the auspices of the Council of
Soviet American Friendship and the
Committee of Youth Organizations of
the U.S.S.R., with the purposes of
sharing our mutual desire for peace
and exploring means of helping our
respective youth deal with life in
a world in which there is a constant
threat of nuclear holocaust.

Also on an international note,
WAND recently served as hostess to
three European women visiting here.

PAGE 6 COMMON GROUND OCTOBER 1984

Patricia Seaver

The Buffalo Coalition for Equal
Rights, representing 20,000 women
belonging to 28 local organizations,
is serving locally as a clearinghouse
for activities related to the Women's
Vote Project (WVP). The WVP is a
campaign sponsored by 68 national
organizations representing over 25
million women. Its goal is to
involve women more fully in the
electoral process, thereby making
public officials more responsive
to the needs of women. Among local
groups working on the WVP are:
American Association of University
Women, Coalition of Labor Union
Women, Junior League of Buffalo, NOW,
League of Women Voters, Planned
Parenthood, WAND, Women in Commu-
nication, YWCA and twenty other Buffalo
and Erie County women's groups.

The Women's Vote Project operated
prior to the 1982 elections using
the slogan "It's a man's world un-
less women vote." Women's groups
were beginning to recognize that not
only do women make up 53% of the
electorate, but they also vote
differently from men, especially on
issues of social justice and peace.
The 1984 campaign, with the slogan
“Put your votes where your rights
are," is emphasizing the fact that
there is a gender gap. The WVP is
a three-part campaign: voter regis-
tration, education and participation.
Wearing pink buttons saying "The
hand that rocks the cradle pulls the
lever--VOTE," members of the Coalition
staffed a voter registration booth
for the duration of the Erie County
Fair. Other voter registration drives
have taken place in malls, public
health facilities, adult education
centers, day care and senior citizens
centers.

Voter education--teaching voters
about the issues and making them
understand how their vote can in-
fluence and change public policy
is a crucial part of the WVP.
Locally, the Coalition will conduct
a candidate survey on issues such
as the Equal Rights Amendment. The
results will be sent not only to the
local media, but also to newly
registered voters along with infor-
mation to make sure they are familiar
with voting procedures and polling
places. The results will also be
disseminated to the 20,000 women who
are members of the organizations that
make up the Coalition by means of
internal newsletters.

The voter participation phase of
the WVP will include dissemination
of "Get Out the Vote” literature,
public service announcements, can-
vassing and providing services such
as phone banks and car pools to in-
crease voter turnout.

The Coalition for Equal Rights
was organized in 1982 as part of the
"A New Day Beyond ERA" campaign of
the National Women's Conference Com-
mittee. The purpose of the New Day
campaign was to establish grassroots
coalitions to work for women's rights
regardless of the outcome of the
ratification effort for the ERA. The
first major project of the Coalition
following its July 1, 1982 organizing
rally in Niagara Square was a survey
of candidates for the U.S. Senate
and House of Representatives, N.Y.
Senate and Assembly, and Governor
on their stand on the ERA. Slightly
more than 50% of the candidates
responded to the questionnaire and
the results were sent to the local
media and to the organizations making
up the Coalition for use in their
internal newsletters.

In addition to the WVP, the
Coalition has engaged in intensive
letter writing and lobbying for the
federal and state ERA efforts. The
Coalition has also worked extensively
with Erie County Legislator Joan Bozer
on drafting a Commission on the
Status of Women for Erie County.

Since one of the main goals of
the Coalition is to promote informed
participation in the political pro-
cess, many of our activities are
aimed at educating the public on the
stands of public officials and can-
didates on issues of particular in-
terest to women, such as the ERA.
Although the Coalition is non-partisan
and does not endorse candidates, we
do urge voters to consider a candi-
date’s stand on the ERA.

The intent of the Coalition is
not to become another women's organ-
ization, but rather to serve as a
network of organizations which are
committed to the attainment of equity
for women. To that end, our meetings
are business meetings wherein repre-
sentatives of organizations meet
to share ideas, plan joint activities,
serve as mutual resources, and co-
ordinate efforts in behalf of equity
issues. If your group would like
more information, call 688-5893.

BEYOND
ERA

Patricia Seaver, Ph.D., is an Adjunct
Professor of Spanish at the Rochester
Institute of Technology. She is the
coordinator for the local Coalition
for Equal Rights, and a member of the
American Association of University
Women. She is married and has one son.