"Walk on Water",  
pen and ink,  
by Linda Michael  

PAGE 2 COMMON GROUND = MARCH 1985  

March 1985  
Volume 3, No. 7  

CONTENTS  

EMICK PLEADS GUILTY  
INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S DAY EVENT  

POLICY  
NEWS  

NEWS:  

CAROL REICHERT ON REPRODUCTIVE  
RIGHTS  

PLANNED PARENTHOOD NEW SERVICES  

PAGE SUBSCRIPTION INFORMATION  

- Woman-  
Express ’85  

POETRY, PROSE, PHOTOGRAPHS, GRAPHICS,  
WOMEN WHO CONTRIBUTED TO THIS ISSUE.  

WOMEN WHO WORKED ON THIS ISSUE:  
Alice, Esther, Bonnie, Heather,  
Susan, Beth, Chris, Jimmie, Ruth,  
Laura, Gerri, Sharon, Beth, Cindy,  
Cathy, Elizabeth, Peggy, Charlene,  
Frigid, Linda, Jan and Wanda Wyneau.  

A very special thank you to the  
folks at the Arts Council.  

Thank you to all the artists, poets,  
and authors who have helped make  
this a very special and exciting  
issue to work on!  

COVER GRAPHIC:  
"Dancer", pen and ink by  
Linda Michaels.  

POLICY  

PHILOSOPHY — Common Ground is potentially, with  
help from Western New York women, a forum to  
celebrate the rich diversity of our community. We view  
the paper as a ribbon that may connect our  
commonalities, our intersection points. We are inviting  
you to participate actively in the building of a support  
system for WNY women. We affirm our commitment to  
enhance the lives of women on physical, educational,  
spiritual, psychological, social and economic levels. We  
want to present, fair-mindedly, the issues that concern  
women, and information of value to women. We offer  
Common Ground as a place where women can display  
their art and personal literature, and re-view the  
tapestries of their experiences.  

EDITORIAL POLICY — Common Ground is especially  
looking for articles which address the needs and  
interests of local women.  

1. Common Ground is a publication of news, culture  
and dialogue from women’s perspectives.  

2. News, Opinion, Analysis and Commentary will each  
be clearly labeled as such.  

3. We are seeking to provide accurate, straightforward  
information of value to women.  

4. The collective will not intentionally print or support  
materials or viewpoints which will harm women  
because of color, sexuality, religious or ethnic  
background, physical disability or economic situation.  

5. While opinions expressed in Common Ground are  
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the  
collective as a whole, we do accept responsibility for  
choosing what we print.  

SUBMISSIONS — We welcome articles, letters,  
information and announcements of interest to women.  
Graphics, cartoons, art and photography will be  
gratefully received. We especially invite women who  
do not usually have access to traditional media,  
women of color, differently abled, economically or  
educationally disadvantaged, and those for whom  
English is a second language — to write. Suggested  
length of letters: 250 words. Letters must be signed to  
be printed. We will, however, respect your privacy and  
withhold your name if you request. Suggested length of  
articles, commentary, analysis: 500-750 words. Please  
type and double-space your work, 40 characters across.  
If you do not have access to a typewriter, please print  
clearly. In time we hope to have a typewriter, paper,  
etc., available for those who request it. Include a  
stamped, self-addressed envelope and work and home  
phone numbers. Because we want to hear your voices,  
if your piece needs to be edited for length or clarity, we  
will call you/ask you to do it. Keep copies of your work.  
We will try to notify you within three (3) weeks if we  
intend to use your work. If we print it, we will give you  
five (5) copies of the issue in which it appears. Artwork  
should be black and white copies only, and  
title/describe your work. We will copyright the entire  
issue, but the copyright on each piece reverts to the  
author/artist, so that she may decide where her work is  
printed. Please request a style-sheet for further  
information and guidelines if you want to write.  

COMMON GROUND  
WNY Women’s Newsjournal  
P.O. Box 313  

Bidwell Station  

Buffalo, New York 14222  

NEW PHONE NUMBER: 881-4383,  
©1984 WNY Women’s Newsjournal  

ADVERTISEMENT POLICY AND RATES — See  
Advertisement Section.