the  
collective | :  
meets | |  

Contents  
Policy  
GENTLE READER:  
The social event of the season was  

CONTENTS  

Judy Goldsmith In Town  

REVIEW: Missile Envy  

3. News  
NOW Candidate's Night  
ERA Poll Results  

the Buffalo Women's Tea Party, held Goldsmith con't  
at the Downtown YWCA,.  

Ms. Lee Lyons, director of the YW, 4. REVIEW: The Burning Bed  
sent watercress sandwiches, though ~ REVIEW: The Natural  

she was unable to attend due to a  
most nasty case of the sniffles. biG  
Ms. Beth Mann spoke on behalf of  

Common Ground, and Ms. Charlene  

Wheeler talked most eloquently,  

with audio-visual aids, on the EMMA 6.  
collective. Ms. Anne Montes poured,  

The highlight of the evening was  
networking. Women from several groups  
mixed with ladies from others. Re- 7.  
presentatives from the Coalition of  
Labor Union Women, Volunteer Support 8&9  
Advocates for Rape Victims, the Dis- r  
placed Homemaker Center, the YWCA,  

Caldicott con't  

WOMAN EXPRESS  

REVIEW: Body of the Work  

Notes From My Grandmother's Journal  
Poets' Corner  

Photographs  

Pot Pourri  

Calendar  

10. Women's Safety  

Erie County and Buffalo NOW, South-  
town Women's Resource Center, Cassandra| 11. 10 Days in the Soviet Union  
the Radical Feminist Nurses' Network WAND Notes  

and the Seneca Women's Peace encamp- Women's Safety, con't  

ment exchanged information on several  

different topics, including the oppor- 12. "Y" Women's Weekend  
tunity for charitable works.  
Ms. Gerri Baycr came down with a 13. Announcements  

frightful case of nerves and was  
unable to complete her piece on the  
history of Common Ground. Ms. Mann,  
previously mentioned, did a marvelous  
job of describing the purpose of  

the paper and what nice women could  
do to further the cause:  

-help with lay-out, selections, dis-  
tribution, advertising  

-buy subscriptions and get everyone  
who is anyone to buy subscriptions.  

Ms. Brooke Bovard, looking lovely  
in her silk blouse, did a perfect  
job as mistress of ceremonies, and  
Elaine Litner, of the Tonawanda Litner,  
helped prepare a stunning refreshment  
table. Susan J. and Kay made everyone  
feel most welcome.  

The most amazing of all was that  
not a tea-cup was lost. Oh—and a  
good time was had by all.  

P.S. Special thanks to the YW  
and Lee Lyons for the use of the  
room and the tea service.  

14. EMMA IS...  
Resources  

15. Advertisements  

16. Back Page and Subscription Info.  

WOMEN WHO WORKED ON THIS ISSUE:  

Diane, Heather, Gerri, Peggy, Marilyn,  
Susan, Kate, Laura, Frigid, Alice, Jan,  
Beth, Susan, Linda, Kay, Cathy, Joan,  
Elizabeth, Charlene, Ruth, Esther,  
Beth, Judith, Bonnie, Chris, and  
Sharon  

COMMON GROUND NOVEMBER 1984 PAGE 2  

POLICY  

PHILOSOPHY — Common Ground is potentially, with  
help from Western New York women, a forum to  
celebrate the rich diversity of our community. We view  

the paper as a ribbon that may connect our  
commonalities, our intersection points. We are inviting  
you to participate actively in the building of a support  
system for WNY women. We affirm our commitment to  
enhance the lives of women on physical, educational,  
spiritual, psychological, social and economic levels. We  
want to present, fair-mindedly, the issues that concern  
women, and information of value to women. We offer  
Common Ground as a place where women can display  
their art and personal literature, and re-view the  
tapestries of their experiences.  

EDITORIAL POLICY — Common Ground is especially  
looking for articles which address the needs and  
interests of local women.  

1. Common Ground is a publication of news, culture  
and dialogue from women’s perspectives. :  

2. News, Opinion, Analysis and Commentary will each  
be clearly labeled as such.  

3. We are seeking to provide accurate, straightforward  
information of value to women.  

4. The collective will not intentionally print or support  
materials or viewpoints which will harm women  
because of color, sexuality, religious or ethnic  
background, physical disability or economic situation.  

5. While opinions expressed in Common Ground are  
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the  
collective as a whole, we do accept responsibility for  
choosing what we print.  

SUBMISSIONS — We welcome articles, letters,  
information and announcements of interest to women.  
Graphics, cartoons, art and photography will be  
gratefully received. We especially invite women who  
do not usually have access to traditional media —  
women of color, differently abled, economically -or  
educationally disadvantaged, and those for whom  
English is a second language — to write. Suggested  
length of letters: 250 words. Letters must be signed to  
be printed. We will, however, respect your privacy and  
withhold your name if you request. Suggested length of  
articles, commentary, analysis: 500-750 words. Please  
type and double-space your work, 40 characters across.  
If you do not have access to a typewriter, please print  
clearly. In time we hope to have a typewriter, paper,  
etc., available for those who request it. Include a  
stamped, self-addressed envelope and work and home  
phone numbers. Because we want to hear your voices,  
if your piece needs to be edited for length or clarity, we  
will call you/ask you to do it. Keep copies of your work.  
We will try to notify you within three (3) weeks if we  
intend to use your work. If we print it, we will give you  
five (5) copies of the issue in which it appears. Artwork  
should be black and white copies only, and  
title/describe your work. We will copyright the entire  
issue, but the copyright on each piece reverts to the  
author/artist, that she may decide where her work is  
printed. Please request a style-sheet for further  
information and guidelines if you want to write.  

COMMON GROUND  

P.O. Box 313  
Bidwell Station  
Buffalo, N.Y. 14222  

NEW PHONE NUMBER: 881-4383.  
©1984 WNY Women’s Newsjournal  

ADVERTISEMENT POLICY AND RATES — See  
Advertisement Section.