courage and the tact to suggest such  
alternatives to the future teachers  
of my own children, if necessary?  
Another intriguing aspect of sex-  
role stereotyping is the issue of how  
far a child can "cross the line"  
into the world of the opposite sex.  
There is still a big gap between how  
much masculinity girls can exhibit  
and how much femininity boys can exhibit.  
For instance, it is fine for a girl to  
have many stereotypically male charac-  
teristics from early childhood well on  
into adolescence (for example, it is  
acceptable for her to show an interest  
in sports), but God forbid that a boy  
display any stereotypically "femin-  
ine" qualities, even as a young child.  
A boy interested in ballet, let's  
say, makes many people uneasy at best,  
and disgusted at worst. He'll meet  
with an assortment of misogynist  
comments, the most frequent (and  
in my opinion the most damaging) of  
which is "sissy."  

The only equivalent for his female  
counterpart is "tomboy," but the  
connotations of these two terms differ  
immensely. Cute, interesting and even  
a bit of a novelty, a tomboy is no  
great cause for concern, at least up  
until the early teenage years; it is  
expected that at some point, she'll  
outgrow this stage. "Sissy!" on the  
other hand, is a serious accusation;  
both peers and adults dislike—some-  
times even loathe—this boy, because  
he suggests an effeminate, weak male—  
perhaps even a potential homosexual.  

So I think that crossing the line  
too far, for either a boy or a girl  
(but especially a boy) is too threaten-  
ing to others. Homophobia (that is,  
the fear of homosexuals) compels  
many parents to raise their boys  
as "real" boys, and their girls  
as "real" girls.  

Not only is there widespread  
fear of and ignorance of homo-  
sexuality, I also believe that the  
fear of boys acting like girls indi-  
cates a great contempt in our cul-  
ture for women. We all know that  
much of the work done by women is  
monotonous, under-acknowledged, under-  
paid, and it centers on serving others.  
No wonder boys don't want to be  
like girls. But other aspects of  
women's lives, such as their behaviour,  
their dress, their interests and their  
activities other than work, are  
apparently also not desirable to boys.  

In a recent article in Redbook  
magazine (February, 1983), Carol  
Tavris reported on a survey done by  

Dr. Alice I. Baumgartner and her col-  
leagues at the Institute for Equality  
in Education at the University of  
Colorado. Baumgartner asked this  
question of almost 2,000 children  
grades 3 - 12 in both rural and urban  
areas of Colorado: "If you woke up  
tomorrow and discovered that you  

were a (boy) (girl), how would your  
life be different?"  

The children's responses (many of  
which are quoted in this article)  
pointed to one outstanding conclusion—  
that both sexes had fundamental con-  
tempt for females. The boys found  
little to admire in women, and the  
girls seemed to realize that being  
female was limiting, lonely and not  
as much fun as being male.  

So what is the answer? When we  
pat pink on our baby girls and blue  
on our baby boys, are we really begin-  
ning a potentially dangerous process?  
It is clear to me that we cannot  
eradicate sex-stereotyping; people's  
attitudes  
will not be changed overnight.  

But there is a partial and gradual  
solution, and that is to raise our  
children in a more androgynous manner.  

I feel that androgyny (having both  
male and female characteristics)  
can result in more freedom for every  
one, and a more equitable balance of  

power than now exists in our society.  
After all, if our sons can both dress  
a doll and run to home base, then  
they will both be prepared for their  
future role as fathers, as well as  
benefit from physical exercise. If  
our daughters can both change the oil  
in the car and cook dinner, then they  
will both be prepared for their future  
role as car owners and drivers, as  
well as benefit from nutritionally  
balanced meals.  

To me, that represents freedom—  
the freedom, for example, not to  
have to depend on someone else when  
the car needs fixing, or the freedom  
to not be deprived of fully experienc-  
ing all aspects of one's newborn child.  

And isn't freedom what America is  
supposed to be all about? Let us look  
at our own children, and the other  
children that we come in contact with.  
Are we letting them be free, or are  
we merely pigeonholing them into a  
world of "the pinks and the blues"?  

* "The Pinks and the Blues," a pro-  
duction of NOVA and WGBH, pro-  
duced, written and directed by  
Veronica Young, aired on Channel  

17 in Buffalo, on September 30,  
1980.  

given their timing, mainly sustain  
certain butterflies and unlike their  
fall sisters, seldom set seed.  
(Anyway, if it's any of our business,  
violets mostly propagate by means of  
runners, or scions, as they're known  
in the botanical world.) For all  
their sweet aroma, violets have  

a tangy, even bitter, flavor, which  
sits especially well with white vin-  
egar. To prepare, gather the flowers,  
fresh, wash thoroughly, bruise slight-  
ly (do be careful), and pile loosely  
and high in a glass bottle. Fill  
with boiling vinegar; cover tightly;  
and set away on a warm, dry shelf for  
ten days. Strain the vinegar, then  
bring to the boil, and pour into  
sterile bottles. Add a fresh violet  
to each, and seal (see Rose, 1979: 217-28).  

Although Daphne thinks the matter  
deserves attention, if violet-flavor-  
ed vinegar is not your idea of  
"essence of Love, essence of Mother-  
hood," you might instead add violets  
to your next (or first) batch of  
apple jelly. Cook with flowers,  
and store with fresh ones.  

A medicinal 'syrup of violets'  
may also be prepared, perhaps using a  
seventeenth century recipe:  
= Take a quantity of Blue Vio-  

lets, clip off the whites and  
pound them well in a stone  
mortar; then take as much  
fair running water as will  
sufficiently moisten them  
all; and to every half pint of  
the liquor put one pound of  
the best loaf sugar; set  
it on the fire, putting the  
sugar in as it melts, still  
stirring it; let it boil  
but once or twice at the most,  
then take it from the fire,  
and keep it to your use. This  
is a dainty Syrup of Violets  
(Grieve, II, 1971: 9835).  
Today, I suppose, we would most likely  
use this 'syrup' in sherbet: As  
Mary Poppins was wont to warble,  
"a spoonful of sugar [in sherbet]  
makes the medicine go down!" Please  
note, though, the virtue of moderation—  
violets may have a laxative effect.  

COMMON GROUND FEBRUARY 1984 PAGE THIRTEEN