COMMON GROUND >

Emick Sentenced

by Joan Dickenson

Leslie Emick, 24, was sentenced
in Allegany County Court April 10 to
five years' probation and 3,000 hours
of community service for the February
1983 shooting death of her common-law
husband, Marshall Allison.

Before pronouncing sentence, Judge
Wayne Freeman Jr. scolded her for be-
coming pregnant (her child is due
mid-August.) She was married April 1
to Dean Swift, 45, a divorced father
of two who works part-time as a sales
representative and part-time as a
country and western musician.

The conditions of probation include
the 3,000 hours of unpaid work in a
Delaware hospital near her parents'
home where she and Swift live with
Raechelle, 5, and Jordan, 3, Emick's
children. In addition, Emick must
"seek vocational training or an aca-
demic curriculum to equip her for
employment." She must be evaluated by a
professional.

From a feminist or liberal stand-
point, the sentence was a foregone
conclusion, given that Freeman is a
reasonable, enlightened man. To send
Emick to Bedford Hills Correctional
Facility would obviously have been

But in Allegany County, people
were guessing until the last minute.
As Special Prosecutor Patricia
Fogarty made her speech recommending
one to three years at Bedford Hills,
the reporter next to me leaned over
and whispered, "Emick's going to
prison," for Fogarty was reciting a
list of circumstances that made Emick
sound like an irresponsible youngster
with some low cunning.

Fogarty implied that Emick deceived
the public by saying she's in nursing
school, when actually, she's only in
a nursing preparatory program at Del-
aware Technical Institute. Fogarty
charged that Emick had not sought
recommended counseling and that her
efforts to help other battered women
were “of questionable value, because
they were made to look good." Fogarty
said a domestic violence hotline in
Delaware refused Emick's help for this
reason.

But when I talked later to Emick's
lawyer, Tom Cleary, I heard quite a
different story. He takes the blame
for the misunderstanding about the
nursing school, and I myself can't
remember whether Emick actually said
she was a first-year nursing student,
or I only assumed it. The counseling?
She's getting it now. As for the
hotline, Emick was not turned down
because she was insincere about help-
ing, but because of her legal status.

Both Fogarty and the judge also
criticized Emick for going ahead
with her studies, at taxpayers' ex-
pense, without first ascertaining
whether, as a convicted felon, she
would ever be accepted as a nursing
student, or be able to get an RN
license. But later, I saw a letter
from Delaware Technical Institute that
said, first, that Emick's felon status
should not bar her from enrolling in
nursing school; and second, that there
should be no problem in getting a
license. Moreover, Cleary said there
was no point in Emick's applying
until her case was resolved; she
could find out whether she could
seek release from civil disability,
a mechanism for restoring civil rights
to convicted felons.

So again, as in the trial, the
facts were not presented fairly. Un-
fortunately, all the charges—but
few of the answers—made the news-
papers.

I myself was unsure about the
sentence because I live in Allegany
County, I knew what people were saying,
and I knew the judge has to live here
too. (He also has to run for re-election.)

If you believe, as I do, that Emick
should have been arrested, let alone
tried and convicted; if you believe the
killing was self-defense even though
Marshall Allison was asleep—then the
sentence of probation is an outrage. If
Emick is innocent, she is serving a
sentence for a crime she did not commit.

But she did plead guilty to second-
degree manslaughter. And the feeling
in the community is that "she took
a life, and she should pay!" I know
it's hard for the Common Ground
readership to swallow, but a lot of
people in Allegany County (and not
just ignorant rednecks) thought she
should go to prison.

They range from the man who told
me, "That sentence is a license to
kill," and his buddy, who said, "I'm
sleepin' with a knife under my pil-
low from now on," to more thoughtful
people. One man said, "Mary O (a
local town clerk convicted of embez-
zling $40,000 in town funds) got six
months in jail, and she only stole
money!" Another said, "So now the
price of a human life is 3,000 hours
of community service? Come on!"

Others referred to the Jon Taylor
case, another domestic violence
killing. Taylor, at 14, killed his
father and buried the body behind
the chicken coop, where it was found
a year later. He was tried for
second-degree murder, but the jury
decided he had killed in self-defense
and found him innocent. Now Fred
Taylor was awake and fighting when
he was killed. All the same, people
are saying, “Allegany County? That's
the place to kill someone. If you
want to do a murder, do it here and
you're guaranteed to go free."

Still another resident said, "I
realize she was a terribly abused
woman, but she killed someone and
she could have left!"

“She could have left"—an opinion
that shows no understanding of the
battered woman's syndrome—is the
main reason she was convicted in
the first place. For those who
don't remember, Emick was convicted
of first-degree manslaughter in
December 1983. Although sentenced
to two to six years in Bedford Hills,
she remained free pending the outcome
of the appeal, and in November 1984,
the conviction was reversed and a
new trial ordered. But then Emick
met Dean Swift and decided she
couldn't face another trial. She
wanted to get on with her life. So
in February, she pleaded guilty to
second-degree manslaughter.

At the original trial, she claimed
self-defense, saying that Allison—
crazed by the fact that Emick had
told an outsider about the abuse—
had threatened to kill her when he
awoke. She and her children could
not safely leave the isolated Cuba
Lake trailer; it was 4 a.m. and
there was snow. "I honestly believe
that if I hadn't shot Marshall that
night, I'd be the one who was dead,"
she testified.

The judge acknowledges that when
Emick pleaded guilty, he had pretty
much decided on probation. But when
he learned of the pregnancy and
marriage, he “went through the roof"
in one observer's opinion, and when
he mounted the bench April 10, was
still not sure what he was going
to do.

He got a lot of letters. Many
urged probation; quite a few urged
prison. Those in the latter group
stressed that a sentence of probation
"would give any spouse the right to
pull a gun...and kill with impunity.”
Freeman said. He didn't buy that
though. "I do not believe that giv-
ing you probation will give anyone
else the right to do what you did,"
he told Emick.

CG collective member Gerri Bayer,
who was present at the sentencing,
was furious with the judge for his
paternalistic remarks about Emick's
conduct. “The pregnancy is none of
his business," she said. “One thing
that should have been said in that
courtroom is that if the system had
worked properly, her pregnancy would
be nobody's business."

She's right. But I think the
judge was aiming his remarks at his
constituents as much as at Emick.

He was under a lot of pressure to
put her in prison, and his lecture
was a way to make his “soft" sen-
tencing look harder.

Some of the pressure was gener-
ated by Marshall Allison's family,
who were very vocal in their demand
for a prison sentence. “There's no
justice," Frances Allison, his
mother, stated outside the courtroom.
"That girl's a walking time bomb.”

continued page 3