PAGE 14

Emma Is... .

ANNOUNCING an exciting new series  
of postcards featuring the photographs  
and art of women in Erie County! There  
are twelve cards, and the art was  
contributed by ten local women. Some  
of the pieces were featured in the  
WomanExpress issue of Common Ground -  
others are new pieces that you may not  
have seen before. Each of the cards  
has the title of the photo or artwork,  
the contributor's name, and a brief  
description of the woman who contributed  
the work.

Friday evening, April 12, 7 - 9  
p.m., we will have a reception at EMMA  
to celebrate the series and honor the  
artists and photographers.

Peggy Sanford, who describes herself  
as a woman of the world, contributed a  
photograph titled "Two Sisters at a Gay  
Party at the Moon Glow (early 1950's)."  
Donna Jordan Dusel, photographer, artist  
and writer, contributed her photograph  
"Teacups" that appeared in WomanExpress.  
Doris A. Santercole's photograph "#1 from  
Beginnings Series" also appeared in  
WomanExpress; Doris is a Buffalo feminist,  
artist and photographer. Two of graphic  
artist Linda L.J. Michael's drawings that  
appeared in WomanExpress are included in  
the series - "Fairy Tales and Teddy Bears,"  
and "Grapevine Fairy."

Barbara Ann Hock's drawing "Farthmothers:  
Venus" that appeared in WomanExpress is  
also part of the series. Barbara is a  
graphic illustrator and author of "Rain  
Dancer." Ruth Geller, author and activist,  
contributed two photographs titled "Hello  
from the Window, 1971" and "Auntie Phil  
with Camera, 1983."

Elizabeth W. Stone, who describes  
herself as a woman of adventure,  
contributed a photograph titled "Jeanne  
on Break: the first U.S. Forest Service  
woman's land survey crew, Alaska,  
1974." Anne Montes, a Peace-loving  
Hag, contributed her photograph titled  

COMMON GROUND — APRIL 1985

Local Women's  
POSTCARD  
SERIES

Newly published & available at  
EMMA, 168 Elmwood Avenue

Reception for the artists  
APRIL 12, 7 - 9 p.m.

Public invited. Free Refreshments.

This project was made possible in part by the  
Funding for the Arts (L.I.F.T.) Program,  
administered by the Arts Council, N.Y.  

"Venus of Willendorf,"  
pen and ink by Barbara Hock

"Women's Equality Day, Seneca Falls,  
1984." Peggy L. Chinn, feminist, activist,  
nurse and writer, contributed a  
drawing titled "Rain, Rain Go Away."  
Charlene Eldridge Wheelen, graphic  
artist, writer and shameless agitator,  
contributed a drawing titled "Three  
Women."

The postcards will be available at  
EMMA as long as our supply lasts! The  
cards are 50¢ each, or a package of one  
each in the series will be available at  
a special price.

All of the cards are wonderful  
representations of women's art and  
women's lives that will be a joy to  
share with friends near and far. This  
project was made possible by a grant  
from the Arts Council, and provides an  
opportunity for sharing some of the  
wonderful creativity and art of women  
here in our own community. We hope you  
will be able to join us at our celebration,  
greet the women who made this project  
possible, and learn more about what EMMA  
is all about!

EMMA is located at 168 Elmwood Ave.,  
just south of North St. Our phone  
number is 885-2285. As always, we  
appreciate the support of women in our  
community - you DO make it possible for  
us to continue to serve our community.  
If you have been thinking about the  
possibility of becoming involved by  
staffing or working with us in some  
other way, please call us. As you have  
probably noticed, we are still having  
difficulty having women available to  
keep the center open during all of our  
regular hours - we still need staffers!

Public funds from the N.Y.  
State Council on the Arts  
and the County of Erie.