QUESTION:

Anne Brewster, Clarence, N.Y.:

* I went to a woman for the first
time because I felt more comfortable.
Since it was my first visit, she
explained everything. She even took
time to explain some current issues with
me, including many different things I
didn't know before."

Valerie Leuthe:

"We probably don't visit our gyn-
ecologists enough. Going on a regular
basis is important in the context of
preventative medicine, especially with
respect to the Pap Test.

My gynecologist doesn't send me a
follow-up reminder like my dentist does.
Gynecological care is just as serious
as dental care. Patients could fill out
a postcard at the end of each appoint-
ment, which the office could then just

keep and mail out at, say, 6-month
intervals."
Jane O'Donnell, R.N., Snyder:

"Most women are very nervous when
going to the gynecologist and the doc-
tors often don't take enough time to
explain things. Many gynecologists tell
a patient what they think she should
hear, without considering the patient's
personal opinion, or without being open
to discussion. For instance, if there's
a form of birth control they don't like,
they often won't discuss it. Some
gynecologists act very authoritarian
with their patients."

Anonymous:

"The most crucial thing is
women be able to ask questions
and receive answers. Doctors should
feel that explanations are in order
for all aspects of health care."

Community Speak:

"How do you feel about visits to your gynecologist?
How could they be improved?

QUESTION FOR NOVEMBER'S COMMUNITY SPEAK-OUT:
How can women have real impact on the political process?"

Emily Goodman, Eggertsville:

“I'm very fond of my gynecologist.
I think he's a real friend. I chose him
because I was planning to have children.
I have two babies and he's been very
supportive and very reassuring with the
problems I've had. He's a rather
unusual doctor in that he related to me
as the person that I really am. That
has been very important to me. I did
choose him after asking other people for
recommendations."

Lynda Zwinger, Buffalo:

"My experiences with gynecologists
have been negative until I discovered
Dr. X, who is God's gift to gynecology.
He treats his patients like whole people.
He discusses your problems AFTER you're
off the table, fully clothed and in his
office. His exams don't hurt, which I
didn't think was possible. He's also
concerned about women's health in gen-
eral, and educating women about women's
health issues.

Otherwise, I've been treated like a
prototype hysterical woman. Dr. X rep-
resents the antithesis of all my other
gynecological experiences."

Anonymous:

"They've had no experience in
counseling in any way, and yet the gy-
necologist is one of the first people a
woman goes to with any kind of intimate
problems. I once asked questions about
sexual performance, and I was told to
go read the Kinsey Report. I was also
on contraceptive pills for eleven years,
which I thought was ill-advised.

When you're in the position for a
pelvic exam, you're totally vulnerable.
You also have questions, but the only
time you have to ask them is during this
exam, and these questions add to your
vulnerability."

A wind-down by Sharon Przepasniak:

“Dr. Sarah Trenholm, Ithaca:

"A strategy to use if you're in a
new place is to call a Women's Center
or even a Women's Studies Department
in a university, because they could re-
fer you elsewhere to get a good recom-
mendation. Also, you ought to be able
to ask other women how a gynecologist
would react to questions or problems.
Some people have particular needs or
particular sensitivities, and so they
should discuss this with the person
they're asking advice from. They
should get an idea of how the health
care provider would handle a par-
ticular situation. Also, some women
who might be reluctant to go to a male
gynecologist could go to a nurse
practitioner for at least Pap smears."

Sherry Summers, Buffalo:

"The Buff State Clinic is where I
go and generally I'm very pleased with
it. Of course, I'd like to see more
women gynecologists; you feel a common
experience with them and you feel more
trust in them. The biggest complaint
I have about other gynecologists I've
gone to is that they don't seem to en-
courage you to get to know your own
body nor to do the health care at home
that you could."

Judy Gerber, Buffalo:

“My basic feeling is that there is
increased sensitivity to women's issues
and women's concerns, but I suspect that
there is not a commensurate sensitivity
in gynecology. I think that it's in-
cumbent upon women to make demands on
the medical profession to meet their
needs, and to develop relationships with
gynecologists that are less paternal-
istic in nature."

"Do you feel that women

a. endorse

and is seeking

(2 sentences) Responses may send comments to:
COMMUNITY SPEAK-OUT, Common Ground, c/o Women's Studies
Academy, Buffalo State College, 1300 Elmwood Ave,
Buffalo, N.Y. 14212. Your response must be signed.
Please state if you wish your comments printed anony-
mously. Responses must be received the first of the
month for publication the following month.
(Nov. issue.)

“Progress” Report
on Sex Discrimination:

During President Reagan's news con-
ference on July 23, reporter Sarah
McClendon, 72, accused the President of
sitting on an official report of sex
discrimination and harassment of women
in the federal government.

The President denied receiving the
report, but White House press secretary
Larry Speakes later said Mr. Reagan had
been briefed on the report at a sub-
cabinet meeting.

Two days later, the President
released the results of the seven-month
study of the "Task Force on Legal Equal-
ity for Women" prepared by the Justice
Department's Civil Rights Division. It
found that at least 79 examples of sex
bias existed in current federal stat-
utes, and at least 111 that were
changed to eliminate such bias.

One example of uncorrected sex bias
was an Army regulation distinguishing
between required years of service for
men and women before they can transfer
to the retired reserve from active duty.

It also reported that the General
Services Administration, a government
housekeeping agency, agreed to revise
at least 19 publications including the
GSA Handbook that "portrayed male em-
ployees as supervisors or in leader-
ship roles, while females appear only
as secretaries."

COMMON GROUND

Page 4

SEPTEMBER 1982

The report concluded that "the fight
against sex discrimination is not yet
over, and until the laws of this coun-
try fully protect the rights of men and
women equally, there can be no relaxa-
tion of the effort to eradicate the
last vestiges of official action ground-
ed in sex-biased prejudices.”

Aid for Rape Victims:

Under a bill signed by Gov. Carey on
July 22, 1982, rape and sexual assault
victims will no longer need to prove
they made an “earnest resistance" to a
sexual attack. Under the new law, a
victim will only need to prove lack of
consent.

Said the Governor: "There is ample
evidence that a victim who actively
resists a rapist runs the very real
risk of being severely beaten or killed."

Supporters of the bill hope it will
encourage more women to report sexual
attacks, and make rape convictions
easier to win.

Subscribe to
Common Ground.