D.E.S. Daughters

There are several million people  
whose lives have been affected, some  
quite drastically by Diethylstilbestrol,  
but none so consistently as DES daughters.  
It is estimated that up to 95% of all young  
women whose mothers took DES have structural  
abnormalities in their reproductive systems.

The most common one is vaginal adenosis,  
a condition marked by abnormal,  
but non-cancerous cells in the vagina.  
The cells themselves are not abnormal,  
but their locations are.

Sexual development takes place in  
humans between the sixteenth and eighteenth  
week of pregnancy. The outer cervix and  
the vagina are composed of skin cells,  
while the Fallopian tubes, uterus and  
inner cervix are made of glandular cells.  
The differentiation of the cells is affected  
by estrogen in the mother's body. If the process  
of differentiation is not completed,  
glandular cells are left in the vagina  
and that is referred to as adenosis.  
This occurs in up to 90% of DES-exposed women.

Another condition similar to adenosis  
is also found in DES daughters. It  
is called cervical ectropion and it is  
the growth of glandular tissue on the  
outside of the cervix. Neither adenosis  
nor cervical ectropion are serious  
in themselves, but it is important to  
have frequent gynecological exams because  
these abnormally placed cells may  
have an increased susceptibility to  
malignancy.

DES daughters often have structural  
oddities in the lower genital tract.  
Leukoplakia is a disruption in the maturation  
process of the cervix, resulting in a  
milky-looking cervix.

This often disappears as a DES daughter  
enters her mid-twenties. Mosaicism  
and punctate areas in vaginal and  
cervical tissues. Nabothian cysts are  
small glands that become plugged by  
developing tissue. None of the aforementioned  
are cancerous conditions, but they should  
be watched by a knowledgeable physician.

The abnormalities that are harder  
to detect are those in the upper genital  
region of DES daughters. Up to 70%  
of the women with cervical and vaginal  
abnormalities may also have upper tract  
defects. Abnormally formed uteruses—T-shaped,  
rather than normal triangular formation. Some  
women have smaller than average uteruses  
and doctors have found unusually  
textured uterine linings in DES-exposed women.

Clear Cell Adenocarcinoma

One of the more unusual, but most  
life-threatening of DES-related problems  
is a rare malignancy called clear  
cell adenocarcinoma, a disease that  
normally occurred only in the genital  
tracts of post-menopausal women. Only  
three cases of this were reported in  
younger women before the use of DES.

New adenocarcinoma were occurring  
in women in or around the puberty years.  
The youngest reported victim was only  
seven, the oldest, twenty-nine. The  
incidence of the disease rises sharply  
after the age of fourteen, levels  
off between the ages of seventeen and  
twenty-one and then appears to decline.

Many DES daughters have abnor-  
malities in their reproductive systems.

Dr. Arthur Herbst, head of obstetrics  
and gynecology at the University  
of Chicago Medical School was one of  
the first to treat this disease in  
young women. He started and maintains  
a registry of DES and steroid hormone  
related cancer cases.

The risk of cancer in women whose  
mothers took DES is inversely tied to  
when in the course of the pregnancy  
the drug was administered. The earlier  
in the pregnancy that the drug  
was taken, the higher the risk for  
cancer in the daughter.

Researchers think that DES acts  
as an agent that produces abnormalities  
and that the abnormal tissue is later  
predisposed to developing cancer. They  
theorize that DES caused irregular tissue  
to form in the developing reproductive  
system of the fetus. Incomplete  
development of the vaginal tissue may  
leave a DES daughter with the abnormality  
called adenosis (see above).

This tissue is subject to rapid  
change called metaplasia, a process  
by which the abnormally placed adenosis  
cells change to normal vaginal cells.  
The theory is that this rapid  
change from one kind of cell to another  
may give rise to the disorderly cell  
growth that is characteristic of a cancerous  
condition.

DES is also a suspect in other non-cancerous  
or pre-cancerous changes in the cervix  
and vagina. These changes are loosely  
termed dysplasia, and range from mild  
to pre-cancerous. Neoplasia refers to  
tissue already beginning to become cancerous.  
Neoplasia is often non-invasive, meaning  
that it doesn't spread, it stays where  
it started. Most DES daughters will not develop  
cancer. However, because of that cellular  
abnormality known as adenosis,  
twice yearly gynecological exams are  
recommended.

Doctors offer varying opinions on  
the hows and whys of fertility problems  
in DES daughters, but no one denies  
these problems exist. They include  
ability to conceive, repeated  
miscarriages, incompetent cervix (one  
that can't bear the weight of a pregnant  
uterus and opens), ectopic or  
tubal pregnancy and premature delivery.

DES daughters often have a hard  
time conceiving, because their reproductive  
systems may not be good environments  
for movement of sperm, because  
of poor quality mucus in the cervix and  
vagina. DES daughters have more Fallopian  
tube defects than the general  
population which may prevent the sperm  
from meeting the ovum, or that may keep  
the fertilized egg from travelling  
down the tubes to the uterus. A bumpy  
texture on the uterine wall may present  
an inhospitable location for a fertilized ovum.

DES daughters have an unusually high  
percentage of miscarriages. One reason  
is cervical incompetence; the cervix  
dilates too early in the pregnancy  
and the fetus literally drops out.

This can be stopped by cerclage, or  
stitching the cervix so that it doesn't  
open at any time during her pregnancy.

Ectopic, or tubal pregnancies are  
more common in DES-exposed women.  
Fallopian tubes cannot expand with a growing  
fetus and if the problem is not  
caught in time, the tube can rupture  
and cause hemorrhaging and infection.

Fewer than two in 1,000 DES daughters  
develop adenocarcinoma, but that  
raised questions when it was estimated  
that DES was prescribed for between  
500,000 and 3,000,000 women between  
1940 and 1971.

There is a note of hope here. DES  
daughters often grow out of the problems  
related to their abnormalities.  
Adenosis and cervical ectropion often  
disappear as the women mature. Studies  
show that a DES daughter has a good  
chance of conceiving and delivering  
a healthy baby if she just keeps trying.

“It is estimated that up to 95% of all young  
women whose mothers took D.E.S have structural  
abnormalities in their reproductive  
systems.”

If You’re a D.E.S. Daughter

If you know you are a DES daughter,  
tell your doctor and make sure that  
you have twice-yearly gynecological  
exams. These exams can become less  
frequent as you get further away from  
the crisis puberty years. A DES  
daughter should have her first exam  
after her first menstrual period, or  
by age fourteen. A good gynecologist  
will perform a more specialized exam  
on a DES daughter, that includes palpation  
of the vagina and pelvic region,  
(a gentle probing for roughness or  
lumps); a Pap smear or cytologic  
test, which is a scraping of cells  
from the cervix and vagina; Schiller's  
(or Lugol's) iodine test, where the  
cervix and vaginal walls are coated  
with iodine. Abnormal cells will  
not retain the brown stain, indicating  
their location. Another part of  
the examination may be the colposcopy,  
which allows the physician to get a  
magnified view of the cervix and vaginal  
tissue. One of the benefits of  
this procedure is that photographs can  
be taken, allowing a permanent point  
of reference for cellular changes. If  
the doctor performing the exam thinks  
it necessary, she/he may perform a  
biopsy, which consists of shipping  
small bits of tissue from the cervix  
and vagina, which are then sent for  
microscopic tests.

How to Find Out About Your  
Medical History

Health records can be very difficult to get,  
if you've moved from the area where you  
were born, or if the obstetrician who attended  
your birth is no longer available.  
Doctors are often proprietary about records,  
or they may fear lawsuits. Hospitals,  
doctors and pharmacists need not keep  
records for more than seven years.

If you aren't sure whether you've  
been exposed to DES, try these suggestions:

1) Talk to your mother. Ask her if she  
had a history of miscarriage, if she  
took any drugs at all during pregnancy,  
if she had been confined to bed rest.  
Bed rest and DES were prescribed together,  
and one company manufactured vitamins  
that contained stilbestrol.

2) Contact your mother's physician. If  
she/he is deceased, try to find who is  
the executor of the estate, and if they  
have possession of the records.

3) Check with the family pharmacist.  
Druggists are obliged to keep prescription  
records.

4) If you can't get information from  
any of the aforementioned sources,  
write the record department of the  
hospital where you were born.

5) Discuss this with your father. He  
may remember filling prescriptions for  
your mother during her pregnancy.

6) If there is even a vague possibility  
that you were exposed to DES, have the  
exam. Roswell Park Memorial Institute  
has a DES screening center and appoint-  
ments can be made by calling 1-800-462-7255,  
or ask your doctor to perform the  
more specialized tests.

If you have been exposed, you can  
help other DES-affected people by  
joining the registry maintained by the  
New York State Health Department.

Write NYS Health Dept., Rm. 565, Tower  
Building, Empire State Plaza, Albany,  
12237.

Next Month: psychological effects of  
DES, information on mothers and sons  
and some legal information.