Daphne’s

by Sarah Slavin

A Sharing of Herbs and Bread

Daphne is fixing dinner because the  
Pythian sisterhood soon will meet.  
This year the meeting is at Daphne's  
treestead. During the intercalary  
month every eighth lunar year, the  
sisterhood meets to keep the ceremony  
of the ancients among ancients. We  
also hear stories about Apollo and  
his false tales of conquest and  
plunder at Delphi. At Delphi (Pytho),  
high crowned with rushes, we seven  
were young and old as we pleased and  
spoke in prophecy as the sacred pool  
and bay laurel led us. This then is  
a significant sharing of herbs and  
bread.

Daphne has down already from the  
shelf a jar of mint jelly to accompany  
the bread—or for that matter, just to  
follow the spoons to our mouths for a  
bit of sweet. (Mint jelly is good  
with fresh pears, too.) Mint jelly is  
simply made: Mix together 2 cups water,  
1 cup plain white vinegar, 1 cup clean  
spearmint leaves (which contain Vita-  

min A), and 6-1/2 cups sugar. (Daphne  
did say sweet but, presumably, mint  

jelly is consumed in small doses.)  
Bring the ingredients to a full rolling  
boil, and add 1 bottle liquid  
fruit pectin. Let the mixture return  
to the boil and cook one minute. Re-  
move the leaves. Pour into hot steri-  
lized glasses and seal. This jelly  
may be made with other flavors of mint  
(or with basil, which also contains  
Vitamin A), and with apple cider vine-  
gar instead of white vinegar. The  
mint leaves may be added instead to  
apple jelly in preparation, reducing  
the amount of sugar needed and elimi-  
nating the need for bottled pectin.

We seven used to feed tiny spoons-  
ful of mint jelly to Typhoea, the  
python child of the earth goddess  
Gaea (Ge). We prophesied in Gaea's  
name. Her Typhoea was a gentle ser-  
pent and familiar spirit who loved  
nothing so much as a scratch on the  
back of her head and a taste of mint  
jelly. My sisters Aristonice and  
Periallus and I preferred childcare  
and Typhoea's python hugs to tending  
the laurel branches and myrrh that fed  
the sacred altar flame and purified  
our surroundings. We had many ways  
of amusing Typhoea, who otherwise  
performed many childlike stunts. The  
day she dangled by her tail from the  
sheer walls of the high plateau named  
Parnassus (a cleft of which cradled  
Delphi), mint jelly lured her back.

But, getting back to fixing dinner...

bread? Soften 1 T dry yeast granules  
(which contain vitamin B6) in 1/2 cup  

warm water, then add to a mixture of  

2 T soy-based margarine, 1 T wild flower  
honey and 1 cup warm water in which  

PAGE 10 COMMON GROUND JUNE 1986  

was cooked without salt a green vege-  
table such as celery (a source of  
vitamin A that has a naturally high  
salt content). Add 1-1/4 cups un-  
bleached white flour, 1/4 t fresh  
grated nutmeg, 1 t hand crumbled home  
dried sage and 2 t celery seeds. With  
a wooden spoon stir in 1 cup whole  
wheat flour (which includes vitamins  
B and E), then turn the mixture out  
onto a floured table or countertop.  
With your hands, if you try this  
recipe, mix in up to 1 cup whole  
wheat and unbleached white flours  
combined. Do NOT let the dough get  
stiff.

Knead thoroughly until the surface  
of the dough is shiny, not sticky,  
and large bubbles form beneath the  
surface. You can scarcely knead bread  
too much! Return the dough to the  
bowl in which it was mixed; cover  
with a towel, and let rise until double  
in size. Turn the dough back onto a  
hard surface and punch it down with a  
succession of folds, then reknead until  
the surface of the dough is smooth.  
Form into a loaf or any shape that  
pleases you, and place in a standard  
sized loaf (or other) pan. Let rise  
again until double in size. Bake at  
400 degrees for 35 minutes. Brush  
the top of the loaf with soy margarine  
immediately after it comes from the  
oven and is turned from the pan onto  
a folded towel to cool. If not eaten  
the same day, home baked bread dries  
rapidly—this process may be hindered  
by wrapping the loaf well and storing  
in the freezer. For a different  
flavor, 1/2 cup grated parmesan  

cheese (a source of B vitamin) may  
be added to this bread at the same  
time the herbs and spices are. If  
you add the cheese, you probably  
will not want to serve the bread  
with mint jelly!

Earth mother Gaea likes bread.  
The harvest is, after all, hers and  
ours through the deep-breasted Gaea  
in each of us. My sister Theonice  
brought Gaea herb bread for comfort  
when Apollo slew dear Typhoea, who  
had descended near the dark olive  
groves past the final rock spur on  

the lower hillside leading to the  
Crisaean plain and, six miles thither,  
to the gulf of Corinth. Into the  
body of Typhoea, who was of Gaea and  
Gaea alone, Apollo emptied from his  
bow a quiver of tarnished arrows.  
Apollo sought after the center of  
the earth at Delphi for his own  
temple, and so he mortally wounded  
Typhoea—as if, infected by blood-  
guilt, Apollo ever could possess the  
center of the earth in any of us...  
as if belonging ever could be his.  
As in baking bread, belonging, the  
center of the earth deep in us all,  
is in the body, rising.

For comfort's sake, bread with  
butter can be nice. Served under  
Daphne's tree, or springside at Gaea's  
laurel-roofed sanctuary, this means  
adding herbs to soy-based margarine,  
a source of vitamins B1, B2, niacina-  
mide and C as well as calcium and  
iron. Note, however, that soy mar-  
garine is rather salty. Real butter  
has cholesterol but less salt. Virtu-  
ally any herb you like will do for an  
herb 'butter.' How will you choose  
an herb to go with this particular  
bread and meal? One rule of thumb is:  
Do not repeat herbs. Congenial flavors  
are nice; so are surprises! Repeti-  
tiveness adds little. This time  
Daphne is going to keep things simple  
and use curled parsley, which is  
milder than flat (Italian) parsley.  
Parsley with mint and chives is a  
good combination of herbs for this  
purpose. Either kind of parsley  
happens to be an excellent source of  
vitamin C (172 mg. per 100 g.) and of  
beta-carotene, a dietary chemical the  
body turns into vitamin A and one  
possible factor in a decreased ten-  
dency toward cancer. Parsley also  

contains iron, manganese and potas-  
sium. Generally speaking, herbs  
should be cut with scissors and not  

a knife. If you have a food proces-  
sor, you have, however, a satisfactory  
means of doing a large amount of  
parsley at once. Store what you will  
not use right away in a capped jar in  
the frig. If you are not going to  
use the parsley soon, freeze it to  
retain the vitamins. Eating signi-  
ficant amounts of fresh parsley daily,  
repetitively or not, strikes Daphne  
as a good idea. Billie Potts,  

Witches Heal, p. 49, suggests the  
same thing, adding in a discussion  

of the plant's medicinal value.

Daphne adds 2 parts parsley (no  
stalks and few stems) to 4 parts soy  

margarine. When measuring fresh  
herbs, pack them tightly. Note that  
fresh herbs are more delicately  
flavored than dried ones, and that  
leaves are more delicately flavored  
than stalks and stems. Use about  
twice as much of the fresh as the  
dried herb to achieve the same degree  
of flavor, remembering in any event  
that fresh and dried herbs will not  
taste precisely the same. If they  
incorporate notable amounts of stalk,  
dried herbs also will taste harsher  
than fresh ones. Before adding to  
the margarine, marinate for an hour  
in a tightly covered dish the snip-  
ped parsley with enough fresh lemon  
juice to moisten it, then stir bit  
by bit with a small wooden spoon  
into the softened margarine. Chill  
overnight. (This herb spread is  
also great with a baked potato; add  
ratatouille and you will have  
another festal meal!)

Tune in, in July, for the rest of  
dinner!