MERGER  
details  

AND EMMA IS  

THE COLLECTIVE MEETS...  

“Emma Is . . .” and “The Collective Meets” columns are being presented jointly this month to announce the joining of Common Ground and Emma Collectives in a new coalition.  

It is 19 Women's the work of Common Ground and the work of Emma under a single non-profit corporation. Simultaneously, Emma is changing her formal name from Emma: Buffalo Women's Bookstore, to EMMA: WNY WOMEN'S RESOURCE AND CULTURAL CENTER. Emma will continue to offer books that can be purchased, but our new name more properly reflects our commitment to providing resources and cultural opportunities for women in the area.  

Each collective will continue to operate as a separate entity with separate memberships and tasks - one to produce a monthly newsjournal, the other to run a resource and cultural center. Finances will continue to be separate matters but the two groups will be directed by a single, collectively-run board of directors consisting of all women from both collectives who choose to declare their membership on the board. Each group will maintain our feminist collective process, which is written into our new by-laws.  

Over the past year and a half, the Common Ground and Emma collectives have worked together on a number of projects. Given the harsh economic times of the 1980s, we have found it to our advantage to work together to keep both organizations healthy and able to provide information and resources to Western New York women.  

The new agreement within the corporation formalizes our connection and is an expression of our belief that unity is a critical element in the survival of alternative organizations.  

Our purposes, as we delineated them in our new by-laws, are:  

To write, publish and distribute information by and for women to enhance the lives of women on educational, physical, social, spiritual, psychological and economic levels.  

To arrange seminars, literary programs, public forums, theatrical and other entertainments for the intellectual, moral and social advancement of women and of the public at large.  

To provide resource services for women to enhance their educational, physical, social, spiritual, psychological and economic levels.  

To do any other act or thing incidental to or connected with the foregoing purposes or in the advancement thereof, but not for pecuniary profit or financial gain of members, directors or officers.  

By working together we expect to strengthen both organizations. However, our commitment to unity extends beyond the two collectives to all community groups with which we share common goals.  

Currently the Emma and Common Ground Collectives are working in coalition with such organizations as:  

- West Side Repertory Company, Gay and Lesbian Community Center, the Center for Positive Thought, Allentown Community Center, and the National Organization for Women (NOW) to produce a local performance of the Gemini Dance Troupe on March 28,  

- Nyu Li Tao, Gay Rights for Older Women, and SUNYAB's Women's Studies College to produce women's dances three times a year,  

- Radical Feminist Nurses Network, American Civil Liberties Union, NOW, YWCA of Buffalo and Erie County, Haven House, WAND, and other community members to produce a week of activities celebrating International Women's Day, March 3-10.  

Through this work we are helping to provide a much wider range of activities than any single group could. We are also learning how to work together and to provide inter-group support. It is part of our effort to make this a more solid community for women.  

A major implication of our new by-laws for both collectives is defining membership in each of the collectives. We are both seeking ways to facilitate involvement by as many women as possible. The Emma Collective is having a new member and friends potluck on Sunday evening, March 18. At this time Emma will be announcing new approaches for membership and involvement in our decision-making that will enhance the ability of more women to become involved. The Common Ground collective will be announcing similar changes in the near future. If you are interested in becoming more involved with either collective, give us a call at 885-2285!  

LETTERS  

Dear Sisters,  

This letter is meant to convey special thanks to all of you who make Common Ground available to the women of Western New York, and my own personal thanks for the messages of sisterhood, hope, and information I receive from “our own newspaper."  

I am a middle-aged woman who is a feminist; a secretary; a part-time student; a wife; a mother of three grown children; and a grandmother.  

My areas of interest are: women's history; the ERA; NOW; menopause; job opportunities for women; unionization of secretaries; and adequate pay for women workers.  

Thank you again for Common Ground; it keeps me in touch with local and national women's issues and provides me with an awareness of what women are doing and thinking about. It saves me from the isolation I feel often and live with daily.  

Yours sincerely,  

Margot A. Pfohl  

DEAR READER...  

We have published the artwork, fiction, poems and reviews of such local women as Judith Geer, Bonnie Johnson, Joy Walsh, Ana Maria Hidalgo, Ruth Geller, Sarah Slavin, Peggy Chinn as well as that of others of high caliber.  

Our pull-out calendar of events and pages of announcements of community interest make CG handy to have around all month long, and the "Women's Resource Directory" and the informational articles make CG an important publication to save and savor as a reference in your home or office.  

The women who produce this paper are from all walks of life: married, single and divorced; grandmothers, mothers and childless. We are ages 20 to mid-50s; work for a wage, work inside the home, own our own businesses, are unemployed, on welfare, or students. Our political perspectives are wide-ranging, as are our styles of writing, but what we each bring to CG is the conviction that it is important for us to communicate with each other as women, to share information and end the isolation we each sometimes experience.  

We are convinced that other women agree and are excited about Common Ground. The subscription you buy brings you (or a friend) 11 issues a year of the best news, information and entertainment for women.  

Welcome to Common Ground!!  

If it is your first time enjoying this paper—or if you have been a regular reader—you might like to know a little about Common Ground and the women who produce it. Common Ground is a non-profit, all volunteer produced and managed newsjournal.  

This paper was conceived to be a communication link between women in Western New York; somewhere a woman can go to find information, news and resources of value to women, with a wide variety of content. Organized in April 1982 by five local women, CG has published continuously since September 1982, and in the process has gained the respect and confidence of hundreds of women, and of many women's groups and organizations. CG is the proud co-recipient of the 1983 Women Helping Women Award, presented by the Buffalo Chapter of the National Organization for Women.  

We are also proud of providing solid reporting, by well-known writers such as Joan Dickenson. We have even "scooped" other publications on occasion with a news story, interview or review, so we can say "You saw it here first!"  

Our pages are open to women for their analysis of the things that affect our lives, and to the sharing of intimate stories that make  

===SUBSCRIBE NOW===  

For The Woman in Your Life - You!  

Keep in Touch With What's Happening For Women Every Month  

POLITICS + CULTURAL EVENTS -  

REVIEWS + THE ECONOMY -  

THE ARTS + HEALTH ISSUES -  

LOCAL & NATIONAL NEWS  

RESOURCES ESPECIALLY FOR WOMEN  

MONTHLY CALENDAR OF EVENTS  

ELEVEN ISSUES / YEAR.....$11.00 - $15.00  
See Coupon on Back Page  

COMMON GROUND MARCH 1984  

PAGE 5