I praise things that remain themselves  
though cut off from what fed them,  
through transformations.  

These lines of celebration are from  
a poem, "Sage and Rue," by Marge Piercy  
(Living in the Open, Knopf, 1979,  
pp. 14-15). The sparing herbs, the  
healing, soothing, playing herbs that  
rise from "Sage and Rue" are basil  
"lifting raggedy spikes," ferns, dill,  
"the rampant dense mints," tarragon...  
thyme and lemon verbena...chives, fennel...  
lovage, nepenthe, parsley and lilies...  
rosemary. A real old wives', including  
spinster's, collection - weeds all, thriving  
on neglect, drawing, debauching and why not?  
"The small things of this world are sufficient  
and magical."  

I happen to love this poem. It's  
not like loving a handsome red automobile  
or even Brach's jelly beans. It's not  
like loving my daughters and my son either.  
It is that this poem is written by a woman  
who gardens, understands and celebrates the  
magic and sufficiency of herbs. And,  
I join her feeling for them and for  
their attributes.  

Note again the poem's title: "Sage  
and Rue." According to Maureen and  
Bridget Boland (Old Wives' Lore for  
Gardeners, Farrar, Straus and Giroux,  
1976, p.29), sage and rue ought never  
to be grown together, because the rue  
will poison if not kill outright the  
sage. Rue is sometimes believed to  
be a poisonous, although not usually  
deadly, plant. Supposedly its seed,  
infused in wine, produces an antidote  
for poisons. Then too, rue has  
been thought to repel witches - if  
not witches, then spirits; if not  
spirits, then certainly fleas, which  
I must admit bear repulsing.  

There seems, however, to be some  
difference of opinion about rue. Mrs.  
M. Grieve reminds us that Italians to  
this day enjoy it in salad (A Modern  
Herbal, II, Dover Publications, 1971,  
p. 695). Fortunately, the Italians do  
not seem to be an endangered people.  
Mrs. Grieve also mentions that, prepared  
with treacle, rue makes a conserve used  
by country folk. The treacle referred  
to here is probably not a plant, per se,  
but an uncrystallized syrup, an afterproduct  
of refining sugar. (Treacle is also an  
herb. The seed of the treacle hedge  
mustard is incredibly bitter - not  
the sort of thing to mix casually  
with rue or, for that matter, use as  
a base for a conserve. At least, I  
hope it isn't.) In any event, urbanization  
is doubtless a greater threat than rue  
to those attuned to country living.  
Regarding witches, Adelma Grenier Simmons  
finds rue quite at home in a witch's  
garden and wreath, and also writes,  
"Use it with garden sage to be particularly effective”  
(A Witch's Brew, Caprilands Herb  
Farm, Coventry, CT., n.d., p. 529.  
All agree, though, about the fleas.  

Marge Piercy has nicely placed  
"Sage and Rue" in a section entitled  

BUFFALO ARTS REVIEW:  

A Magazine Whose Time  
Has Come  

A new project is underway in Buffalo,  
one with a grand scheme and far-reaching  
implications for the artistic community  
in Western New York. This is a magazine,  
Buffalo Arts Review, (BAR), that will  
serve both working artists and those  
with an interest in cultural developments  
within all areas of the arts. The magazine,  
published by the Irving Press Collective,  
recently made its first appearance as a  
four-page supplement to the Arts Development  
Services' newsletter, Articles. After one  
additional supplement, to appear in the  
winter issue of Articles, Buffalo Arts  
Review will debut in a quarterly magazine  
format, tentatively slated for March, 1983  
publication.  

The magazine was originally conceived  
by founding editors George Howell and  
Craig Keller as an arena in which to  
access the works of a wide range of  
artists in all branches of the arts  
(music, visual, dance, literature, film,  
media, performance, theater, etc.), and  
to raise and explore provocative and  
substantive issues that affect artists  
and the public, both universally and  
most particularly here in Western New York.  
The aim of such a publication, they  
planned, would be to provide the sort  
of high-quality, in-depth coverage of  
the arts that is virtually unavailable  

by Ann Markle Ford  

from a centralized source in this area;  
the presentation would be in the form  
of reviews, previews, interviews, essays  
and graphics. Armed with this much-needed  
idea, Howell and Keller set about making  
BAR a reality. The first step was to  
recruit a group of like-minded individuals  
into a team that dubbed itself the  
Irving Press Collective. After attaining  
non-profit corporate status, the Collective  
applied for a grant from Arts Development  
Service (ADS) that would enable them to  
partially cover costs of publication for  
the first year. With ADS encouragement,  
the Collective then began the work of  
composing and producing the first BAR  
supplement issue, with the goal of  
providing as broad coverage of the arts  
as available space and time would allow.  
The supplement, which appeared October 1,  
carried articles on the Buffalo Theatre  
Collective; Martje More, a local gallery  
owner; poet Jayne Anne Phillips; Judy  
Pfaff, a visual artist who was exhibiting  
her work in Buffalo; and included an essay  
addressing cultural pluralism, an issue  
which affects every working artist (as  
well as those who follow the arts) in  
modern society.  

Buffalo Arts Review is currently  
soliciting contributors (primarily  

"A Particular Place To Be Healed."  
think we must grant that she knows  
what she's about, and ample about sage  
and rue, and herbs generally, to  
appreciate her poetic vision. "Asking  
little and slowly giving what no  
one needs/they thrive in poor soil  
under the blast of the sun." She  
does not mention, but I will, that  
rue is also known as the herb-of-grace,  
ostensibly for its use in a ritual  
high mass, and that sage - discussed  
in "Daphne's Tree" November 1982 - is  
known sometimes as a sign of domestic  
virtue, perhaps for its rejuvenating  
properties in the hands of a proper  
white witch. It does seem the two  
are a pair - no one need deny them  
that - and if they occasionally quibble,  
well, again why not? Marge Piercy  
may have the last word here, anyway:  
"In that harsh acid, the savor will be  
trapped and held."  

Sarah Stavin is assistant professor  
of political science at State University  
College at Buffalo and a writer of EMMA.  

writers, graphic artists, and those  
with layout-pasteup experience) who  
are knowledgeable in any area of the  
arts, to submit articles and/or graphics  
for consideration for the spring issue,  
or to work on production of the same.  
BAR is particularly interested in work  
that presents original and controversial  
perspectives on the arts and artistic  
issues.  

Writers, graphic artists, and those  
with working knowledge of magazine  
production, who would be interested in  
contributing to BAR or becoming a  
working member of the Irving Press  
Collective, are invited to contact the  
Collective in writing at 22 Irving  
Place, Buffalo, N.Y. 14203; or to  
telephone founding editors Craig Keller  
(883-1509), George Howell (881-2807),  
Cheryl Bell (885-3014), or Mary Roseberry  
(856-7520).  

Ann Markle Ford is a poet and psychotherapist  
living in Eggertsville, N.Y. She is an  
adjunct faculty member at the University  
of Buffalo and a contributing editor of  
Buffalo Arts Review.  

COMMON GROUND JANUARY 1983 PAGE 19