{As mentioned in the January issue,  
I will, for a time, not be doing  
"Community Speak-Out," because of my  
inability to do the necessary inter-  
viewing. In its place, I will be  
writing this column, which I have  
decided to call "Potpourri."  

This title is appropriate because  
of both its definitions. According  

to The American Heritage Dictionary  
of the English Language, "potpourri  

is a combination of various incongruous  
elements; a miscellaneous anthology  
or collection." Because I plan to  
write on a variety of topics, based  
on my own observations and contempla-  
tions, that affect women in some way,  
this word seemed an appropriate  

label. The other definition of  

this word is "a mixture of dried  

flower petals and spices, kept in  
a jar and used to scent the air."  
To me, the flower petals suggest wo-  
men's beauty and women's love, while  
the spices suggest food and cooking,  

which in turn remind me of women's  
work and women's talents.  

The above title, which I have bor-  
rowed from a 1980 segment of PBS'  
Nova series, is a phrase that I have  
often thought about these past few  
years. It refers to the lengthy  
process of learning how to behave,  
how to appear and even how to think  
according to one's sex. This process  
is, I believe, culturally acquired,  
rather than biologically inherited.  

From the very moment of birth,  
when a doctor, midwife or even ambu-  
lance attendant cries, "It's a girl!"  
or "It's a boy!", one's sex determines  
how others view and relate to him or  
her. In fact, to my mind, our society  
is still quite overly obsessed with  
immediately knowing someone's sex  
(what's the first question asked when  
a baby is born?), and just as immedi-  
ately making assumptions about that  
person based only on gender.  

Perhaps it is because I am with my  
children all the time, and perhaps  
because I know them so intimately,  
that I seldom think of them in terms  
of their sex. Instead, when I am  
with them, I see only their person-  
alities and their behavior. So it  
almost surprises me when others  
comment on either their personalities  
or their behavior in relation to  
their sex. I have already been  
told that my six-month-old daughter  
has a "petite" face, but would that  
word be used if she were a boy with  
the same features? And when my four-  
year-old son is disruptive or con-  
trary, I am angry not only at him,  
but also at the observing adults  
who excuse his behavior by saying,  

COMMON GROUND FEBRUARY 1984 PAGE TWELVE  

The Pinks and  
the Blues  

by Sharon Przepasniak  

"Well, he's just a normal boy." To  
me, that's no excuse.  

So despite the women's movement, I  
still see many people around me—par-  
ticularly other parents—reinforcing  
"traditional" sex roles, on many levels  
from the very blatant (boys don't  
play with dolls) to the more subtle  
(daughters are taught to cook while  
sons are taught car maintenance). As  
a feminist, I worry that such rigid  
roles can be very limiting to both  
boys and girls.  

This sex-role stereotyping begins  
at birth. Yet people either don't  
give it much thought, or perhaps  
don't realize its effect on children.  
I used to be one of the former, despite  
the fact that for four years, I  
worked with children as a junior high  
school teacher. However, since be-  
coming a mother, I have been overwhelmed  
by the intensity of sex-role stereo-  
typing, and the frequency of its re-  
inforcement, as well as the power—  
or lack of power—inherent in it.  

My first insight into how pervasive  
sex-role stereotyping is came when  
my first child was about 3 months old.  
Tired of seeing him in one-piece  
yellow sleepers (yellow is considered  
a 'safe' color when buying baby-  
shower gifts), I ventured downtown  
to buy him his first pair of denim  
overalls. When I asked the department  
store clerk where I could find over-  
alls for infants, she wanted to know,  
"Is it for a boy or a girl?" A bit  
incredulous, I replied, "It's a baby.  
Does it make a difference?"  

In retrospect, I acknowledge my  
naivete! Bows or rick-rack on infant  
girls' overalls, and plain overalls  
for infant boys (or better yet, ones  
with little footballs or trucks em-  
broidered on the pockets) was only  
the beginning. From clothes to toys  
to TV programs to recreation, the  
world still seems to be hell-bent  
on making our girls look and act one  
way, and our boys, quite another.  

Perhaps clothing sounds like a  
minor aspect in this issue of sex-  
roles, but consider how much clothing  
children actually go through, espec-  
ially in the early years when they  
grow so rapidly (not to mention that  
what a person is wearing can often  
affect how others view that person.)  
In my attic are 8 or 10 boxes of my  
four-year-old's outgrown clothes, and  
most of them represent a real struggle  
to find things that were affordable  
and well-made, but at the same time  
not covered with baseballs, footballs,  
cars and trucks, and that were some  
other color besides seemingly infinite  
shades of blue. I have yet to find  
a children's clothing store or clothing  
department in the Buffalo area that  
does not separate its stock according  

to sex.  

Another important part of our  
children's lives is play. What they  
do and the toys they play with are  
still, to a large extent, influenced  
by what our culture expects of them  
according to their sex. Granted, girls  
can now run, climb trees and play  
sports more readily, but boys still  
cannot comfortably and openly jump rope  
or cuddle dolls (yet it is interesting  
to note that a little boy holding a  
stuffed animal seems to be much less  
threatening than that same boy carry-  
ing a "real" doll.)  

And although there are many toys  
that bridge the gender gap (puzzles,  
coloring books, and games to name a  
few), the ones that do not are quite  
clearly labeled. A close look at  
catalogs, Sunday newspaper advertising  
supplements or the actual boxes that  
the toys come in will often directly  
state what sex the toy is intended  
for, both in words and in the inevi-  
table picture of the correct-sex  
child playing with it. Toy advertise-  
ments on television—especially on  
Saturday morning—nearly always make  
a clear-cut pitch to either boys  
or girls, and we all know how  
readily children's desires can be  
influenced by commercials on TV.  

A discussion of sex-role stereo-  
typing of our children would be in-  
complete without including school,  
for this is perhaps their greatest  
influence outside of the family. I  
will face this obstacle soon, since  
it is only a matter of months before  
my oldest enters kindergarten. My  
own grammar school recollections  
loom large: girls help clean up  
the classroom, but boys lift heavy  
boxes; girls are asked to help the  
teacher during recess, while boys  
run around on the playground; kinder-  
garten girls are encouraged to play  
with dolls, but kindergarten boys,  
with building blocks; when two lines  
or teams are needed, it is always  
boys on one side, girls on the  
other.  

When I taught 8th grade, I tried to  
devise methods to lessen the distinction  
between the sexes (such as rotating  
classroom chores so that each child  
can have each job at least once, and  
the practice of dividing the class  
into two groups according to such  
criteria as the first letter of their  
surname, or the colors they had on  
that day), but will I have the