THE ARTS

Alex Dobkin

Concert

Alix Dobkin is my all-time favorite singer/songwriter/entertainer, and bearer of glad tidings and truth. I first heard her music in 1974 and it stopped me in my tracks because of the honesty and intensity with which she sang about women: living, loving, making choices and struggling through both the high and low obstacles in our lives. She sang about my life with a woman-identified sensibility that resonated in me.

I traveled to see and hear her perform at two music festivals, and in Baltimore, Washington D.C., Syracuse, Boston, and New York City; and was thrilled to hear that she would be in Buffalo at last!

Dobkin is one performer who has never disappointed me in concert, and May 6 at the Church of the Ascension in Buffalo was no exception.

She is a Lesbian, a Jew, a mother, a survivor, a performer/musician, and a woman who constantly challenges other women to think about and evaluate their world.

Her concert was equal parts humor, stories, beautifully crafted and executed music, and political rap about Lesbians, racism, anti-Semitism and women's lives. More than any other "women's music circuit" performer, she gathers the pieces of our women's Movement's struggle and knits them together, makes the connections, presents the whole picture.

When Dobkin walked on stage she brought with her a dazzling smile and put her whole self on the line with the audience. She was honest and direct about who she is, what she expects from herself and her audience.

She opened with “Woman to Woman”, a celebration of woman-vision, and a “Coming Out" medley of songs about herself and her life as a Lesbian. Her voice is clear, strong and incredibly flexible. She has a polished style, knows what works well for her, and knows her way around a guitar. When she is on stage, no one misses a back-up band!

Raising issues is one of Dobkin's fortés. She spoke about the prevalence of anti-Semitism in the Women's Movement and the Lesbian Community. She said it seemed to her—the anti-Semitic attitude was a lot like homophobia: "Being Jewish was O.K... a lot like being Lesbian: It's O.K. as long as you don’t talk about it too much or be too pushy." This hurts and divides us as women. She said she felt it important for all women to reach into our own cultural backgrounds for strength; that we are all survivors. We don't have to buy the whole package or adopt patriarchal values, but can take the parts of our cultural heritage we need. She felt that it was especially important for white women to educate themselves about other cultures.

She sang a Yiddish song, “Why Does the Tailor Sew So Well". Dobkin describes Yiddish as a woman's language, as opposed to Hebrew which men traditionally speak. Then she sang a song by Karen Beth called "Not My Own", a chronicle of this continent's conquest by white men who destroyed the indigenous peoples and cultures. The song talks about Jewish culture surviving in countries "not their own", all women surviving in cultures "not their own", and how hard she found it to identify with a country and a culture that has such a heritage of brutality.

Dobkin changed the pace a bit with a song about fat women and her personal attraction to "big women", which had the audience laughing and clapping. She did a new tune called “Room to Grow" about giving ourselves the room to make mistakes, try new things and support and nurture each other, and followed it with her "Talking Lesbian Music Concert" about her European Tour in 1979.

The next song was a solemn, angry one about the issue of separatism, called "Some Boys", which has, rightly or wrongly, been identified as a particular identification of Dobkin's. She has taken a great deal of bitter and hostile criticism for her desire to perform for women only; excluding even boy children.

She feels so strongly that women have to prioritize women in their lives, and that men, even as boys, take vital energy from women. She has put up with vicious rumors and trashing in her asking women to think about how and where they spend their energy; and many women have stayed away from her concerts and music because they considered her too radical, or crazy, or scary! It is unfortunate that any woman would stay away from Dobkin and her music on the basis of innuendo and misunderstanding, because Dobkin deserves to be judged in the flesh. I know of several women who only attended the concert under a little peer pressure, who came away energized and delighted and not intimidated at all.

I have heard Dobkin say, many times, in explaining her position: "It is not all men who are the problem. There are [individual men who are very nice] and whom I like. But it is always men."—meaning that men as a class perpetuate sexism. Women must separate their positive feelings for individual men from the reality that men hold power over women in this society.

Dobkin continued with a medley, "I Hate Men” by Cole Porter, "100 Easy Ways to Lose A Man” by Leonard Bernstein and "Girls Want To Be With The Girls" by the Talking Heads. The audience loved it.

Her next three songs were new tunes about relationships: “Best Friends", "Pitfalls of True Love" and "Never Been Better". Dobkin writes eloquently about her own life and times. It takes a great talent to put so much that is personal into a song and perform it without sinking into obscure references and egotism.

Her second set went quickly. The highlight for the audience was the chance to sing along with her, bringing a very warm, connected feeling to the women there.

Her stage presence was delightful and infectious. She is an accessible and energetic performer who focused on the audience. I have seen how effectively she does this when there are thousands too, rather than the 70 or 80 who attended this concert. More women, lesbian and straight, should have attended, and hopefully the next time she is around, dear reader, you will take a chance on an evening of good fun.

Ruthie Green is a pseudonym for a woman who hopes some day not to need one.

COMMON GROUND JUNE 1984

Record Reviews

“From the Heart”

"From The Heart" Meg Christian 1984 Olivia Records

Ten years ago, Olivia Records released its first album "I Know You Know" by folksinger Meg Christian, kicking off what was to become a revolution in women's music. The album enjoyed enormous success, reaching thousands of women hungry to hear music written and produced by them, and about their lives. Meg Christian’s fourth solo album, “From The Heart", continues this revolution that has become a tradition.

Her music has grown in sophistication over the years, and her last album, “Turning It Over", was a departure from her folk roots. "From The Heart" takes this one step further; in fact, my impression upon first listening was that she had gone beyond her personal style into a more homogenized sound. She has combined elements of pop, soul, and jazz into these highly produced songs. However, the more I listened to it, the more I liked it. There is still plenty of Meg shining through the arrangements.

A new aspect that this album reveals is Meg Christian you can dance to; particularly the first cut, "You Got My Attention,” and "You Can Do It" (both living-room tested by this reviewer and found to be boogie-able). The album has its share of poignant love songs as well. While none equal the bittersweet simplicity of “The Valentine Song" or “Morning Song", Christian's “Happy Birthday" is a sweet celebration of long-term relationships. On the flip side, the ballad "Living In The Moment" explores the motivation for one-night stands, and the eighties trend to avoid commitment. The song speaks with loving honesty to the many who find themselves attracted only to those who are unavailable.

ANNE MURPHY'S SHOW AT EMMA

"I'm always falling for someone who's falling in love with somebody who loves someone else. And I'm always sleeping with someone who's keeping a light in the window and a heart on the shelf."

The album's title track seems to be a message to the women's community to be happy and try to start fresh when things get stale. She says: "Where are we going? Where are we going? When our principles start to stunt our own growing? Fooling for freedom Where is our freedom When we've broken old chains just to make new ones?”

My impression is that she's saying that good politics are great, but don't deny individual differences and happiness.

As always, Christian is assisted by the best of musicians. On this album, she's backed up on vocals by Vaneese Thomas and Carolyn Mitchell, whose voices work well with Meg's and add more warmth and depth. Tenor and soprano sax by Yolanda Nichols makes the upbeat numbers swing, and synthesizer work by Novi Trovog fills out the sound in some songs. I thought the synthesizer was perhaps a little too much; the production could have been less filled out.

"From The Heart" is a solid, pop album. Not as immediately likeable as "Turning It Over", it nonetheless will weather many listenings. Don't let the slick sound fool you; there's much depth here. The listener will get what is almost taken for granted with a Meg Christian album—good music, from the heart.

-Susan Clements

-photo by Phyllis Christopher

Multi-media artist Anne Murphy (above) had a successful one-woman show at EMMA, The Western New York Women's Resource and Cultural Center at 168 Elmwood Ave. Murphy's work consisted of colored and black & white Xeroxes of personal objects and of faces. Above is Murphy in a kimono.