ALL TOGETHER JOURNAL / JULY 1976 3

- Eve’s Garden is oasis for women  
in their quest for sexual freedom

High on the fourteenth floor of a quiet,  
tasteful office building in the Carnegie  
Hall area in New York City is a mail order  
operation and retail showroom at 119 West  
57th Street. It could only exist in the  
enlightened latter half of the 70’s. For, in a  
friendly, guilt-free atmosphere, EVE’S  
GARDEN is devoted solely to extending  
the sexual pleasure of women.

Dell Williams, the empathetic and  
warmly welcoming proprietor and owner  
of EVE’S GARDEN, is quick to explain  
that, despite all the words that have been  
written on the subject of so-called “Sexual  
Liberation”, many women are still leading  
deprived sex lives. “It’s the first shop of its  
kind dedicated to the pleasurable needs of  
women,” says Dell, “and a place where  
women can have access to erotic products  
and information about them, with  
dignity.” “The existing shops that sell  
sexual paraphernalia seem to specialize in  
male needs and go in heavily for sado-  
masochistic merchandise,” she continued.

The sexual boutique, opened Monday to  
Friday from 12:00 Noon to 6:30 and  
Saturdays from 12:00 to 5:00, is small and  
intimate, with erotic prints and posters on  
the walls. Three other women wait on  
customers, answer the active phones and  
fill mail orders that come in daily from all  
over the United States, Alaska, Hawaii and  
Canada. Inquiries for the catalog have also  
been received from Japan, Israel, Sweden  
and South America.

Nestled on shelves and tables around the  
shop are several types of vibrators—  
including the best-selling “Prelude 2”  
which was especially designed as a sexual  
aid for women—and love oils and body  
lotions in enticing fragrances. Also  
displayed are erotic jewelry, incense and  
atmospheric candles. Colorful tee-shirts  
abound, including one imprinted with  
Betty Dodson’s famous labial flower  
design and others carrying such messages  
as “My Body Belongs to Me... but I share.”  
Also available is the Eve’s Garden  
“Pleasure Poncho,” a soft blue denim  
caftan which is part of an expanding line of  
sensual at-home clothes. EVE’S GARDEN carries a wide range of  
books on women’s health and sexuality, of  
which Betty Dodson’s “Liberating  
Masturbation” is the best seller. Also very  
popular are “For Yourself—a Guide to  
Orgasmic Response” by Lonnie Barbach,  
“The Nature and Evolution of Female  
Sexuality” by Dr. Mary Jane Sherfey,  
“Getting Clear-Body Work for Women” by  
Anne Kent Rush, “Loving Women” by the  
Nomadic Sisters and Shere Hite’s “Sexual  
Honesty.”

Reaction of women to Dell Williams’  
unique shop range from, “It took some  
real guts for me to come in” to “Far out,  
what a groovy place,” to “Thank you for  
Eve’s Garden—I never would have had  
the nerve to buy a vibrator in a  
drugstore.” Older women, in particular,  
are enthusiastic about having the space to  
be honest and candid about their sexuality.  
Among the browsers are sex educators,  
counselors and therapists and women  
recommended to the shop by their doctors.

Dell is often asked to explain the reason  
for naming her business EVE’S GARDEN:  
“I wished to show Eve as a strong,  
positive woman whose decision to taste the  
‘forbidden fruit’ was motivated by a desire  
to take responsibility for her own life. As a  
matter of fact, I view her as the first  
feminist! Likewise, today’s Eve is also  
taking responsibility for her own life. That  
is why I called it EVE’S GARDEN. She no  
longer is willing to accept the social and  
sexual imprisonment she was condemned  
to as the result of challenging authority.  
She, too, is challenging the social forces of  
repression and declaring her own right to  
life, liberty... and the pursuit of pleasure. I  
believe sexual liberation is crucial to  
women’s liberation.”

HOW IT ALL STARTED

Prior to Fall, 1975, Dell Williams had  
been an Account Executive with a Madison  
Avenue advertising agency. Two ex-  
periences conspired to pry her away from  
her original career. Sometime during 1973,  
she attended a Body-Sex Workshop con-  
ducted by Betty Dodson, a writer, erotic  
artist and feminist sex educator. The  
workshop had a profound effect on her own  
life, as well as on her understanding of the  
very deep need that women still have to  
free their bodies and their minds from  
society’s sexual taboos. The second in-  
cident occurred when Dell coordinated an  
historic Women’s Sexuality Conference in  
June, 1973, sponsored by the New York  
Chapter of the National Organization for  
Women. The conference had wall-to-wall  
attendees and received nation-wide press  
coverage. At the conference, the  
manufacturer of the vibrator, “Prelude 2”  
displayed the product and literature,  
which were received with such enthusiasm  
that the stock was completely sold out.

The experience of the conference led to  
Dell’s handling the “Prelude 2” as a mail  
order item out of her own home. Attending  
other women’s conferences, she displayed  
the vibrator—along with the Dodson book,  
“Liberating Masturbation,” as a com-  
panion piece. Soon, women started  
dropping over to Dell’s apartment at all  
hours, and encouraged by the response,  
she placed her first ad in Ms. Magazine  
advertising her tasteful catalog. As a  
result of the ad, women from all over the  
country began to write in for the catalog  
and congratulated her on providing such a  
long-needed service. Soon, Dell was  
packing and filling orders late into the  
night.

In September, 1975, Dell moved into her  
present office-showroom, choosing an  
office building location rather than a store  
front—in order to maintain a feeling of  
privacy and confidentiality.

Dell Williams shows some of her unique store’s offerings.

Today, Dell Williams feels that there is a  
decided growth of sexual consciousness  
that cuts across all class levels. And, with  
the women’s movement in the vanguard,  
many men and women are beginning to  
deal with the rigid sex-role conditioning  
that has, in the past, inhibited sexual  
pleasure. Along with the demands for  
equal pay for equal work, women are now  
demanding their right to sexual pleasure  
and orgasm.

As to the future, EVE’S GARDEN plans  
to expand its product line to include an  
Arts Division specializing in erotic art and  
graphics by women artists, as well as a  
Health Division specializing in nutrition  
and health-related products. For Dell feels  
strongly that sexuality is an essential part  
of an individual’s total health picture,  
related to nurturing and caring for one’s  
body. Dell also envisions a blossoming of  
EVE’S GARDENS all over the country.

Dell, herself, it would seem, is a new role  
model for women—offering us an in-  
spirational Twentieth Century portrayal of  
Eve.

Lifestyles ’76 Convention/ Seminar — ‘A Human Experience’

By Bob McGinley  
Member, ALL TOGETHER Board of Advisors

LIFESTYLES are what it is all about.  
Your lifestyle, your friends’ lifestyle, your  
neighbors—and the man and woman  
across the country from you. How you live  
and think, how they live and think, is  
reshaping American society. The trend is  
toward humanism, personal and sexual  
freedom, and economic growth.

We give names to these lifestyles—Open  
Marriage, Core Marriage, Swinging, New  
Woman, Group and Corporate Marriage,  
Golden Years, Bisexuality, Gay Life,  
Single Life, Single Parent, yes—even Step  
Parent and Traditional Marriage.

The names give us something to talk  
about. They set each lifestyle apart from  
the others (when in reality they intermix).  
But at this point in our society’s  
development the distinctions are helpful.  
As with the advent of the label “Gay”,  
these names assist in a necessary con-  
sciousness-raising and the beginning of  
understanding. The names foster talk  
about the new and developing lifestyles  
making people everywhere aware of their  
existence, helping these people to reach  
out, to experiment, to explore options they  
did not know they had.

We use lifestyle names in our con-  
versations and the Media talks or writes  
about one or more of them daily. Yet most  
of us, including the Media, are ignorant of  
their true nature. Rather than simply  
developing ways of life and coping with  
today’s world, these lifestyles are often  
treated as something alien and sometimes  
threatening. As with the words  
‘heterosexual’, ‘homosexual’ and  
“bisexual”, we all too often use lifestyle  
names as labels to classify and to support  
our personal or public bias rather than to  
communicate.

How many really understand what  
swinging is all about? Why it began? The  
different forms it takes? Or its rapid  
growth? How many are aware of the new  
consciousness and political thinking that is  
developing out of the swinging of the  
sixties and early seventies?

How many understand what it means to  
be bisexual? Or Gay? Or a Single Parent?  
What are the pressures, overt, subtle, and  
subliminal, that a woman must face in  
pursuing a personal decision to remain  
single as a way of life? Or to find her  
identity as a person rather than a thing or  
an object.

Bob McGinley, a member of the ALL TOGETHER Board of Advisors, heads up the  
Lifestyles '76 Convention/Seminar, August 20-22, Buena Park, California.

Who understands a Core Marriage, let  
alone the real differences of developing a  
core marriage in Southern California as  
opposed to Pennsylvania?

Do many of us understand the changes  
that are occurring in our marriages, our  
daily lives, and our economic lives?

LIFESTYLES ’76 Convention/Seminar  
is about all of this. It is a purposeful and  
conscious gathering of all lifestyles. The  
intent is to foster understanding, promote  
learning, and help bring “alternate”  
lifestyles out of the closet to be emerging  
lifestyles, while providing the fun, ex-  
citement, and socializing of a large con-  
vention.

LIFESTYLES ’76 is August 20, 21, and  
22. It begins Friday night with addresses  
by LLOYD M. LEVIN, President of ALL  
TOGETHER, and DR. EDGAR W.  
BUTLER, Professor of Sociology at the  
University of California at Riverside.

A series of working seminars fill  
Saturday morning and afternoon, broken  
by the LIFESTYLES Luncheon. In the  
early evening a Cocktail Party fosters the  
mixing of Professionals in education,  
counseling, and research, with men and  
women of the Media and those people the  
convention is all about, the Lifestyle  
Practitioners.

Saturday night is the social highlight of  
the convention with the LIFESTYLES ’76  
Banquet and Dance. RUSS PARKS,  
Comedian and co-manager of the Wide  
World Cabaret, has worked hard to put  
together two wild hours of entertainment  
that will be the envy of Las Vegas!  
LIFESTYLES ’76 is not all seriousness and  
“meaningfulness,” it is also as much fun  
as a World’s Fair!

Sunday reverts to the serious side with a  
Symposium dealing with all the lifestyles  
discussed during the individual seminars.  
The papers and seminar synopsis  
presented at the symposium will be the  
basis for chapters in a book “Lifestyles ’76  
Conference Proceedings.” It will also be  
videotaped for use by educational groups.

Offering something for everyone, free-  
thinking couples who attend will have the  
opportunity to taste California swinging in  
the form of impromptu get-togethers and a  
giant party at Wide World Social Swing  
Club.

Many people have worked long hours to  

(Please continue reading on page 6)