i  
4  
a  
i  

Library of Congress  

Susan B. Anthony  

The object of this Essay is to explain, as  
clearly as I am able, the grounds of an  
opinion which I have held from the very  
earliest period when I had formed any  
opinions at all on social or political mat-  
ters, and which, instead of being weakened  
or modified, has been constantly growing  
stronger by the progress of reflection and  
the experience of life: That the principle  

which regulates the existing social  
relations between the two sexes—the legal  

subordination of one sex to the other—is  

wrong in itself, and now one of the chief  

hindrances to human development; and  

that it ought to be replaced by a principle  

of perfect equality, admitting no power or  
privilege on the one side, nor disability on  
the other.  

John Stuart Mill  

Often a dissident group requires a  

prominent spokesperson before the group  

will be heard. The Women’s Suffrage  

movement in America obtained just such a  

spokesperson when England’s John Stuart  
Mill published his essay “The Subjection  
of Women” in 1869. The quote above is the  
first paragraph of that essay. Mill’s  
writing was disseminated widely by  
suffragists and it did seem to help some in  
gaining them a hearing with their lords  
and masters.  

Lords and masters, indeed. That has  
been precisely the legal, political and  
social relationship between men and  
women before, during and since the  
founding of this country. Our founding  
fathers signed a document which stated  
that all men were created equal and the  
language was clear to all people of that  
day, it did not apply to slaves and that  
meant negroes and women. In the early  
days of the “home of the free and the land  
of the brave” a married woman could not  
legally hold and spend money, even if she  
earned it herself. She could not make  
contracts and in a divorce she was not  
entitled to keep her children. Her husband  
had nearly absolute power over her and  
she was legally obliged to obey him in all  

things. The fact is, the status of the  

American woman was that of a chattel  
slave. Of course, she had more rights if she  
had reached the age of majority and did  
not marry, but society pretty well made up  
for any deficiencies in the law to make  
singleness a rare state and to control the  
few women who did not marry. Curiously,  
while even some of the founders of the  
country debated whether slavery should  
be allowed in the new country there did not  

seem to be any parallel concern for  
women.  

Actually, one of the founders of our  
country did indeed consider the question of  
women’s rights, occasioned by the  
following letter from Abigail Adams to  
John Adams written on March 31, 1776:  

“I long to hear that you have declared an  
independence—and by the way in the new  
Code of Laws which I suppose it will be  
necessary for you to make I desire you  
would Remember the Ladies, and be more  
generous and favorable to them than  
your ancestors. Do not put such unlimited  
power into the hands of the Husbands.  
Remember all Men would be tyrants if  

they could. If particular care and at-  

tention is not paid to the Ladies we are  
determined to foment a Rebellion, and will  
not hold ourselves bound by any Laws in  
which we have no voice, or Representation.  

“That your Sex are Naturally Tyran-  
nical is a Truth so thoroughly established  
as to admit of no dispute, but such of you  
as wish to be happy willingly give up the  
harsh title of Master for the more tender  
and endearing one of Friend. Why then,  
not put it out of the power of the vicious  
and the Lawless to use us with cruelty and  
indignity with impunity. Men of Sense in  
all Ages abhor those customs which treat  
us only as the vassals of your Sex. Regard  

us then as Beings placed by providence  

under your protection and in imitation of  
the Supreme Being make use of that power  
only for our happiness.”  

Here is John Adams' incredible reply to  
his wife's reasoned and reasonable request  
to “Remember the Ladies” in a letter to  
Abigail written on April 14, 1776:  

“As to Declarations of Independency, be  
patient. Read our Privateering Laws, and  
our Commercial Laws. What signifies a  
Word.  

“As to your extraordinary Code of Laws,  
I cannot but laugh. We have been told that  
our Struggle has loosened the bands of  
Government everywhere. That Children  

and Apprentices were disobedient—that  

schools and Colleges were grown tur-  
bulent—that Indians slighted their  

Guardians and Negroes grew insolent to  

their Masters. But your Letter was the  
first Intimation that another Tribe more  
numerous and powerful than all the rest  
were grown discontented.—This is rather  
too coarse a Compliment but you are so  
saucy, I won’t blot it out.  

“Depend upon it, We know better than to  
repeal our Masculine systems. Although they  
are in full Force, you know they are little  
more than Theory. We dare not exert our  
Power to its full Latitude. We are obliged  
to go fair, and softly, and in Practice you  
know We are the subjects. We have only  
the Name of Masters, and rather than give  
up this, which would completely subject  
Us to the Despotism of the Petticoat, I hope  
General Washington, and all our brave  

Heroes would fight. I am sure every good  
Politician would plot, as long as he would  
against Despotism, Empire, Monarchy,  
Aristocracy, Oligarchy, or Ochlocracy.”  

Abigail was given her answer and  
American women have been living with it  
ever since. The laughter of other men was  
ultimately to strengthen the resolve of  
suffragists over the three quarters of a  
century it took to acquire the vote for  
women once they set out to achieve it.  
However, before there was any movement  
to emancipate women, there was a  
powerful movement to abolish slavery in  
the country. To abolish slavery meant only  
one thing, to free the Negro slaves, not the  
women of all races. Regardless of their  
own status, women worked hard in the  
abolitionist movement. In spite of  
their work, they could never speak at  
policy making sessions. In a day long  
debate at an international anti-slavery  
congress in London, the question of  
whether a delegation of American women  
would be seated was finally decided in a  
peculiar way. As Mr. Wendell Phillips of  
Boston put it, “I have no doubt the women  
will sit with as much interest behind the  
bar...” He referred to a bar on which a  
curtain hung and behind which the women  

delegates were required to sit. One of the  
women in that delegation was Elizabeth  
Cady Stanton who, along with Susan B.  
Anthony, might be considered a founder of  
the women’s suffrage movement in  
America:  

A gentle Quaker woman and ardent  
abolitionist, Lucretia Mott was to be the  
catalyst that led to the Women’s Rights  
Convention held in Seneca Falls, New  
York in July, 1848. It was Lizzie Stanton  
who convinced the other women planning  
for that convention that they should  
demand the right to vote. Mrs. Mott  
protested, “Why, Lizzie, thee will make us  
ridiculous!” Of course, Lucretia Mott was  
right, they would be ridiculous. However,  
by demanding the vote, as subsequent  
events proved, they would also become  
famous. Lizzie Stanton was working under  
the old maxim, any publicity is good  
publicity. The following item from the  
Lowell, Massachusetts Courier is an  
example of both the publicity and the  
ridicule they received: “PROGRESS—  
The women folks have just held a Con-  
vention up in N.Y. State, and passed a sort  
of “bill of rights,” affirming it their right  
to vote, to be teachers, legislators,  

(Please continue reading on page 2)  

retirement.  

Maybe it was the Pill? Maybe it was the  
Vietnam War? Maybe it was the  
recognition of the need to control  
population growth, the need for ZPG (zero  
population growth)? Maybe it was the  
need for women to find their identity as a  
person not as an object or a thing—or  
maybe, just maybe, it was the need of  
people to expand, to breathe, to be free.  

Maybe it was the realization that for  
many the system didn’t work for them. Not  
in the terms of the draft resisters, not in  
terms of the “doves,” not in terms of the  
student objectors—but in terms of the  
corporate executive who was conditioned  
to the face that “white collar workers don’t  
get fired,” only to wake up one morning to  
find for an example that a W.T. Grant  
could collapse and where was the white  
collar worker then.  

Maybe it was in the terms of the one  
million people who in 1975 dissolved that  
union made in heaven, blessed by the  
state, and held in high esteem by the  
corporate structure—until that president  
of the corporation became one of the one  
million.  

Well the nuclear family isn’t going to  
die—that family of mama and papa and  
two kids is going to be around for a long  
time—but that doesn’t mean that better  
ways can’t be found, and better models  
can’t be designed, that better living  
arrangements can’t be established  
satisfactorily and acceptably for those  
seeking something more than the promise  
of the nuclear family.  

The two child suburban family may still  
be important to many who need that kind  
of lifestyle—but so is the lifestyle of  
remaining single needed by many. So is  
the lifestyle of those who have no choice  
but to remain single because they are old,  
and Social Security forces many old people  
to stay single lest a legal marriage cause  
them to take a reduction of Social Security.  
Or maybe they are single because they are  
gay and any form of a legal union is denied  
them or because of economics, a  
cohabitation is a more viable arrangement  
for say college students whose education is  

(Please continue reading on page 2)  

carefree.