6 ALL TOGETHER JOURNAL / JULY 1976

AW

By Philip Bizar and Michael Pildes

Practicing Attorneys & Members of Board of Advisors

The United States Supreme Court has
just completed its work for this current
term. What do those “nine old men” do
down there in Washington?

The Supreme Court has nine members
that are appointed for life by the President
with the consent of the Senate. Once they
become members of the Court they either
die in service or retire when they become
infirm. Justices, as they are called, can be
impeached but this rarely ever happens.
Former Congressman Gerald R. Ford
initiated impeachment proceedings
several years ago against former Justice
William O. Douglas. After several months
the matter went into limbo.

Most Presidents (not all) choose com-
petent legal authorities for the bench who
are philosophically in tune with the
current administration. Some justices are
tough on the rights of criminals and prefer
State action over federal intervention.
These members are usually called con-
servative or strict constructionists. Other
members follow the Bill of Rights, the
First Amendment, and restrict the power
of law enforcement officers. These justices
are called liberals or champions of in-
dividual rights.

Since most justices serve many years, a

conservative appointment now may be a
liberal one twenty years later. The Court
has “swing” members that vote with
either the liberals or conservatives
depending on the issue. A majority of the
members hearing a case are needed for a
decision. Issues that are decided by
substantial majorities (9-0, 7-2) become
the law of the land for generations.
Decisions returned by a five to four vote
can change the next term or with a new
appointment to the Court. The return of
capital punishment (June, 1976) has been
brought to you by the Nixon appointments
to the Court.

Justices hear cases from October to the
end of June the following year. Arguments
are heard in about 175 cases. In most of the
cases heard, written signed opinions are
published. The Court has discretion on
whether or not it will hear a case with
some exceptions. A refusal of the Court to
consider a case is an affirmation of the
lower federal court or state court.

Decisions of the Court declaring local
ordinances or state statutes void may
involve just the litigant in the suburbs of
Tucson or it may require all state
legislatures to conform to the ruling. A
recent Supreme Court case on abortion
from Missouri would be a good example of
the national scope of a decision.

Lifestyles ’76 Convention/Seminar

(Continued from page 3)

bring about LIFESTYLES ’76, the third in
the Lifestyle series. As lifestyle activists
and the Directors of Wide World Of Con-
temporary People, my wife Geri and I
have worked and planned for
LIFESTYLES ’76 for close to a year.

Dr. Edgar W. Butler is Co-Chairman of
LIFESTYLES ’76. In addition to his work
at the University of California, Dr. Butler
has written several books on American
society and is Principal Investigator of
Community Research Projects in
Riverside, California. He is responsible,
along with myself, for the planning and
execution of the lifestyle seminars and the
symposium.

Among those assisting as seminar
facilitators are Dr. Gerald Hunt, Institute
of Psychiatry and Human Behavior,
School of Medicine, University of
Maryland; David Bergland, Attorney in
Huntington Beach, California and the U.S.
Vice Presidential nominee of the Liber-
tarian Party; Dr. Barry Singer, Professor
of Psychology at California State
University at Long Beach, and Member of
the Board of Advisors of AMRCUS,

Michael Pildes

<=
Philip Bizar

ABORTION—Married Women: Do not
need the consent of Husbands. Unmarried
Women under 18 years: Do not need
parental consent. Planned Parenthood of
Central Missouri v. Danforth, Nos. 74-1151
and 74-1419 (June 30, 1976)

In its decision, a majority of the Court
declared several provisions of the
Missouri abortion statute unconstitutional.
By voiding two provisions of the statute, the
Court significantly enhanced the principle
that a woman alone shall determine
whether or not she has an abortion.
Section 3(3) of the statute required the
prior written consent of the spouse of the
woman seeking an abortion during the
first 12 weeks of pregnancy. The Court’s
reasoning for voiding the aforementioned
section is clear and unequivocal. “... The
State cannot delegate to a spouse a veto
power which the State itself is absolutely
and totally prohibited from exercising
during the first trimester of pregnancy.”

Section 3(4) of the statute required
unmarried women under 18 years of age to
have the prior written consent of one
parent before an abortion could be per-
formed. Both this section and 3(3) above
allowed abortions with consent if the
mother’s life became an issue. The Court
used the same reasoning for minors as it
did for married women.

This abortion decision (majority
opinion) was written by Justice Blackmun
and joined in by Brennan, Stewart,
Marshall, and Powell. Justice Stewart
wrote a second opinion of his own joined in
by Justice Powell. In the second opinion,
Powell suggested some form of parental
consent that was not an absolute veto
would be acceptable to him. Justice White
wrote a third opinion joined in by Chief
Justice Burger and Justice Rehnquist
concurring in the majority opinion in part
and dissenting in part. These three
members all favor requiring consent from
husbands and parents.

Justice Stevens delivered a fourth
opinion, concurring in part and dissenting
in part. This member is in favor of
parental consent but not spousal consent.

Going to law school does not help much
in understanding this case as it applies to
the future. It seems probable that a
majority of the Court would require
consent in both cases after the first
trimester. A majority of the members
would allow some form of consent if it
wasn’t an absolute veto of the mother’s
position.

Now that we are all experts on the
Supreme Court, other lifestyle cases will
appear in future columns.

Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; and Hugh
Wallace, M.S., Counselor at the Lifestyles
Center, Fullerton, California.

Others involved in LIFESTYLES ’76 are
Ray Engel of Hollywood, The House Of
David in Oakland, California, the Silver
Chain in Bloomington, Minnesota, and
several lifestyle groups across the
country.

In the not distant future, and helped by
events such as LIFESTYLES ’76, it will
not be important to label lifestyles. In the
more socially advanced areas of our
country, people will live, work, and play
without particular regard to lifestyle or
sexual inclination. This won’t be because
society will suddenly permit it—it will be
because people will have woken up to, and
will have assumed, freedom to be them-
selves.

ALL who become involved in
LIFESTYLES ’76 will have had a part in
this social change.

Registration and information for
LIFESTYLES '76: P.O. Box 5366, Buena
Park, CA 90622; Phone (714) 821-6117.

Elliott Leighton, our contributor for this
month's column, is a family therapist and is the
director of the Institute for Human Relations in
Santa Rosa and Walnut Creek, California. He
also practices with Bay Area Psychological
Associates in San Francisco. He was formerly
director of Esalen Institute at Big Sur. He has
worked and written extensively in the area of
human relationships, and is conducting inter-
views and research for a book on relation-
ships. If you would like to share your relation-
ship experiences, please write Elliott Leighton,
c/o ALL TOGETHER.

QUESTION: Sometimes I feel so lonely
that I do things I know are foolish and self-
destructive, but at the time it seems to get
rid of the anguish of my loneliness. How can
I get out of the vicious cycle?

ANSWER: All of us at some time or other experience what is commonly called
“loneliness.” The word itself, however, is usually used to describe several separate
things, such as feeling closed off or alienated from other people, or perhaps the
“grey” feeling of nothingness. Sometimes we confuse an unfulfilled feeling of wanting
or needing contact with others as loneliness. It may be helpful to distinguish the
feelings of being “locked out,” or “locked in.”

We all have needs, and we are each governed in our phases of what we do by the
search for fulfillment of those needs. For example, we each have a need for food, and
when we walk into a restaurant and order a meal, we are searching for fulfillment of
that need. It is when we are frustrated in the fulfillment of our needs that we learn
new, different, and sometimes counterproductive ways of meeting the needs, such as
breaking a grocery window to get food because we didn’t have the money for the
restaurant. That acting out is in unhealthy ways, and that’s where most of us get into
trouble.

Some time ago I was working with a patient, who we'll call ‘Joe.’ Joe was part of
that large part of the city population that we sometimes call ‘closet gay.’ He was
married, had had a succession of jobs that were unsatisfying and which usually ended
by his being fired. Joe came to me because he was unhappy, morose, and unable to
find any joy in his existence. As Joe unfolded in the course of our therapy sessions, we
shared together what he was doing in his day-to-day life, and so much of what he was
doing was really a disguised search for fulfillment of needs.

Joe was an excellent example of the need to be “OK” with other people—he
basically wanted to be accepted and approved of. He wanted to be appreciated and
complimented. Somehow, this wasn’t happening for him, and his way of ‘being’ with
other people was to be unpleasant and snide. He was, in a subtle way, saying to other
people, “you’re not ok with me, either, and I’m going to make you uncomfortable.”
One of his working colleagues finally told him he was obnoxious.

Joe was terribly upset at the direct reaction that he received that day, but it was
helpful that he had someone talk straight to him. We spent much time talking about
that experience, and how he was reliving the experience of vainly wanting his father
to like him and give him approval.

Sometimes, we learn to ‘be’ in the world by our relationships with our own parents.
Here, for Joe, was a basic need to be loved and accepted, and a father who put him
down, who didn’t meet Joe’s need to be ‘ok’. So Joe found other ways of trying to
satisfy that need. He became sarcastic, snide, and disapproving of others. The result
for Joe was that he encountered more of what he didn’t want—rejection. Somehow, he
had never resolved with his father the whole ‘gestalt’ of being the little boy who
needed to be ‘ok’ before he could grow up to be the man who could give other people
approval and accept approval within himself.

For Joe, who was experiencing many of the problems that go with the unresolved
sexual identity of being in both the straight and the gay worlds, his acting out also took
the form of frequenting ‘gay bars’ and momentary forays into the gay world. This was
for him as unsatisfying as most other parts of his lifestyle.

Gradually, Joe was able to sort out his need to be accepted and how he responded to
that need in ways that exaggerated rather than satisfied that need. When he was able
to accept his own neediness, he was then much less needy; one of the paradoxes of our
human condition.

All of us are lonely sometimes. For some of us, the pain of being lonely is so great that
we busy ourselves in social things, which are satisfying only when we really are able
to feel connected to others. Sometimes we mask our hurt feelings of loneliness with
subtle kinds of anger—what we sometimes call ‘passive-aggressive’ behavior; like
the subtle and ‘accidental’ ways we hurt other people. Sometimes not so subtly, like
the odd pleasure some people get from being on the giving end of an S-M trip.

Many people mask their unconnectedness by joining what someone once called
‘the friction crowd.’ They get into promiscuous and way-out sexual activities in the
unconscious hope that somehow they will feel something; a kind of denial of a sense of
deadness. Many of the swapping clubs and kinky communal scenes are made up of
people who are trying in this way to meet their unfulfilled needs to be ‘connected’ with
others. Unfortunately, most of the other people in the same scene are also trying to
work through their own needs in the same way and seldom have much to ‘give,’ ex-
cept in a superficial way. If our connectedness is founded only on the friction of our
bodies, we end up at least as lonely as we started.

Most of what we’ve been describing has to do with the sense of being ‘locked in,’
with all the pain of feeling that we’re not ok with ourselves. Sometimes, our sense is
that we have to be closed up or someone will look inside of us and see all the ‘bad’
things we feel about ourselves; all the things we don’t approve of in ourselves, even
like the “weakness” of needing other people.

I never cease being amazed at how, in our society, we get messages that it’s great to
like to be with other people, but if we really need other people, it’s not ok. (Perhaps
they will take advantage of us or betray our needs). The truth of the matter is, we all
need others, and we all need to be needed, but many of us are hell-bent to deny those
real feelings. ‘Ha, Ha,’ laughing and scratching, and the emptiness of the party scene
are testimonials to that crazy-making message.

A few years ago I had occasion to be at a large cocktail party. There must have been
several hundred people in the room, all of whom were professionally associated, but
few had any personal connections in the room. My own mood at that moment was
rather introspective, and I looked around and began observing how people were each
in their own way responding to the universal need to be welcomed and accepted. Some
people seemed to huddle against the walls, as if they sought not to be noticed in their
aloneness; others engaged in the other extreme, boldly encountering someone else.