2 ALL TOGETHER JOURNAL / JULY 1976

National Archives

Elizabeth Stanton

Women's Rights

(Continued from page 1)

lawyers, divines, and do all the sundries
the “lords” may, and of right do now. They
should have resolved at the same time that
it was obligatory also upon the “lords”
aforesaid, to wash dishes, scour up, handle
the broom, darn stockings, patch
breeches, scold the servants, dress in the
latest fashion, wear trinkets, look
beautiful, and be as fascinating as these
blessed morsels of humanity whom God
gave to preserve that rough animal man,
in something like reasonable civilization.
Progress! Progress forever!”

One of the most important outcomes of
the Seneca Falls Convention was that one
Susan Brownell Anthony became aware of
a movement of women’s rights. This young
lady was, at the time, devoting her energies
to the Temperance movement. That
movement, in fact, was considered to be
largely in support of women in that it
would free them of the horrors of a
drunken husband. However, as Susan
began to reflect that it was men who made
all the decisions in the Temperance
movement, she began to realize that only
through a women’s movement could
women make any progress toward
freedom. In the early 1850s she joined with
Mrs. Stanton and for fifty years until
shortly before her death, she devoted her
full energies to the Women’s Suffrage
Movement. Sadly, neither Susan B. An-
thony nor Elizabeth Cady Stanton lived to
see women even win the vote, much less
anything approaching full equality. Never
mind, Susan and Elizabeth, women have
not yet attained anything like full equality.

A grim milestone on the rocky path
toward a vote for women occurred in 1866
when the women tried to convince the
Congress that they should be given the
franchise along with the Negro. Not only
did they not succeed, but for the first time,
because of a peculiarity of wording in the
fourteenth amendment, women were
specifically excluded from the vote by the
U.S. Constitution. Before, the states could
determine who would vote and no one was

_ Number 5/July 1976
Published monthly by ALL TOGETHER,

INC., a not-for-profit corporation in the
State of Illinois.

Suite 1416 / 205 W. Wacker
Chicago, Illinois 60606

Lloyd Levin President/Founder
Grant L. Ford Publisher/Editor

Sarah Wilson Directory

Board of Advisors
Philip Bizar — Merle Goldberg
Nancy Borman Dan Gumbleton
Paul Breton Kay Levin
Edgar W. Butler Hy Levy
Rob Cole Robert McGinley
Helen Colton Millard Perstein
Charles Dawson Michael E. Pildes
Ellis Gold Robert Renouf
James R. Smith
© 1976 by All Together, Inc. All rights
reserved. Permission to reprint material
contained herein (except separately copy-
righted articles) granted upon request.

specifically excluded by the federal

constitution. Now, the vote was limited to
males, regardless of race or color. With
some justification, Susan Anthony angrily
swore, “I will cut off this right arm of mine
before I will ever work for or demand the
ballot for the Negro and not the woman.”
At this point, Mrs. Stanton realized they
would not see success in their own
lifetimes. Well, the black men did get the
right to vote and over fifty years later, in
1920, this nation finally began to remove
the chains from the oppressed majority.
Although neither lived to see success, both
Susan B. Anthony and Elizabeth Cady
Stanton worked as long as they were able
for the cause that consumed most of their
lives.

What happened to the condition of
women after the right to vote was
achieved? Dr. Anna Shaw, at one time the
leader of the National American Woman
Suffrage Association, was quoted just
before she died, “You younger women will
have a harder task than ours. You will
want equality in business, and it will be
even harder to get than the vote, for you
will have to fight for it as individuals and
that will not get you far. Women will not
unite, since they will be competitors with
each other. As soon as a woman has it for
herself she will have entered the man’s
world and cease to fight as a woman for
other women.” We all know there is a lot of
truth in those words. However, even with
the vote and other legal progress for
women, they were still not equal, even
under the law.

To move for full equal status for women,
the National Woman’s Party conceived an
Equal Rights Amendment on November
11, 1922. The amendment, worded,
“Equality of rights under the law shall not
be denied or abridged by the United States
or by any State on account of sex,” was
introduced into the Congress in 1923 and
again each year for the next forty-nine
years. Nevertheless, in the period after the
19th amendment was passed giving
women the vote until the mid-1960s the

women’s movement was comparatively

unnoticed by the majority of Americans,
including women. In the fifties, the civil
rights movement emerged to assist blacks
in their struggle to use the power of the
U.S. Constitution to free themselves of the
oppression they still suffered nearly 100
years after their “emancipation.” The
civil rights movement, like the abolitionist
movement, met with some early success,
largely because of the dedication, hard
work, and risk-taking of women, both black
and white. Once again, however, women
began to see that while they were welcome
to do the chores and take risks in the civil

rights movement, they rarely were
allowed to make the decisions. In fact, the
civil rights movement acted as a sort of
catalyst or consciousness-raising ex-
perience for women. It also brought the
country’s attention to the problems of
many, if not all, of its oppressed groups.
Ironically, blacks have again made legal
strides that women have not been able to
match. It took some fifty years for women
to gain the right to vote after black males
were given the same right. By such
reckoning, we can expect passage of the
Equal Rights Amendment sometime after
the beginning of the next century.

While there are many parallels between
the women’s movement of the 19th century
and the current women’s movement, there
are important differences. The last
movement began from a base of clear and
total legal as well as social inferiority for
women. Today, much of the legal problem
has been resolved, yet employers,
financial institutions, landlords, and
society in general still see women as
different in ways they are not different and
inferior even though they are able to do
nearly all of the things that men do. The
earlier women’s movement recognized
that working for the vote was simply a
symbol for all of the other wrongs against
women. Today’s feminist recognizes that
the principal battles to be fought entail a
drastic reorganization of the family and
society so that women will be perceived
both by men and themselves in a very
different way than ever in past history. No
longer is it enough to change laws. Values
and social structures must change as well.

Another problem that today’s feminist is
willing to face that was not generally dealt
with in the past is the rights of lesbians.
Socially, it has become possible for these
women to identify themselves, although
not without considerable personal risk.
Women in the movement understand that
none of them will ever be free unless all of
them are. While this notion has caused
considerable disagreement among
feminists, it now seems to be a well-
established principle. Lesbians, in fact, are
in the forefront of the women’s movement
today and their contributions are legion.

Yet, today’s task is infinitely greater
than the arduous task the suffragists set
out for themselves. Consider that what
needs to be done is to no less than com-
pletely alter the basic values of an entire
society. Simultaneously, women who
accept the predominantly male image of
themselves must learn self-respect, while
all men must be brought to understand and
accept that women will be equal to men in
every way possible. This effort is a con-
tinuous, long-term effort with all the built

President Levin to be in California

Lloyd Levin, president of ALL
TOGETHER, will be in California during
the month of August, where he will be
speaking at several meetings, seminars, and
conventions. He will also be appearing on a
number of radio and television programs
during his trip.

His schedule includes the following con-
firmed appearances: August 16, Parents

ALL TOGETHER
moves to new offices

Growing pains can sometimes have their
positive side, too. And that’s what we've
been having at ALL TOGETHER. Because
of the growth of your organization, we've
had to move to larger offices at 205 West
Wacker, the Engineering Building on the
north side of Chicago's “loop.”

The new offices, provided by the
Marketing Corporation which provides
membership services for ALL
TOGETHER, includes a large main office
area, an editorial office for the All Together
Journal, and two private offices.

Typesetting equipment and art facilities,
shared with YourStyle Publishers,
Inc. (Chicago Gay Life), will enhance the
publications of ALL TOGETHER,
including this paper. This is also located in an
adjacent workroom.

Lloyd Levin, president of ALL
TOGETHER, invites you to “drop by for a
cup of coffee. Let's get acquainted. We're
here to serve you, and hope to serve you
better in our new location.”

‘Without Partners (POP), Burbank; August

17, POP, Encino; August 20, Keynote
speaker for Lifestyles “76; Anaheim (see
separate article — next page); August 24,
Growth For Singles, Glenwood; August 28,
POP, San Gabriel. He also has several ten-
tative radio and TV appearances. Watch
your local papers for times and places.
Also included in his travels for the month
of August is a trip to Florida to appear

before the Florida Insurance Commission,

where he will testify at hearings concerning
the changing of insurance laws in that state.
He has appeared in California and Illinois
previously, at hearings which resulted in the
liberalization of those states’ insurance
laws. He has interviews and meetings
scheduled as well. (Schedule not available
at press time.)

in difficulties of maintaining such an ef-
fort. ALL TOGETHER, which supports the
women’s movement, is committed to
furthering the women’s efforts through
communication with the business and
financial community, through providing
non-discriminatory programs for women

and through articles in the All Together

Journal devoted to reminding all of our
members what the problems are and what
needs to be done. If feminists everywhere
will dedicate and re-dedicate themselves
to an ever-continuing effort, we at ALL
TOGETHER can do no less.

That’s what ECOMORES
is all about...
(President's message—continued from page 1)

more important at this point in time than a
legal marriage.

The two-child suburban family may still
be important to many, and so is that
opening of marriage that provides for an
expansion of “‘self’’ as well as “both
together”—and that opening of “‘self’’ or
“both” can run the entire gamut from
mental to physical to economic to sexual
experimentation of any part or parts of
these directions. And so, we come to
ECOMORES—(eco) referring to
economics and (mores) referring to group
custom, moral attitudes, and habits.

As the lifestyles All Together addresses
itself change from alternative to
emerging—then so does the economic
impact change from suspicion to reality
with reality comes change—hopefully for
the better.

So what’s wrong with experimentation—
the seeking of alternatives... like the use of
“the pill” or voluntary sterilization.

I guess it depends on what side of the
fence you come from. Ask yourself! How
excited would you be about publicizing the
spread of voluntary
(estimated at 7 million from 1969-1974) if
you were a baby manufacturer? “That's
what ECOMORES is all about” ...and
when you talk about 7 million in just five

years, you’re no longer talking about an

alternative, you’re talking about an
emerging lifestyle.

With voluntary sterilization comes all
kinds of directions both men and women
can and will explore, all kinds of economic
impact, all kinds of ECOMORES.

Editor’s Apologies

In the press of moving to new offices, which took place in the middle of
preparing this issue, we fell behind! Please accept our apologies for the
delay in getting you your All Together Journal. Now that we have moved into
our new offices, we have ample working space and equipment to move our
schedule up to get you your paper much earlier. We have combined facil-
ities with another lifestyle newspaper, so we're looking forward to growth

in size and quality from now on.

By the way, we'd like to hear from you. This is your newspaper, and
we appreciate your contributions, whether it be a letter, a poem, or an
article. So we'll be looking forward to getting your input.

Grant Ford
Editor

All Together / Suite 1416 / 205 W. Wacker / Chicago IL 60606

a

sterilization