4 ALL TOGETHER JOURNAL / JULY 1976

LifeStyles Directory

Hi, All,

This month we are packing the directory chock full of
goodies for everyone. There are bookstores, gift shops
and communes.

Are you a single parent? If you are, did you know
that you are one of over 7 million? Parents Without
Partners and Uni-Parent are at your service.

One of these days, I’d like to take a Yoga course. How
about you? You been thinking about the same thing?
Well, in case you have, on the north side of Chicago
there is a Yoga Center. It is the Sivananda Yoga
Center.

Then there’s communes. First of all, in Canada,
there is the Alternative to Alienation. They publish a
journal of the same name.

Are you into vegetarianism? (tell me, folks, is that a
word?) In DeKalb, Juicy John Pinks serves vegetarian,
as well as meat, meals that even a non-vegetarian
will enjoy. On Wednesday evening at about midnight,
singers, dancers or whatever your act is, you can
perform on stage before an audience.

Besides communes, there’s a publishing collective.
The Community Publishing Cooperative publishes a
bimonthly journal, Communities which includes ar-
ticles dealing with issues applicable to community
living.

On another note, there is a plea from the Howard
Brown Memorial Clinic. Due to the high cost in
malpractice insurance, they need help. 7,000 dollars a
year ain’t chicken feed, so if you can help, please do.

If you can’t find what you want, that’s where I need
your help. Won’t you send me the name and address of
your favorite place? You probably remember that I’ve
asked you this question in every issue, well, I’m asking
again. If each one of you would send one name and
address, that should keep me going for a few months,
Ok?

Well, people, take care until next month.

Sarah

Last issue when we introduced the color codes we
neglected to list the New Woman, her color is Red.
Sorry about that.

The Howard Brown Memorial Clinic
1250 W. Belden
Chicago, Ill. 60690
312-871-5777

The Howard Brown Memorial Clinic is Chicago’s
only gay operated, volunteer staffed center for the
testing and treatment of venereal diseases. During the
past two years, by operating only one evening a week,
the clinic has been able to test and treat almost 5,000
persons. But more needs to be done. The incidence of
venereal diseases in the gay community of Chicago is
high.

With an all-volunteer staff of doctors, nurses,
technicians, health workers and other professionals,
the clinic has been able to offer quality and confidential
health care to the community as a free service. The
costs of rent, medical supplies, insurance, and other
operating expenses have been entirely supported by
individual contributions. The insurance necessary to
retain doctors and other medical professionals,
however, has risen a startling $7,000 in one year. This
insurance premium is currently due and cannot be
absorbed by the donations received. As a result, an
emergency fund raising drive is currently under way
to ensure the continuation of these services.

The clinic is named in honor of the late Dr. Howard J.
Brown of New York City. A native of Peoria, Ill., Dr.
Brown was New York City’s first Health Services
Administrator during Mayor Lindsay’s administration. In October ’73 he made page one news by
publicly announcing that he was a homosexual in an
attempt to end the prejudices which continue and by
helping to found the National Gay Task Force to carry
forward that initiative.

Alternative to Alienation:
Box 46 Stn. M.
Toronto, Ont. M6S4T2
416-925-8908

Alternative to Alienation is a commune. It is also
called the Spice of Life Collective. Here’s a community
where open loving, non-competitive relationships be-
tween men and women, gays and straights, form the
basis for a lifestyle of feeling and self-expression.
The Collective originated over four years ago when
seven people joined together to delve as deeply as
possible into the problem of self-alienation. If you’d
like a copy of the journal, Alternative to Alienation,
send 35 cents to the above address.

Community Publications Cooperative
C.P.C. Box 426
Louisa, Va. 23093
703-894-5126/967-9536

Community Publications Cooperative (C.P.C.)
publishes a bimonthly journal called Communities.
The journal includes descriptions of various
cooperative and communal living groups and articles
dealing with issues pertinent to community living
such as education, government and therapy. There are
also listings which connect people with the groups and
resources they need to find.

Six publishing ventures with a shared direction
joined together in 1972 and C.P.C. was born. To receive
a copy of the journal, Communities, send $1.25 or $6.00
for a year’s subscription to the above address.

If there are any questions or need for further in-
formation, please write or call C.P.C.

United Sisters
P.O. Box 41
Garwood, N.J. 07027
201-233-3848 (hotline for women only)

UNITED SISTERS is the successor to Daughters of
Bilitis in New Jersey. PUCE MONGOOSE, the
newsletter published by the UNITED SISTERS is the
successor to the LAZETTE. US was formed in August
of 1975 by women who had been active in Daughters of
Bilitis.

The objective of US is to provide educational and
civil rights by Lesbians for Lesbians—and women in
general. Referrals, peer counseling, information
center, and a speaker bureau are also available.

“UNITED SISTERS is a Lesbian/feminist
organization, as such we sometimes attract ‘sickies’
who call in and hassle us—curious males who get their
‘kicks’ from calling us and talking to a Lesbian. For
this reason we will not handle calls from men, unless
we can ascertain that the calls are by authorized
people with legitimate purpose (gay organizations,
professionals, etc.).”

Uni-Parent of Family Services
of the East Bay
920 A Street
Hayward, Calif. 94541
582-0210

The program of Uni-Parent was developed over
three years ago to deal with the special difficulties of
being a single parent, or a child of a single parent
family.

Their aim is to provide professional counseling to the
single parent family. They are staffed by licensed
family, child, and marriage counselors.

Seamist Motel
2657 S. Atlantic
Daytona Shores, Florida 32018
904-767-7100

This moderately priced motel is open seven days a
week, 24 hours a day. All ages and lifestyles are
welcome.

You can swim in the pool or just relax. If you want to
watch T.V. you can do so in the comfort of your own
suite. Each suite has a refrigerator so that you can
keep all that good beer cold.

Sivananda Yoga Center
1246 Bryn Mawr
Chicago, Ill. 60660
312-878-2468

Jonathan C. Phillips of the Center says that all
lifestyles are suitable to yoga practice. So get on over
there to the Center and get a special beginning yoga
course every Monday at 6 pm. You pay only $10.00 for 3
classes, 3 lectures, a Yoga book, and a chart.

The Sivananda Yoga Center does not require any
contracts or other obligations. Your development is up
to you.

Executive North
P.O. Box 110
Mount Prospect, Ill. 60056

Married swingers, bi’s and couples interested in
swinging, hear ye! Here is the club for you. In exis-
tence for five years there are over 250 couples—500
members.

Mike La Croix, center of Executive North, hopes to
provide a common meeting place for couples in-
terested in the swinging scene in Chicago via monthly
social dances. Non-members are also welcome.

Parents Without Partners, Inc.
7910 Woodmont Ave., Suite 1000
Washington, D.C. 20014
301-654-8850

Parents Without Partners International is a non-
profit, non-sectarian, educational organization devoted
exclusively to the welfare and interests of single
parents and their children.

Parents Without Partners was organized in 1957 by
two people concerned with single parenthood. Since
then there have been Chapters of Parents Without
Partners established in every state in the Union and
Canada, as well as other countries.

“The Single Parent,” Parents Without Partners
magazine, is the only publication dealing solely with
the problems of single parenthood. Featured are ar-
ticles on child-rearing, income taxes, and many more.

Are you a widowed, separated or unmarried parent?
If so, you are eligible to become a member of Parents
Without Partners. To find out about a Chapter near you
write to the above address.

Village Inn—Drake Restaurant
85 Amity Street
Amherst, Mass. 01002
413-253-2548

Brad Parker owns this apartment/hotel. There’s
also a restaurant and lounge. Brad says that the
Village Inn has the best jukeboxes in the area. Open
daily from 10 am to midnight.

Village Inn—Drake Restaurant is the place that
made Amherst famous.

Juicy John Pinks
134½ Lincoln Highway
DeKalb, Il. 60115
815-758-8746

Juicy John Pinks is a non-profit collective dedicated
to the promotion of quality in human life. Its various
projects have been developed in pursuit of this central
goal. All people involved in the collective participate in
setting goals and policies.

The restaurant offers one main dinner nightly to
ensure freshness, so that members can concentrate all
their energy on the meal. They feel that many eating
places today have become preoccupied with fast
service at the expense of quality. Whenever possible,
all meals are prepared from scratch. The places
that a vegetarian can get a well-balanced dinner are
few, writes Sandy Funk, president of Juicy John Pinks.
Dinner is served at 5:00 pm every Wed. through
Saturday. Entertainment starts at 9:00 pm. Prices are
low to moderate.

The Pacific Center for
Human Growth, Inc.
P.O. Box 908
Berkeley, Calif. 94701
415-841-6224

The Center started as a gay switchboard/hotline and
is now a multi-service professional mental health and
other charitable services for all sexual minorities.

Richard Boxer, Executive Director of the Center,
and his staff want to provide high-quality, professional
health services to sexual minorities.

Services offered include individual counseling and
rap groups. In addition, there’s an educational service
division sponsoring a speaker’s bureau and training
workshop for other professional agencies; and a prison
program which seeks to meet the needs of gay men and
women in prison or on probation or parole.

The Brook
919 Post Rd.
East Westport, Conn. 25501
203-226-6204

Paul Kish, owner, welcomes gays and lesbians to this
disco every day from 3 pm to 2 am and on Sunday until
midnight. Price range is low and the age range is 19-50.

Odds and Ends Club
4910 Edgewater Dr.
Orlando, Florida 32810
305-293-9733

On Friday and Saturday nights, where can you go if
you are gay, lesbian or bi? To Odds and Ends in
Orlando.

Wallace Wood and James Bruce welcome you to
this moderately priced bar daily from 4 pm to 2 am. On
Saturday and Sunday they are opened at 2 pm.

On Friday and Sunday nights you will be entertained
by female impersonators.