with “I’m so-and-so from Chicago. What do you do?” My third ear was hearing them say, “I’m terribly alone and uncomfortable and I want you to validate my existence and importance as a human being by talking to me about the doing-doing part of your life.”

Other people “made conversation,” by talking about whatever. That had little to do with the person-to-person transaction. It seemed to be a benign kind of “friction crowd” trip.

I’m certain that I felt at least as uneasy as anyone in that room, and when I turned to someone near me, I felt like sharing that with them. “I feel terribly lost and lonely in crowds like this, especially this evening, because I feel alone among people I’ve never met before,” I told him. The man looked at me, and as if I had spoken to his most inner self, told me he felt the same way. We began talking as people to each other, about how we felt about being there, about our lives being so alien to what was going on in that room. We were achieving a kind of intimacy that made the human connection that most people in that room wanted and were preventing because they were so busy acting out their denial of acknowledging what they were feeling in the ‘here and now.’

It may be an incidental postscript, but he and I have remained friends since then, even though we meet seldom more than once a year.

I don’t know how to think and speak of loneliness without considering the other end of the spectrum: intimacy. Intimacy, as I am using the word, is nothing more or less than my giving another person the power to hurt me; by allowing myself to be in some way vulnerable.

Loneliness has the quality of being distance-from-other-people, even in the crowds and even in many marriages. That distancing is sometimes bolstered by being defensive, by being in a ‘busy-busy’ posture, or even by being hostile or seemingly angry. The opposite of making a kind of contact that allows us to share our feelings of needing, caring, loving, hating, anxiety, unsureness, cockiness, and whatever else occupies our inner being moment-to-moment. When I can, selectively, choose a person I can trust with the keys to the inside of my being, and I allow that person to know what I am feeling, I experience a special kind of phenomenon: I am connected. That’s the opposite of feeling lonely. Yes, it can be risky because not everyone in the world can be trusted with the keys to my inner being, but if I can be selective, I can have a sharing of humanness that makes me alive.

Sometimes the roles or role-playing that we do in our lives gets in the way of our intimacy, and makes us lonely. In turn, this sometimes makes us act out the roles even more so.

Sometimes, when I am working with couples whose loneliness prevents intimacy, I like to use a particular example:

We all know people who seem to wear a personality costume through life, who act, if they are male, as if they still were sporting the varsity letter, or wear a vested suit as if it were part of their personality. Or females who wear skirts that might better suit late adolescence. These people spend much energy acting out those roles, whether it be the B.M.O.C. or the macho male image, or the ‘magnolia twinkle toes’ image of the helpless female. Remember that our society places a lot of emphasis on men being “successful,” strong, assertive, and women being passive, responsive to men, and slightly helpless. Typically it is the man as the striving executive and the woman as the secretary.

That set of roles and images doesn’t always coincide with the real feelings and self-images. Sometimes men do feel unsure, and are sad, scared, and question their self-worth. Sometimes women do feel assertive, creative, and able to effectively use power to move and manipulate people and things. But where is it okay to act and to express those real feelings?

The answer is that in the intimate relationship: it is safe to ‘be’ whatever we are—scared, unsure, aggressive, questioning, sad, happy, loud, quiet, even ‘obnoxious.’ We can use our intimate relationship as a sounding board; it can give us support and supportive criticism, and because it is founded on how we really feel, it tends to be the kind of response that we trust. That intimate relationship is one in which it’s okay for a man to cry, and for a woman to reveal her aggressive side, both in ways in which we might not do in the world at large.

That relationship is the ultimate answer to loneliness. It is for many of us the one place in the world where we do not have to distance ourselves behind a role or cultural playacting. If we can ‘be’ in the context of a truly intimate relationship, we do not have to act out by doing foolish and self-destructive things.

Relationships that are close and intimate do not appear like the genie out of the bottle. They evolve. Most people, when we get to speaking on real terms, desperately want such a relationship. How does it happen?

Most of us learned to trust, or to distrust, very early in life. We learned to hide the things from ourselves and from the world that we feel are not acceptable to us. Our own disapproval of some of our wants and needs still continues to discourage the kind of openness that spawns trust, but what’s wrong with some risk-taking? What’s wrong with saying to someone that we'd like to be close with that we feel a little closed off at this moment in time? Another interesting paradox is that when we can express what discomfort we are feeling, we usually stop feeling the discomfort. (Try it, it works.) Human nature being what it is, we may find that the other person responds first from the sense of being trusted as a human being, and then from the need to be needed. Very often, they will themselves share their feelings, and from there on, we may find a mutual escalation of closeness and trust.

I think that most therapists and other people helpers will agree that most of the destructive acts done by people to themselves or others come from parts of ourselves that we haven’t aired out or shared. In other words, the loneliness and the distancing of our beings is connected with a buildup of all kinds of self-destructive acts and acting out, to meet needs that can be met with intimacy.

Intimacy allows me to be aware of who and what I am, and what my needs really are, and keeps me from kidding myself into thinking that the foolish and destructive things really meet my needs.

To Bill

But be gentle,

For I have many

Bridges, rivers and mountains
That I must contend with, too.

I have fallen into the mire before,
And I know I will do it again;

Where are you going?
Take my hand and perhaps
We can travel it together.
Which bridges must you cross?
What rivers must you forge?
What mountains must you climb?
I have crossed bridges,
I have forged rivers,
And have climbed mountains;
Yet there are so many more to be undertaken.
Ask me only for these moments,
For no tomorrows can I promise.
But if I can help—
My hand is outstretched.

And I know I will do it again.

I have felt grief,

And I have caused others to feel it also.
But I have loved and laughed

And felt the sunshine on my face.
Where are you going?

Take my hand

And perhaps we can take it together.

I have failed in my goals and hopes before,

—Curtis Sparks

ALL TOGETHER JOURNAL / JULY 1976

Readers’ Feedback

I am enjoying ALL TOGETHER's
well-written, timely Journal. I paid
special attention to: C.G. Swiftpen — keep up the good work; hope to see
more of your work. President’s message — I am sure your message
bridged the gap in making the
members feel more like one big family
with individual needs. Law, Reach
Out, Reader's Feedback are all badly
needed for one and all. Remember,
we are in this All Together!

San Jose, California

Dear All Together Staff:

I have recently heard of your
organization’s goals and feel that,
perhaps, membership in your
organization would be most valuable
to both me and several friends. In
order to evaluate your program, I ask
that you send me a monthly journal
as a complimentary copy as well as
appropriate membership forms.

Thank you for your cooperation
with my request.

Madison, New Jersey

Editor: We're always glad to send out
complimentary copies so you can see
what we're doing. And all members
are urged to request additional
membership forms. Share ALL
TOGETHER with your friends!

Gentlemen:

Please send me full information on
membership in ALL TOGETHER.
My mate and I have been together
now for five years and we have to
consider the welfare of our two
children in the future as far as their
lawful rights are concerned. Perhaps
application with a national group of
people living alternative lifestyles or
whatever variety can help us in credit,
life insurance — all of those things
many alternative couples omit,
forget or about which we are ill-informed.

Middletown, New York

Editor: Thanks for your letter which
expresses the problems many people
in alternate lifestyles face. You'll find
more information about the answers
to some of these questions in up-
coming issues of the Journal.

Dear Friends:

Just got the 3rd issue of All
Together Journal, and it is really far
better than I thought it would be —
you are really doing an incredible
job.

Good luck for the future — ALL
TOGETHER is badly needed by
many of us. Maybe if we DO get
ALL together, we will be able to
change at least some things.
Sincerely,
New Jersey

All Together:

I would consider myself
gay, more than anything else.
However, I have on occasion,
entered into heterosexual
relationships. Relations with men can
often be more satisfying physically,
but relations with women are more
satisfying emotionally.

However, there are two problems
related to my lifestyle. First of all,
although I am an extrovert, I do not
have the nerve to approach other
women — I don’t know how, and I
am afraid they might go screaming to
the police. Therefore, I have to wait
until another woman makes the first
move. Secondly, I am in the Army,
and my job requires a high security
clearance. Blackmail is a definite pos-
sibility since the military discharges
unfavorable people who are gay. I
like my job, and find it very
rewarding, but loathe the way Uncle
Sam pokes into personal lives.

I am married... to a man who is
impotent. It was a matter of con-
venience. We plan to divorce when I
return to the States, whenever that
may be. He lives 50 km from me and
occasionally visits since we are
friends. However, my sexual life has
been at a standstill since last Fall
when I came to Germany. My female
lover of several years standing lives in
America.

I would like to see the
decriminalization of being gay, and
would like to see the government, es-
pecially the military, have less in-
vestigative power regarding personal life.

Editor: We can only hope that your
involvement with ALL TOGETHER
will help you in some of your
problems. One positive thing is that
we hope to offer ways that people can
meet each other without the fear of
discovery that is so prevalent in our
world today. And let’s hope we
become so big that people will
recognize that there are millions of us
living alternate lifestyles. Only in
great numbers can we see the changes
we so greatly desire.

Sent in by a reader:
If you love something let it go.

If it comes back it’s yours, if not
it never was.

Something to ponder!

‘REACH OUT!’

Our REACH OUT letter this month
has several questions included. We are
referring the letter to the writers of our
Law column. However, you readers
might have some helpful comments,
too.

All Together,

I don’t know what heading my inquiry
should be listed under, but I am
sure you will know.

This is a problem faced by many
women: single women who remarry,
women who marry a man that was
formerly married, etc.

1. How to be sure the man has
legally divorced his former wife and
has a decree on file (on public record
somewhere).

2. Your legal rights concerning
your stepchildren, your legal and
financial obligations to your
stepchildren, even though you may
think of them as your own.

3. The choice of adopting or not
adopting your stepchildren; how this
affects change in legal financial status.

4. State aid sponsored programs
and their reaction to stepmothers,
adoptive stepmothers.

5. The discrimination stepmothers
encounter when seeking State-Aid,
Medical-State Aid for her
stepchildren, for herself.

6. Legal information available to
stepmothers.

7. The stepmother and the State
Appeal Board, and the Public
Defender (especially in the State of
California).

8. Stepmother’s obligations to her
natural children versus stepchildren,
versus step-adoptive children.

9. Has there been any change in the
eyes of the public at large regarding
the stepmother per se (vs) archaic
Hansel & Gretel type stepmother.

10. How many people believe that
a stepmother can love her
stepchildren as much or more than
her own (natural children)?

I would surely like to get some
responses to this inquiry.

Regards,
San Jose

O.K., members, it's up to you. Can you
come up with some answers for this
member? We look forward to hearing
from you.