Page 5

PERSONAL BEST  
I thought it was absolutely obnoxious. The whole thing. Reactions 9 ob ae

Produced, written and directed by men. No feminist consciousness in this movie. It was definitely fat oppressive. What can I say... I did keep hoping they'd get back together.  
Chess I liked it. There should be more films on athletes. I liked it. You NEVER see a movie focused on women’s sports. I'd like to see a movie made about women’s team sports.

It’s nice to see a clean, out movie. Impressive women’s sports film, All-American... clean and wholesome.

Jeri  
Sandy Adams

I'm bothered by the fact that it’s all suggested that relationships with women is a step to something else (the Mariel Hemingway role). It probably wouldn’t have made it as a movie otherwise — it had to be presented as an adolescent relationship. M. Hemingway never grew a bit in the film.

It didn’t have anything to say to me as a lesbian. I guess if you saw it in high school it’d make it easier growing up.

Peggy Luhrs  
Mary Twitchell

It's not a good movie technically, but I really enjoyed watching the action. It started out all right, but it got diffused. C- as a movie, but I liked it a B+.

Let’s get Tori here quick!  
Jody

Barbara Volz  
As a coach, a woman, an athlete especially, it was intense for me on every level. People will see the options; I think every athlete can identify with that movie.  
Elaine

Debbie Venn  
I like. oooh, aahh, uha. overall. The comment at the end was great, and when she got drunk and stumbled around. But I was tense a lot that someone was gonna fuck up a muscle or a knee. I felt like those two women meant a lot to each other, and when they look back on their lives they’re gonna remember.

Joan Tennessee

I wonder how much they paid those scene?

I got turned on from the physical aspects of it, but I didn’t like the way they handled the women. Especially the steam room scenes; they tried to make women act like men, and I don’t think they do. That was disappointing; I guess that’s Hollywood for women to do that.

comment overheard, a stranger in the women’s bathroom,

The movie was fucked from beginning to end. Emotionally shallow, incredibly looksist/thinkist, fat oppressive. Homophobic yes Mandy (did you catch the penis-envy bit — “I want to hold it?) Had nothing to do with my life, and I was on the track team (shotput, javelin). It’s just like when Playboy does a photo essay on their idea of Lesbians, Lesbian sex. co-opted.

I was disappointed. Mariel Hemingway‘s acting is below average. I have a tremendous crush on Patrice Donnelly. It's hard to put my finger on what's lacking in the movie — their relationship is so shallow and empty.

Euan Bear  
Sue Schein

Joya  
I had too much warning about it before I saw it. I don’t think it’s a great movie as far as how it’s made (the scenes, plot, etc. don’t tie together), but there are some good scenes. And Tori is very believable — she’s someone you could actually know. The fat black woman seemed to have no function but to make people laugh. No development... the only shots of her were at her waist. And it was voyeuristic — the pool, all the crotch shots, even the hurdles shots were at the crotch.

Shelly & friends, Chicago

I resent that it was predominantly written by a man, for a man (like when they said they ‘fuck’ each other, a male concept). And her relationship with her male lover — he looked at her exploitively from the start, and she was oblivious to it. That’s unrealistic. 

So many things weren’t O.K. — the racism by omission, the homophobia. But I loved seeing women athletes on film, the seriousness of working out and how close women athletes get. I was pissed at the camera work, I wanted to see hurdlers and high jumpers and runners and they focused on crotches. Tori was very believable and I was moved by her compassion. And they say it’s not about a lesbian relationship...

Etana Lynn  
As a movie it won't get any awards, but I really enjoyed it. It was upsetting that this woman ended up with a man at the end. 

It had some political incorrectness I'd expect from Hollywood. The girls didn't end up being lovers — it’s probably anti-lesbian. And everyone’s in great physical condition, but far out for a Hollywood film. And I was in love with Tori.

P. Torpe  
COMMONWOMAN MAY—JUNE 1982