SEPTEMBER, 1982

COMMONWOMAN

Page 12

Photos by Lynn Vera

HAPPY BIRTHDAY
74 ee COMMONWOMAN
‘Somewhere between hard work and magic — She comes out. She comes out. She comes out. She comes out. She comes out (and sometimes she doesn't come out so as not to become an institution). Well, here it is the 4th anniversary and I’m the sole remaining original core group member. Four years — that’s a long relationship. Glad to report we've both grown and changed. Commonwoman began with about 13 women and many visions of a women’s newspaper. We met often, talked, cried, laughed, struggled and created a newspaper, radical not just by content but by our very existence, our daring to print. The core group has, after many efforts to sustain it, dropped out. 

I've lost advertisers and distribution. SF Digest press refuses to print us. (Remember, you can get Hustler at the Grand Union.) We've been called too radical, too lesbian, too boring, too ingroupy, unprofessional, politically incorrect, and too politically correct, and don’t, but that we continue to come out, with passion, time after time. The magic is in the coming out time after time. The magic is in the coordination without coordinators (isn’t that anarchy?). The magic is in the layout, editorial. The magic is in the women working alone — advertising women, copy prep, billing, typesetting, fund-raising, bookkeeping, distribution, writing, drawing, taking photos, reading (that’s you). The hard work part is being a Commonwoman member stuck with a decision she needs a group to make. And of course, the magic is hard work and vice versa.

What do I love most about Commonwoman?

A. The women who work on it — magicians, sorceresses, laborers.

A. The many, many, many women who write and draw for her, some whose names and voices I had never heard before.

Future. I envision risks of form, risks of content, stretches into the margin and off the pages, I encourage passion and wildness.

And speaking of risks, what about changing her name to Commonwomon? And who should make that decision?

By Linda Wittenberg

|

suey exAyy Aq 02044

Also Bear - Copy Prep

Page 13

Sue Ball - typeset.

NVWOMNOWWOO

zee) ‘uaew3id3s

ant

also wonderful, and, as recently women working together

“PPort, contributions and :