Pal

reprinted from

Our Backs)

dan., ‘84, Off

The following letter is from
Women Against Occupation, formerly Women Against the Invasion into Lebanon. Recently they have been participating with Palestinian women in protest of the treatment of women political prisoners in Israel.

Dear Sisters,

On November 4, 1983 one hundred Palestinian and Jewish women held a sit-in at the International Red Cross office in East Jerusalem. Although thousands of Palestinians are imprisoned by the Israeli authorities both in Southern Lebanon and in Israel, the sit-in was aimed specifically at the fate of thirty-two women in the Neve Tirzeh prison in Israel.

These women have all been charged with crimes that “threaten the security of the

Electroshock:
Berkeley Judge

Blocks Coalition

Judge Winton McKibben has ruled against the Coalition to Stop Electroshock's motion to intervene in the defense of Berkeley’s electroshock ban.

The Coalition had authored and campaigned for the ban that was passed by voters in November 1982.

Since many of the active members of the Coalition are former inmates of psychiatric institutions and/or former recipients of electroshock, they felt they had a unique and crucial perspective on the necessity for the ordinance.

On Dec. 2, McKibben also reaffirmed his previous ruling granting the psychiatric association’s motion for a summary judgment which overturned the shock ban without permitting a full hearing on its merits.

The Coalition plans to continue its struggle against shock in Berkeley on as many fronts as possible, and is investigating bringing a lawsuit against Herrick for violations of the state law.

Von

SOSSSSSOSSHSSHOHSSOSSSSSSSSSSSSSOCOSSEE

OOO OSHOHSOOHSHSOSOHOHSOOSOOOO

KNOW, KAUNCHA, THERE

WAS A TIME WHEN
ALMOST EVERYONE

GEING MACHINES, BECAUSE
THEY WERE WORSHIPPED.

When the women refused to cook meals for their guards, seeing this as a humiliating and degrading demand, their already poor situation rapidly deteriorated. Since May 1983 they have been locked in their cells twenty-three out of twenty-four hours a day. All reading and writing materials have been denied and family visits which used to be once every two weeks have now been cut to once every two months. Even this restriction is arbitrary, as one mother has not been allowed to see her daughter in four months and was told to come back in another two.

At the sit-in, one of the women’s lawyers reported on a new, more horrifying development. On October 31 the women noticed that the guards were banging on their cell door demanding that their books be returned. A representative of the prison authorities was called in and started spraying tear gas into the small crowded cells. The women ran to the windows and broke the glass in order to breathe. The guards then started beating them with clubs and spraying even more tear gas. They fell to the ground choking, barely able to breathe, unable to help one another. They were reminded of Israel's Ex-Chief of Staff General Eitan’s stated objective regarding the West Bank Palestinians: “running around like drugged cockroaches in a closed bottle.” One woman remarked that they had finally become those cockroaches.

In response, a special unit entered the cells, contaminating them once again.

Despite the fact that the doctor and three paramedics were present, the prisoners were denied any treatment for three days. Even then the care was minimal, consisting of Vaseline for their burns and Tylenol for pain.

Four days after the attack, the women had still not been allowed to leave their cells at all. The guards who entered the cells to bring food themselves wore gas masks, yet forced the women to eat in the cells.

Due to the sit-in on Friday, the Red Cross contacted the Israeli authorities to arrange a visit to the prison. They requested a visit on Sunday, a regular working day in Israel, but this was denied and arranged for later.

Women Against
Oppression

P.O. Box 2760
Tel Aviv, Israel

The cells were thick with gas. It clung to the walls and floor, contaminating them once again.

The Law of Return, a novel by Alice Bloch, Alyson Publications, PO Box 2783, Boston, MA 02208. 617-542-5679. $7.95 ($8.50 post-paid). 1983. From the author of Lifetime Guarantee comes this magnetic story of self-discovery and change. The story weaves through Greenwich Village, early women’s center days, through Jewish and Arab neighborhoods in Israel, into a young feminist’s exploration of her Jewish identity, her cultures (Feminist, Jewish, Orthodox, Lesbian) and her place in the world. It moved me a great deal; captivating and enjoyable reading. (Lynn).

Sandino’s Daughters: Testimonies of Nicaraguan Women in Struggle, by Margaret Randall. New Star Books, 2504 York Avenue, Vancouver, V6K 1E3, Canada. Paperback, 1981. The story of the Nicaraguan revolution, of the women who, over generations, fought in every capacity to overthrow, bit by bit for 50 years, the Somoza dictatorship. Through personal interviews, the reader is opened to the incredible lives of women who fought, resisted and won. Intensely inspiring, feminist, and empowering... every woman should read this book as it brings the victory, and hope, home. An exciting and necessary exploration of women’s struggles and strengths in other than North American women’s movements.

Transformation Through Birth: A Woman's Guide, by Claudia Panuthos. Bergin and Garvey Publishers, 670 Amherst Rd., So. Hadley, MA 01075, 413-467-3113. $12.95 (paper), 1983. A positive book dealing with the psychological aspects of the birth experience — mental well-being, the influence of family, overcoming past negative experiences, and postpartum feelings. Watch for a review in March.

Ripening and Dreaming, Volumes I and II of “An Almanac of Lesbian Lore and Vision.” Word Weavers, PO Box 8742, Minneapolis, MN 55408, $4.95 each, postpaid. The voices of many women taking ourselves and our varied powers seriously. Lesbian lore, celebrations, word explorations, natural facts, dreams, drawings, games, visions. Our own version of the mainstream almanac. “When we nurture the dream, we feed ourselves.”

Common Lives/Lesbian Lives, a quarterly, PO Box 1553, Iowa City, IA 52244. $12 a year. Entering their third year, the women who publish this incredible journal continue to put out work that represents our diversity and our creativity. The writing is down to earth (not stuffy) and the stories and poems validate the loves, struggles and lives of lesbians of many different situations and lives. Available in the EWP library.

WE ARE SORRY... The woman who had planned to review Reweaving The Web of Life (Women and Nonviolence) was unable to do so. We do want to tell you about this remarkable book. Anyone who would like to write a review for the next issue, please contact Lynn by mail at Commonwomon address (see page 2) to get the book.

3,000 Years of Racism, by Merlin Stone. A primer of racism which theorizes about 3,000 years of racism and the predictable stages of racist development. For information, write New Sibylline Books, Inc., Box 266, Village Station, New York, NY 10014.

Women in Shadows, by National Committee Concerned with Asian wives of U.S. Servicemen. $8.00 postpaid, add $1.00 for first class. Bok Lim C. Kim, 964 La Jolla Rancho Road, La Jolla, CA 92037. This handbook is a must for any social worker who has to deal with or may deal with battered Asian wives of U.S. servicemen.

But THEY STILL KEPT PLUGGING INTO WOMEN.