DECEMBER, 1981

A Vermont Women’s Publication of News, Culture and Dialogue from a Feminist Perspective. Published Every Six Weeks.

REAGAN FOR SHAH,  
KEMP FOR QUARTERBACK  

For years, we heard, like the distant roar of rockets  
The echoes of simple solutions of simpletons  
For a society tumbling with greed, avaricious for war—  
“Take those bums off welfare and put them to work,”  
They said, referring mostly to women who put in a  
sixteen-hour day, seven days a week.  
And of course  
They meant the government ought to starve our children,  
Abandoned by a social structure caving in.  
“Get everybody back to work,” they said and TOOK  
AWAY JOBS  
“Damn those lazy sluts on welfare having all those  
children and don’t let them have money for abortion or —  
BIRTH CONTROL.”  
“Stop those Affirmative Action programs. Why it’s  
time White people got a chance...”  
If there is a war in El Salvador or not,  
It’s war at home for Black people as it has always  
been.  
“Stop encouraging artists. They’re not reliable  
and often opt for peace and the rights of the oppressed.”  
Why even Plato distrusted artists. But, no, they “our  
leaders” weren't educated enough to come up with that one.  
The humiliation of workers is part of the plan,  
the poisoning of their lungs and life.  
The Reagan Administration will not recognize the  
right to strike in the USA though Reagan praised it in Poland.  

All the deodorants can’t hide the stench inherited from the  
mild mannered peanut lover — the daily murders of people  
in El Salvador — and the American nuns who loved them and  
were murdered for that love.  

If those nuns had been captives in Iran, the U.S. Govern-  
ment might have started a war in memoriam.  

Because those nuns loved and cared for the oppressed, this  
government waived no flags over their deaths.  

All those Madison Avenue ads can't hide the stench of  
a policy that takes vegetables from the mouths of poor  
children in schools, hands them relish (looking already  
too much like blood), saying  

Sorry, kids, we need to buy new war toys, new tron bombs.  
MADMEN!!!  

You want to starve us, bully us with the threat of the des-  
truction of the earth  

to the earth — plundering, pillaging, raping, destroying.  

No woman can afford the luxury of feeling bad about herself.  

As some men have been to women for 5,000 years, they have been  

Big Business like the mythical Male Ego is fragile.  
It can easily be discouraged by sharing  

Even a little of its wealth it stole from the workers.  
The nutrition of Big Business must be  

100% GREED AND CALLOUSNESS.  

Well, now we got what those simpletons were begging for.  
We've got Reagan. We’ve got Kemp.  
Any human cosmetics of this system are wiped away.  

AND GOVERNMENT REPRESSION  

NYACK  

Excerpts from “A Statement  
from the New York Three  
Freedom Campaign and the  
International Committee to Free  
Dhoruba Moore  
Condensed by Nancy Powell  

“On October 20, a number  
of political activists and revolu-  
tionaries were arrested in con-  
nection with the robbery of a  
Brinks truck and the deaths of  
two police and a Brinks’ guard in  
Nyack, New York... In this  
situation there have already been  
so many distortions and lies that  
we decided to write this state-  
ment to clarify some of the  
realities as we see them.  

“Since Nyack, there has  
been a well-orchestrated govern-  
ment campaign in which long-  

time community activists have  
been arrested and killed, politi-  
cal organizations slandered, the  
Black community terrorized by  
illegal searches, and all of it  
justified by an expertly manipu-  
lated media campaign designed  
to confuse and terrorize the  
people of this country.  

“This repression and its  
cover of hysteria is not new...  
Historically for Black people this  
struggle for human rights...  
began with African freedom  
fighters like Shaka Zulu resisting  
the chains of slavery and fighting  
against the beginnings of Euro-  
pean colonial domination of the  
civilizations in Africa, and con-  
tinued through the movements  
for liberation in modern times of  
Ghana, the Congo, Mozambique,  

NANCY, LOOK AT  
THE DOLL SANTA  

THE EARTH DEPENDS ON US TO RECOGNIZE OUR DIVINITY, TO RISE  
UP AND AFFIRM THE PRINCIPLES OF LIFE  

TO PREVENT THE DESTRUCTION OF OUR HOME, THIS BESIEGED,  
THIS ABUSED, THIS VIOLATED, BUT STILL GIVING  

Zimbabwe and now  
Namibia, — and  
through the thousand other  
forms of fightback against  
oppression by enslaved African  
people within the borders of the  

The statement goes on to  
discuss how the Civil Rights  
movement led to “the demand  
by Black people to control the  
social, economic and political  
institutions affecting their daily  
lives... As a result, by the mid to  
late 1960s, organizations like  
the Black Panther Party (B.P.P.),  
the Student Non-Violent Coor-  
dinating Committee (S.N.C.C.),  
Congress of Racial Equality  
(CORE), Detroit Revolutionary  
Union Movement (DRUM),  
Republic of New Africa  

Angola,  
Azania — and  

EARTH.  

—Phyllis R. Sawyer  

(R.N.A.) and the Revolutionary  
Action Movement (RAM) had  
sprung from those struggles and  
organized thousands of Black  
and white people in a response  
to police brutality, indecent  
housing and education, geno-  
cidal health care services and the  
general absence of any real  
political and economic power in  
the Black and Latin communi-  
ties.  

“At the same time, halfway  
round the world, the same  
government policy that had been  
responsible for these conditions  
at home was being exposed and  
defeated by the Vietnamese  
people... It was during this  

period that the Students for a  
Democratic Society (S.D.S.) and  

later the Weather Underground  
Organization (W.U.O.) began to  
organize and fight against the  
war with Vietnam and for  
democratic rights in this coun-  
try.  

“And just as the ruling class’  
government waged war against  
the Vietnamese people, it moved  
against those at home who were  
fighting for... change. It was  
during this period that the FBI's  
long-term program to destroy  
organized responses against  
oppression in this country  
became clearer to us. One of the  
main instruments was COIN-  
TELPRO (Counter Intelligence  
Program) which had as its  
primary stated goal to ‘expose,  
disrupt, misdirect, discredit, or  

Continued on Page 18