THE SEXUALITY/NON-SEXUALITY OF TOUCH

By Gwen Shervington

Touch, Touching, To Touch. What reaction do you have to these words? Do you blush? Feel warm? Get turned on? Off? These words spark different reactions in each of us. Touching is displayed differently throughout the world. In some countries it’s not unusual to see two men or two women kissing/touching/embracing in the street. Here, however, the guidelines on touching are very strict. This is due to our puritan ethics, values, and mores.

It has never been acceptable for American men to display tenderness towards anyone, especially not towards each other. It used to be unacceptable for men and women to be physical with each other in public, until the sexual revolution. Now it’s acceptable for the opposite sexes to kiss, touch, and virtually make out in public. This is not to say that this activity is acceptable and respected by everyone, but it’s more commonplace to see a man and woman being physical in public today than it was 50 years ago. Society has been more lenient with the female of our species, allowing them more freedom with touch: little girls holding hands, teenagers walking arm in arm, women embracing/kissing upon greeting each other. But if these women embracing/kissing each other look like dykes, it becomes absolutely, positively, totally not okay.

With straight women, touching each other is generally a purely platonic action; a display of emotion, warmth, love. For lesbians, touching has these same connotations but takes on an additional one too... sexuality... and society can’t deal with that! Sadly enough, neither can some lesbians! Unfortunately, touching and sexuality for most people go hand in hand. Not many realize that although touching is always a part of sexuality, sexuality is not/need not always be a part of touching. When touching is viewed only in the sexual sense, it tends to take on a somewhat negative air. An example is the fact that most men only touch women when they want sex. Consequently, some lesbians, having dealt with men for part of their lives and/or having no positive women-oriented role models to identify with, hold on to this stereotypical view of touch. They only touch in sexual situations and if touched, assume it’s a come on or a sexual innuendo.

Consider the mentality behind consciously or unconsciously thinking, “I want to be sexual with her, I’ll touch her so she’ll get turned on.” Or “she’s touching me, she must want to make love.” Or “I want to make love to her but I’m not sure she feels the same way, I’ll touch her and see how she responds.” Or “I hope she touches me, then I’ll know she wants to be sexual.”

I REMEMBER

By Joyce

Some Orgasms I Remember

The faked ones.

The ones that never quite get there.

The ones that hurt.

The run of the mill orgasms.

The ones where no one else is into it, and my own hand isn’t what I have in mind, so I eat ice cream instead.

Other Memorable Orgasms.

The first one that felt good.

The time the downstairs neighbors banged on the ceiling because of all the noise.

The time all the dogs came upstairs to the bedroom and barked and panted and bounded around on the bed with us.

The orgasm in Virginia, in the motel, after the guy who gave us a ride there and wanted to do it with me, or at least watch us do it — the orgasm after he finally left.

The time was in the bathroom at camp with someone in the next stall, and me keeping my breathing as even as I could.

The orgasm when we were at Pat and Cathy’s, and we slept overnight, and they got up early and went to work, and you went out jogging, and I went to take a shower, and they had one of those massage shower heads.

The one at my parents’ house, when they weren't home. First in their bedroom, and then on the living room floor, and then on the hall stairs, and then the living room again.

The one in the bedroom off the living room, when there were lots of people in the living room, and after I came, they all clapped and laughed and whistled.

The orgasms that make me laugh.

The ones that make me cry.

These are very negative heterosexual outlooks on touch, but a lot of us use touch in this fashion without even thinking about it. We should consciously refrain from viewing/using touch only in sexual terms. Touch is such a pleasant experience, such a warm sensation when used positively.

The sense of touch is the most special among the five senses. It’s the only sense not limited or localized to one specific area of the body. We can fully enjoy the pleasurable sensation of touch from head to toe. But first we must learn to touch positively. There are many ways of learning to enjoy or be comfortable with touch devoid of its sexual connotations. The most obvious way is by learning to enjoy/be comfortable with touching ourselves. Rub your arm, caress your legs, play with the fine hairs on your belly. Let your hands and skin experience each other. You'll be amazed at how relaxing this sensation is. Another way to enjoy non-sexual touching is through massage. The boundaries of massage are limitless! The professional massage or a massage to or from a friend is equally fulfilling. Even giving or receiving hugs comfortably is a step in the right direction. Whichever way you choose to learn about enjoying touch, the most significant key is relaxation. Relax, just enjoy and appreciate the feeling, whether you’re touching someone or being touched.

But what happens if during this enjoyment of touch one, or both, or all get turned on? It’s elementary my dear Watson, elementary! The solution is purely up to the individuals involved. It’s their choice and decision what they do in this situation. There’s nothing wrong with becoming excited while touching or being touched, it’s only natural in some situations. The important thing is to be aware that touching only enhances sexuality. Touch is tenderness, touch is warmth, touch is caring, touch is love. But touch is not sexuality! Don’t always view it as such!

Touch is an experience all in itself. If you're still skeptical and nonbelieving, go ahead and try it for yourself... Reach Out And Touch...

The time at school, when someone walked in on me in the bathroom, and I was shaking and breathing funny, and they said — are you ok, and I said I might throw up, because I couldn't tell them really why I was breathing funny.

The orgasms in my dreams, with some of the most surprising combinations of people.

The time now, when I stop writing this and notice that I can reach and touch the typewriter, or I can instead reach and touch myself.