Page 4

COMMONWOMAN DEC. 1979

On Being Anti-Male

By Robin Taylor

Recently, a friend of mine, L., told me of a conversation with another woman, H., in which H. accused L. of being anti-male. L. felt vulnerable to this charge, feeling, I guess, that she was doing something wrong or bad.

Being anti-male, as I understand the term, usually means much more than not wanting to put one’s energies into supporting and caring for a man and/or men. That, to me, would be any woman's choice, and, conversely, any man’s. The accusation of being anti-male usually implies not liking men or even hating men and that, for many women and men, seems to be considered a crime. It is the disliking and even the hating part of being anti-male that I want to discuss.

First, let me say that there was a time in my life when I did hate men. For almost a year of that phase I did not like to be in the same room with a man. The hatred, and the anger and the rage, were a purging of emotions accumulated from years of insults, abuses, confusions, hypocrisies, that I had absorbed — not knowing how to protect myself. I don’t hate now, except the hierarchy of the Catholic Church and the telephone company. Still, I'm not fond of the men who support this oppressive, sexist, racist society. Nor am I fond of the women who support the men who support this oppressive society. But then I do not feel under any obligation to like anyone or everyone; nor are she/he/they obligated to like me. It is my right, as it is every woman’s right, to dislike, to hate whomever she chooses. Feelings are feelings and the first step toward congruency and integrity is owning one’s feelings.

But there is a whole other psychological/political perspective on this question of not liking men. We women talk of and fight against this sexist, oppressive society in which we live. We talk and write about struggling to overcome discrimination and sexual harassment in employment and education. We struggle to preserve our rights to know about our bodies, to have children only when we want to, to feel safe on the streets, in our homes — safe from having our bodies violated and battered. We talk about all of this, we struggle for our rights, we march, we debate, we lobby. But we never talk about the dislike or the hatred that we experience as women from men. And the fact is that most men do hate us, but they do it in a very different way.

The pervasive violence against women in the forms of rape, battering, pornography is hatred. Denial of access to safe, legal abortion, of birth control information and devices; and of sex education is hatred. Discrimination in employment and education is hatred. Causing another to live in fear is hatred. Denying another access to the riches, joys, and responsibilities of full adulthood is hatred. Denying another’s right to grow, develop, and experience the inalienable rights of life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness is hatred. Not passing the E.R.A. (Equal Rights Amendment) is hatred.

And why do we not talk about this hatred we live with? The fear that is in us? The fear that we as women feel in our interactions with men?

I think we do not talk about this fear and this hatred because men pretend they do not have it, and we, in our confusion and our need to survive, collude in that pretension. But look at how men's hatred of us works. They have established systems and organizations to institutionalize their hatred. The hierarchy of the Catholic Church, and thus the whole Catholic Church, has spearheaded the efforts to deny women what we need to be the sovereigns of our bodies. Old, celibate men wanting to control the bodies and the lives of young, sexual women through the institutionalized pathways of religion, law, and medicine are hating women while they deny their individual responsibility. The function of the institution is to absolve the individual of immediate and personal responsibility. Men have institutionalized their hatred of women through their political, religious, economic, medical, and educational institutions. The institutions then assume the responsibilities of oppressing women, of hating women, of causing women to live in despair and fear.

Meanwhile, our friendly man on the street firmly avows his affection for women and is horrified and hurt at the thought that any woman could dislike him. But does this horrified and hurt man do anything to alleviate the despair in which women live their lives? Not usually. In fact, most men don’t want to know what women’s lives are like. Most men would never consider contributing even a little of their money to women’s efforts to end the oppression in our lives. They profess their caring and concern while some other man exploits or rapes women, even the women he says he loves. Meanwhile, he has the streets to himself. He is paid almost twice what a woman is paid doing the same work. He receives the scholarships, the educational opportunities, the athletic training and pleasures. He is free from procreative fears and responsibility. He is free to blame the victim.

The difference for us is that we have to own our antagonistic feelings. We have no brute power to oppress; no institutions to remove the responsibility for our actions from us. When the Central Vermont Women’s Center decides we do not want men in our space because this is a place for women, we are considered anti-male. When women decide to put our energy, time, and money into women only, we are considered anti-male. When we see men as the oppressors, we are considered anti-male. We are attacked and accused. Enough. If that makes us anti-male, so be it. But until such time as every man and every woman who is opposed to anti-male sentiment is working to end the woman-hating we live with every day, I feel we are justified in being just as anti-male as we please. Silence is collusion.

HAPPY WINTER SOLSTICE

Anti Leahy

Dr. Ted Hager, chairman of the New England Conservative Political Action Committee (NECPAC), based in Manchester, N.H., has announced that NECPAC will work to replace Vermont Senator Patrick Leahy with a “responsible, conservative” leader.

Early in October, NECPAC sponsored a full-page ad in the Burlington Free Press as a “first step in telling the people of Vermont about the real Pat Leahy: the senator who has voted to end development of the B-1 bomber, who has voted to give away the Panama Canal, and who has voted to spend our tax dollars for federally funded abortions.”