Nuclear

Nuclear Reactor — an intri-
cate mechanical complex whose
function is to convert the heat
released from the fissioning, or
splitting, of the atom (usually
uranium 235 or plutonium 239)
into electricity. Steam is genera-
ted by the heat, and the steam is
used to turn turbine generators,
producing electrical current.

Breeder Reactor — a
mechanical complex that pro-
duces plutonium 239 by bom-
barding uranium 238 with a
stream of neutrons. When the
uranium 238 absorbs a neutron,
it is transformed into plutonium
239.

Fission — the process occur-
ring when an unstable atom is
struck by a neutron so that it
emits two more neutrons, with
each of those neutrons striking
two more atoms, and so on — a
chain reaction.

Fuel rods — pencil-thin rods
of U-235. Forty thousand such
rods (weighing 100 tons) may be
found in the core of a reactor.

Uranium — the heaviest of
the naturally occurring elements
— atomic number 92, atomic
weight 233-238. Its two most
common isotopes are U-238 and
U-235. It is the isotope 235 that
is the more rare and is used as a
fuel in nuclear reactors.

Glossary

Alpha particles — those
emissions associated with plu-
tonium and other radioactive
materials. These particles have
very low penetrating power,
but if inhaled or ingested, they
can be lethal.

Reactor-core meltdown — if
the core of a nuclear reactor is
deprived of coolant, the fuel
rods would begin to melt in a
matter of minutes. The rods
would then melt through the
stainless-steel reactor vessel, mix-
ing with the remaining coolant
and resulting in a tremendous
steam explosion. This explosion
could rupture the concrete con-
tainment shell, releasing lethal
fission products into the lower
atmosphere.

friends of animals, inc.

Page 7
Hardwood Veins

The veins split open exposing the naked heart. Thrown aside
the pile of hearts grows. The small ones, young and innocent, are
left whole. Others, older, are gnarled and twisted and scarred with
knots of anguish. Still others, that grew strong, are now easily
split into halves, into thirds. Each piece cries as it is torn apart
from the rest, promising never to fall in love again.

Raising the wooden handled maul over her head, she lets it
fall forward. Its strength is carried in the momentum of the
downward swing. The clean sound of wood being split hovers in
the air as ghosts dance out of her mouth with each breath, with
each stroke. She tosses the heat of her night aside; the pile grows
larger, making certain there will be warmth between her cold
sheets.

Her boots grunt in the snow as she steps to put another log
before the muscle of her heart. Thwack! Cries of pain echo
through her veins as the wooden arms of rock maple are torn
apart, no longer embracing its core. Her heart pounds fiercely as
she raises her arms again; her eyes remain fixed to the grain with
the descending maul in another stroke of fury.

The open air no longer bites her cheeks. Blood flushes
throughout her face. Her nose, red, runs down to her lip. In her
arms she cradles the split wood and carries the pieces inside. She
puts them to sleep in the firebox, tucking them in with paper and
giving them chips for pillows. As the wood turns white her feet
warm with the smell of wood smoke. She rests her weary body
in the rocker chair near the stove. Her tired eyes dream of maybe
loving again but her heart murmurs not yet, not yet.

—Robin Devine

P.O. Box 151, Underhill, Vt. 05490
899-4740

Vermonters — do you realize
that on Oct. 24 the trapping
season begins for otter, fox,
raccoon, muskrat, skunk, mink
and coyote? This continues to

Dec. 31

Bobcat and fisher
trapped from Dec.

19 to 31,

beaver and more otter from
Jan. 8 to early March. There is
no limit set on any of them.

The otter is the noblest little
soul that ever went four-footed
through the woods. — Ernest

Thompson Seton.

Note: It is unlawful to set a trap on another person's land without
permission.

Write, in protest, to your county representative on the Vt. Fish and
Game Board before their meeting on Oct. 21. (see below):

Combatting

Continued from Page 4

teachers — JROTC instructors
are certified without having to
meet normal standards for teach-
ing certification. (3) Moral ques-
tions — should young people
be taught war in our schools?
That is what JROTC, with its
small arms training, uniforms,
and drill, really amounts to. (4)
Waste of money — The school
system pays to bring the military
into the schools. In these days of
tight money for schools,
wouldn't this money be better
spent? Suggest to the school
board members alternatives you
would rather have money spent
on. Their phone numbers are:
James Gilson, chairman (Ward 6,
548-6863); Joseph Bauer (Ward
1, 864-4697); James McGregor

(Ward 3, 658-6259); Daniel
Ryan (Ward 4, 864-6589);
Michael Fitzpatrick (Ward 4,
864-9242); F.A. Brooks (Ward
4, 658-4169); Elizabeth Bern-
stein (Ward 5, 862-0823);
Edward Longe (Ward 5,
862-4247); Colin Ducolon (Ward
1, 863-1497); Barbara Hockert
(Ward 2, 862-2759); Diane
Gallagher (Ward 6, 658-3874);
Patrick Spaulding (Ward 2, 658-
5005); and Francis Palm (Ward
3, 862-5931).

The Hunt
...He is burning with passion. He cannot live without her. He
pursues her. She makes him pursue her. The faster she runs the
stronger his desire. He will overtake her. He will make her his
own. He will have her. (The boy chases the doe and her yearling
for nearly two hours. She keeps running despite her wounds. He
pursues her through pastures, over fences, groves of trees, crossing
the road, up hills, volleys of rifle shots sounding, until perhaps
twenty bullets are embedded in her body.)... She is wild. She flees
whenever he approaches. She is teasing him. (Finally, she is
defeated and falls and he sees that half of her head had been
blown off, and that one leg is gone, her abdomen split from her
tail to her head, and her organs hang outside her body. Then four
men encircle the fawn and harvest her too.)
excerpt from Women and Nature by Susan Griffin

RETURN

TO THE PENTAGON

For info contact:

603 899-4197

November 15 & 16, 1981

- Buses From Vt.

— accommodations and
Childcare available

- money and help
needed -

WOMEN’S PENTAGON
ACTION

Washington D.C.

We women are gathering because life on the precipice is intolerable.
We know there is a healthy, sensible, loving way to live and we intend to live that way.

PLEASE JOIN US — AT THE ACTION AND WITH THE WORK OF ORGANIZING