Assessment

Continued from Page 5

I am thinking that it looks like more than a few questions to me. A dull thud of thunder rolls over the mist enshrouded hills, punctuating the silence that has enveloped this transaction.

“Have plumbing?”

“Vag”

I think of the added dollars those shiny copper pipes will add to my taxes.

“Don't suppose you know what it is.”

He is unable or unwilling to explain to this anomaly before him the differences in pipes.

The rain is starting in earnest and it is evident that I am getting rather wet. Again I offer that they see for themselves. No. They will sit in the car. I notice that the rain is bouncing off the car door and onto my inquisitor’s face. He ignores the droplets and checks galvanized pipe on his list. Again I must fight the smile that threatens to burst upon my chin.

He glances up at the roof of my house and spies a wisp of smoke left from a morning fire.

“Heat with wood.”

“Ne.”

I neglect to mention the central heating installed by the former owners to comfort their old bones. He looks at his three papers, mostly blank. His ballpoint is skipping where raindrops have made wet circles. He hands the clipboard to his silent cohorts and starts to roll up the window.

“1?”

“CF BOER BY”

“zt)”

“ORICA 7,”

“We care about what”

“Well, guess that’s all.”

In his embarrassment he must say something else before he can drive away.

“Ya gonna teach up at the grammar school?”

He thinks he has found the explanation.

“No. I will farm.”

It is too much. He rolls up the window and starts the car. Quickly they maneuver their escape and granite meeting oil pan screeches a farewell as they head for safer quarters. I wonder if, later, they will draw their wives into this encounter to search, like police matrons.

I wave at them, but they do not look back and at last the smile can come. My wet laughter climbs the hills until the thunder over Camel’s Hump returns the sound.

WOMMINAGRAMS

By Arni and bed  
Unscramble these words to figure out the letters in the puzzle:

MOANZA 00

NOMWY ae  
BAILA “00  
HPAOSP aeRO  
SNIPTRSE ___ fe)  
TRICOLIS O__O_O

The puzzle: A wommin’s state. The letters which fall in the spaces marked “O” spell out the answer. The answer must be unscrambled.

WOMEN’S WEAR

you eat!!

That's why we're now preparing uniquely delicious vegetarian sandwiches. Choose from fresh hummus, guacamole, tofu salad and others.

Also:  
@ Fresh Produce  
@ Vitamins &  
@ Juices

Sunday 12-9  
Mon.-Sat. 9-9

247 Main St.  
Ston, Vt

Just Arrived  
Fall & Winter Skirts, Slacks & Blazers  
Wool Blends & 100% Wool

30 to 40% off suggested retail

Still in Progress  
1¢ Sale on all Summer Merchandise

Buy 1 get 1 of equal or lesser value for 1¢;

MON, THUR and FRI  
9:30 - 9:00

TUES, WED and SAT  
9:30 - 6:00

CLOTHES “HOWNO

100 MAIN ST., BURLINGTON

FACTORY OUTLET FOR MEN’S & WOMEN’S CLOTHING

New In Town!!

DESIGNER LABELS

AOR LESS:

CHURCH ST. LZ 14  
BURLINGTON, VT. &  
“Across from the old courthouse. 862-561}

6461 LSNDNVY NVWOMNOWWOS