Page 20

battered...

Continued from page 7

a fight. Every time it rang, I would stop breathing and quickly get off from it. Just going to the store across the street as fast as I could was still accused of going to bed with someone in all of five minutes' time. I began not talking on the phone, not having anyone over and staying home. He then even persisted that someone was coming over, that’s why I was staying home. He insisted that I go out with him while he drank, perhaps punched someone out and drive the car so the police wouldn’t pick him up for DWI. I began to go out with him and my kids, my responsibilities and myself got neglected. By this time, my kids were all out of control, treating me badly, too, and I in return to them, as well as failing in school. They even began mistreating the cat.

I remember one time in particular, that really left me scared. My husband was drunk, beat on me, pushed me off the porch onto a cement foundation. My husband saw me lying there and realized what he had done, he instantly came after me like a raging maniac and tried to strangle me. I got away and was running to the nearest phone with him right behind me with a hammer meant for me. I got to the nearest house first, just in time to see him put the hammer right through my windshield of my car, shattering it into hundreds of pieces. I said, “Wow, that could have been my head.” He ran down the street, I ran back to get my kids. Just then the phone rang — it was him clicking a loaded gun in my ear. I hung up on him, got my kids in the car, windshield glass and all and went to a motel, hid my car, wrote a rubber check and spent the night there. I don’t think I ever spent such a long, scary night. I would have much rather been with him; at least I would have known where he was and what he was doing.

I went back to him the next morning, when he was sober, nice and of course sorrier than ever. Again promising and reassuring me that it wouldn't happen again. Through everything, I hadn’t realized that my abdomen was injured and in a lot of pain. He said, “It’s just a bruise, it will go away in a few days.” He wanted no part of my going to a doctor.

Things felt different this time and I was hoping that they were, I was beginning to feel like a generator instead of a person. We got lucky. F.H.A. gave us a loan to build a house. It was a nine-room, split entry ranch worth $70,000. We started to pay our bills, we got a new car. I got him a job that paid better than any of the others. My abdomen was starting to feel like it was going to fall out by this time. We were getting along a little better. Six months after we had the house almost built, I collapsed and needed an emergency total hysterectomy. He came in that night and had blown the entire paycheck almost, was drunk, left the kids alone, hit a tenant in our block which got us evicted and started to pull my I.V. out, as he was feeling guilty and afraid I would tell why I was really there. The nurses threw him out. I instantly felt hate for the first time in my life. When I got home, I looked at him and said, “I don’t have anything left to give you. I’m empty.” He started to sap energy off from my best friend, who was my best friend for 21 years. He started seeing her — I didn’t even try to stop him. He came home one night, drunk after fighting with her and raped me and took my son by his hands and made him help him. He soon left — I put a restraining order on him, but it did take my son to say, “Mommy, I don’t want daddy here anymore.” He got the house, the furniture, my stepdaughters, my best friend and all of the money, leaving us an empty apartment with no power or water, as the landlord shut them off as we were evicted. Then I was forced to put my boys in VFC as I couldn’t walk around in the street with them. The pain and emptiness from losing everything including my boys was so unbearable and things looked so hopeless and I felt like just an empty shell with no energy left. I ended up in a severe chronic depression, took 2500 MLGS of Elavil, an anti-depressant I took throughout the marriage, spent four days in intensive care where my kidneys shut down and my heart stopped three times. I had five machines and a lot of caring people fighting to keep me alive. Yet when I came to, all I could say was “what the hell am I still doing here — I don’t want to be here.” On those words, they handcuffed me an hour later and sent me to the Vermont State Hospital where I spent 4½ months.

Needless to say, I am still here existing in life without fear, with my identity and freedom back with a lot of first-hand knowledge and 10 times the energy I ever had. I am very grateful for being alive and climbing up the ladder and not stopping until I get to the top. I think the most critical thing is the fact of not giving so much of yourself away that there’s nothing left for you.

Richards Beauty Shop

percussion hair

“shampoo cut blow dry reg. $12.00 with this coupon $10.00

ELECT ROBIN LLOYD CITIZENS PARTY CANDIDATE FOR CONGRESS

A WOMAN FOR PEACE, JOBS &

CAN YOU HELP IN THE CAMPAIGN?

Spread the word! WE NEED YOU!

For Appointments: 864-6309

CAREER DECISION-MAKING PORTFOLIO HOW-TO GUIDE
INVESTMENTS * COMPUTER PROGRAMMING * THE PROBLEM
RESUME * CONSULTING * SELF-DEFENSE * SIGN LANGUAGE
Rock climbing * Wilderness CANOEING FOR WOMEN *

BIRTH OPTIONS IN VERMONT * STRETCH FOR HEALTH YOGA *
BACH FLOWER REMEDIES * INTRO TO SUPPORT GROUPS *

AUTO BODY RUST REPAIR HOUSE DESIGN * CAR REPAIR
WOMEN'S LITERATURE * WRITING WORKSHOP * INTERIOR
DECORATING * FALL WILDFLOWERS * AND MUCH, MUCH MORE!