4

Rape

Continued from Page 1

Paige’s defense was based on showing that the woman was a “bad girl.” She gave her phone number to a woman whose last name she didn’t know. She drank. She called in sick. In short, she behaved in a manner typical of many single women. As a matter of fact, just being 28, unmarried and not searching for a husband makes her a “bad girl.”

A submessage insinuated throughout the trial echoes a message that offended me in the movie Looking for Mr. Goodbar. In that Hollywood production, a 27-year-old teacher spends her lonely evenings going to bars and picking up men. Eventually she is raped and murdered. Three messages came through clearly: women who behave that way are courting disaster; “loose” women should not be allowed to teach children; and women who go to bars are there looking for sex.

Men I have spoken to are angered by this trial. Several have admitted to equally bad behavior in the past. Another expressed his disgust with Paige. He said that on occasion he has felt sexually violent toward women, but he is aware that this is a negative feeling that he needs to control. “I always respect a woman's boundaries, read her body language. I can control myself. Any man can.”

MONWOMAN AUGUST 1979

Other men have expressed embarrassment. One friend said that he cannot imagine the experience of fear that women must feel because of the inequality in size and strength. “I have seen that look of fear in a woman's eyes: Is this guy gonna freak out?” He was angry that men like Paige justify that fear.

Unfortunately, Paige’s acquittal was not surprising. Paul Lojesky of Men Against Rape pointed out that a case like this illustrates the need for degrees of rape, like there are degrees of murder. None of the men with whom I have spoken feels that Paige should go unpunished, but most predicted his acquittal because “it’s not like he was lurking behind a bush.”

Gradated rape laws were formally proposed as part of the final statement of the federally funded International Women’s Year conference. This logical and relatively simple partial solution has been suggested in rape literature for over a decade, but has not yet been enacted.

Enactment of gradated rape laws would involve redefining the crime as assault, rather than a property crime. Susan Griffin in “Rape: The All-American Crime” traces the history of the legal treatment of rape. “The laws against rape exist to protect the rights of the male as possessor of the female body, and not the right of the female over her own body.” She cites a passage from the Yale Law Review which defines why it is so difficult for a “bad girl” to obtain a conviction against her assailant.

“In our society sexual taboos, often enacted into law, buttress a system of monogamy based upon the law of ‘free bargaining’ of the potential spouses. Within this process the woman's power to withhold or grant sexual access is an important bargaining weapon... The consent standard... does more than protect a significant item of social currency for women; it fosters and is in turn bolstered by, a masculine pride in the exclusive possession of a sexual object... An additional reason for the man’s condemnation of rape may be found in the threat to his status from a decrease in the ‘value’ of his sexual possession which would result from forcible violation.”

Gradated degrees of rape would mean that the legal system would have to recognize that rape is a crime against a woman, not against her potential possessor.

Susan Brownmiller states that a woman has the right to refuse to have sexual intercourse regardless of what she has done previously. If a man forces her to have intercourse, then she has been raped, even if she first thought that she wanted to be seduced.

Throughout the trial I found myself identifying with the woman. I understand how she could have been attracted to Paige. He’s flattering and flirtatious. If I had met him in a different context I might have accepted a date. I also understand how initial feelings of sexual attraction can subside over the course of an evening, even if the man is still being seductive. If I had been in the woman's place I probably would have continued drinking amaretto while hoping that he would suggest breakfast again, or take me home. The woman's unwillingness to leave the apartment is justified since it was very cold out, and she didn’t know where she was.

I am sure that Paige did not intend to assault this woman. He wanted to seduce her. He had been trying all evening. But in the eyes of the law, this desire renders him innocent.

There is no excuse for

The Staff of the Ski Rack wishes to thank the many friends who have so generously helped us after our recent fire. We hope to be back in business before the winter season.

SKI RACK

85 Main St. 658-3313 Burlington, Vt.

sexually assaulting a woman. If there were degrees of rape this kind of assault might be third degree rape: an unpremeditated seduction/rape. A jury would be more likely to convict a man if the crime for which he was being tried was more reflective of the actual situation.

Women have a right to choose sexual contact. We do not give up that right over our own bodies under any circumstances. It doesn’t matter if we are drunk, if we are in his bedroom, or even if we have embraced, kissed or removed some of our clothing.

After my experience I told a friend, “It was horrible. I was so frightened. It felt as if I was raped.” Of course it felt as if I was raped. I was raped. Hundreds of women are probably raped every night under similar circumstances.

Acquittal gives legal sanction to intolerable behavior. It perpetuates a social/sexual circumstance which humiliates women. Few women press charges in this kind of assault. Instead we feel horrible, angry at ourselves for allowing ourselves to get into the situation, angry at our assailant for taking advantage of our miscalculation.

Acquittal also reinforces the myth that men are not responsible for self-control. Everyone has experienced the physical control necessary to hold back urination until we reach a toilet. Urination is a far more urgent physical need than sex. I am sure that Paige does not wet his pants. If he doesn’t, then he must have the necessary control to repress sexual urges.

Gradated degrees of rape are a practical legal solution. A practical personal solution is to resist advances regardless of circumstance. This woman fought for her right to control her own body. She should be praised. The law needs to recognize that women own their own bodies. No one should have to feel the way I felt, the way many women have felt.

TRUSTWORTHY WORK DONE ON ALL AGES AND MAKES OF FOREIGN CARS

BOB’S FOREIGN AUTO REPAIR

228 N. WINOOSKI AVE., BURLINGTON CORNER NO. WINOOSKI, NO. UNION

658-1043

Bob welcomes customers from the Burlington Women’s Community