© .

SUPER SURVIVOR CARDS

GAIL WINTERS  
“THERAPY” SURVIVOR

These cards were prompted by Super Sister cards — commercial  
“baseball cards” honoring famous women — stars of government,  
business and entertainment. They are Super Sisters, but so are we.  
Every one of us women is confronted daily with different challenges  
we must struggle through to keep sane/to keep alive. We are amazing!  
We do survive! We are ordinary/everyday women — we are all Super  
Survivors!

A “discipline problem” in school (that  
means, did what she wanted, not what  
they did). Married alcoholic, abusive  
man. Tried suicide. Drugged & impri-  
soned in “hospital” to help her adjust.  
Her counselor came on to her. When she  
complained, they increased her pills.  
Finally she got out, only by doing  
exactly what they wanted her to — even  

Cut the cards out, paste them on heavy paper back  
color. More cards in the next issue of Commonwoman  

tho she hated it — quit taking the pills,  
joined a self-help group, speaks out on  
“mentally ill” people’s rights, and  
created by Toye Cheney knows it’s very sane for her to be very  
angry. “THERAPY” SURVIVOR  

MOLLY ANDERSON  
FAT SURVIVOR  

SYLVIA KENTON  
FAMILY VIOLENCE SURVIVOR  

Lived through her husband repeatedly beat-  
ing her and the kids. The neighbors  
turned up the radio. Her parents told  
her she must try to be a better wife.  
The cops said there was little they could  
do. With black eyes & cracked ribs,  
escaped with the kids and only the  
clothes on their backs, to a shelter for  
battered women and kids. Began a new  
life.

Was put on her first diet at 7. Took her  
first diet pill at 12. Wore her first girdle  
at 13. Lost 40 lbs. and gained it back 6  
times. Quit dieting at age 37. Threw  
away her scale, went to the beach in a  
bathing suit at 196 lbs., and learned to  
love herself.

FAMILY VIOLENCE  

SUPER SURVIVOR  

ROBERTA COOK  
3RD WORLD SURVIVOR  

Lives in Vt. Usually the only 3rd world  
person on the bus, in the store... people  
either stare at her or won’t look at her.  
Never gets that job, that apartment,  
except one time because of a quota.  
White feminists tell her she’s working  
against women because she associates  
with 3rd world men. Finally, with other  
3rd world people, reclaims her culture,  

*Another card for another Super  
Survivor. What about YOU?  

SUPER SURVIVORS  

3RD WORLD SURVIVOR  

RACHEL GOLDBERG  
JEWISH SURVIVOR  

ANDREA WILKS  
SUBURBAN SURVIVOR  

Mother of 3 “beautiful” “gifted” children,  
Wife of a banking executive. Drives  
cute little car to country club. Smiles  
sweetly. Never complains. Can’t figure  
out why she’s not happy. Survives through  
all this numbness to still have some real  
feelings and an identity of her own —  
not only as his wife and their mom.  
Finally goes back to school, gets a job —  
a paid job — and a divorce.

Her grandparents are survivors of the  
Holocaust. Had a part in the grade  
school Easter show. Her 2 aunts both  
had nose jobs. Knows Christmas carols  
from high school chorus. Kept her nose.  
Petitioned the Board of Education  
successfully for excused absences for all  
Jewish holidays, and for equal time  
(assemblies and study) for Jewish holi-  
days. Later, when harassed in store  
owned by non-Jew, organized successful  
boycott.