FEBRUARY 1981

A Vermont Women’s Publication of News, Culture and Dialogue from a Feminist Perspective

Women’s Rights Threatened

The newly elected Vermont Legislature began meeting recently. This legislature has more Republican and more conservative members than last year’s. This is true both in Vermont and nationwide. Women’s rights, as well as those of other oppressed groups, are threatened by the outcome of a number of bills before the legislature this session.

Our rights to abortion in particular, and to women-controlled health care in general, are threatened by a number of bills expected to be introduced this year. Abortion — our right to take on the enormous responsibility of a child by choice and not circumstance — is fundamental. Birth control methods are available, but none work all the time, and the most widely used methods, birth control pills and IUDs, have significant risks to our health. Furthermore,

access to any birth control method is difficult for young women. When birth control isn’t available or isn’t effective, it's women’s lives that are affected; we bear the children; we do most, if not all, of the child care; our lives are expected to be devoted to our children. So where do the men of the Legislature come off trying to control our access to abortion?!!

$ HELP $
COMMONWOMAN PLEDGE COUPON

Nonetheless, the right-to-life forces plan to introduce eight bills this legislative session. All these bills single out abortion from other medical procedures, and would make abortion more difficult to obtain in Vermont. Only one bill had been formally introduced after the first week of the legislative session. That bill, introduced into the Senate by Chester Scott, a Republican from Windsor County and long-time supporter of right-to-life legislation, is aimed at minors, the group of women having the least access to birth control information and methods, and most vulnerable as a group because of their age and legal status.

Another bill expected to be introduced by anti-abortion forces calls for a constitutional convention nationwide where right-to-lifers hope to pass a “human life” amendment to the constitution which would outlaw abortion completely. This is the only way for them to reverse the Supreme Court decision of 1973 guaranteeing women the right to abortion. A constitutional convention could rewrite any part of the constitution and thereby take away any of our rights. It is a dangerous tool of the right wing.

Another bill would require that a physician be present whenever an abortion is performed. This bill directly affects the Vermont Women’s Health Center in Burlington, where first trimester abortions are performed by physicians’ assistants under the supervision of a physician, as well as directly by physicians. Statistical studies have shown that the complication rate for abortions performed by physicians’ assistants is no higher than for those performed by physicians. The VWHC provides half of all abortions for Vermont women. If their functioning is curtailed, abortion might not be available to all Vermont women choosing it.

Furthermore, VWHC is one of only two women-controlled health facilities for women’s reproductive health care in the state. And it is the only facility in the country where lay women trained as physicians’ assistants are providing abortion to other women. Vermont is the only state where one can become a registered physician's assistant through an apprenticeship training program. Every other state requires completion of AMA-approved formal school training. These programs are costly and only available out-of-state. The Women’s Health Center’s two-year on-the-job training program enables women without the resources or freedom to attend school in other states to become physicians’ assistants. P.A.s can deliver health care under the supervision of a physician, but don’t need to be in the physical presence of one.

Yet even the apprenticeship training program is being threatened in this year’s legislature. The Vermont Society of Physician’s Assistants this summer voted the apprenticeship trained P.A.s (mostly but not all from VWHC) out of the organization. Now they intend to introduce a bill that would require all P.A.s to be graduates of AMA programs. This would eliminate apprenticeship training of P.A.s at the Women’s Health Center here and throughout Vermont. It would limit medical skills and the legal right to use them to those with the time and money to leave Vermont to go to school. VWHC and pro-abortion groups need support to challenge these legislative threats. The Health Center needs letters of support from women who've received services there and women who would be able to testify at legislative hearings in Montpelier. Pro-abortion groups include Chittenden County Right-to-Choose, Vermont Right-to-Choose and the Vermont chapter of the National Abortion Rights Action League (NARAL). All these groups need help to defeat the bills coming before the legislature, and protect our reproductive freedom.

WINOOSKI, VERMONT 05404

Phone,

Consider this—Think about giving according to your income;

$60/year contribution by a woman earning $3,500/year could be compared to a $200 contribution by a woman earning $12,000/year.

I will pay $——

Name.

Address

$ 10 per issue

By Carol Wertheimer