A

s Nicaraguan Compañeras

17

2 Nicaragua, El Salvador, Guatemala, Neighboring countries

3 (just south of Mexico) of dark

= skinned, Spanish-speaking peo-

& ples fighting for their right to eat

Z the food they grow, to have a

3 say in how their lives proceed

iret live-beyond. The recipe of ore
direct and recognized result of
P corporations (like Dole, US Fruit, And for this to have hap-
etc.) to grow commodity crops pened, the women of the coun
for export. The native people try had to be involved on every
work the land for wages which level, and they were. In the
buy almost nothing... not even inspiring and amazing book,
sufficient rice and beans to keep Sandino’s Daughters, I came to
themselves alive. In El Salvador see the revolution in its fullest
the per capita income per YEAR sense. Women, mostly
is $80. Backbreaking work for young women (in their teens
export. Thousands of acres of most of them, or early 20's)
once fertile land going to waste spoke of their role in the war. It
Americans.” (In 1978 Nicaragua fought in the battles as rank and
was 90% dependent on the U.S. file soldiers as well as comman-
economy.) Countries where tantes. Women ran communica-
adults in their 40's are consi- tions, organized villages, planned
dered old, and the life expec- 200 issues, and carried out
tancy is in the 50's. Countries where the people Fone guerrilla bombings... every
have organized for many years, phase of the FSLN and of the
and trusted that “the people will see” work from outside that
rise up” countries where Organization involved women as
revolutions have brewed in the crucial members and initiators
blood of an abused and tortured. This in itself is revolutionary.
People who have nothing more any woman who has worked in
to lose. 

The people: are working together on so many levels” and “In amazing networks to overthrow, on their
own terms, the tortuous military
governments that enslave them
and make their lives suffering
and hopeless.

The U.S. Marines installed a
man named Somoza in power in
Nicaragua in the 1920's. He and
his family have “owned” and
run Nicaragua in an oppressive
dictatorship for over 50 years.
“Resistance and armed struggle
against Somoza has been grow-
ing for all of this time. Under
the banner of the FSLN (San-
dinista National Liberation Front), the people fought and finally, in 1979, overthrew Somoza and established a revolu- tionary government in Nicara-
gua. The people had won.

They won. Against incredi-
ble odds a poor, farming people
organized, trained, armed them-
selves, and overthrew the
death of our oppression; it shows
economic roots, its social lit-
erations that sustain it.

Photo by Ruth Hawkins

vinism of “the Left.” For the
women, and men, of Nicaragua
to have pushed, out of necessity
and urgency, past this barrier brings an additional significance
to the victory... and a new hope
for a life not rigidly defined by
gender and its accompanying
expectations and limitations.

Lea Guido, the Minister of
Government of National Recon-
struction, Secretary during
the struggle, shows women the full measure of their
participation and the ideological justifications for their
actions.

BS rural day care center/school in Nicaraguan town

Our Revolution, as well
as others, represents not only
our people's victory, but the
victory of all oppressed peoples.
That's why I believe that the
participation of Nicaraguan
women in the Revolution and
now in the reconstruction represents a triumph not only for
ourselves but for our sisters
around the world. It is our job
to see that our participation
continues and grows. The revo-
lutionary government has
decreed laws on women’s equal-
ity. We must make sure that
these laws become real and vital
instruments through our own
organization and militancy. I have been profoundly
affected by reading the stories of
the women in this book. I am
not even sure if I can name it,
talk clearly about it, yet. But it
has to do with a broader defini-
tion of resistance, a deeper
urgency to struggle, and a cross-
cultural complexity to feminism
intensely moved by the
LAD ODT oo Oie ANESE.
women; a radicalness not diluted
by the fact that they fight
alongside men who respect
them, mutually, as “compas”
(comrades). Here is the story of
women’s movement in a
country traditionally as male
dominated on every level as any;
and here is the story of a victor:
ious people who cannot deny
that the women were the key to
the people’s victory, and on a
parallel track, their own. Dora
Maria, a guerrilla commander in
the liberation war, speaks about
the change in personal relation-
ships between men and women
(sadly, no one in the mainstream
yet talks about woman to
woman relationships).

“The Nicaraguan people are
emerging from a war and they
have been tremendously affected
by it. It is impossible to see so
much death and go on unaffect-
ed or unchanged by it... We
had to live through things most
people can’t even imagine. All of
this has called into question
values and beliefs that used to be
taken for granted. I mean, what
COULDN'T change in a home
where a woman was already
capable of seeing her children
fight for the revolution, accepting
their death, burying them
and then often having to pretend
they were still alive so the
repression wouldn't fall on them
all the harder? Anything, even
the role of women, so deeply
rooted — can change.”

This book gives me hope,
and tremendous respect for the
men and women and the youth
of Nicaragua. But especially for
the women. Women who secretly
joined the FSLN and fought
in many ways, some hiding their
involvement from husbands who
didn't approve (almost always
because of fear; the death squads
were notorious) and from child-
ren they were trying to protect.

Impressions

By Carolyn Blair
My deepest impression as I
left Nicaragua was that I had
been privileged to glimpse brief-
ly a remarkable people at a
crucial time in their history.
After so many years of oppres-
sion, they at last have an oppor-
tunity to build a just society.
There is a warmth and a depth
of religious conviction that
impels them to work together
for the common good. Their
leaders, from Sandino to the
present government, have fos-
tered an openness and generosity
that makes possible their warm
acceptance of us North Ameri-
cans, even though our govern-
ment has long supported their
oppression.

The women we met, most in
high government positions, were
outstanding in their ability to
face the possible defeat of their
efforts (by our intervention),
and yet live their lives day to
day with courage and hope.
Most striking was Monica Balto-
dano, a regional official for the
junta. She had fought at the
front and became part of the
high command in Managua during
the insurrection, earning
herself the title of Guerrilla Com-
andante. She is now considered
one of the most important
women in the government. She
had her first child while working
clandestinely, and had to place
him with friends for three
months. At the time of our
interview, she was seven months
pregnant with her third child.
She expressed deep fear of an
imminent U.S. invasion. “Imagine,” she said, “what a bombing
could do to Managua. There is
no place to hide. Of course we're
afraid.” Yet she invests in the
future by bearing a child. She
ended the interview with words
we heard repeated over and over
again. “We only ask that you
speak with clarity of what you
see here. We are not perfect, but
we are entitled to make our own
mistakes and seek our own
way.”

I am one of the group of Wes-
tern MA women who traveled to
Nicaragua in November with the
women’s group of the Nicaraguan
Education Project.

Photos by Emma Wennberg

The following quotes are
from an interview with three feminist women
from Santa Cruz who went to Nicaragua as part of a nine-person delegation. They went for three weeks, acting as non-violent witnesses to the increasingly dangerous situation. The entire interview appears in MATRIX, Nov. 1983.

The woman in the interview named Jesse taped a moving 45-minute message outlining her impression of Nicaragua, some background on the Revolution, and her beliefs on what we in the U.S. can and should do. To borrow the tape, call Lucy, 863-3586.

Jesse: It’s one thing to be here in North America and think
that there are these contras and they're military people and
they're attacking military targets and then there’s the Sandinista
army and they're fighting the contras and it’s all a little confusing.
But when you get there it’s not the least confusing.

The contras are terrorists. Terrorist is a term that needs a clear
definition. When you talk to women who went out with baskets
and picked up the pieces of children and you ask who did this,
and it was the contras, then the contras are terrorists. It's ridiculous
to apply that term loosely to the Sandinistas or the guerrillas
fighting in El Salvador. That's not terrorism, although that’s what
the establishment press often calls it. That's people fighting for
freedom. People who leave children chopped up on a battlefield
are terrorists. The line that I came out of Latin America with
was “the contras do not simply kill people." That's the line that
won't go away, that I keep remembering.

Sarah: Perhaps the most important thing for North Ameri-
cans to know is that the contras have no popular backing among
the people of Nicaragua. They consist mainly of former Soma-
cista National Guards funded by the CIA in its attempt to destabi-
lize Nicaragua. They're mercenaries. Last year alone they received
50 million dollars in aid for training and equipment. Before that
they were not being effective in their campaign. Suddenly their
effectiveness has increased.

Barbara: You went to Nicaragua with Peace Brigades Interna-
tional, a group identified more with pacifism than with feminism.
Jesse: I went down there as a feminist. For me, it’s really
co-optation to say that feminists aren’t going to be interested in
what's going on in Latin America, just as it is to say that femi-
nists don't belong in the anti-nuclear struggle. For me, feminism
means things like honoring life, honoring the earth, honoring its
peoples, honoring the forces of life, honoring ourselves. It was a
very natural thing for me to go to Nicaragua. It was not some
weird little side trip. I went specifically as a feminist, and the
work I did was feminist work. Both being a presence on the
border and focusing on the Nicaraguan women.

The Visit

By Rose A. Markham
Northampton, MA

When I was called on the
phone by Beverly Treuman
from Washington to invite me to
join a women’s group traveling
to Honduras and Nicaragua to
learn firsthand what the Nicaraguan people are trying to accom-
plish, I wondered what I could
do to help in their struggle... and
why go to Honduras, a country
used as a base by our CIA in the
past and currently in attempts to
overthrow popular and legiti-
mate governments?

Our eight days in Central
America brought us into contact
with people in Honduras opposing their government's increasing
militarization of their country
with great cost to desperately
needed social programs for the
majority of the people. Our first
encounter was with the presi-
dent of the Committee of the
Disappeareds whose brother had
been kidnapped by heavily
armed men in plain clothes, in a
van without a license plate,
in broad daylight in the middle
of the capital, Tegucigalpa, witnessed by perhaps 100 people, a
terroristic tactic that effectively
silenced protest. The sister and
other family members continue
protests, vigils, attempts to get
information, appeals to U.S.
government officials and get no
satisfaction but do receive
threats from the police, who
keep them under surveillance.
She has lost her job and can't get
another. U.S. and Honduran
military men were all around our
hotel, clearly a formidable
presence in the country. We also
met with military officials, both
Honduran and U.S. One, an
important official in the counter-
revolutionary force, the “con-
tras," who attack border com-
munities in Nicaragua, kidnap,
torture and kill farmers, stu-
dents, women and children,
ranted about Nicaragua as a
center for “international terror-
ism" where Spanish and other
foreign “terrorists are trained to
overthrow governments such as
Costa Rica.” We later discovered
that his father had owned
thousands of acres of land in
Nicaragua, appropriated because
he was discovered to be harbor-
ing contras.

It was a relief to get to
Nicaragua. There we met govern-
ment officials, women holding
important posts in the govern-
ment, ministers, American and
other foreign priests who parti-
cipate in the struggle, sometimes
at great risks... one told us that a
week doesn’t go by that one of
his friends is not tortured,
mutilated with breasts cut off or
testicles stuffed in a dead priest’s
mouth, and killed. The target of
the contras are usually ordinary
farmers, campesinos, poor peo-
ple working in cooperatives or in
family groups, for the first time
on land of their own. The
literacy, health, job training, and
education programs have given
people hope and determination
to keep the progress achieved or
to die in the attempt. The
teachers, health practitioners,
and agricultural reforms are
special targets of the former Somoza
National Guard and others of
the elite who have lost their
privileges. Someone in Nicaragua
told us that the armed struggle is not nationalistic but
rather a class war in all of
Central America.

Among the many inspiring
and wonderful people we met
were some most remarkable
women, one a young, soft-
spoken attractive woman who
had been a “guerrillera” in the
days of clandestine revolutionary
activity. Almost casually she
admitted that she had been
imprisoned and had been tor-
tured. At some point during her
underground activity she
decided that she wanted to have
a baby, perhaps as a way of
affirming her faith in the future.
When life became precarious, she
had to bring her then three-
month-old child to her parents'
home. Eventually, she had a
second child and was now
pregnant with her third, at a
time when the country was in
the midst of attack from Honduras
and, probably, the U.S. military.
Her children were named for
heroic communities. To me, she
represented the courageous
women of Nicaragua who proved
themselves in times of great
personal peril in a country like
other Latin American countries
where women traditionally are
devalued. The former guerrillera,
Monica Baltodano, now occupies
an important government post.
She is an inspiration to yet
another young woman, at age 29
one of the “older” persons in
the government, who is respon-
sible for the foreign news section
of Barricada, the Sandinista
party newspaper. Sofia Monte-
negro, like so many of her
comrades, grew up in a middle-
class family. Her father and
brother were officers in the
Somoza military and were killed
during the civil war. Sofia had
early on become involved in
political activity as a student,
had also engaged in clandestine
activity as a courier and operator
of a “safe” home. This beautiful
young woman declared that if
the U.S. military persists, it will
become inevitably involved and
find itself in another Vietnam.
She said that when people are
terrorized and murdered they
eventually lose their fear and
will fight to the death any
attempt to return them to
a life of brutality as the Nicaraguans experienced under Somoza. She also is an admirer of
feminist writers with whose
writings she became acquainted
as a high school student in West
Palm Beach, Florida, and inter-
estingly, of the ancient Greeks,
Clytemnestra and Medea,
women who destroyed others
who would destroy them.

Of course, we met the
opposition, too. The editor of
La Prensa, whose father was a
liberal and assassinated by
Somoza, but who himself had
not been involved with the
newspaper until he took over the
paper after his father's death. He
was of a different stripe. The
paper took a turn to the right
and his who was an
important official on the paper
left along with 80% of the staff
to form his own newspaper, El
Nuevo Diario. A brother of La
Prensa's editor started another
newspaper, Barricada.... three
family members with very differ-
ent ideologies. We were told that
La Prensa distorts and manipu-
lates the news. Such as, printing
a photograph of an important
government official above a
news item with large headlines
that read, Child Molester. There
were others who openly oppose
the government, but like the
newspaper, are allowed to con-
tinue to function. La Prensa
does have to submit material for
the censor, and from time to
time is shut down. Although we
are sensitive to the issue of
censorship, we must recognize
that the government is in