“COMMONWOMON

Women Who Worked on This Issue:

Editorial: Laurie Larson, Lynn Vera, Peggy Luhrs, Mandy McDermott, Michiyo Cornell, Linda Comito.

Layout: Linda Wittenberg, Ellie Jones, Lynn Vera, Maelen, Conme Harrison, Amethyst, Oak, Michiyo, Marita, Sondra, Alvertea, Till Prairie, Mayumi, Joyce Chaney.

Finances: Jean Palmer, Gwyn Marilyn.

Distribution: Linda Wisgenberg, Lynn Vera, Sandy Adams, Sondra. Printing: Transits Tanet Hicks, Joyce G.

Boston: Ding Forist  
Bristol: Becca Fuller  
Central Vt.: Ameth

Subscription/Mailing: ko Peta, Lou, Jean Palmer, Z

Copy Prep: Anne Genovese

Calendar: HELP! (Editorial) and Ellie

Advertising: Ellie Jones

Fund Raising: Ellie Jones, Lauren Berrizbeitia, Mandy

Common 2 recommends:  
read this issue in bed

We changed our name, and we've gotten some comments about it and we want to say something about what it means to us to now be Commonwomon. For one thing, changing the spelling is another of our attempts (and reminders) to watch the language and all its subtle ways of keeping womyn down or abused. In this case, it is taking the space to delete the “man” from “woman.” We think it’s a good statement to have visible on newsstands. The byline on the masthead is also different — did you notice that it says “a wild womon’s publication”? That too seems more reflective of what really is... the old line just seemed too limited and conventional somehow, and not truly indicative of the spirit with which we conceive and create this paper, not to mention the letters we get from womyn all over the country that remind us that we are unique, daring sometimes, and healthily wild.

Want To Advertise in Commonwomon?  
Call Ellie 864-7986 after 4 or weekends.

SEND TO:

P.O. BOX 242  
ONLY $6 PER SUBSCRIPTION

WINOOSKI, VERMONT 06404

WE. on  
=| newsletter -

A RADIA

BOX 7516

GRAND RAPIDS MI 49510  
SUBSCRIPTION $4/year (2 issues)

A Lesbian/Feminist Journal of Art, Literature, Politics... individual subs: $10/4 issues (out-of-

COMMON WOMAN

RO, Box 2306  
Pleasant Mill, CA 94523

send $100 for sample issue  
COMMON LIVES/LESBIAN LIVES quarterly magazine: 112 pages documenting lesbian experience and thought through stories, autobiographies, histories, theory, photos, graphics, journals, correspondence. CL/LL makes special commitment to soliciting and printing the work of lesbians of color, fat lesbians, lesbians over fifty and under twenty, disabled lesbians, and lesbians of varying cultural backgrounds. 1st three issues available. $3.50/copy, $10/yr. Descriptive flier available. PO Box 1553, Iowa City, IA.

Special issue forthcoming 1982  
Women’s Altars and Shrines

I swear it to you  
I swear it on my common woman's head

The common woman is as common as a common loaf of bread —  
and will rise!

Dear Readers:  
We certainly don’t feel as if we have adequately “covered” sex. We haven't even touched (ha, ha) on all of the subjects we had intended to cover, not to mention those we think of as afterthoughts. We received no copy on heterosexuality, or sex and aging, or S/M, or bisexuality, or eroticism/pornography... the list goes on. We make no pretense that this is an inclusive issue, but we present it in hopes of stimulating (ha ha) further dialogue. So send us more,  
Love and Kisses, The Editors

Make Common the other 2 in your life

A note for this issue on sexuality:

We womyn have had a lot of training in being sex objects, in being how we're ‘supposed to be’ sexually. We all feel the pressures of heterosexual roles, whether we act them out or not. We lesbians may feel pressures of our community's sexual unwritten rules and myths. What combinations of pressures we end up with over the years! Be a good girl; put out... These days, we're ‘supposed to’ have multiple relationships and multiple orgasms, both with ease. Some of us do. Some of us can handle one. Some of us don't have sexual relationships; some, no orgasms.

In this issue of Commonwomon, there is space for womyn being blatant about their sexuality. Womyn are encouraged to take this focus on sexuality not as pressure, not as a comparative test, but as permission to be where they may be sexually.

An issue on love

One confesses one’s crimes, one’s sins, one’s thoughts and troubles; one goes about telling, with the greatest precision whatever is most difficult to tell...

one confesses — or is forced to confess. When it is not spontaneous or dictated by some internal imperative, the confession is wrung from a person by violence or threat; it is driven from its hiding place in the soul, or extracted from the body. Since the Middle Ages, torture has accompanied it like a shadow, and supported it when it could go no further.

Michel Foucault  
The History of Sexuality

Telling, talking, confession, the talking cure, the Catholic Church, America’s oral passion, the therapeutic society, the great American myth of complete communication... Sex and sexuality, nothing needed to be said, nothing repressed, replication of societal obsession, reduction of politics possible? I don’t know. An issue on sex was not expected but maybe could have been predicted.

Mand laid Covers, numbered, perfect bound. $6.00 postpaid. VOICE OF THE NEW WOMEN'S RELIGION The radical critique of academic feminism... holds that if we use language accessible to...

P.O. Box 11363, Oakland, CA 94611”