page 4

Ethan Allen, one of the best childcare centers in the state, is closing. After struggling for the past couple of years with lack of funding, the staff decided it was no longer viable to continue at present. The state of Vermont, which has been cutting funding for childcare, suddenly turned up 350,000 dollars in its treasury. It’s too little too late for Ethan Allen. The closing of Ethan Allen is one more result of the Reagan program and apparently some mishandling of funds at the state level. Women, in case you don’t know what the government has in store for you: it’s referred to as the feminization of poverty. Projections based on current economics predict all poverty level people by the year 2000 will be women and children. Slashing daycare is part of the scheme to keep women doing free labor for the benefit of the state and men. A suggestion for advocates of daycare who want to do something, save all your dirty diapers and send them to the statehouse!

Raygunomics has just cut off the senior citizen program at

The Vermont Women’s Health Center is pleased to announce that the mural “Celebration of Women,” created for the Health Center by Burlington Cadette Troop 16, is now on display. The three-dimensional mural of ceramic tile depicts images of women in their expanded roles in today’s society. The mural was funded by a private donation through the Winooski Youth Development Commission as part of a youth program that has produced other tile murals in the Burlington area. The Cadette troop specifically chose the Vermont Women’s Health Center as their project site, and have been working on the mural for the past three months.

Stop Smoking!!!

The Vermont Lung Association offers a free training course to volunteers who would like to help others stop smoking. The volunteers conduct smoking cessation clinics in different areas in the state. For information about either becoming a volunteer or attending a clinic, call Janet Francis at 863-6817 or 1-800-642-3288.

LOCAL NEWS

NO BOYS, NO POPCORN

THE GRAPEVINE

August 28, Barre was the scene of a statewide Take Back the Night March. Barre was chosen because a young woman was recently murdered there during the ethnic heritage festival. There were several strong radical speeches, Sally Stoddard spoke of being a battered wife and then freeing herself of that to face sexual assault by a cop and finally battering by the FBI who were after a man she had lived with 2 years previous, because they thought he’d come back for his property.

Phyllis Sawyer spoke of a nun who was raped in her cell in a Texas convent: “Who is going to say she asked for it?” she asked.

There were men along the march route with knives, trying to block part of the route. Violence was brought out of the shadows. Men stood around, waving knives while the police escorted the march. A woman called for the police and a woman officer collected the knives and charged one of the men with disorderly conduct. Meanwhile the march became a spiral not orderly enough for the two policemen in the cruiser and they insisted we get back in line. The irony of being escorted by the police when so many women, who report rape, feel they get raped a second time by the police or the defense lawyers. A woman raped on her way to the Rape Crisis Hotline was told by a lawyer: “We know you have fantasies of rape.”

When the boys are not specifically out after women they can always rape the environment and everyone in it. Nuclear waste for example poses a threat for generations if a full-scale or any scale war doesn't happen first. Governor Dick says we have to protect the waste from terrorists but he’s not worried about protecting the people from the waste. Vermont has made it clear that it does not want nuclear waste or an arms race but state and federal government are oblivious to the will of the people. With 1984 coming, beware the inversion of the word security into “newspeak.” How secure do you feel in a world that is an armed camp continually arming itself yet our rulers keep selling it to the people in the name of security. If they can send one man to the moon goddess, why can't we send them all and all their toys too.

Photo by Lynn Vera

ALERT!!

ALERT! Nuclear Waste Shipments moving through Vermont have allegedly been stopped temporarily. Women who are interested in direct action around this and other issues are meeting on Tuesday, September 21, at 78 Monroe Street at 7:00 p.m. Do you trust a Dick with your security? Snelling doesn’t care.

By Lynn Vera

“It was a long time ago already (2 months), but the effects linger. Generally it seems as if the Coop decided that separatism — when it means women only — is divisive and not worthy of support. Whether their judgment referred to an isolated all-women event, or to the philosophy/lifestyle of lesbian separatism is unclear; what is clear is that a large number of women, “separated” and not, were outraged.

O.K., so what happened? Commonwoman asked the Onion River Coop to donate $3-5 worth of popcorn and lemonade supplies to use for fund-raising sales at the Alix Dobkin concert in July. (To my knowledge, the coop has never refused anyone before — they budget $20/month for such donations.) Without much discussion and over the protest of one of the women members (Coop staff is 7 women and 2 men), the group decided not to donate the food because it couldn't support an all-woman event. They said they support Commonwoman, but couldn’t contribute to raising funds at a “separated event!”

A meeting happened a few days later, which (this is hearsay) one of the men dominated with his attempts at explaining to the women why separatism was not politically correct. Apparently “the coop” was deciding how Commonwoman could raise money and how women (dykes) could “act,” within the framework of being “progressive” politically. When one of the women (a dyke) who attended the meeting got furious at the man’s attempt to demean her life and politics and stormed out of the meeting, she was dismissed as being “hot-headed.” What it feels like it comes down to is that with the exception of two additional women, the coop staff refused to recognize their mistake and instead continued to try and justify it in the light of “politics.” The man’s explanation was that politics are either progressive or regressive and that “separatism isn’t progressive because it’s not moving toward change.”

The Coop is respected and supported as a political, active force in our community. On the scale of world realities, they’re definitely considered more on “our side,” allies, politically. I support the coop, and work in coalition with many of its staff. We're definitely all “left” of center in this struggle to make a healthier, safer, less oppressive world.

But it sure feels bad to feed the fire that burns you.

When asked if they would've responded negatively with a request to support an all-Black event they said that was different. Different how?

It only translates that women meeting and growing as a political entity and force for change is not respected or seen as serious work. Threatening? Yes, probably, but what gets put out is “regressive,” “divisive,” “not the REAL issue.”

The meeting could be a beginning in some ways. A great deal of discussion happened — both in the communities of women here and with and among the coop staff women. I think (hope) the coop was forced to realize the effect of such an impulsive reaction, and pushed to examine their group process and reconsider their role as representation of the coop membership (a large number of whom, by the way, are dykes).

But there are still wounds, and doubts, left to smolder. The woman who left the meeting told me, “I finally felt like an idiot being there. Why try to talk to the coop men about separatism? Of course they don’t support it, it’s threatening. It just made me feel strongly and would focus their political energies into lesbian and feminist causes. When other group struggles want and need our support and work we're fine, but when it comes to them supporting us and our need for separate space and actions, they get threatened, and slap our wrists.”

Yep, that is what it felt like.

Bad girls, you overstepped the accepted boundary when you said men can’t come to the concert you support. This has to change. Coalition is, I still believe, essential. We will not all be able to personally relate to and understand the tactics, politic or even immediate direction of every group we work in coalition with. It’s clear that if radical, “progressive” people splinter ourselves then we're doing just what “they” want. Men have done this to women for decades in “the Left,” and it’s still happening. Women (Lesbian and Straight) need, and will continue to, have times to meet and grow together without men. This must be recognized and supported — however threatening or complicated.

Women’s Rape Crisis Center

The Women’s Rape Crisis Center needs ten new volunteers to work on the hotline and on publicity. Experience is helpful, but not necessary because we will provide training. If you are interested, please call 863-1236 evenings.