Race, Class and

Condensed by Linda Comito

The following is excerpted from a Press Release and pamphlet by the Alliance Against Women’s Oppression (AAWO), formerly the Third World Women’s Alliance. Emerging out of the anti-racist struggle, they are now a multi-racial women’s organization committed to building an anti-racist, working-class women’s movement. Reproductive rights are one of the major concerns of the Alliance. Their address is The Women’s Building, 3543 18th St., San Francisco, CA 94110. (The editor's comments and/or additions will be in parenthesis.)

The fight for women to be able to make conscious and well-informed decisions about having children is entirely central to all other aspects of our struggle against oppression. After the 1973 decision to legalize abortion, reaction set in quickly, beginning with the concession in 1973 that hospitals and doctors don't have to perform the procedure. In 1976, a major setback was the Hyde Amendment’s elimination of federal Medicaid funds for abortion. Local and state efforts to restrict abortion abound, with three of these laws currently before the Supreme Court — the Court that in 1978 upheld the Hyde Amendment. More ominously, direct terror tactics of vandalism, bombing, kidnapping, harassment, and other disruption have gone on through the years since 1973.

When we examine the particular impact of these attacks, we can see that they hit minority and poor women hardest. The right to abortion has increasingly become a question of access to abortion. For women with money and time, abortions may have become more of a hassle to get, but they are still readily available.

To celebrate this anniversary as a clear-cut victory is to ignore the impact on minority and poor women. This means the U.S. women’s movement must become more attuned to defending the rights of minority women.

The majority of the U.S. population thinks that women should have the right to abortion (67 percent according to a 1981 Life magazine poll). And, in September 1982, two anti-abortion bills introduced by Helms were defeated. Most candidates who are anti-abortion were defeated in the last election.

But we can expect other anti-abortion bills to be introduced. And the laws that the Supreme Court has accepted for review are particularly frightening. The Court will rule on the Akron, Ohio ordinance requiring that women be counseled that a fetus is a human life and that the abortion procedure could cause “severe emotional disturbances.” Akron also requires a 24-hour waiting period for all women, parental notification for women under the age of 18, and hospitalization for third trimester abortions. (Why don’t the public opinion polls count?) Already in 1978, Peace Corps workers were denied the right to use their medical benefits or U.S. government health facilities for abortions. In the same year, medical coverage for abortion was also withdrawn from Defense Department personnel and their dependents.

WHO IS THE ENEMY?

1. The Role of Organized Religion — The Catholic Church and Fundamentalists. The current attack on abortion began as an assault launched by the Catholic Church, stemming from particular (peculiar) ideas about the “purpose” of human sexuality, the role of women in society, and the character of the human soul. Through the National Conference of Catholic Bishops and systematic parish organization, the Church has raised millions of dollars and mobilized thousands in the anti-abortion crusade.

In the mid-1970s, Christian fundamentalists joined the anti-abortion cause, actively promoting the most sexist, racist, and national chauvinist views in U.S. life. Through the Moral Majority and the National Right to Life Committee, they have outstripped the influence of the Catholic Church, representing a more dangerous foe because they form a large part of the mass base of the “New Right.”

2. The New Right

From their perspective, women’s liberation, and especially access to abortion, is destroying the American family. The “model family” is one in which the man is the breadwinner and principal authority, the woman is to bear and raise children and be a helpmate to her husband, and the children are raised to follow suit. Anything else is judged deviant. (This “family,” of course, no longer exists in this country as a norm.)

3. The U.S. Government: Chief Enforcer of Women’s Oppression

The New Right has scored major gains in translating its views into social policy through the electoral and legislative arenas. Thus, the array of bills and riders before Congress whose passage would mean the total elimination of women’s abortion rights. While the New Right is the most visible and vicious opponent of abortion and women’s rights, it is the power of the state that enforces women’s oppression.

The present struggle for abortion rights should be understood as a major episode in the long-term effort to forge a revolutionary trend in the U.S. women’s movement.

A whole train of social consequences oppressive to women has become attached to the biological fact that women are child-bearers. In U.S. society, women have responsibility for raising kids; social services like infant care, childcare, and after-school care are often entirely unavailable or prohibitively expensive. This presents a tremendous disincentive to women to seek work outside the home. At the same time, most women have no choice but to become part of the wage labor force. Many families in which both parents are present can simply no longer make it on a single salary.

For the poorer sectors of U.S. society, one wage has never been sufficient. The phenomenon of the working mother dates back to the earliest beginnings of the wage-labor force and, for Black families, back to slavery. And since World War II, the massive entry of women into the waged work force has made the working mother the rule in the majority of U.S. families. Additionally, the number of woman-headed single-parent households is rapidly increasing. A larger percentage of minority women fall into this category relative to their numbers in the population as a whole. Women — and particularly poor and minority women — work outside the home not just because they want to but because they must in order to survive. For working women, the ability to exercise control over the reproductive process is key to their ability to remain in the workforce — securing their own economic independence and contributing to the livelihood of their families.

January 22, 1983 represents a time for all women to reflect on where we have come and where we need to go from here. The advancement of the struggle for women’s liberation hinges critically on whether the women’s movement will be able to win the battle to protect and broaden reproductive rights. Among these rights, none is more crucial than the right to safe and affordable abortion.

THE VERMONT

Medical bills don’t have to hurt.

Low cost, quality health care for the entire family. All clinic services including evening house calls.

COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTER

260 North St., corner North Winooski Ave., Burlington

864-6309

Medicare/Medicaid/ Blue Cross/Blue Shield

WOMEN'S HEALTH CENTER

Pre-Menstrual Syndrome Workshops

February 1st & 8th 7 p.m. $5 Fee

Menstrual Syndrome Classes

Sliding Fee Scale Available

330 North Ave., Burlington

ETANA FINKLER