Page 12

Interview

Continued from Page 6

HP: There’s a new doctor in town, who works at the community health center. He came in to check chiropractic out as a patient, which is incredible, for a medical doctor to come into a chiropractor’s office as a patient. And now we refer patients to each other. If I have someone come in here with gonorrhea or impetigo I’m not going to tell them I'll adjust their spine and everything's going to be dandy. I'm realistic. So I think Western medicine has its place. I also think doctors on a whole do too much prescribing, and not enough talking to the patient and being a real doctor. Doctor means teacher. You’re supposed to educate your patients as to what the problem is, and let them go from there.

CW: Do you require x-rays?

HP: I don’t use x-rays routinely. I require x-rays if there has been any kind of physical trauma, or if I feel that their bone structure may not be sturdy enough to have an adjustment. If they come in as a Medicaid patient, the state of Vermont requires that they have a full spine series, even if they’re five years old, which is absurd. I use radiation very discriminately.

CW: How do you work with other forms of alternative healing?

HP: I like to do things conservatively. I don't believe in antibiotic therapy. There’s been a bug going around where people have been coughing their brains out. When I got it, I chose to take care of myself with vitamin C, goldenseal, eating lightly, juices, and rest. Another woman chose traditional antibiotics. As soon as she stopped taking them, she got a vaginal infection. The antibiotics had disturbed her body chemistry to that point. I see medicines as having deadly side effects. I just read in Reader's Digest, which is a very conservative magazine, that we now cannot combat the bacteria and viruses that are mutating among the antibiotics so calmly administered, and not only are these antibiotics administered, but farmers are putting them in chicken and cow feed, and if we eat meat, we take it all in, all those antibiotics and hormones. We're becoming a very sick nation with these strains we can’t deal with with antibiotics anymore.

I use nutrition and herbs primarily, to deal with a patient’s problems. I also refer people for massage and colonic therapy. I also use physical therapy, in the form of exercises I recommend to the patients to do. I can do muscle stimulation to work on a system. I stimulate certain points, that increases circulation to the area and that cleans out the toxins.

CW: Do you use the same points as acupuncture?

HP: I use similar points. I don’t use needles. It’s all through the means of acupuncture or my muscle stimulation machine. I do a little bit of acupressure, a little bit of shiatsu, a little bit of ultrasound therapy.

CW: What if I come in here and I've never been to a chiropractor before, and I tell you my back hurts. What is going to happen to me?

HP: What I’m recommending now is that all my new patients attend a Thursday night lecture. It’s a free lecture, one hour long. I basically explain the premise of chiropractic. The first thing that is formed embryologically is the nervous system. It turns into the brain and the spinal cord. The brain communicates to the rest of the body through the spinal cord. If there are problems in the spine, it cuts communication. You can have many different symptoms, but if it’s a chiropractic problem, and if you adjust the spine, the person should get well. Now if the person is doing something damaging, then that symptom will continue. So I try to educate about what they’re doing that is damaging. So in the lecture people can ask whatever questions they want.

CW: Do you think it is good for people to crack their own backs?

HP: I think it’s good for people to do yoga. There are some exercises you can do and crack your own back if you know what you're doing, but I don’t think cracking your own neck is a good idea. The neck is a delicate area. The spine has a vitality you don't want to interfere with unless you know what you’re doing. Yoga is best. Everything should be slow and fluid.

CW: It sounds like chiropractic and massage have similar goals. How can a person tell which is more beneficial?

HP: I work with massage on a referral basis. Massage has its own place. You can relax the muscle, but if the bones are out of alignment, they're going to cause irritation on the nerves. Adjustments relieve nerve tension. A lot of times from massage alone, a person’s bones will go back into alignment. (90% of the problems in the spine get readjusted while we are asleep.) It’s the fixated vertebra where a chiropractor has to intervene. I know a lot of different techniques. I learned how to nerve trace, to find a temperature differential in the body where there is a problem. If you get sensitive enough to it, you don’t have to palpitate each vertebra. You can feel a heat coming over some area, where there’s inflammation, or cold in an area where there hasn’t been nerve supply.

The basic thing I do is check the legs, checking for length. Then I check for tension in different areas of the spine. My basic goal is to balance the legs. If one leg is shorter than the other, and you are walking around like that day in and day out, you're carrying more weight on one side of your body than the other. One side has more stress. My basic goal is to integrate the right and left sides of the body. To me there are three basic causes of subluxation (minor maladjustments) of the spine. One is emotional problems that cause your muscles to tense up. A muscle contracts from tension, pulls the bones out of alignment. That's called autosuggestion. Then there’s chemical. A person takes in poison. The body is overloaded with sensory input. The spine, as a defense mechanism, throws the bone out of alignment that goes with the nerves going to the place where the poison is, so that those nerves aren't getting or sending signals, so the nervous system isn’t on such overload, so the body can go on with some other function. A lot of drugs cause this, not just illegal drugs: caffeine, nicotine, aspirin, over the counter drugs, prescribed drugs. I don’t see prescribed drugs as being beneficial to health.

CW: You have strong feelings about alcohol...

HP: Yes, I don't think alcohol is very good for you. It causes the pancreas to go into a state of alarm, and causes the kidneys to overwork. Alcohol is a very direct way to wreck your pancreas quick.

CW: There are some doctors who say a bit of alcohol is beneficial...

HP: There are times when I could see the benefits outweighing the obstacles. If a person is very tense, and may have a hard time digesting food, a bit of alcohol before a meal could be beneficial. Each person’s body has to tell them what is good for them.

CW: And marijuana...

HP: This is something they're talking about more and more in health journals. Marijuana sets off a low blood sugar reaction. In a lot of new cancer journals, they’re saying marijuana can even cause cancer in some people, because it makes for a perpetual state of low blood sugar, where the body's immune system breaks down and the defenses are not there, and if the body begins producing mutant cells, and you're in a state of low blood sugar, you have little chance of overcoming that abnormal circumstance in the body. But then again they’re giving marijuana to cancer patients, so who knows? They say it’s good for glaucoma. Again, a little bit at the right time might be all right.

CW: Will you talk some about being a woman chiropractor? Is that an issue for you?

HP: No. It’s not really an issue for me. It hasn’t been a problem. Some of the other doctors and chiropractors in town have been wonderful to me. A lot of people would rather see a woman than a man. A lot of men feel more comfortable with a woman touching them than a man.

CW: What percentage of your patients are men and women?

HP: I don’t know, but I’d guess two women for every man.

CW: Let’s get some information on the Thursday night lectures.

HP: Currently I'm talking about the spine for the month of October. Then from interest and response, I’ll branch into colon therapy, detox programs — how to detoxify your body.

Elise Marks works with Dr. Craig Barcomb. She does the colon therapy. [Colon therapy — colonic irrigations — are a jargon name for thorough enemas, cleansing of the colon (large intestines) by washing. Over the years, undigested wastes get deposited on the walls of the large intestine. As these deposits get bigger, the walls can do less of their job — to move waste material out of the body, and to absorb nutrients. So less good stuff gets into the bloodstream; more bad stuff gets stuck in the body. People may have as much as 30 — even 90 pounds of waste in their intestines. In a colonic irrigation, with a machine, the large intestine is (painlessly) filled with water mixed with oxygen. The water loosens old wastes. The oxygen kills parasites. Then the colon is emptied. This procedure is repeated several times over the course of the hour treatment, each time getting out more wastes and toxins, and allowing the body more room to cleanse and heal itself in the future. Ed. note.]

They have the finest machine on the market today. Elise is a trained therapist. It’s amazing the results I've seen — that a lot of low back pain can be caused by colon problems. I personally had a series of 10 colonics. The desire to eat junk foods diminished. The more poison I got out of me, the less I wanted to put it back in. It’s incredible all the problems that can stem from health of the colon. All your female organs are there. There's no way to thoroughly cleanse the colon without colonics. Not even diets. If you have old waste matter that’s been adhered to your intestinal walls since you were 3, you need to get rid of it, so better absorption can take place and you can start rebuilding your health.

It's water mixed with oxygen. The oxygen kills parasites on contact. Lots of people have parasites. Parasites are a protective response in the body. The parasites eat the undigested waste matter, absorb toxins. Otherwise the body would be overloaded with toxins. But it would be better to not have the toxins or the parasites.

CW: Do you have anything else you'd like to say?

HP: We have excellent books on health here. It’s a lending library. Any person can use them for a week. I want to quote Thomas Edison, who said that the doctor of the future will use no medicine, but will interest his patients in the care of the human frame, in diet, and in the cause and prevention of disease. Disease is just a lack of ease in the body.

People have to take responsibility for their own health. So it’s a patient-doctor relationship that is one to one. It’s not that the doctor dictates, and you don’t have a say. You work it out. The information is there and the guidance is there. I want to share what I know.

CW: Hilde Plosker, Chiropractor, 864-0019. Office hours are Monday-Friday. Free health lectures on Thursdays 8-9 p.m. Dorset St., Burlington,

Elise Marks: colonic irrigations

MASSAGE Center

Bea Bookchin Carol Jordan Massage Therapists 175 Church St. Burlington, Vt. 862-8806