Greensboro,

DECEMBER 1980

Women's Pentagon Action  
By Linda Wittenberg

IN THE SHADOW OF THE  
GUN

April 10, 1971 — Washington D.C. 2000 women march at the Pentagon. Their march is disrupted by police brutality. Women are beaten. Abigail Kaplan, a 19-year-old organizer of the rally who was beaten, died soon afterwards on a camping trip in what those close to her felt was a result of the clubbing.

November 1, 1980 — Washington, D.C. Yolanda Ward, a young black woman very active in tenants’ rights organizing, is assassinated. She is separated from her companions on the night streets of D.C. and shot in the back of the head.

November 15, 1980 — Vermont: First day of deer hunting season. We drive towards D.C. to the Women’s Pentagon Action — an action planned to protest militarism and make the connections between violence in the streets, against women, against the planet, and the continuation of the arms race.

November 16, 1980 — Washington, D.C. 2000 women meet for a day of workshops, and in the evening, with police escort, march in candlelight vigil for Yolanda Ward.

November 17, 1980 — Washington, D.C. 2000 women surround the Pentagon and block 3 of its 5 entrances. Over 100 women are arrested; 34 are sent to federal prison.

November 17, 1980 — N.C. Two KKK members, and two Nazis, who opened fire on unarmed demonstrators, are found innocent in the murder of 5 Communist Workers Party members at an anti-Klan rally.

“We have come here to mourn and rage, and defy the Pentagon because it is the workplace of the imperial power that threatens us all.”

Unity statement, Women’s Pentagon Action  
MOURNING

2000 women — gathered November 17, Monday morning at Arlington Cemetery, and marched in mourning to the Pentagon. We followed the much larger than life Bread and Puppet theatre puppets, and a banner saying, “WOMEN VS. THE PENTAGON STOP THE ARMS RACE.” We have come as resisters, to say No! we will not tolerate the continuation of the arms race, No! we will not tolerate the destruction of the planet, No! we will not tolerate nuclear power, military spending (500 million dollars a day), No! we will not tolerate the support of racist governments, or racism at home. “We recognize the connection between the violence of the Pentagon and the violence in women’s daily lives.” (Unity Statement) As we gather round a parade ground facing one entrance to the Pentagon, a flock of geese fly overhead. We are theatre. We shriek and moan, and in the parade ground we plant the grave markers of victims, war dead. Karen Silkwood, Yolanda Ward.  
MOURNING, RAGE

We wail till the large puppet doves fly; then the red puppet of rage enters and we scream no, No, NO shaking our fists at the Pentagon. I find it hard to mourn as a ritual. Like rage, it’s an emotion I keep buried a lot because it’s too hard to function day to day and also react to every atrocity I feel and see and hear of. I want to hear recounted the names and stories of our war dead so that I can connect my mourning with the reality of terrorism in our lives. It’s also hard to rage at the air, at a building. Later, when we are blocking the entrances to the Pentagon, and I see the big shots, mostly white men, cold men I know are making decisions worse than I can imagine, my rage is looser. I scream killer, murderer, in their ears till I am hoarse.  
MOURNING,  
EMPOWERMENT  
One woman in my affinity group said, “What I like about this march is that it’s about magic.” Theatre and magic. Following our regional puppet we take hands and begin to encircle the Pentagon. I overheard one male reporter say to another, “now they're doing that thing with their hands again,” and I yelled to him, “yeah, it’s magic.” His remark put me behind the boys’ eyeballs for a minute into how their brains were interpreting this event. Encircling a building holding hands and scarves as empowerment is a far cry from orderly lines of soldiers with guns on their shoulders marching as a show of power. Our cadence was never hut-2-3-4; our feet fell to the rhythms of old and new chants, “All we are saying is give peace a chance,” “Fight back in large numbers,” “We shall not be moved.” On our shoulders we carried banners —  

RAGE,  

(continued on page 11)

NOW Convention

The annual Vermont State National Organization for Women Convention was held at Edmunds Junior High School on November 22. About 50 women, both members and non-members, attended.

At the morning business session, state officers were elected. Carol Davis of Williston was re-elected as State Coordinator. The position of Secretary Treasurer went to Pam Schwingl of Middlebury. Pam Greene was elected as Legislative Coordinator. A report on the state of the national women’s movement was made, with an emphasis on the hazards very likely to be posed by the Reagan administration and a conservative, Republican-dominated Senate.

The speaker of the afternoon session was Roberta Weiner of the President’s Advisory Committee on Women. A main point of her speech was that the Equal Rights Amendment still has a chance of ratification, especially if women form coalitions with people who are pro-ERA, even if they are not allies on other issues, for example, abortion. Weiner stated that women need to work with men on the ERA, something the audience seemed not completely in accord with. (Ms. Weiner is not a N.O.W. member.) The danger of a Constitutional Convention, headed by the “Right to Life,” the “Moral Majority” and other conservatives, was pointed out. Again, this was portrayed as an issue to be worked on with whatever allies we can find.

Referring to Reagan’s debate comment that women do not need the E.R.A. because our rights can be “guaranteed” by statutes, Weiner stated that a bill is being drawn up in Congress with about 20 separate statutes pertinent to different areas of sex discrimination. This legislative tactic will go on concurrent with the attempt at ratifying the Equal Rights Amendment before 1981.

Afterward, 6 workshops were held, on the following topics: Older Women in Midstream, Women and Labor Organizing, Women and Employment, Issues in Women’s Health, Domestic Violence, and Lesbian/Straight Consciousness Raising, which was the best attended.