By Bear  
In a packed room at St. Michael’s at the unlikely hour of 10 on a Sunday morning, representatives of five women-oriented organizations gave us “The Women’s Movement in Burlington: A Local Report,” a workshop in the Women and Society Symposium.  

Glo Daly, resplendent in “woman-built clothes,” spoke about the 19-member Vermont Women’s Health Center collective providing an “alternative to the cold speculum and patronage" of male medicine. VWHC’s services show a strong feminist awareness: “fertility awareness" classes, an alternative form of birth control; abortions performed by physician’s assistants and a doctor; artificial insemination for both married and single women; and a sliding fee scale for all their services. Glo said there were still political contradictions for her in working at the Health Center: “We still prescribe birth control pills, which are dangerous, not to mention the I.U.D., which may cause pelvic inflammatory disease, and may lead to a hysterectomy... We spend a lot of time solving problems due to intercourse.”  

Caren Renee and Patte Ghezzi represented the Women’s House of Transition, a collective providing a safe, temporary shelter for battered women and their children, who come from all economic classes. Some shelters, because of federal funding, require income tax information, birth certificates, marriage licenses, and/or detailed background information before admitting women to their programs. The WHOT has few requirements; the group provides advocacy, referral to community resources, a listening ear, occasional childcare, and safe space to the women who come to the House. The House itself is run by those who live there. The women talk to and help each other assume responsibility for their own lives. One of the hardest problems for the collective, and for the battered women themselves, is how often they return to the men who abuse them. “There is no real support for them to leave; they usually have children to support and little or no money... In order to get a temporary restraining order against the man, they have to already have filed for divorce. But Legal Aid doesn’t take divorce cases for months,” Caren and Patte explained.  

The Women’s Rape Crisis Center is a non-profit, volunteer organization offering a 24-hour hotline, victim advocacy, and support for women who have been raped. It grew out of Women Against Rape, which ceased operating March 1. Lucy Gluck and Vicki Cacavio of WRCC defined rape as a violent crime which invades a woman's privacy. Lucy stated, “One problem is that after a woman has been raped society is a second attacker. It is perhaps the only crime where the victim is as much on trial as the rapist.” The Rape Crisis Center tries to buffer that second attack with support, liaison with hospital personnel and police, public education, and law reform lobbying. The WRCC needs money in order to continue the hotline and provide speakers for organizations. Their meetings are on Monday nights and are open to all women. The hotline number is 863-1236.  

Patti Ghezzi speaking on the Women’s House of Transition at the Local Report.  
Photo by Joan Knight, Courtesy St. Michael's College  

The Burlington Web  

Nanci Ames Curtis spoke from her experience as a psychiatrist and founder of the Creamery Educational Foundation. “I began to see in my private practice, since the majority of my clients were women, that the depression these women were suffering was really oppression.” Ames said she founded CEF in order to help people recapture their own energy, removing the blocks of guilt and sadness, and then helping them express their creative energy, stating and acting on their visions, by sponsoring workshops and classes at a lower cost than traditional therapy. The Creamery Educational Foundation also sponsors the Women: Women Women conference as a way for women to experience their own power, creativity, and energy, according to Ames.  

Louise Piche talked about how the personal is political and illustrated how her own political awareness of women’s oppression grew with a series of vignettes from her life since she was a child. The result of Louise’s involvement in politics coupled with her involvement in and love of physical education, is Mission Possible, one facet of which would be a weekend training camp for women. The idea is that by getting women to camp and play and work together, they will realize their power and their bonds with other women.  

Time ran out with many women wanting to discuss the issues of rape and violence against women. Mention was made of many other women’s groups in Burlington, including women-owned stores, clothing works, a housecleaning collective, Commonwoman, and dance classes.  

Glo spoke for many of us when she said, “I am grateful for and inspired by the Women and Society Symposium and by our own community. We are breaking away from monogamy and compulsory heterosexuality. We take care of each other and each other's children. I'm glad to be a spinster in the Burlington web.”  

GETTER ON GUDDE  

Review of the Gudde Dancers.  
Choreography by Lynda Gudde.  
Dancers: Tanya Comonetti, Sifvia Dela Rosa, Lynda Gudde, Shelly Pressley, Linda Torrey.  
Reviewed by Robin Getter  

The usual questions come to mind in evaluating a dance piece: was it unusual? unique? interesting? stimulating? impressive? To most of these I would have to answer no. All except for the unusual — it was unusual in the ways the dancers (all of whom are women) touched and held each other at times. Was it lesbian dance? I’d say no. But there were glimpses of lesbian imagery throughout.  

The performance, presented during the Women and Society Symposium at St. Michael’s College, was in three parts. The first was done to a classical Schubert and Brahms piece called Ode to Schubert. The dance was extremely slow, extremely soft — oppressively so. I felt frustrated at the lack of energy, the lack of any real exertion. The movements were so painstakingly executed that it made me uncomfortable. At one point, however, the four were split into two couples dancing closely in a very graceful and sensual manner. That changed the tone completely and got my interest up for sure. Occasionally in those moves I got the feeling of looseness and grace, the freedom I'd been looking for. But mostly the dancers seemed to be holding back, too obviously trying to control their every move.  

The second piece was called Hope Is the Thing with Feathers. The music was a slow, tiring Chopin piece. The dancers again moved obnoxiously slowly and softly. Pointing a toe was a big deal! The two dancers wore 19th-century dresses that obscured every natural line; full long skirts, tight necked bodices, big fluffy sleeves, all of which obscured my appreciation of the piece. I wondered if they were trying to hide something, as was the original intent of those clothes. The dancers had good technique and seemed to know the piece well, yet the choreography made little sense. With just two people on stage I expected a lot of communication and interaction. But I was let down because only occasionally did they make contact. These few times were the most exciting moments in the piece. There was a triumphant ending where they embraced and took off together, which was really wonderful. The program stated that this dance was created especially for the Women and Society Symposium. Perhaps this was Gudde’s way of being woman-oriented. I wished she had done more of this throughout.  

We then moved on to the third and last portion of the show, called Tribute to the King — Elvis Presley. The setting was excellent — low intense blue lights, loud 1950s rock from Elvis “himself,” five long-legged bodies silhouetted in black... you expected a lot to happen. Some things did happen — the most dramatic (or pseudo-dramatic) when Lynda calmly stepped to the edge of the stage, and just stood there facing the audience with arms and legs open wide. I loved it — how simple, how complete. The next best was the spoof on Elvis’ song “Falling in Love with You.” This was a welcome note of sarcasm and frivolity. The audience responded appropriately with hoots of laughter. The song, so sickeningly romantic and serious, was perfectly juxtaposed by the dancers who were jerking and writhing on the stage. But the rest of the piece, unfortunately, was a lot like the others: too controlled, the choreography too obvious.  

The point remains, however, that these dancers are all women and that they portrayed some very loving and exciting moments together. It’s a shame that Gudde did not continue with this theme directly — confronting it, really offering it to us fully. Actually, I wish all the dancers, as well as the choreographer, had given themselves more fully. What do you think?  

The Gudde Dancers  

Another View  

By Justa Housewyffe  

This woman’s conference at St. Michael’s was said to be about women and society, for scholars and professionals. Well, scholars are only students, and most women certainly are students of life, and if 30 plus years of housewifery doesn't make one a pro, nothing can.  

The first speaker, Patricia Carbine, was very late, having trials just getting to Vermont at all, and we had pinch-hitter speakers, one of whom was the popular Sister Elizabeth Candon. When Carbine finally arrived she spoke of women in the workforce — jobs are harder to find and ill-paid still, especially for older women. She spoke of the Iranian women not being able to keep in touch with their sisters in surrounding communities in their fight not to wear those silly veils and blankety-blank gowns — they had to call the New York Ms. magazine office to find out how sisters in their own country were faring.  

When she was through speaking, I went up on stage to hold her small cool nervous hand, call her a world-blesser, and thank her on behalf of housewives.  

I was very late to a reading of a paper about nuns. It had never occurred to me before how much like housewives they have been. They had trained as nurses and teachers and more, yet when funds were cut at their churches they were the ones stuck with scrubbing floors and all those mundanities plus what they had been trained to do. Some even had to learn how to cook. If a Mother Superior became firm in what was needed in her area, a Bishop would just send her somewhere far away, leaving even more work for those nuns to do. It all made me very angry. If those nuns had gone on strike, it would have served their church right. Not only were they wed to the church but had males in charge over them, plus their imposing deity. Sr. Elizabeth spoke after the reading, saying something about the men being aware of modern times and trying to do better, and how grateful she is. I wanted to tell her to never mind being so damned grateful, but just appreciate it as it’s the least they can do.  

Lisa Alther, author of “Kinflicks," was next on stage, reading a chapter from the new book she’s working on. Very tall and tailored, nervous from head to toe, her nose began to run as she read, and fishing in her pantsuit pockets elicited no tissue. How I wished someone near stage had hauled out one for her. When she was finished she stepped nimbly offstage to a front seat, and stood when I shook her hand, with a wide smile for my compliment of her fresh, original phrasing. Justa Housewyffe enjoys very much meeting and speaking to famous women who have been all over the world, and no matter how accomplished they are, they really do appreciate attentiveness. It must be very hard to go to strange places, wonder how the food will be, if there will be a comfortable bed and if you'll be able to sleep if there is. Women in every walk of life have much in common with one another and we all can use a pat on the back.  

Suppertime at the cafeteria was pleasant, with a choice of foods. When my companion and I had finished eating, we were joined by a reporter from the New York Times, who said she planned on doing a piece on the different types of women who attend conferences. I gave my name beginning with “Ms.” and she hastily assured us her paper won't use that word. She said about five years ago her paper began using “Mrs. Mary Smith” and if referred to later she'd be called, “Mrs. John Smith,” but some women even now prefer to be called ONLY by “Mrs. John Smith,” and we all shook our heads regretfully over that. She spoke respectfully of those for/with whom she works, but the impression that her paper won't dignify the perfectly good word “Ms.” with their stuffy prestige is still firmly with me, and I thought it was terribly nice of them to finally get around to finding out a woman is a person in her own right. Her doleful-faced husband of 26 years stayed at another table, and despite her careful makeup and precise hairdo she is definitely a feminist.  

Next, my companion and I, both weary by now, went to the free film Love Goddesses. The sound was much too loud and hurt my ears. We saw film bits from silents to talkies showing women getting hit by various males in various ways. One blonde was sizzlingly branded by a very young Sessue Hayakawa. A memorable one showed a blonde getting whipped, and she hauled off and took the whip away from that male and began hitting him with it. We certainly cheered over that. Films have a long history of the misuse and abuse of women, undressing them and bleaching them, laying on the makeup and meanness with a heavy hand. They must have thought they had made it to the “big time” — who cared if they could have been great poets, scientists, plumbers, truck drivers. I took my earache to the outside door, peering in to watch more of the film. It outraged me to see a mother figure from my childhood disrobing for an old shoe-polish head of a doctor to check her heart — this was Jeanette MacDonald who, even in the shaky soundtrack of that day, had a very obvious talent, a fine singing voice. I could watch no more, the rage, it’s too late in this case anyway, hard to still.  

I had planned on attending the next day, but had very little sleep as it was literally 80 degrees in my motel room. The manager said he could do nothing about it. But next morn I went back to the college, rode round and round trying to find a parking place, finally gave up and went home.  

It would be nice if conferences didn’t stress that they're for “professionals,” as many housewives do not think of themselves that way. For too many years they have been the scapegoats for any foibles of their children and husbands, had guilt trips laid on them if too neat/messy, etc. Any woman who works outside home who still has to clean it may be called “professional” but still is a housewife as well. One doesn’t necessarily have to have a husband to be a housewife.  

CENTERING  

Lisa Alther reading from a work-in-progress.  
Photo by Joan Knight, Courtesy St. Michael's College  

“When every American woman sees the ring around the collar commercial on the TV they want to ask, ‘Why doesn’t he wash his neck?’” — Pat Carbine  

CONFERENCE  

(Continued from Page 1)  

sent were struggling, as are non-academics, with the patriarchal overtones of their occupation and are struggling to leave the patriarchal system. Although within the structure of the conference itself there was sectioning of workshops by discipline, as a whole the conference was interdisciplinary and many papers overlapped into other fields. It was a conference of women’s studies, which at the core are interdisciplinary, and a study of the connections themselves.  

Framework for a Feminist Analysis  

One of the most exciting events for me was a workshop called “Framework for a Feminist Analysis.” Sharon Shepela’s paper, titled “Feminism as the Defining Concept for Feminist Discipline,” was the highlight of this workshop.  

At first appearance, the title seems absurd. Of course feminism is the defining concept for a feminist discipline. But Shepela clearly demonstrated the problem feminist scholars have — if they don’t play by the rules of patriarchal scholarship (the main one being that one does not hop over into another field outside one’s own field) one may be fired or at least seem like a crazy person who is partaking in unclear thinking.  

Shepela’s main point was that the feminist scholar should be a feminist first. This puts the scholar in a position in which she or he (a very definite feeling at this conference was that men as well as women can be feminist) can attack problems from a feminist perspective. The implications of this statement are grand. Dana Greene, a historian in Shepela's audience, pointed out that a feminist historical perspective would mean an entire rewriting of history. Patriarchal historical periods have been defined by those events that do not have a profound effect on women — for example wars and cultural periods such as the Renaissance. The new feminist question will be: what events mark a turning point in women’s lives?  

The proposition here is a difficult one for the scholar. Not only could she or he lose her or his job, or find it difficult to attain tenure, but the scholarship in this area is hard to find at best and tucked in heavily weighted patriarchal language at worst.  

Interestingly enough, Shepela also pointed out that she felt that feminist theology is becoming the paradigm for feminist scholarship. Feminist theologians have gone the farthest in her estimation. A local woman commented after the conference that she felt that the theologians present at the conference were the most radical. Since theology was my field in college, my ears perked up. Why are the feminist theologians the most radical scholars among the feminist intelligentsia?  

Perhaps the nature of religion lends itself to the liberation movement. Or perhaps it is that in these times of tight money and pragmatism theology is no longer taken seriously and is seen as a peripheral liberal arts study like women’s studies. What effect can the ivory tower theologian have on the minds of the young who must learn to survive?  

Feminism is, after all, about the struggle of women to survive politically, economically, socially as well as morally and spiritually. In the realm of the ivory tower, women are able to contemplate the nature of women and rediscover women’s history. Perhaps the theologian has gained skills in her or his education to be able to seek out the minutest details and to write on esoteric subjects. For women, this can prove to be an all-important skill because we have to drive through the general works to find clues for our history.  

Morality and Feminism  

In another workshop, on “Morality and Feminism,” there were interesting undercurrents that were recognized by the local viewers. Peter Tumulty, involved with the Right to Life campaign, gave a paper on the possibilities of natural law as a framework for feminist ethics.