```
page 4 AD LEAF LE LE LEP ME LP EE LEME LE LE LG ESE MELE IEE SG IE MEE ME LEAF. ELE. ELE NEEDLE LBL LG IE AEE EE STL MELE SLE ASP MEP MF OB

2
Z,
S|
2
”
e:
go

LAE SEE LEE EIS SENG EEE POLI Dt

| ELE ABE EE AE SE BEST LE. IME SE SE ME SF OME LE SESE BE OE SE DLE SP IE AE ME LP ELD SESE PE EAP AT AE SINISE SEG EMEP MEISE RSET LOAEE EAE MA PE AG,

Politics of Penile

Penetration

On June 17 in City Hall park, supporters of the Vermont Women’s Health Center held a rally to voice women’s insistence on the right to choose abortion. Many feminist women were there. The speakers all voiced fear and anger at the recent repressive climate in this country. In the last months there has been a rise nationwide of anti-abortion, anti-women, anti-homosexual sentiment. This political atmosphere culminated in Burlington with an attack on the Vermont Women’s Health Center. A fire bomb was thrown on the porch the day after — Mother’s Day. The VWHC is a gyn clinic. Abortions are performed there.

I was asked to speak at the rally. The night before I had abortion nightmares. My dreams and thoughts were full of my women friends in college and their painful abortion ordeals. Abortion was illegal then. “Free love” was in, but abortion was out. At the rally I spoke about the anger I felt concerning the bind women are in. That bind leaves them impregnated and then vulnerable to lawmakers and political climate, morality and sexuality values. These circumstances and values can force a woman into a motherhood not freely chosen, or a back alley abortion that can leave her dead. Some of my women friends decided that marriage and motherhood were the way to deal with their pregnancies. Some chose costly, dangerous, illegal abortions. One of my friends died because she was refused entrance into six hospitals because she was hemorrhaging after having had an abortion.

Ten years ago, I too feared pregnancy, possible motherhood, and the illegal world of abortion. I was a sexually active heterosexual woman for nine years. I am now a lesbian and a feminist. I have somewhat loosened that bind. I believe from all I have learned about sexual politics in the past four years that it is an extremely important political issue for feminist women to discuss that women would not get pregnant so frequently and therefore need abortions so frequently if men would stop penetrating them. I believe that women’s lack of control of their bodies comes in many forms not the least of which is being penetrated. For

By Vicki Smith

the last year that I was sexual with men, and in the past three years, I've been thinking about what I've come to call the ‘Politics of Penile Penetration.’ Conventional heterosexual lovemaking includes as a matter of course, or habit, intercourse, i.e. penis in vagina, in and out, till the man orgasms (usually). Why is this so? This culture is Patriarchal. Men have the power. Women must please men in order to get a share of that power. One way that women please men on a sexual level is to let men penetrate them with penises. Penile penetration feels real good to men. Most men will orgasm with vaginal friction around their penises.

It is also true that the patriarchy (men) defines what is natural - sexuality and good lovemaking. The patriarchy tells us it is natural for men and women to be sexual partners, because men have penises and women have vaginas, and the two make a nice fit, -and therefore we should FUCK (i.e. have intercourse). The patriarchal Catholic church says that sex is sinful unless the lovers (men and women) are possibly making children. That's why the Catholic church is against birth control. And this culture, and patriarchal cultures worldwide believe that the only natural sexuality is heterosexuality, and the only valid sexual activity is coital (penile penetration). ‘Going all the way,’ losing virginity, consummation of marriages — all these concepts assume that lovemaking means intercourse.

Intercourse does not provide the necessary stimulation of the clitoris to produce orgasm in women. Women orgasm clitorally. Most women do not orgasm from being penetrated; the clitorises of those women that do are being stimulated simultaneously.

Psychotherapy, psychology, psychiatry and most other disciplines of this culture are not free of sexist definitions of women’s sexuality. Freud accused women of immature and inferior sexuality because women orgasm clitorally. Armed with this new information professionals convinced women that ‘frigidity’ was an overwhelming personal problem, not a cultural and political one. Many women believed this; many women still do. If intercourse remained the standard sexual activity, and men orgasmed by having their testicles rubbed on a woman’s clitoris, then it would be men who were frigid.

The patriarchal medical world is responding to women’s overwhelming sexual frigidity, not by education of women’s anatomy, but by vaginal and clitoral reconstruction; the clitoris is being moved closer to the vagina so women will enjoy intercourse. Men are reordering women’s genitals so women will enjoy intercourse, rather than facing the reality that women’s natural sexuality is not coital.

At this point I could go off into a number of different directions about what I believe women’s natural sexuality to be. I will try to limit those, but I believe some discussion here is necessary. I believe men and the patriarchal culture look at making love or — sexuality primarily as a tension release. Orgasm is the prime motivator and goal in sexual activity for men. Because the vagina has the right friction and lubrication to produce orgasm in men and because men’s needs are primary (before women’s, children’s) in this culture, then sex is genital, coital, and orgasmic. I believe that women are much more touch sensitive and this sensitivity is more diverse. They are not so genitally focused. It is the culture that has taught men to be numb, to be machinated, I know that many men that I had intercourse with numbed out at the point of penetration and became machine-like. All concepts of this culture manifest themselves on a sexual level. I think also, that heterosexual women have to have numbed themselves out in part in order to live in a world that places their needs (sensual and clitoral stimulation) secondary. I too numbed from fear at the point that men entered my vagina. My fear was a feeling of being invaded, of being acted on, of being powerless, and a fear of the possibility of getting pregnant. Only in a male-dominated culture would women let men penetrate them for the man’s pleasure primarily. The risks to women from penile penetration are overwhelming. Many women

(Cont'd on page 15)

By Debi Ennis

As a heterosexual woman, I have found it difficult to become an active member of Burlington’s feminist community. I have felt outnumbered and intimidated by the strong lesbian faction here. I have watched shyly from the sidelines, believing that my time and energy were unwanted unless I was one of “them.” Some of these fears may be imaginary; others are based on real experiences. In order to become involved I must assert myself and separate the realities from the myths. This is important to me because I want to be involved in feminist struggles and I want to be accepted and respected as a straight woman. I don’t want to feel excluded from working with lesbians on mutual issues of concern. I believe that I have more in common than at odds with lesbian feminists. I am hurt when our energies can’t be joined in struggle and celebration. I can learn a lot about myself as a woman and as a feminist by interacting with lesbians who are “woman-identified.”

Feelings are strong and the issues are complex in the relations between lesbian and heterosexual women. I don’t pretend to have all the answers or to understand all the subtleties. There are many ways to approach the question, from the political to the personal. In this article I am focusing on my experiences and feelings as a beginning. I hope this will encourage wider discussion and a broader analysis of this topic in the future. It is necessary to have an honest and open dialogue in order to understand each other and to bridge the gap that exists between various factions of the feminist community.

COMMON MYTHS EXPLORED

From both sides, I have experienced and encountered stereotypes, prejudices and myths. I have been mistrusted as a straight woman who might invest the energy I receive from the women’s community back into men. Sometimes I think that lesbians believe I am unable to develop as a complete person because I am involved in a relationship with a man. This involvement doesn't require me to abandon my aggressive, dynamic, spirited, intelligent, self-determined and independent qualities. I'm not content to sit back and let men make the decisions or do the heavy and mechanical work. I’m not interested in learning feminine roles in order to attract men. And sure, there are times when I'm disgusted and repelled by the mannerisms and behaviors of some men. But this doesn't cause me to give up on all men as hopeless biological mutants. I am aware of the social conditioning that makes some men into unbearable male chauvinist pigs. Although I might choose to avoid and ignore these men, I am able to recognize and give credit to the men who are struggling to escape their long history of social conditioning (which I am also trying to do).

In turn, I have made lesbians into idols, believing that the strong, admirable qualities they possess aren’t accessible to straight women. My insecurities and paranoia about having relationships with men have prevented me from tapping into women’s energy or space. I have made the erroneous assumption that all the interesting women I meet at rallies, meetings or social events are lesbians. I've hesitated from approaching women I admire by convincing myself, "She's not interested in meeting you because you're involved with men.”

I don’t think this is just an individual problem. Three years ago I briefly met a local woman within feminist circles. We liked one another but kept our distance because we each incorrectly assumed that the other was a lesbian. We were reluctant to present ourselves as heterosexual out of a fear of disapproval. What this amounts to is that we gave up our chance to become friends in order to protect our mysterious identities. This is a good example of the difficulty that heterosexual feminists face in finding each other for support and sharing in the Burlington community.

On reflection I am ashamed that it took me so long to be open with this woman. I have nothing to gain by denying my heterosexuality. It only causes me to lose my self-respect and credibility within all the factions of the women’s movement. Unless I am able to be clear about where I am now I will not be able to move towards any deeper understandings or analyses. My ambiguity has and will continue to hinder my personal associations.

I am embarrassed to recall the number of times I have referred to my male lover as “my friend” to avoid the revealing pronouns “he” or “she.” Gay people have

(Cont'd on page 11
```