6261 HOHVW NV

Everywoman’s

Herstory

By Bear

Monday, February 5, the
Living Arts Series UVM
presented M. Tulis Sessions in an
outstandingly strong one-woman
show titled “Women I Have
Known.” The show was created,
written, and performed by
Sessions, and directed by Michael
Gregor.

Set on the
small, almost bare stage of the
Living/Learning Center, she looked
around and saw her audience of perhaps 700 people,
mostly women. As the
character “Everywoman,” or the characters she portrays, Sessions conversed with us, challenging us to respond. She wished us “Good
Evenin’” in a gutsy, hill-country
drawl, with a lot of self-assurance
and energy behind it. As we sat,
holding our breaths, not knowing
what to expect, she came
back with, “I says, GOOD
EVENIN’ to ye.” She received
our chorused “Good Evenin’”
with satisfaction. Sessions encouraged us to laugh, cry, shout,
and respond. She then proceeded,
with a superb sense of timing
and a dry wit, to fill in the
backgrounds of the historical
women she portrayed.

The women Sessions has
known are all strong women of
the past. Anne Hutchinson
(1590-1643) was thrown out of
Massachusetts Bay Colony in the
early 1600s for her “heretical”
religious views, views which
undermined the power of the
ministers in the community. “Everywoman” commented
afterward, “Anne Hutchinson
was different... Some years later,
in Salem, we saw a whole gang
of women who were different,
who healed with herbs and
spoke their minds.... We couldn’t
listen to them at all. We just
hanged them.”

Lucy Stone (1818-1893)
was the Grandmother of Us All,
the founder of the first feminist
movement in the United States.
She went to college (“There
were two colleges admitting
women at the time.”)

Sessions portrayed Sojourner Truth (1797-1883) as a high point in the show. She stood straight and tall, using a cane, bent elbows sticking out a little behind her. She walked stiffly across the stage, creating with her five-foot plus frame the image of a six-foot tall black ex-slave. At the first “official”
women’s conference — post-
Seneca Falls — in Worcester,
Massachusetts (“A conference is
when everybody got somethin’ to say and you all got to listen. If you don’t have to listen, that's just a party.”), Sojourner spoke
to the 20,000 delegates after
hours of speeches: “‘Sisters, I
don't know why we don’t just
reach out and take these rights
we've been doin’ all this talkin’
about. Thank ye for hearin’
me.’” And Sojourner sat down.
Sessions rasped out more from
Sojourner: “A man tells me
women can't be treated the same
as men ‘cause Jesus was a man. I
say to him, ‘How you think
Jesus got here? It was between
God and a woman. Man got
nothin’ to do with it!’ “Between
colored men in the South
and white women in the North,
white men in both places are in a
heap of trouble.”

After her dramatic pauses,
Sessions then went on to
Everywoman, with the other
characters, including Katherine
Houghton Hepburn (1878-1951), who closed the
houses of prostitution in Hartford,
Connecticut, before women could vote. Her concerns
were with the spread of venereal
disease (spread to wives from
husbands who frequented the
places) and the resulting epidemic
of deformed children born,
as well as “white slavery” — the
forcing of women into the
profession. Hepburn published
on a huge storefront banner the
names and addresses of all 24
city counselors who voted to
delay indefinitely a vote on
whether to close the whorehouses (“We didn’t have political
power — no vote. But we had
‘Domestic Power.’ And it
worked.”).

Victoria Woodhull
(1838-1927), Sessions’ next portrayal, became the first woman
financier and the first woman
candidate for President of the
United States. Her platform
included birth control, shorter
skirts, equal employment, equalizing social customs, and suffrage. Everywoman poked fun at Woodhull’s
apparition and counseled against
the feelings of being trapped in an endless cycle of childbearing and rearing. Women came to Margaret Sanger sick to death (literally) of
being pregnant after eleven kids
and twenty-eight self-induced
abortions. Margaret Sanger gave
them the diaphragm. Everywoman told of Sanger’s arrest
and portrayed the young mother
who ran after the paddy wagon
screaming, “NO! You can't go!
Come back! Tell me the secret!
S-A-V-E ME!” Everywoman had
tears in her eyes as she cried out,
“I can't forget her!” She straightened, turned away, and declared quietly, “So I won't.”
Everywoman — and M. Tulis
Sessions — took her leave and
thanked us for hearing her.

Talking with
M. Tulis Sessions

By Bear

I met M. Tulis Sessions a
few days after I had been swept
away by the power of her
presentation, “Women I Have
Known.”

Bear: Would you call yourself a
feminist?
Sessions: No.
Bear: Then what determined the
content of your show? Dramatic
adaptability or political content?
Sessions: Actually, it was saleability and dramatic. I say saleability because I don’t like to emphasize politics — it frightens people away. These women are real, the stories are true. All I’m doing is reclaiming history, opening up our realms of possibility. You see? It's hard to be the first at anything. Now, a woman can run for President and not be the first — Victoria Woodhull did it fifty years ago. History was written by men who covered up these stories because they’re too threatening. On the other hand, women wouldn't have the vote except for men deciding it should happen. Our history is identifiable not in the documents. You have to go back and look at the original documents.

Bear: How freewheeling did you intend the show to be in terms of audience response? You invited us to laugh and join in at the beginning, but later the show felt more structured, not allowing for spontaneous dialogue.
Sessions: I do invite people to respond in order to bring the audience. They need to hear that. Laughter is acceptable — laughing at our own ignorance, laughing at our ancestors, at the changes that are happening.

Leaving the stage to a long,
standing ovation. She deserved it
for the power, wit, and understanding of our herstory she gave us. Her characters and portrayals were varied, but none of them was silent.

You may contact M. Tulis
Sessions about doing a show by
writing to: Women I Have
Known, 850 Seventh Ave. Suite
705, New York, NY 10019, or
by calling 212-581-6470 (her
answering service).

Bear: What did you think of the audience?
Sessions: I thought it was a good audience. There was a radical faction to my left who laughed a really bitter laugh. They were very angry. It’s bitter if they should remember that we can and should also direct that anger at ourselves for putting up with our oppression.

Bear: How do you feel about the men in the audience?
Sessions: The men in this audience listened very intently. I was pleased. I think Vermont men are very aware about this.

Bear: You've been doing this show now for four seasons. Are you bored by the repetition?
Sessions: Did I seem bored to you? No, it’s never boring. How could I be bored? I’m one woman relating directly to the audience. This is my work and there’s a joy that comes when I remember this. I’m studying with Michael Moriarty (who played the Nazi propagandist ‘Dort’ in the Holocaust), and one thing I’m learning from him is that every minute is new. Every minute is Truth. Every breath is new. How can I be bored when it's all new? Every time I’m on stage I try new things. I’m always improvising because I’m very sure of the basic characters and their words, the basic information.

Bear: Who is Everywoman, your persona? Is that a southern accent?
Sessions: It’s more “west than south, maybe Arkansas, but mostly she’s a country woman. Country people are extraordinarily together. They don't say much, but every word is important when they do speak. There's a country humor told in stories and it invites you to feel comfortable.

Bear: How do you deal with receptions?
Sessions: I really dislike receptions. In general, it’s like being on parole. But sometimes you get someone like Joan Watson at UVM for a host, who will be “regular” with you and just go out for a beer. Receptions are all part of public relations, part of the job. I don't want people to come and ask me to talk to them. I’ve just spent two hours on stage talking to them. It’s like saying to a pro basketball player, “Hey, let's go shoot some baskets after the game.” I want people to realize that talking to each other about what they've seen and heard is as important as talking to me. This is the first time, though, that someone has called long distance to talk to me about the show and what I think. I’m impressed. But then, it fits with Vermont. I love Vermont. I think Vermonters deal with the Truth in their lives.