ART FOR THE “NON-ARTIST”

By Etana Finkler

The “Non-Artist” As “Artist” — a 17-woman show — was an art exhibit at Everywoman’s Place from July 17 through August 6 which I coordinated. This show was the result of four workshops I have facilitated since April. These workshops were free since I think it is a revolutionary part of cultural change to share and exchange information without a money value. Put to it, when we are striving to find alternative good ways of making a living (e.g., reading tarot, doing massage), we must not forget to also share our skills for free, so lack of money does not keep a woman from her growth. The exhibit consisted of xeroxed stationery by Gwyn Marilyn, an original comic strip by Chris Taylor which appeared in Commonwoman, three landscape watercolors of views of Cliffsides Park, and 12 original silkscreen wall hangings.

Most people feel they can't draw. You may share this feeling; but I think what you are really feeling is that you draw at a third or seventh grade level. When looked at this way, it is not surprising since that is when you probably stopped drawing. Most people who say “I can’t draw good” mean they can’t draw realistically. Good is a value judgment, while realistic drawing is a skill which takes practice but can be learned, just as we practice and learn to throw a ball or do carpentry or learn to cook. Art can be frustrating and hard for the “artist” as well as the “non-artist.” What is important for me is to encourage myself and others to have fun: to enjoy the process; and to work from our gut or inspiration or intuition, which we all have. Art is a good chance to communicate non-verbally in this very verbal culture.

Take a risk and go beyond your fear of “art.” Patriarchy, in making art for artists only, has robbed us of one of the few pleasures of life. Dip into the magic of colors.

DRAWING does not have to be a big deal. And xerox machines make inexpensive copies so easily. Make your own stationery!

SILKSCREEN can be easy and inexpensive. It is accessible to us all. It is great for small quantity reproduction (10-30-300 copies). The designs in the exhibit were made using only paper stencils. For $10-15, you can get your materials and design your own T-shirts, banners, etc.

WATERCOLOR can be difficult, but it can also be an easy and satisfying art form. Take an inexpensive watercolor set and brush on your vacation, to record your impressions and fantasies, and have fun with the juicy luscious colors!

Page 19

WOMEN NOW

WATERCOLOR, on

Photos by Lynn Vera

HOW TO WATERCOLOR

By Etana Finkler

Simple Watercolor Instructions

Remember to have fun and relax.

Set up: open paints; drop a large drop of water onto each color so colors will be moist by the time you're ready to paint. Fill cup with water. Have toilet paper or tissue handy for blotting.

Make a viewer, see diagram. This will greatly help you visualize your 3-dimensional world in a 2-dimensional manner. I still find this simple paper viewer with rectangle cut-out to be of the greatest value.

Look in the viewer to find the composition (picture) you like. Notice landmarks for vertical ¼ and ¾, also horizontal.

Sketch lightly in pencil basic form (not details).

Remember to have fun and relax.

Think about lights and darks (tone) rather than color.

Make a little “thumbnail sketch” (2" x 3") quickly (1-3 min.) with dark, light & medium tones. Try another sketch with different tone arrangement quickly. Choose which you prefer. You want large forms of dark, medium and light tones to make your picture effective. Don’t get lost in details until the end. Objects near you should have good contrast (lights next to darks). Objects will look further away if tones are similar though colors are different (i.e. light blue water near light or medium green land will look further away than dark green land near light blue water). In transforming the 3-dimensional world to a 2-dimensional paper, the artist uses “tricks” or techniques at her whim to create an effective picture, even if it changes what she sees. For example, feel free to move a boat from distance to foreground if you want; or put a person in the picture for added interest; change the person's shirt from light to dark if you want, or move an island 500’ to the left if you want it in your picture!

Paint forms (sections); think of areas that won’t touch; example: sky then water. Then WAIT for them to dry before painting an adjoining area. (This is so different wet areas won't run if you don’t want them to.)

Within one form there may be several forms. But keep the basic tone (dark, medium, light) the same. Vary colors slightly.

Use various techniques to finish. Then put in details. Be patient while a section needs to dry.

- WATERCOLOR TECHNIQUES: (why not practice on a separate piece of paper?)

a) wet paint on wet paper (sky)

b) dry paint near dry paint (edges); won’t run.

c) dry paint on dry paint (texture); keep brush very dry for second layer.

d) wet paint on dry paint (translucence)

e) even wash

f) stroke of brush (esp. for leaves or flower petals) may be softened by immediately wetting edges with clean brush of water.

It’s a good idea to have a second brush of clean water for controlling runs and for blending.

- Now work in details you may want, and paint until you feel the painting is finished.

Remember to have fun and relax.