COMMONWOMAN

PDP O OVP VPOVNADP ADP VADP ALP OP OPV AP OLP OAD VAP ADAP

COMMONWOMAN

o>

WORKERS
§ RE GROUP: Linda Wittenberg, Peggy Luhrs, Gwynn Marilyn, 
Ramona Monteverde, Jean Palmer, Lynn Vera, Nancy Powell,
§ Jane Dewey, Helen Greenspan, Paij Bailey.
* EDITORIAL COMMITTEE: Jane Dewey, Peggy Luhrs, Men
* McDermott, Ramona Monteverde, Nancy Powell, Myra Timmins,
Lynn Vera, Kathleen

BUSINESS: Jean Palmer, Gwynn Marilyn
SUBSCRIPTION, MAILING: Joknee Avrutik Sqrannelarklass
DISTRIBUTION: Jane Dewey, Wendy Bell, Marion
ADVERTISING: Alverta Perkins, Ellie Jones

COPY PREP: Euan Bear, Linda Camito

LAYOUT: Carol Altobelli, Etana Finkler, Joknee, Linda Witten-
berg, Gwynn Marilyn, Lynn Vera, Ramona Monteverde, Senny
PESK, Ellie Jones

Commonwoman is made up of a small group of women who work
together collectively to put out this paper. At present, no one on the
collective is paid for her work.

NOTES FROM THE CORE

The September emergency meeting brought about 25 women toge-
ther for the purpose of discussing and continuing Commonwoman. It was
really encouraging and we decided to continue. Most of the women who
attended that meeting worked in some way on this issue.

At the core group meeting we decided to try and share some of our
process and decisions with readers, which we'll do in this box.

We want to expand our distribution, both throughout Vermont and
elsewhere. If you would distribute the paper (which may mean picking up
a bundle at the bus) in your area, even if to one outlet, please contact us at
the address below. If you live locally and have ideas for good outlets for
the paper, send them too.

We want to reply to women who send copy for publication when we
think our editorial suggestions and feedback would help get your point
across to readers. We realize some women never hear from us or see their
piece in the paper. We hope to improve that communication.

We cannot be responsible for returning cartoons,
graphics, photographs, or written material unless special arrangements are
made in advance or a stamped, self-addressed envelope is provided by the
contributor.

PLEASE: articles submitted should be short and succinct. It helps
us a lot if they are typed, double-spaced. Three pages maximum please.

We are working on a policy for reimbursing women for supplies to
do a solicited assignment for Commonwoman. Since our finances are
very tight, we would only like to reimburse women who can't afford to
provide the materials (for example photographic supplies), but we cannot
afford to pay for gas, time, overhead, etc. We do reimburse in full travel
expenses for distribution, and mailing and phone costs.

We're happy to have two new women with lots of energy working on
ad sales. If you know someone who'd like to advertise in the paper, have
them contact the address below.

Our post office mess-up is fixed up. We have our old address back.

We want to have a poster to call attention to Commonwoman, with
space on it to fill in where it can be bought locally. We would like help
and input on this so we came up with a POSTER CONTEST. The winner
will get a subscription to the paper or a renewal. The poster should be
eye-catching, 11x22, with a logo of your design if you choose. It should
also include our masthead. See classifieds for more info.

Commonwoman is published every 6 weeks. Subscription rates are

$6.00/8 issues, $20/8 issues for institutions. It is free on request to women
in prison and to women in mental institutions.

DEADLINE: Tuesday, November 24
Sunday, November 29

LAYOUT: December 5 & 6, 1981

yo santos Inc.
Box 242

Winooski, Vt. 05404 TELL OUR ADVERTISERS

you saw it in COMMONWOMAN
Typesetting: Sue Ball
VAIO HLDV OY

after her affairs and protect her.
I do not believe that any sex,
class, or race can safely trust
its protection in any hands but
its own.”
—Helen Keller in an unpub-
lished letter to the Brooklyn
Eagle, courtesy of Rad-
cliffe Quarterly, reprinted
here from Ms., Nov, 1980.

Another Isolation

“I have departed from the
traditions of my forebears, male
and female, in the espousal of
woman suffrage... Most of my
dear friends are anti-suffragists.
Even the one nearest to me in
the world, my teacher, is some-
times distressingly lukewarm.
She still expects men to look

ONE OND QVM ONL NNN ORONO LPP OPP NLP OPP LPP

PLL OG LPP LOPLI OL LDAP AP PLP LP OPO LION

I swear it to you
I swear it on my common woman's head

The common woman is as common as a common loaf of bread —

and will rise!

TELL OUR ADVERTISERS you saw it in COMMONWOMAN!

LETTER

Reagan — Have a Heart???
To the Editor:

One of the most depressing
things about the attempted
assassination of Reagan, after
the fact of it, was that, according
to the media, Reagan never
let down his act. A bullet one
inch from his heart... and one of
his first questions is “who's
minding the store?” An impor-
tant question, especially given
the mixed report of who
thought they were minding the
store, and a folksy question, but
completely unreal given the
circumstances. What does this
man think about death?? His
body, almost his heart pierced
by a piece of metal... didn’t he
have a momentary twinge of...
powerlessness, maybe even... a
cosmic (!) feeling of remorse...
that he is succumbing to a
boomerang of bullets... the bullets
that the U.S. of A. is spraying out across the world, that are
cutting through Salvadorean peasants and Philippine workers and
black American teenagers, have pierced full circle... and that
maybe... he could be changed by
this event! !?! No. No change. No
compassion. No gun control.
The same cardboard Hollywood
folksy. There’s only one way I
can explain it — he can’t be hurt
cause he has no heart!!!

Robin Lloyd

The Brattleboro Women’s
Crisis Center will once again be
providing direct services to bat-
tered women, their families, and
victims of rape. Emergency calls
may be made to the Center’s
hotline number (802) 254-6954,
from 5 p.m. on Friday until 2
p.m. on Monday and during holi-
days as well. Callers will be refer-
red to a volunteer trained in
crisis intervention, who can
make all necessary arrangements
including police protection, to
ensure the safety of the woman
and her children. It is hoped that
this service can be expanded to
seven days a week in the future,
as more funding and volunteers
become available.

Emergency shelter for up to
three days will be provided by
a network of safe homes in the
Brattleboro area. The Crisis Cen-
ter will help families find other
housing after this period. More
safe homes are needed, and any-
one interested in information
about the safe home system can
leave a message with the answer-
ing service.

EVERYWOMAN'S

RESOURCE NUMBERS

EVERYWOMAN’S PLACE... 658-2422
RAPE CRISIS CENTER... 863-4236
WOMEN HELPING BATTERED WOMEN... 658-1996

GREATER BURLINGTON WOMEN’S COALITION... 863-3586
VERMONT WOMEN’S HEALTH CENTER... 863-1386
GAY AND LESBIAN HOTLINE... 862-4296

VERMONT CANCER INFORMATION SERVICE
1-800-225-7034 (toll free service for
people with questions about cancer)

HERSTORY HOUSE SHELTER, Rutland... 775-3232

UMBRELLA, INC., St. Johnsbury... 748-8645
or 3148

PLACE
200 MAIN ST:
658-2422

NEW HOURS

MON. 10:30-5

TUES. 7:30-1

WED. 9:30-1:30

THURS. 9:30-3:30; 7-9
FRI. 9:30-5
SAT. 9-5