COMMONWOMON FEBRUARY 1983

Page 10

I have been loving wimmin since my first lover Karen who I lived with for three months when I was fifteen. She left for an ashram, I went on to 11th grade. On and off through these past nine years I have primarily identified myself as a lesbian feminist, with one exception four years ago. And here I am getting ready to come out again nine years after the first coming out. I'm coming out as a person loving person. It is hard; it seems like I fear the wrath, or the judgment or the exclusion of the women’s community which is such an important part of my life. I kept looking for words, a ‘lesbian identified’ bisexual, a bisexual, and settled on person loving person. I refuse to sleep with or otherwise support the enemy. So I started looking clearly at the enemy and finding, for lack of better words, that the enemy is not men, but the patriarchal, dominant, disrespectful attitude and treatment of others that is the enemy. Some women are more patriarchal than some men.

When the women cadets at Norwich chant along with the men at their morning “exercises: “Rape Kill Pillage Plunder,”—and when women cops hassle me far more than men cops, I feel sorrow for these women who have not learned to value and respect themselves, who put on the costumes of so-called “power.” Maybe I'm just searching for rationalizations as I find myself loving a man, but I don’t see that I am sleeping with the enemy. I'm a revolutionary, in as many ways as I can see at the moment. I am trying to help create a peaceful planet, to quote Peggy Kornegger, “what I ask is nothing less than total revolution, revolution whose forms invent a future untainted by inequity, domination or disrespect for individual variation — in short, feminist — anarchist revolution.”

So as I've struggled through this coming out as a person loving person I have decided that the really revolutionary thing is loving relationships, because they give us the arena to practice nonviolent transformation and the strength to get out there and work against the despair, devaluation and psychic numbing that is so prevalent.

In some ways I am really resistant to the idea of having a male lover. I recognize how impossible it is made in this culture for women to support each other. Men seem to feel like they have the power and the right to communicate their thoughts. They are culturally validated, while women’s words don’t carry the same weight. I recognize that an important part of the revolution is for women to pay attention to each other, to offer more support and affirmation, trust and community to each other. We have been raised in isolation; it is part of that standard divide and conquer psychology that I believe is consciously practiced.

I have been in various mixed situations where I have gotten a lot more support, appreciation and verbal stroking from the men present. This illustrates to me how difficult it is for women to express themselves, maybe why some women seek male approval. This awareness has made me consciously decide to give women a lot more verbal support. I am not in competition with women; in so many ways when a womyn does something well it supports me. I think, oh yes, I could do that too, but I don’t always give her the verbal support for what she is doing. I actively confront this cultural invalidation of women by building stronger and stronger systems of support with my sisters. But still a part of me fears that I am copping out on wimmin by being lovers with a man.

And I wrestle with all these questions of appearances. Who wants to appear in public as heterosexual? How blatant, how awful. We need to be out there visually creating and showing the alternatives, showing that it is possible and joyful and wonderful and beautiful and common to be a strong womyn, a womyn loving womyn. So many of my contemporaries, radical lesbian feminists still fell for the trip of the happy nuclear family, with so much pain, psychological and physical till they finally learned to love themselves and each other. That is revolutionary, their lives turned around. We have a women’s community precisely because we need support in a misogynist culture for women to learn to love themselves. And we are still struggling with it; so many of us have internalized such self-hate. Our revolutions share similar means and ends; we want our future and our present to be anarchical, respectful, flexible, loving and peaceful.

So after I struggle with these questions of sleeping with the enemy, fear of ostracism from the wimmins community and, But how would it look? I get down to the sexuality part of being lovers with a man. In some ways I want to close my eyes and not look. I have been raped; I’ve seen and felt penises used as weapons. Wimmins' bodies are soft, familiar, enfolding. I am going very slowly in being lovers with a man; it is unfamiliar territory but I am pleased.

I’ve read that nonviolence is a belief in the sacredness of human personhood. It is the challenge of loving. As I come out as a person loving person I feel like I am meeting that challenge more and more completely. There are still many steps that I need to take and many places I have yet to see where I am not meeting that challenge, but I am trying to be open; I am trying hard to not abuse or take away another's freedom.

This has been a very hard thing to write and also very freeing; there are a lot of lessons to learn, and a lot of time to learn them in I hope. Thank you wimmin for yourselves and your help.

Lori Barg  
RD 1 Box 82  
E. Calais, Vt. 05650  

(Is this the scenario for a t.v. ad, or does it, did it, actually happen?)

A group of teenage girls stand on a street corner. They are wearing tight jeans and t-shirts and giggling. They are natural talking to each other, these youngsters. So that, looking at them closely, the lipstick, earrings and bracelets they wear seem out of place. A car drives by with four boys, who hoot and holler. The girls change their poses a little; maybe one puts a hand on a hip.

(What kind of communication has taken place?)

Scantily clad women’s bodies are painted boldly on billboards over highways and city streets. Women have no choice about certain aspects of this culture’s attitude toward them. All kinds of advertising reinforce the image of a woman's body as a commodity. And women make a living by appearing in this advertising.

In a restaurant, the owner will choose if his employees will be male or female or both; how old they will be; and what they will wear.

A very expensive restaurant may have only men working. These men, the waiters dressed in black suits, contribute to the atmosphere of expense, gourmetness, exclusiveness.

Some recognizable restaurant images:

— a middle-priced restaurant with cheerful, young females waiting tables in modest, attractive dresses.

— a family restaurant with waitresses of mixed ages in spotless black polyester uniforms with a collar.

— a businessman’s lunch and after-work spot with waitresses dressed in mini-skirts or shorts.

The most arrogant common example of the use of waitresses to create an atmosphere is the Playboy Club. Here, again, the image is exclusiveness.

Exclusivity.

For the waiter, it is expense, sophistication, decorum.

For the waitress it is also expense. However, the exclusivity, the specialness, is created by her highly visible body which has passed certain standards. The exclusivity for her is in her accessibility.

We asked the waitresses we interviewed if they felt as if they were on display. We also asked them if they had problems dealing with male customers. Many of the responses were vague and even contradictory. This is not an easy thing to have to take into consideration on a daily basis. It may be simpler to ignore it, or turn it into a joke, or consider it another painful aspect of the job.

Because, after all, there is nothing she can do. Unless she is working in an unusual place where the manager will defend a waitress’s decision to refuse to serve a customer, it will be only the most blatant, rude forwardness which might provoke the manager to turn the customer away.

A waitress is meant to be accessible, cheerful and friendly.

Because of space limitations, we had to serialize this article. It will be continued in the next issue. It will be difficult for you to locate if you miss it.