@ personal

page 6 stencil acer

N

LLM A

PAINIDOIRASS IBOX

Is

ME LE AE LEAF ELE E IE IB ETL SE PLEA LE LG LG AE LD EE IDI LE PE MEL LT IPI SPIE EG IDM ELE. BE LE SPEDE PEE LEAMA AT MG SEM SPP APG AF LEE

HE PERSONAL

AND

THE POLITICAL

By Joyce Bressler

One of the contributions of
the modern Feminist Movement
is the idea that the “personal is
the political.” What is political
can be defined as power
relationships, and their process.

In the general society the
relationships between nations,
between individuals and
governments, or people with
power and people without
power are a few examples of
relationships that are political.
“With the new Feminist
awareness, we've learned that
personal relationships, including

individual sexual relationships,
are also political, and therefore
reflect power dynamics and
struggles.

It was an advance in Women’s
consciousness to understand our
problems in these
terms. Consciousness raising
groups sprang up all over,
allowing women to share their
feelings of frustration and
oppression within sexual
relationships with men, and as

women in a male-dominated
society. We learned that our
personal problems are not

isolated, that they are connected
to a system of male supremacy

that has historically and
culturally kept women down.
These dynamics manifest

themselves in the larger society

in a series of complicated ways,
including lower wages, sexual
division of labor, lack of day
care, domestic violence, rape and
denial of abortions, to name a
few.

Modern feminism has helped
many women to improve our
personal relationships and to
fight sexism in the general

society. However, to rely totally

on consciousness-raising and
individual awareness to improve
the lives of the masses of women
is just not going to work. Our
oppression in this society is not

limited to questions of sex. We

are also divided by racism, for
example, when black and white
school children are taught to
fear each other. As workers we

are exploited every day by an

owning class that uses our labor
to make huge profits, while it

pollutes the planet and leaves us

with the crumbs. The oppression
that we feel based on sex, race,
age, sexual preference or any
other form is not in isolation of
the other. The economic system

is a common denominator,
which we are subjected to and
which must change if we are
going to end our own oppression
as women. A structural change
involving the entire economic
system, as well as the systems of
male and white supremacy, has
to come about in order for any
widespread, long-lasting change
to occur.

Therefore, I see the error of
narrowness and one-dimensional
thinking being made by some
feminists who have extended the
idea that the “personal is the
political” to an extreme in
isolation of other crucial factors.
An example of this is Vicki
Smith’s article in the August
issue of Commonwoman entitled
“Politics of Penile Penetration.”
Although I respect Vicki for her
frankness and openness in
sharing personal feelings that
many of us need to hear, I
believe it’s an error to raise
personal feelings and experience
to the level of ideological
theory.

She has done this by deducing
that sexual intercourse is an
expression of male power and
oppression. By avoiding such
involvement she has found a
form of personal liberation.
Therefore if all women stop
having sexual intercourse they
will win liberation, also. This
may follow a logical progression,
but a lot is being left out.

Historically, women’s
oppression in the family and the
general society was linked to the
origin of private property. After
the development of private
property men saw the need to
subjugate women in order to
insure their property would be
passed on to their heirs. No
matter what personal choices we
make, as long as the system of
private property exists, we will
never be free.

In other words, to view the
act of sexual intercourse as the
cause of women’s oppression in
isolation of history, economics,
social and cultural factors is
seeing the world through tinted
glasses.

Vicki is assuming that sex
between men and women which
involves penetration means that
the woman is performing an act
to solely please the man. She is
not giving heterosexual women
any credit for taking care of

their own needs in a given love
relationship. Love making is a
two-way street, whether it be
gay or straight. It also is a way
of expressing intimacy,
sensuality, and closeness that
may or may not be genital.
Vicki's statement implies that
women who are involved with
men are so passive that they
can't assert themselves in sharing
with their lovers what pleases
them, or take any responsibility
for a mutually satisfying sexual
experience. I find these
implications extremely insulting.

This system isn’t going to
change overnight. We have to
survive physically and
emotionally in order to be
strong enough to wage the fight.
We choose to find our emotional
support in this process in a
variety of ways. One way is
through love relationships. Some
of us choose to have love
relationships with people of the
same sex, and some choose
people of the opposite sex, and
sometimes we choose periods of
celibacy or non-involvement.
But whatever our choice, we
should stand by each other in
our right to make this decision,
while fighting discrimination and
oppression based on sexual
preference. Then it's important
to get beyond this controversy
over sexuality in the women’s
movement. We must begin to
seriously examine the system in
a scientific way to determine a
strategy that will build unity
with our allies and challenge the
real enemies.

Is the sex war at the root of
other major evils such as race
and class slavery, capitalism,
puritanism, imperialism, and
warfare? And if so, can such
evils be exiled from the mass
human condition forever by any
but a feminist method? (What is
a feminist method?) Given our
conditioning as women, can we
ever become feminist
revolutionaries for human
beings, without becoming
lesbians? As women, can we
wage any sort of revolution if we
are psychosexually bound to
men or marriage or full-time
child care? Men can scarcely be
revolutionaries under such
conditions, even though their
relationship to women, marriage,

and child care is a far less
committed one. But why even
wage a struggle, especially a
violent one, if its goals are
simply revenge or power? What
if we “won” and became as
removed from emotion and
sexuality as men are? But
perhaps, as women, we will
never be allowed full emotional
and sexual expression unless we
control the means of production
and reproduction.

(Phyllis Chesler in Women and
Madness, 1972)

Daughter
of a Lesbian

By Melony

I am fourteen and I am the daughter of a lesbian woman. For
this reason I feel very unique. My mother is a very strong person
who I enjoy and is looked down upon in society for being a
lesbian.

I know that ever since I was little, I have always had to cover
up when the subject came up about “gays.” I had a way of
dealing with it when I was young that kept me on top. It wasn’t
the best way. In fact, I’m not proud of it. I did things like I would
put down kids that were on the bottom, the un-liked kids,
the ugly kids, the fat kids — to get on top — and that was the
only way I could find to deal with the fact that my mother was
homosexual. I felt that everybody hated me because they hated
gay people and the fact that my mother was gay meant that they
hated me. As I got older I realized that all the kids I was with
didn’t know what they were talking about. ‘Gay’ was just a
word that they had heard their mother or father say in a very
nasty tone of voice and that they copied and thought it would be
a good way to pick on somebody else and make themselves feel
better, but it’s not. Very often, I catch myself saying some very
sexist or racist thing. Where did I get this from? Why am I saying
this? It doesn’t really click but I realize that I’ve been listening to
particular things that someone has said and I'm just saying it. It’s
the popular thing to say. The popular joke. The joke that’s so
funny that it gets the laughs. But if you actually analyze it, it’s
not funny at all. Why do they have to make a joke about the
dumb person that walked up the street? Why do they have to
narrow it down to the dumb black dude or the French or the
Polak or the stupid broad?

I find my mother one of the most wonderful people in the
world. The reason? Because she is strong. Strong enough to go
against society to do what she enjoys most, which is loving
women. I have a wonderful relationship with my mother. Mainly
because she gives me the freedom to be myself. Many people my
own age are being constantly brainwashed to be something they
aren't. If a young girl chooses to be homosexual she is looked
down upon to the point where she might even change her mind,
not because she wants to for herself, but because she can’t stand
the pressure from other people. I’m lucky. I feel strong in myself
because I know I can be what I want to be without worrying
what other people think. For myself, I am too young to know
whether I am heterosexual or homosexual permanently. But I
know at the moment I am heterosexual.

The only time I get angry in my life about gays is when people
threaten to hurt people, like Anita Bryant. People that are gay are
not hurting Anita Bryant. They are not hurting anyone. They are
doing what they want to do, being with people they want to be
with. Because my mother is homosexual does that affect me? The
only way it affects me is what social pressures will do to her and
do to me. If there wasn’t that impact there would be nothing
wrong.