COMMONWOMAN AUGUST 1979

THEY POISONED MY MOTHER

Nancy, my mother, was strong.  
She had to be, to resist insanity.  
She spent a good deal of her life  
doing things she didn’t want to do.  

Of course I can only guess  
and piece together how she felt inside,  

from memories of the bits of herself she showed,  
or of the bits of herself I paid any attention to then,  
not knowing she was going to die,  

and besides that, not allowing myself the flaw of caring anyway.  

I played out my role,  
cold, rebellious daughter.  

Nancy Ann Cheney  

And she played out her roles —  
as PTA mother, dressing for the meetings, rare lipstick  

I still feel the guilt, grey and cold and flat,  
like the dull linoleum of our kitchen floor.  

She washed it twice a year — maybe that much —  

part of her revolution.  

I still feel the guilt,  

glaring and relentless and harsh,  

like the lights in the hospital corridors.  

She went in for routine tests — how boring — and died.  

LETTING GO  

By Vicki Deva*  
(*Devaney — Rose's maiden  
name. Deva — also a goddess.)  

August 16, 1979.  

My Mother's death will  
bring on my death... I will not  
live after she dies... I have not  
cut the lifeline cord... I must let  
go of her... If she is a strong  
woman, then I am a strong  
woman... Yet, I am alone and I  
am strong... If she is passive and  
abused, I feel powerless, abused,  
numb... I am angry at her life  
choices... I am angry at our lack  
of knowledge and lack of trust  
in self-healing... I am angry that  
she looked this time to Doctors  
and Hospitals and Radiation...  
our alternatives are self-empowering  
and therefore a scary  
alternative.  

Until I let her go (cut the  
cord, accept her death, and  

our differences) I am too vulnerable  
to her... I have given my  
Mother the power to shape my  
image of myself... I have allowed  
other women to shape my  
self-image... I let other women  
nurture me with good images of  
myself... My Mother has supported  
and nurtured the strong  
side of me... She has also told  
me in many subtle and not so  
subtle ways to behave for THE  
MAN... accept his image of me...  
I am angry at her for telling me  
this... I am angry that she tells  
herself the same.  

Motherhood (the institution)  
has made Rose and myself  
MAD... Rose beat me as a  
child... I am angry at her... I have  
been numbed to her... I have let  
my child go with ease and  

Continued on Page 8 Vicki Deva and Rose  

uncomfortable, unsettled, resentful on her mouth.  
She hated to dress up and pretend: She never refused to go,  

As housewife — meat, potatoes, frozen vegetables, in an  

electric fry pan, ready like clockwork every night when  
my father sagged in the front door.  

As wife — I saw them kiss — a peck — twice in 18 years. They  

slept together every night. I never heard them yell at  
each other.  

As worker — She worked every morning, getting us all (were  

we crippled?) going. She worked daily for a wage. She  
worked at night without pay, feeding, chauffeuring,  
nurturing. Who did she have to complain to?  

Every day after school I told her stories of my day, as  
she stirred that day’s four basic food groups on the stove.  
One night she wanted to tell me about her day.  

I said I wasn’t interested.  

“But I listen to you every day.”  

“No one made you.”  

I knew my words had slapped her, stung her, emptied her,  
numbed her, voided her.  

Now I know more than I did then,  

but I had logic on my side.  

But she was an escapee — on the couch with her Arizona Highways,  

wishing she hadn't lived for the last 25 years where she  
didn’t want to live, and where she was going to live, or  
so she thought, for some time.  

She was an escapee. She made it legitimate.  

She was a camper. A girl scout. A girl scout leader.  

She wore pants and boots, and got dirty,  

and knew all the trees, and bugs and flowers and clouds,  
and slept outside, and played in the water,  

and walked in the woods and mountains.  

One time, in a campground,  

she swaggered along —  

I mean, she didn’t walk like a girl —  

she just walked.  

She had on pants and shoes and shirt from the men’s department.  
Her hair was short, a cap on her head, no make-up.  
Some people laughed.  

“Was that a man or a woman?”  

I heard and felt ashamed.  

But there was something else there,  

and I felt proud.