page 6  
2 D  
‘Election  
3|Continued from page 1)  

The second woman to be lieutenant governor of Vermont will preside over that body and Mary  

Just Skinner, a liberal attorney, will be seated to represent Washington County. Mark Kaplan and Bill Daniels, two incumbents who have been supporters of women’s rights and abortion rights, were returned as Senators from  

Chittenden County. That is the good news. The bad news is that Senators Mandigo and Ogden, two rabid anti-women  

politicians, were returned by the electorate. In general, the real power bases in the Vermont Senate remain fifty years behind the times in their attitudes toward women.  
In the House of Representatives, some visible “friends of women” were retained, most notably Sallie Soule, Gretchen Morse, Louise Swainbank, and Susan Webb. Representatives Ed Granai and Madeleine Kunin, both liberals, gave up their seats when they ran for statewide office. Eight of thirteen House incumbents were defeated who had voted against the Mandigo Bill last session. (The Mandigo Bill proposed to ban state and federal funds for Medicaid abortions.) It is unclear if the abortion issue was a deciding factor in each case.  

Sarah Marie Dietz, running as a Democrat for the United States Congress, got fewer votes than any other major party candidate for statewide office. The lack of support for Dietz, “Mrs. Right-to-Life,” seems to establish that anti-abortion groups in Vermont are only a vocal minority and not a viable political force.  

At the national level, five of the more liberal Democrats in the Senate were defeated: Dick Clark of Iowa, Floyd Haskell of Colorado, Bill Hathaway of Maine, Wendell Anderson of Minnesota, and Thomas McIntyre of New Hampshire. In at least one of these races, the victory of Roger Jepson over Dick Clark, the anti-abortion forces were crucial in turning out of office a supporter of a woman’s right to choose. Ed Brooke, of Massachusetts, was replaced by Paul Tsongas, a liberal who is considered only a “soft” supporter of women’s rights.  
The U.S. Senate has only one woman, newly elected Nancy Kassebaum of Kansas, and so retains its dismal record of excluding women. Margaret Chase Smith, of Maine, was the only other woman ever elected Senator in her own right, an amazing statistic considering that 51.3% of the population is female.  

The equal rights amendment suffered setbacks in Florida and Nevada where citizens voted against it in state referendums. The opposition was extremely well financed and organized, so E.R.A. supporters have much work to do in upcoming legislative sessions. All restrictive gay rights ordinances, including the Briggs initiative in California, were soundly defeated, with one exception: Anita Bryant’s Dade County Crusade was again successful in blocking moves toward civil rights for homosexuals.  

There was good news and bad news in the election '78 returns, but mostly there was no news at all for women waiting for word.  

The Third Annual Women’s Poetry Reading, organized by Alice Deming, was billed as a festival this year — two days of poetry which included a group of invited poets from Vermont who read on Friday night (Nov. 10), a workshop given by Elaine Siegal late Saturday afternoon, and a reading by Cora Brooks from Chelsea on Saturday night. I felt as if I had participated in some strangely solitary encounter weekend. I went from event to event preoccupied with thoughts about calling myself a “poet,” and listening to others who called themselves ‘poets.’ Someone once told me that in the Eskimo language there is no word for “poet.” When any member of the community was inspired, he or she would begin to speak in strings of words presumably recognized as “poetry.” But how is poetry recognized? Is it that each word is given extra space — each word is wrapped in silence?  

I believe that poetry is very often a reporting back of some sort of encounter — with a feeling, an event, an idea, a person, a vision, a place. I, personally, need women’s poetry festivals. I need to hear women describe my world because I feel inundated by reports from men. I was inspired by the size of the audience Friday night — close to one hundred people listening to twelve women. Here’s a report about a pregnancy that could only be made by a woman listening to her own truths.  

Barnacle  

CELEBRATIONS  

POETRY:  

Defining  

unrelated events and objects. Her teaching method worked. We all created enough of a poem to share with one another, but what really set up reverberations inside me was a statement she made that challenged one of my sacred beliefs. (She has a way of doing that.) She said disdainfully that women shouldn’t bother keeping journals because most journals aren’t art, and are, therefore, a waste of energy. I keep a journal, and find it very hard work. It's often agonizing to keep listening to myself. At times my own words haunt me, but I’m not ready to give it up. I'm just going to trust that writing in my journal is an act of self-affirmation (in the long run) which helps me combat the conditioning I share with most women — to do what I'm told and to say what's expected of me. I hope with each journal it will become easier to trust my own voice although at this point I’d probably like to find some excuse to stop. Otherwise, I wouldn’t have been so disturbed by Elaine Siegal’s strong opinions.  

A woman who has obviously learned to listen to herself well is Cora Brooks. She has committed her poetry to memory, surely a sign of self-respect. She is not afraid of silence, of the time it takes to search her memory for the next poem. When she began to speak her poems looking directly at each one of us, I felt as if I were listening to a  

A woman alone in the country  
Peels off layers of long underwear  

Peels down to her skin  

Mirrored in the double panes of window-storm window,  
Her waist and thighs have the same denseness, roundness  
As the trunks of black maples in the snow  

Backlit by the moon.  

Checking for changes, she feels  

Her breasts and her belly:  

They seem of the usual roundness, firmness  

But tonight she gains no pleasure from the touch;  
It is an examination, an exploration  

Of a territory grown suddenly cold and unfamiliar,  
Her navel like a crater on the moon.  

Inside, a barnacle of cells  

Has attached itself to her life  

Her womb sounds sharp notes of change  

The barnacle has fastened tight  

To the walls of her womb and the reaches of her mind.  

It will grow; there’s no way out but pain.  
She spreads her fingers on her belly:  
There will be cold choices in the morning.  

—June Aleshire  
1977  

(This poem previously appeared in Dark Horse.)  

At the workshop on Saturday afternoon Elaine Siegal had us playing with our favorite toys, going out on the street and finding out some secret that was none of our business, and then connecting both experiences by creating a poem — a way to bring order to seemingly  

knowledge, no woman running as a feminist, on a feminist platform, was elected to high office anywhere in the United States this year. That is a grim statistic and tells the tale that  

while the majority of tax-paying, voting Americans are women, to specifically represent them is to be considered a “one-issue” candidate and remains certain political suicide.  

Our  
World  

By Carol Cohen  

Someone Asks You  

Someone asks you how you are and  
you wonder if they notice the slab  
of darkness you've been given to  
balance on your head you  

wonder if you should lie about  
it if you should say anything  

at all Appearing in public  
you could try to be clever and  
poetic you could say  

it is a piece of the shore  
a shoulder of the sea  
once leaned against  

or you could say it is one  
of the sections of one of the walls  
out of the narrow side of winter  

You could say you are just  

trying it on for size that you  

have it on trial that you only  
have to wear it when it’s  

raining — the rest of the time  

you wear it for fun that  

despite its bulk it does not  

distract you from your purpose  

that you feel most exhilarated  

most honored to be under its  
weight while treading water  

the truth is it is an honor  

(reprinted by permission from  
the author from her book  

Ransom for the Moon by Cora Brooks,  
Vt.)  

Acorn Press, Chelsea,  

Burlington  
962-3949  

We sell anarchist,  
check Socialist books.