By Dr. G. Feelbetter  
What is CCHS  

Chronic Compulsive Heterosexual Syndrome (CCHS) in the female range of signs that occur in women anytime between age five and death. The signs may be of a physical, mental, or spiritual nature. Some of the signs include an automatic, twitch-like smile that occurs whenever a man enters the room, a strong albeit secret belief that men do it better, frequent medical history of many abortions, apathy during intercourse, sadness after intercourse, mild to severe depression, general malaise, and, most consistently, a conscious avoidance or aversion to engaging in a long-term (six months or more) sexual relationship with a woman.  
Who has CCHS?  

CCHS is an endemic problem of epidemic proportions. It affects millions of women. It’s been estimated that as many as 80% or more women must cope with it, having signs that can be dangerously life-threatening... for example, wearing dangerously high heels. These women’s lives are constantly being disrupted and endangered by their uncontrollable desire to have one or more signs of onset of the syndrome. Onset can actually happen at any time, especially following periods of stress, drop in self-esteem, and other external pressures or after periods of ill health or general weakness.  

Do I have CCHS?  

There are no medical tests for diagnosing CCHS; however, self-exam for signs and keeping a journal of the number, frequency, and severity of occurrences can be tremendously helpful. The exact cause of CCHS is not known. Some researchers blame it on severe and early programming, others believe that it is hereditary, and there are those who think it’s God's will. It’s clear that more research needs to be done.  

Traditional Views of CCHS  

Historically, women with CCHS have been viewed as anything from wonderful to perfectly normal to strange, depending on who is making the observation! Many of the most severely affected have often been given awards, such as the Miss America or Mother of the Year.  

Change and Prognosis for the Future  

Diet: A healthy diet, as with any health issue, is a good first step. Eat plenty of parsley. Meat should be avoided. Sugar can dangerously weaken one and exacerbate the condition. In fact, any addictions can be danger signs.  

At the same time, it’s important to indulge in as many sensual pleasures as possible; for example, warm baths, sensuous foods, and sleeping over at girlfriends' houses can be healthful aids.  

The following are additional tips: Practice careful self-exam. Remember you are the best judge of whether you have CCHS.  

“Work with Women Helping Battered Women, the Women’s Rape Crisis Center, and Common Woman. Go to Michigan's Women’s Music Festival.  

Sexuality Enhancement  

By Liza Little  

I am a nurse and counselor at the Vermont Women's Health Center, and one of the areas of health care that I focus on with women is sexuality and sexual health. About a year and a half ago, I began a Sexuality Enhancement Program for women at the health center. One of the motivating factors for developing women’s sexuality groups came from the reality that oftentimes health care workers don’t have the time to discuss women’s sexual concerns in depth and that the resources available in our community for women to explore sexual issues were fairly limited. I was familiar from my graduate work with traditional approaches to female sexuality issues; sex therapy and pre-orgasmic groups seemed to have a “problem approach” and a mechanistic outlook—as if a woman's body, her feelings, beliefs, and cultural background could all be reduced to a mechanical problem—like fixing a broken-down car. I wanted to provide some form of program where the context for the groups would be one of enhancement and celebration, where women would have the opportunity to explore their sexual issues, learn from one another, and practice the skills of problem-solving in the area of sexuality.  

The program was designed to take into account three basic components of our sexuality: our attitudes and belief systems, our feelings and emotions, and our sexual behavior or how we express our sexual selves.  

What we think about sex, our basic attitudes and belief systems, are often formed from the early information about sex that we took in as children and later as young adults. Much of this information and these early messages are based on myths, are often inaccurate, misleading, and contribute greatly to the development of poor sexual self-concepts, guilt, and anxiety about sexual functioning and dissatisfaction with one’s sexual identity. One of the exercises in the program is to write your sexual autobiography. This is usually a painful and liberating experience for women as they become aware of how much their present self-concepts rest on early childhood messages about sex and erroneous myths. Some of the myths concerning female sexuality that get confronted in the course of the program include:  
“Sex is supposed to be spontaneous and exciting all the time.”  
“Women should be able to reach orgasm during intercourse without any form of stimulation.”  
“Older women can’t have orgasms.”  
“All women lubricate easily all the time.”  
“Lesbian sexuality is strange and abnormal.”  
“Women who have sexual fantasies are abnormal.”  
“Making love to yourself is ‘second’ best.”  
“Good ‘girls’ don’t have oral sex, anal sex, bestial sex, vegetable sex, or wild sex.”  

Each week there are readings handed out for discussion and a library of books is available so that new information can be accessed and shared together.  

The emotional component to our sexuality includes our sexual feelings and energy as well as our feelings regarding our sexuality. I feel strongly that sexuality and sexual feelings cannot be divorced from feelings in general. If we suppress our sadness, we diminish our joy. If we block our pain, we inhibit our ability to feel pleasure.  

(continued on page 14)  

ANOTHER RIC NIGHTMARE  

...having your wife initiate sex...  

Take B vitamins and get plenty of sunshine and fresh air. Touch, taste, and smell your vaginal area until it becomes comfortable and enjoyable. Relax... (so important)  

Spend a day in bed with a warm, sweet woman friend.  

Come together with other women.  

Learn to tell the difference between parsley and pussy.  

Be alert! Relapses can and do happen, but with perseverance and good common sense, CCHS can be wiped out in our lifetime!!  

Comments, questions, and contributions for research can be sent to: FIGHT CCHS, c/o Dr. G. Feelbetter, AKA Glo, box 355, Richmond, Vermont 05477.  

Coming to Terms With Vaginitis  

Coming to Terms with Gardnerella Vaginalis Vaginitis — Alias “H.V.”!  
By Cate Nicholas  

“I have noticed an increase in vaginal discharge. It doesn’t really bother me except for the incredible odor... smells like fish or an old sneaker!!”  

Sound familiar? Perhaps you have experienced this or have a friend who has described it to you. More than likely the condition is caused by a bacteria called Gardnerella vaginalis. It has also been called Hemophilus vaginalis, Corynebacterium vaginalis, or grouped under the name “non-specific vaginitis.” The organism was first described in 1955 by researchers Gardner and Dukes (hence the name Gardnerella). Up until that time, women presenting with symptoms of increased vaginal discharge that was white to gray in color and had an unpleasant odor were diagnosed as having “non-specific vaginitis”—which basically meant the symptoms were not produced by yeast, Trichomonas vaginalis (trich), or Neisseria gonorrhea (G.C.). It also meant that diagnosticians did not know what organism was responsible for the symptoms.  

At this time, it was the current belief that the condition was caused by a number of unrelated, unidentified bacteria. Gardner and Dukes began observing the vaginal secretions under the microscope (a wet mount). They found a common phenomenon in samples from women presenting with the symptoms described above. The vaginal epithelial cells were covered with small rod-shaped bacteria. The bacteria were concentrated along the borders of the cell, giving it a “fuzzy” or “bearded” appearance. Whenever these cells were observed on the wet mount, the same organism could be isolated on laboratory growth media. They named the organism Hemophilus vaginalis (H.V.) and named the cell they saw on wet mount “clue cells” because they gave the researchers a “clue” as to the cause of the vaginitis. The researchers felt this was ample evidence to prove that H.V. was the cause of this type of vaginitis. Since that time, there has been an ongoing controversy concerning the status of the bacteria, hence the name changes from Hemophilus vaginalis to Corynebacterium vaginale to Gardnerella vaginalis. Although Gardnerella vaginalis is now considered the appropriate name for the organism, you may still hear it called by its other names or even still referred to as “non-specific vaginitis.”  

Not only is there debate about what to call the bacteria, there is also controversy as to whether it is a sexually transmitted disease or part of the normal flora of the vagina that overgrows from time to time. Although it may seem academic when you are experiencing the symptoms, it has an important effect on the way you may choose to relate to the “infection” or how you choose to treat it. What is the effect on the vaginal cells as those bacteria cling to the surface to produce the “clue cell” effect? Why does  

(continued on page 14)