EFL SALVADOR REPORT

Although local news coverage was minimal, over 600 people came out to Burlington City Hall Park on Saturday, February 27 to protest U.S. involvement in El Salvador. There were several such rallies taking place concurrently throughout this country, one of them in Fayetteville, N.C., a town that borders the Fort Bragg military base where over 1,000 Salvadoran troops are being trained.

In Burlington, members of CISPES (Community in Solidarity with the People of El Salvador) had organized the rally and invited nearly a dozen speakers to address the economic and human rights issues being manifested by the struggle in El Salvador. The people of El Salvador are revolting against a regime that exploits over 80% of the population. The ruling military junta is maintained by an oligarchy; 2% of the population controls 60% of the land where coffee, cotton, and sugar are the primary products. While Mayor Bernard Sanders was speaking at the rally, he said that life for most Salvadorans is “beyond imagination.” 75% of the children in El Salvador are suffering from malnutrition. Meanwhile, the U.S. government is supporting the “ultra-rich and neo-fascists.” Sanders called on the American people to “end economic misery throughout the world.”

The rallying cry of the U.S. government, their weak excuse for intervening in El Salvador is “the fight against communism.” Presently, there are 50 American military advisors in El Salvador. There are no government or military officials in El Salvador from Cuba, Nicaragua, or the Soviet Union. It is not communism that is being fought against in El Salvador; it is organized revolution that stems from over 50 years of struggle and oppression. The Democratic Revolutionary Front (FDR) is the political organization expressing the unification of all forces opposing the junta from every sector of Salvadoran society. The FDR is supported by the Farabundo Marti Front for National Liberation (FMLN), the military organization expressing that same unified opposition to the junta. Ninety percent of all the democratic and progressive organizations in El Salvador are part of, or linked to the FDR. The FDR political platform is pluralistic and non-aligned—not dominated by any one party or by any foreign state. The people who form the FMLN-FDR come from all parts of Salvadoran society: labor, peasant, religious, student, professional, and even small business organizations; their cause of democracy and national self-determination is irreversible and just.

The American people have not forgotten the most recent display of U.S. protection from communism through a disadvantaged country: the war in Vietnam. Vietnam Veterans David Ross and Lou Colasante spoke to the crowd at the Burlington rally reminding us that U.S. involvement in Vietnam brought only death to thousands of Americans. Colasante asked that we honor those dead, that we “take what we have learned in Vietnam and bring it to bear in El Salvador—that the dead will not have died in vain.”

Every day more and more innocent people, struggling for the right to live a fair and humane life, are being murdered in El Salvador. The military in El Salvador is one which former U.S. Ambassador Robert White has called “one of the most out-of-control, violent, bloodthirsty groups of men in the whole world.” They have tortured and killed over 12,000 people in the last year. These military forces are being trained and equipped by the American government. They outnumber the liberation fighters by 25,000 to 4,000. Despite these incredible odds, determination on the part of the people is tremendous. I felt this determination and strength most deeply while listening to Omar Aguilar, a Salvadoran studying at Middlebury, who spoke at the rally. Aguilar began his speech with notes, but set them aside as he was moved to speak from his heart. “It seems inevitable that the revolution will win. But I urge you to cut short my people’s agony by applying pressure to your Congress people, by organizing shows of force such as this, which in your country cannot go overlooked.” As Aguilar spoke these words I realized that if such a rally were taking place in his country, the soldiers there would have U.S. support to open fire on the crowd, as they did when hundreds of Salvadorans had assembled to mourn the death of Archbishop Romero, who was also murdered by the junta. Michiyo Cornell, a working-class, Asian American woman, spoke of the universal battles being fought in El Salvador. These are battles against ignorance (50% of the population is illiterate), against fear, and against two forms of oppression that are so often used to further exploitation: racism and elitism. U.S. military involvement in El Salvador is so necessary because of our economic investments there. U.S. corporations and banks have billions of dollars invested throughout Latin America. These corporations make huge profits off the backs of the Latin American people, much greater profits than they can make here in America. They close down shop in this country, putting hundreds of Americans out of work. Then, they set up shop in countries such as El Salvador, where the average 

Continued to page 12

UNIVERSE IS FEMALE

land and an attunement with nature. He gave an example of electric street lights to prove a point. “White man is afraid of the dark.” If a person wants to learn how to walk on the earth, she begins by learning to walk at night. This will sharpen the senses and instill an attitude of care and respect in moving over the earth.

Means pointed out that all power over life itself is female. Everything in the universe is female. Native American cultures focus on a female principle with an emphasis on cycles, nature, and an animate view of everything in the world, rocks as well as wolves. European culture is dominated by a male principle which separates humans from nature (and places them superior to other living things), categorizes and records everything, and destroys everything natural and female in his arrogance, fear of, and need to control anything which has more power than him. Means spoke of men as occupying the role of children and said they must be treated as such. I personally think this is a bit ageist and an insult to many children I know, but appreciate his point as a way of explaining why men have felt the need to create self-importance in their search for a natural role.

Means proved at several places to be a man of contradictions, but I can somewhat understand this considering the difficulty of what he does: face audiences of predominantly white liberals who are for the most part ignorant of the majority of what he says. His defensive answer about the sacred quality of tobacco in response to a woman asking him why he smoked was ridiculous. For him to speak of the off-handed, habitual way one smokes a cigarette manufactured by a corporation which monocultures the plant tobacco in a totally despiritualized way is to totally separate the ritual from the act, and hence any trace of sacredness it may have in another setting. I also understand his frustration at this white person's moral superiority and righteousness over what to him must have seemed a trivial point when he was speaking of environmental annihilation and genocide.

Means spoke of the word “pagan” with contempt, while I consider witches to have been pagans who performed rituals of spirituality in harmony with nature and the female, who have suffered a type of misogynist “genocide” as well. “Pagan” originally meant “rural villager,” and although used as a racist term now, should be reclaimed as a positive idea. I prefer it to the word Means has reclaimed: “Indian.” He says this word comes from the Spanish “indio,” or “in with God,” and claims that even Spanish people could recognize the Indians' spiritual superiority... God in Spain is a patriarch and religions worshipping God are dogmatic... why claim this as one’s own? Or even think of these Europeans as a group of people conscious enough to recognize or ‘validate’ one’s cultural spirituality. He also spoke of some presidents as a measure of understanding which people have the “luxury” 

Continued to page 12