```
.

PTTe TTT eee eee

“What is it like to go back to
school at your age,” you ask?

“Like turning a bulb on in the
attic,” I answered, “there are a
lot of scary empty corners.”

By the time I finally got ready
to re-enter school our five kids,
all over ten, and my husband
were convinced that mom would
have a novel published within
the year! They seemed prepared,
and were happy that I was
undertaking such an adventure
until the morning when there
was no clean underwear
anywhere and no mom in the
kitchen. Instead I sat with my
all-night eyes and purple lids in
front of my typewriter finishing
a paper. And for one who hated
to fail at anything it looked as
though the paper would be late
and the family abused! But the
door from the kitchen to the
living room, where I sat, closed
firmly and quietly cutting off
the plaintive voices requesting
underwear. They wore
yesterday's and dad served his
favorite grits and maple syrup
for breakfast. Sitting tensely in
the other room I began waging
my own battle to change my
attitude about having failed who
and what. The guilt I was feeling
was more a creation of my own
mind, the tension and hostility
was there because I could not
accept not being the “queen” of
the kitchen and the kids. Their
future attitudes would only be
as accepting as my own and I
knew this would be a hard thing
to balance. But I knew also that
the changes had to start
happening now, this — very
morning.

Until this time I had been a
full-time mother, wife and
friend. I had been a manager and
a trainer. I had been an organizer
of a household, of ponies and
kids, music and kids, and book
fairs and art shows all for kids. I
had been a sometime “pilot” for
Open classrooms in the public
schools, a substitute teacher and
an outspoken opponent of the
local high school’s proposed
computerized educational
scheme called ‘45-15.’ During
vacation time I had counted out
the servings of cocoa and hot
cereal for six breakfasts, filled
bags with cornmeal and hash and

“Turning a Bulb
On in the Attic”

By Elizabeth B. Paxson

cheese for us many lunches and
dinners and we portaged our
canoes and children for a week
to St. Regis Pond in the
Adirondacks. Occasionally I had
time to write a poem, less often
a story, and always they needed
grooming and trimming. So they
sat in a pile written on the backs
of envelopes or flowered letter
paper. Some even found their
way onto yellow-lined legal
pads.

The first day of the first class
I was just plain scared. Four
years of college and a B.A.
degree in Zoology twenty-five
years before plus twenty-five
years of marriage and
motherhood had not prepared
me for this moment. I could not
even decide what to wear to
look like a student at 47! I was
going from a job not only
familiar but well-worn. But I
needed to stretch out and
explore new territory, I told
myself as I opened the glass door
of UVM's Old Mill. The sound of
the September wind whining as
it pulled the heavy door shut
seemed to threaten my very
being. The newspaper had listed
the course, English 53, Creative
Writing, limited to fifteen
students. I climbed the stairs to
the seminar room on the third
floor. Fear and self-doubt were
on display in my nervous
laughter and the idle chit-chat

which I exchanged with a
younger student. We were all
seated around a large table,

fifteen of us, when the professor
entered, lean, young, suntanned,
like one of my own kids! But
these fears and doubts faded
rapidly and were replaced by a
new set when the day came for
me to read my first poem, a
villanelle neatly mimeographed

purple-on-white. The poem
escaped from my lips in a
semi-whisper and when I
finished I knew I was suddenly
naked before fifteen strangers!

That was five years ago.
Things have fortunately
progressed beyond this point.
My voice is surer, stronger now
and I've become addicted to the
student life. My goal has become
to earn an M.A. in English. I
have learned that I can handle
two three credit courses per

“Cautious, careful people always casting about to preserve

their reputation, and social standing, never can bring about a
reform. Those who are really in earnest must be willing to be

anything or nothing in the world’s estimation, and publicly
and privately, in season and out, avow their sympathies with
despised and persecuted ideas and their advocates, and bear
the consequences.”

Susan B. Anthony.

term and do well and maintain
that balance with my family that
I initially sought. I have given up
the ponies, substitute teaching
and the other outside activities
which formerly filled my days.
It has put me in a different
world. Studying literature,
philosophy and writing has put
me in touch with an interior
world that has been neglected in
the years of caring for and
nurturing others. It is highly
stimulating, this exploration of
my own caves and the
development of a new
relationship with the world
around me. The way is being led
by the old greats like
Shakespeare and Chaucer and
newer greats like Dickinson, V.
Woolf, Joyce and Faulkner and
Ralph Ellison. And all of this via
an understanding and supportive
faculty. The professors have
sensed my needs, acknowledged
my fledgling status and allowed

me to establish a pace
compatible with home and
family responsibilities. When one
child was hospitalized and

Papers overdue the only pressure
came from their own concern
about my sick one.

I was determined not to
become a family drop-out, and
going back to school has never
been a matter of giving up my
role at home. It has been more
like enlarging a circle, everyone
all around must move over to
make room. And, sure, there are
resentments that creep in, must
be met, but most of the time I
wonder whether the family
members even remember mom's
momentous decision to go back
to school. They are all busy with
their own things. We meet at
dinner. When you ask the kids
what's up, they say, “the house
is more of a mess,” and, “there’s
baked chicken for dinner more
often.” They say, “well, she is
closer to us now because as
students we share the same
problems.” They say, “oh yeah,
she still stays up all night doing
term papers, and the novel?
Well, she does write short stories
and poems!”

Classified

I would like to work with
other women doing research on
lesbian medicine. Anyone
interested, please contact me.
Gooch 864-5392.

Classified

The GCN wants stories of
events in the New England area
to communicate. Send articles to
Gay Community News, 22
Bromfield St. Boston, Mass
02108.

page 7

Pam Greene:

Profile

By Dian Kendrick Mueller

Women today stand at the crossroads between the past and
the future, between the real and the ideal. Many of us are
making the exciting but painful transition from the role of the
traditional woman to a life where roles are unimportant.
Pamela Greene is such a woman.

Pam, the president of the Champlain Valley Chapter of the
National Organization for Women (NOW), was a high school
cheerleader for teams of young men who were testing their
manhood on the basketball courts and playing fields. Today
she wants to use her energy to support herself and other
women who are testing their individual and collective strength
at the frontiers of human experience.

“When I was a cheerleader in high school, the message was
‘You are important, you are essential in building the boys’
egos,’” Pam says. “It took me a long time to realize that I was
giving, giving, giving to men. What I'd like now are some male
cheerleaders to give us support in our efforts to attain
equality.”

Born in 1951 in Burlington, Vt., Pam was the oldest of four
children, and says she was “a very traditional child.”

“I wasn't a tomboy, but I did identify with strong males,”
she says. “I didn’t feel I had much in common with most of
the girls I knew. When I was in high school, three boys and I
were the brightest in the class and we hung out together. I was
a cheerleader all four years of high school, which was a natural
extension of my friendship with these three guys, because all
three were lead players in basketball. Being a cheerleader was
the closest I could get to actually playing on the team with
them.”

Raised first in Franklin, Vt., and then in Richford, Vt., Pam
became all too familiar with the traditional female role before
she graduated from Richford High School in 1969. Aside from
her traditional activities at school, she was also plunged into
the role of mother and housekeeper when her mother died. At
17, Pam became the “woman of the house,” responsible for
the care and comfort of her father, her two younger sisters,
and her younger brother.

“I played the dual role of teenager and mother,” she says.
“I saw the more dismal side of marriage, which has made me
careful about getting married myself. I ask myself, ‘If I'm
going to do all that, who am I doing it for?’”

After high school, Pam studied nursing (another traditional
role for women) at Dade College in Miami, Fla.; at the end of
two years she was a registered nurse. She went on to the
Upstate Medical Unit in Syracuse, N.Y., for postgraduate
training in intensive and coronary care, and also spent a year as
a non-degree candidate in liberal arts at Vassar College in
Poughkeepsie, N.Y. She then accepted a job with the Vermont
Department of Corrections as a nurse/social worker at St.
Albans Correctional Center. She left the Center in 1975 when
it was incorporated with the state prison.

By now having second thoughts about nursing as a career,
Pam spent a year abroad touring 15 countries, including
Lapland, England, Germany, Italy, Switzerland and France.
She says, “There was no country where there wasn’t a visible
women’s struggle.”

Pam's own identification with civil rights began while she
was in college in Miami, where she was exposed to Cubans and
blacks who were struggling for equality. She says she got
“plugged into” feminism while she was working at the
Correctional Center, due to a combination of personal and
political experiences.

Pam is now a student at the University of Vermont, working
toward a bachelor’s degree in feminist anthropology, and is
serving as resident advisor for UVM’s Delta Delta Delta
sorority.

Pam is committed to the passage of the Equal Rights
Amendment, which is currently NOW’s most immediate goal.

“The Equal Rights Amendment is the last best hope of this
country — it’s symbolic,” Pam says. “I'm glad to see how it
focuses people and shows where our culture is, shows how
misogynous our culture is. The current battle over the ERA
shows how threatening the idea of equality is to some people.”
```