Piidto by Lyon Vera

ews:

xx DOUBLE-X-PRESS xx

courtesy of Lesbian

Connection.

Watch out for the new edition of Roget’s Thesaurus.

It’s been

announced that sexist language has been edited out!!

Curfew

Recently, notices were posted in various parts of Rochester, NY announcing a 10 p.m. curfew for men. “In order to protect the safety of women and prevent further violence, all men must be off the city’s streets after 10 p.m. unless accompanied by two or more women,” said the posters, which bore the official city seal and gave a city hall phone number to call for further information. City officials say they have no idea who posted the “ordinance.”

—Amazon

Boo Hoo

Jerry Falwell‘s Moral Majority showed a $500,000 deficit last year, but its income has doubled to about $5.77 million. A speaker for the organization called the deficit “just a minor cash flow problem” caused by increased lobbying.

—Dinah

UVM: Sexism 101

A University of Vermont Sociology professor, Ronald Steffenhagen, has suggested twice in his lectures that the way to avoid the violent aspect of rape is to “lie back and enjoy it.” This statement was made purely for shock value and for the enjoyment of the males in the class—who found the idea very amusing. The women in the audience sat in shocked silence.

Gray and Gay

The Gray Panthers of Jackson, MS, were recently denied a contract by the area’s Agency on Aging because the Gray Panthers’ project director is gay. Before the vote on the contract some agency committee members raised the question of the suitability of the project director because he is a member of the Mississippi Gay Alliance. There was much discussion on the subject, and four members said there was no way they could vote for a homosexual. Despite the loss of this $11,000 contract, Gray Panthers voiced their firm belief that the money for a project should not be based on sexual orientation.

—Press release

Desert of the Heart

Independent filmmaker Donna Deitch plans to produce and direct Desert of the Heart, a film based on Jane Rule’s novel. A major motion picture studio has expressed interest in the book, but fearing exploitation of the lesbian subject matter, Jane sold the rights to Donna. So far Donna has raised over half of the estimated million dollars needed to finance the movie and she hopes to start production in July. As a lesbian, Donna feels that it is important when dealing with the subject of love between women in a movie to have “strong, intelligent, and attractive characters in a milieu accessible to the general public.” She says some well-known actors have already expressed interest in playing supporting roles.

The Washington Blade

Hot Lines

Three hotlines for women are currently in service: The Women USA Hotline (800-221-4945) is a recorded message offering a feminist interpretation of current legislation and feminist activities; The Women’s Sports Foundation (800-652-1455) offers information on athletic scholarships for women; The Sprint Line (800-424-5162) gives information on equal opportunity in athletics.

—Mom Guess What via Lesbian News

Hollow weenies

Despite objections from local NOW members, the Bartlett, TN JayCees held their second annual “witch burning” on Halloween night. The JC's (an all-male organization) claimed that the witch was just a Halloween party symbol and not associated with the nine million women burned during the Middle Ages, as opposed to the flag which meant America and had real meaning. A segment shown on the news on Halloween night ended with a shot of local children in their costumes at the party chanting “Burn her, burn her.”

info sent in from TN

Finally!!!

A two-year-old study by Jack McIver Weatherford, an anthropologist at the University of California at San Diego, has finally uncovered what's wrong with Congress — it’s run by men. He compares Congress to the male ruling councils of the Swahilis of Kenya, which are dominated by ceremonial rituals at the expense of accomplished work. After working on the legislative staff of Ohio Senator John Glenn, Weatherford says that male legislators engage in almost endless posturing on the floor of Congress and in legislative ceremonies, such as bill signing. He says that the women of Congress “work like Trojans” without nearly as much ceremony. Weatherford has a list of reforms for Congress, but he notes that “if enough women were elected to Congress, they would cut all the ritual.”

—Hersay via What She Wants

Hey Partner

1980 was the first year U.S. census forms included “partner” as a possible way to describe the person one lives with. Reportedly, the option was given so the government could tally how many unmarried heterosexual couples were living together. Evidently though, lesbian and gay couples chose this term. 701,000 male-male couples and 537,000 female-female couples listed themselves as “partners,” for a total of 1,238,000 same-sex couples, in comparison to 1,560,000 opposite-sex unmarried couples.

—Dinah and Amazon

Recently during its annual garbage collecting the Lambda Jota fraternity displayed a mattress smeared with red paint with the message “for virgins only.” Local women were quickly alerted and on the scene. After some education by the women present, the boys seemed to get the message and removed the offending mattress cover. It's nice to know how well our informal network works.

Not to Mention...

The American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology has published the first formal study on the health of lesbian and bisexual women. A review of the preliminary study, which included mostly white well-educated women 19-52 years old, finds that “Lesbians as a group seem mentally healthier than heterosexual women or homosexual men.” These 115 women had no cases of VD, and very few cases of yeast infections, trichomonas, or depression. Only 23% of the lesbians reported sexual dysfunction problems, as compared to 63% of white middle-class married heterosexual women in a similar study.

—00

Equity:

Florida State Senator Jack Gordon of Miami Beach has introduced an unusual bill that would give women a 38 percent discount on college tuition. He says it’s only fair because women who graduate from college earn that much less than men with the same degrees. He introduced the measure to make a point to opponents of the ERA, who say state laws are sufficient to assure equality between the sexes.

On October 8th, 20-year-old Stephanie Riethmiller and her roommate Patty Thiemann were walking home from work in Norwood, OH, when they were approached by two men who asked them for directions. As the women started to respond with the directions, they were suddenly sprayed with mace, and the men dragged Stephanie into a waiting van.

Patty chased the van and tried to get its number, but it had no license plates. A week later, the police found Stephanie in a “safe house” in Alabama — she had been kidnapped by professional deprogrammers. Stephanie's parents had paid the deprogrammers $8000 to “help” her, because they thought Stephanie was being “converted to lesbianism” by her roommate. Her mother had previously harassed Stephanie on this subject and called her employer to say that Stephanie was a lesbian in the hopes that her daughter would lose her job and be forced to live at home. Both before and after the kidnapping, Stephanie denied being a lesbian. Stephanie has been granted a court order to keep her parents from contacting her, and has filed a civil suit against them and four of the kidnappers asking for $2.75 million in damages. The suit claims that her father was in the van when she was abducted, and that her mother was in Alabama and aware of what was happening. During the week, Stephanie was repeatedly raped by one of the deprogrammers while physically restrained and handcuffed. After being released on bond, the Riethmillers taped a personal appeal to their daughter at a local TV station saying they loved her very much and would like her to seek professional counseling. They believe Stephanie is “now staying with friends of her former roommate.”

—news clippings sent by reader from Cincinnati, OH

FREE “ELDERLY SCREENING DAY

MAY 15 CALL FOR APPT 3 CH-6307

Page 3

UN Buses

Between 800,000 and one million people are expected to be present in New York to demonstrate to stop the arms race for the Second United Nations Special Session on Disarmament. This will be the largest gathering ever in this country to support the idea of nuclear disarmament. Buses will be leaving Burlington at midnight of the 11th to be arriving in New York City by 7 a.m. on June 12th. Riders will arrive in time to participate in a Bread and Puppet pageant through New York from the United Nations Building to Central Park where the rally will be held. The buses will return to Burlington around 7 p.m. on the evening of the 12th arriving back in Burlington around 1 a.m. on the 13th. Buses cannot be reserved until money is sent in. To reserve a seat, send a $30 check made out to the Burlington Peace Coalition to Wendy Coe, 62 N. Winooski, with a self-addressed stamped envelope. Please do this as soon as possible, so that buses may be reserved.

But We Love You