Nicaraguan

U.S.-Nicaraguan Health Conference in Managua

The following information is the result of an exciting discussion I felt privileged to have with Drs. Emma Wennberg and Judy Tyson, both local women affiliated with Planned Parenthood of Vermont. I had intended to conduct an interview with them about their recent trip to Nicaragua, but I got too involved in free-flow talking with them. So here is the information from my notes minus the structure. I wish I could pass the “charge” I felt on to you as well.

Lynn Vera

We went to Nicaragua for the First U.S.-Nicaraguan Colloquium on Health. We went in a group of 120 Americans as an expression of international solidarity. It was organized by the Committee for Health Rights in Central America, and the subcommittee on Nicaraguan Medical Aid, which is based in California.

Judy: An especially exciting thing for us is that we were contacted by Debra Helvargh, one of the founders and first coordinators of the VT Women's Health Center. Both Emma and myself also helped found the Health Center, and all three of us were part of this trip.

Who attended the conference? There were about 600 Nicaraguans there; doctors, technicians, social workers, government ministers, and rural women who are birth attendants.

Emma talked about these women, the “pateras.” Some of them live so far from the cities that they traveled to Managua (the capital) by canoe and boat and truck for days to reach the conference. The government policy in the city is to encourage women to give birth in hospitals because of hygiene, but in the countryside that is impossible. The pateras, older women between 45-70, are the traditional and necessary “rural midwives,” although without traditional training. We and OB-GYN people in Nicaragua worked to upgrade their practice. For example, to discourage the tradition of chopping the cord with a machete, and using sterile scissors.

What was the attitude around healthcare as concerns training of practitioners?

Both women talked about the awareness in Nicaragua that health care is a right, and is people’s care. There was an acknowledgment of the crucial role the “pateras” play, and an encouragement to validate the need for “non-MD” physician care. An attempt to stay away from the specialists, full residency training, hierarchy in health. When I was surprised that the U.S. contingent had this attitude, Emma reminded me that this was not a cross-section of the AMA, but a self-selected group of health practitioners who believed in creating another way of living. Judy added, “not by training a lot of elite doctors.”

Judy: Our section’s interest was in giving OB care from a midwife approach. There are very few OB trained nurses in Nicaragua, and those few are very traditional and had formal training. They had sort of an uptight way of viewing OB care and found our approach pretty radical and surprising. Things like men being present at deliveries, the husband cutting the cord, the more family-centered childbirth approach.

Is there a position on infant formula?

Emma showed me photos and billboards which read, in translation, “Mother’s milk is the best food for him,” and “Your milk is without substitute and arrives with love.” Judy said the problem is not overuse of formula at all, but the availability of it for women or babies who need it.

Did you talk about contraception?

Judy: Yes; it was the final session of the program, and the house was full, especially with the young medical people (a high of whom are women). There was a high interest in contraception; some even came back to our hotel to learn how to fit diaphragms. Yet reproductive freedom isn’t really an issue that women are vocal about yet. Nicaragua lost 50,000 young people in the last seven weeks of the war in ‘79, out of a total population of 2.5 million. The government wants to repopulate, and the women are going along with that in the national spirit.

Emma: Yet there are the women with the consciousness. Like the woman at the bus stop with two children who told us “this is enough,” but she didn't tell us how she'd control it. And the woman who was about 49 and had five kids and didn’t want more. There is no government subsidized family planning program. There is no education about contraception, no posters in the clinics. The obstetrics people tell us it’s available, but you have to ask for it; it’s not encouraged.

Judy: I get a sense of it as an underground issue, like lesbians, and divorce, and abortion. Perhaps with time...

What about abortion?

Judy: It’s illegal and basically I was discouraged from talking about it. My assigned talk was on P.I.D. (pelvic inflammatory disease). But that was a great reason for me to talk about abortion too, as a subplot. Let me tell you about it. People were interested in hearing about new antibiotics to treat P.I.D. and of more conservative treatment than uterine removal. There was a huge audience, both medical and official. I knew I could sell abortion as a way to treat septic, or infected, abortion. I told them I knew that 90% of their emergency GYN admissions were for septic (self-inflicted usually) abortions. “Actually,” I said, “this is a subject on which you should lecture to me for I haven’t seen a septic abortion since we legalized abortion in 1972.”

So I showed slides and I talked about the mortality statistics pre- and post-legalization of abortion in various countries. I illustrated how in Romania when the government first legalized abortion, both the birth and maternal mortality rates went down. The government then made abortion very hard to get again, in response to the lower birth rate. The result was the expected higher birth rate, but also a higher maternal mortality rate.

The minister of health spoke next, and he reminded everyone that abortion is illegal in Nicaragua, and we should work for the need to eliminate abortion. I agreed, saying that abortion often proves to be the portal for educating women about contraception, and thereby lessen the need for abortions. After my talk, women doctors crept up to my seat in the aisle and asked for protocol, equipment, more information. I gave them addresses for ordering.

Judy: I also am aware that, like everywhere, it is available in the private sector.

Page 7 By Lynn Vera

Photos by Emma Wennberg big marine, armed to the teeth. Our cameras were opened and stripped of film. The whole atmosphere was very formal and tight.

What was your strongest impression or feeling after leaving Nicaragua?

Emma: Seeing a living revolution: how involved everyone is, the feeling in the streets. Of course not everyone is happy, but everyone is involved, interested. Even talking with people who oppose the revolution, still they recognize improvements. People are not afraid for their lives if they disagree, as dissidence was met in the old days.

Judy: The pioneering spirit, it was a turn-on. In a new country, doing this, it’s exciting. Makes me think how it must've been here; we've lost it. The women are so strong; so impressive. It ticks me off when American feminists impose their values...

Was there fear of an imminent U.S. invasion?

Judy: Oh, absolutely. I spoke to women who lived only yards away from the huge oil tanks that had been destroyed by sea and air attacks in October. They had fled and left everything and returned to live there. “It’s such a strategic target,” I said. “It's our home,” they answered. I had the awful feeling I was talking to ghosts; that a year later they won't be alive. People live with the fear; they're used to it. Life goes on. Yet at night, often until 4 a.m., they'll be outside digging trenches and bunkers around the houses and schools. They are preparing.

We also talked about the Indians (a whole other issue. For good presentation read the Winter 1983 issue of Akwesasne Notes), about Contraception, Menopause, about rehydration centers which are crucial to lowering infant mortality, about the Revolution, and the people. I wish I had room to share it all. My sincere thanks to Judy and Emma for their time and stories, and their work.