COMMONWOMAN

The women who worked on this month’s issue are:
WORKERS* 4

CORE GROUP: Linda Wittenberg, Peggy Luhrs, Gwynn Marilyn,  
Jean Palmer, Lynn Vera, Jane Dewey, Helen Greenspan, Paij  
Bailey,

EDITORIAL COMMITTEE: Jane Dewey, Peggy Luhrs, Mandy  
VieDermott, Linda Comito, Laurie Larson

BUSINESS: Jean Palmer, Gwynn Marilyn

SUBSCRIPTION MAILING: Joni AvRutick, Sherry Keefe, Glo,  
Jean Palmer

DISTRIBUTION: Jane Sande, Megan Sondheim, Helen  
Greenspan, Laurie Larson, Kitty Jerome, Linda Siegel,

ADVERTISING: Alverta Perkins, Ellie Jones

COPY PREP: Euan Bear, Linda Comito

LAYOUT: Carol Altobelli, Etana Finkler, Joni, Linda Wittenberg,  
Gwynn Marilyn, Lynn Vera, Ellie Jones, Sherry Keefe, Lauren  
Berrizbeitia, Linda, Dora, Laurie Larson; Eileen Blackwood

COMMONWOMAN is made up of a small group of women who work  
together collectively to put out this paper. At present, no one on the  
team is paid for her work.

NOTES FROM THE CORE  
At the core group meeting we decided to try and share some of our  
process and decisions with readers, which we'll do in this box.

We want to expand our distribution, both throughout Vermont and  
elsewhere. If you would distribute the paper (which may mean picking up  
a bundle at the bus) in your area, even if to one outlet, please contact us at  
the address below. If you live locally and have ideas for good outlets for  
the paper, send them too.

We want to reply to women who send copy for publication when we  
think our editorial suggestions and feedback would help get your point  
across to readers. We realize some women never hear from us or see their  
piece in the paper, and we want to improve that communication.

COMMONWOMAN will not be responsible for returning cartoons,  
graphics, photographs, or written material unless special arrangements are  
made in advance or a stamped, self-addressed envelope is provided by the  
contributor;  
PLEASE: articles submitted should be short and succinct. It helps us  
a lot if they are typed, double-spaced.

We are working on a policy for reimbursing women for supplies used  
to do a solicited assignment for COMMONWOMAN. Since our finances are  
very tight, we would only like to reimburse women who can’t afford to  
provide the materials (for example, photographic supplies), but we cannot  
afford to pay for gas, time, overhead, etc. We do reimburse in full travel  
expenses for distribution, and mailing and phone costs.

We're happy to have two women with lots of energy working on ad  
sales. If you know someone who'd like to advertise in the paper, have them  
contact the address below.

We want to have a  
poster contest at some point.  
Input on this so we can share it with a wider audience. The  
winner will get a subscription to the paper or a renewal. The poster should  
be eye-catching, 11x22, with a logo of your design if you choose. It should  
also include our masthead. See classifieds for more info.

COMMONWOMAN is published every six weeks. Subscription rates  
are $6.00/8 issues, $20/8 issues for institutions. It is free on request to  
women in prison and to women in mental institutions.

EDITORIAL COMMENTS:

Handywoman was out of town for a while and didn’t yet get a chance  
to write directions on how to build a loft as requested by one of our  
readers. Next issue — O.K.?

BEAR'S LETTER — LOST! Two issues ago, Bear had written a letter  
to CW editorial expressing her concern about editorial privilege in the ability  
to answer an article/letter in the same issue that it is printed. We apolo-  
gize for losing Bear’s letter and neglecting to mention it in that issue. We  
also agree with her criticism and will not abuse this privilege in the future.

DEADLINE: Tuesday, April 20

Saturday, April 24  
May 1 & 2, 1982  
SEND TO:

COMMONWOMAN

P.O. BOX 242  
ONLY $6 PER SUBSCRIPTION —

LAYOUT: Typesetting: Sue Ball

WINOOSKI, VERMONT 05404

RESOURCE PHONE NUMBERS AND ADDRESSES

Vermont Women’s Health Center....... 863-1386  
Women’s Rape Crisis Center ............ 863-1236  
Planned Parenthood, Burlington ........ 863-6326  

Middlebury ............................... 388-6779  
Parents Anonymous (days) ............. 864-0104  

Champlain Valley NOW ................. 802-865-0146  
Central Vermont NOW .................. 223-6819  
Addison County NOW .................... 453-4433  
ISIS (In Shelter Is Safety) ..............  
Central Vt. Women’s Center  
151 Elm St., Montpelier  
Governor’s Commission on the Status of Women ........ 828-2851  

I swear it to you  
I swear it on my common woman's head  

The common woman is as common as a common loaf of bread —  
and will rise!

LETTERS

Dear Euan Bear:

It’s not exactly your anger that  
reduces your self-power in my eyes.  
It’s more how you use your anger.  
You have accurate constructive criti-  
cisms; yet, you envelop them in slan-  
der and trashing of women who are  
probably not much less perfect than  
you are. I would appreciate and  
respect you more if you: (1) Speak  
for yourself and your pains and  
encourage your welfare-mother  
friends to speak for themselves, as  
your writing about them in your  
letter (COMMONWOMAN, Feb, ‘82)  
seemed even condescending. (We  
working-class women do not just  
have pain; that is a classist concept.)  
(2) Try to speak in other terms than  
“we” and “you” when referring to  
women and/or lesbians who live in  
Vermont. We are all part of an  
unintentional community, like it or  
not. The community of women in  
Vermont. The community of lesbians  
in Vermont. By saying “you do this”  
to women you disagree with, you are  
giving them a power greater than  
they actually have, and unintentionally  
putting yourself in the victim  
role, lessening your power. Saying  
“you all” shows a lack of respect,  
and I think no one can hear unless  
they feel they are being respected,  
at least. If your use of the term “we”  
and “they” is to separate yourself  
from them, it would be clearer if you  
spoke of the particular things you  
disagree with, omitting the “we” and  
“they.”

Do you think a letter to COMMONWOMAN saying “EWP, there  
needs to be free childcare and a sliding scale at your events,” would not have  
been heard? If so, do you think trashing is the next step?

The gathering you referred to  
was not advertised as “coming out  
stories;” it was “coming out to  
health.” When one woman spoke  
about negative experiences, Glo, the  
facilitator, did ask that we talk about  
positive experiences for most of the  
evening, “since we hear so much  
negativity all the time, for this one  
evening let’s limit it to healthy ex-  
periences to energize one another.”  
This gathering was in the winter at a  
time I felt low about “community”  
and needed positive light stories. Did  
you not hear that interchange? You  
have the right to be critical of the  
theme of the evening. If you had  
other needs, why did you come?

Lastly, I’d like to speak about  
exclusion and “community stars.”  
The human condition of feeling ex-  
cluded (probably patriarchal) is very  
intense and pervasive. Any group, by  
nature of being a product of our  
patriarchal society, has to suffer from  
making people feel, and from peo-  
ple’s feeling excluded. Part of the  
emotional s&m of our culture. I  
think a women’s community is vul-  
nerable to that. We all have felt ex-  
cluded, and, I think, personal power  
through growth makes one under-  
stand and deal on the individual level.  
How we can rise above it in the  
group, or political level would make  
valuable discussion. As I grew to  
understand my working-class roots  
which contributed to my feelings of  
lack of self-worth, and pushed  
through sexism, my self-worth grew.

Could you express your feelings  
without slander and generalizations?

Now I am a powerful woman. I am  
glad of that. I do not want to sacri-  
fice my power as my mother sacri-  
ficed hers to me. I encourage,  
through my person and my work,  
self-power in others; I do not want  
power over others. Sly & the Family  
Stone says, “Everybody is a Star.”  
We are all community stars.

Bear, please don’t continue to  
set up more “us” and “them” than  
there already is. You are not strong  
and angry then; you are being used as  
a tool of patriarchy and hierarchy to  
continue to divide us instead of offer-  
ing the clear sight you have.

In feminist struggle,

Etana  
P.S. I think only 4 working-class  
activists left town; the rest you are  
thinking of are middle class, I believe.  
The passion of your anger blurs and  
exaggerates.

Hey Bear!

I've got a few things to say in  
response to your letter in the last  
issue of COMMONWOMAN “Criticizing”  
women at the “Coming Out as a  
Move Toward Health” gathering that  
took place at Everywoman’s Place. I  
put “criticizing” in quotes because it  
appears more like trashing to me.

You are angry and rightly so  
with zillions of good reasons. But  
anger is a feeling, it's not a sacred  
cow or a license to trash those  
women who are likely to be really  
open to change. Is change what you  
want? If, as you say, there were  
women at that event who wanted to  
talk or quiet women you wanted to  
hear, why didn’t you do or say some-  
thing to make that happen... like  
saying “I'd like to hear from some  
women who haven't talked” or “I  
want to know the stories of those  
who haven't spoken yet,” etc., etc.

You're smart and I've apprecia-  
ted and benefitted from your ener-  
gies for a long time, but in this case  
I wonder if you aren't indulging in  
‘blaming’ in order to show off a  
little about your political correct-  
ness. Although I understand that  
you've worked hard on change...  
the way you put that out can be  
another control trip. I’d appreciate  
it more if you would show your  
politics/consciousness/knowledge in  
ways that might be more progressive.  
Trashing wastes our energy and time;  
it’s too late for that stuff. I learned  
something from your letter, but only  
because I was willing to poke through  
the trash for it.

Some of your stereotypes about  
the working class seem pretty con-  
descending to me; you don’t seem to  
trust working-class women to be  
much capable of sticking up for  
themselves at all. I know the middle  
class programs are hard to buck, but  
working-class women are often very  
fierce. My mother would probably  
say to your letter, “She acts like we  
don't have a brain in our heads.” It  
also seems like you trust other  
women very little to want to and be  
trying to change. You've changed...  
others are willing, too.

The event you spoke of was so  
full of empty silences that two women  
fell asleep, yet you say there was no  
space.

It’s important to have an under-  
standing of class oppression, but don’t  
forget Marxism is not interested in  
women discovering our internal  
power.

You're as much of a community  
star as anyone. We need to turn each  
other on to the star in each of us  
instead of trying to dim or squelch  
each other's light. We all need to be  
creating space for others to shine, to  
advocate for others as we continue to  
honor our own fires. With all due  
respect,

Kabe was a beautiful woman  
and she was strong and well  
respected.

Sisters, our meeting is over  
Sisters, we must part

I'll love you  
at a distance

And if I pin my spine  
to the shore

Yes, we'll land on the shore  
Yes, we'll land on the shore  
be free forever more.