Changing the World with Words

This is a story about a conversation, just another conversation, except that it doesn’t stand alone. There have been so many like it, so many over the past few years.

What happens is that, if I suggest with a look, or a word, that I am a feminist — that I believe society treats women unequally, violently — this acknowledgment creates confidences, or conversations, that might never have happened.

I'm talking about social situations, places where I am standing, speaking to strangers, often with a glass of wine in my hand. The connection is sudden; all at once another woman is talking to me about something that society belies. In a way, we stand in crowded rooms talking about revolutions, or resistance, instead of discussing movies or gourmet food.

This was an office “Christmas party.” The talk was a little too loud with the funny giddiness of being in a restaurant, dressed up, with the people you work with and their “dates,” if they chose to bring one.

I am standing at the bar waiting for a drink. One of the employees walks up. We work in different parts of the business.

He is young, about twenty, and last winter we were in the same karate class. So, we have something to talk about now. I listen: he has earned a green belt and it’s been hard for him, working full-time, having a personal life that he cares about, and working at karate. I congratulate him, “A lot of the ones that earn belts, you know,” he says, “they don’t have to work, they get to do karate all the time. They have money.” I smile and think, well we are on the same side of that fence.

Then his girlfriend joins us. Maybe because I’m tall, they seemed so little and young to me. She is lovely. Clear-eyed, a direct open glance, her hair up, twisted back, sort of rolled, old-fashioned styled.

They live together and there is some difference, he is explaining to me: she is a college student, “a college-girl” he calls it and he never went to college.

Then, she starts to ask... Well, wait a minute, first I probably said something about men and women being from different planets anyway, college degrees are just another difference sometimes and then I probably said that more often it seems to be the opposite, it’s the man who has the degrees.

The bar was stuffy with cigarette smoke and the talking, louder, faster now, I think, all around. The texture of people in their best clothes, showing another side to each other. We are other things than what we are all day in the print shop: there’s a dancer and a musician. A poet. There’s raising kids. There's business — the people who take that seriously.

So, then she asks, “Did you hear about the demonstration in front of the lingerie store?”

I nod. “The protest against the for-men-only fashion show. Women wearing practically nothing in a room of fully dressed men.”

She asks, “What did you think?”

“I think it’s disgusting. Another degrading act in a culture which is violent against women. I think it contributes to the fact that I can’t feel safe walking down a street at ten o'clock. I think it’s pornographic.” I try to state my position clearly. I watch her calm smooth face, hair pulled up in combs.

But her face isn’t so calm. She stands, with her soft hair and clear eyes, young and proud, with the strength and anger of conviction. “I agree. I wish I’d been at that demonstration. But, Pete didn’t think it was so bad. We had an argument about it this morning.” 

We both look at Pete. “Interesting,” I say, “the man I live with didn't think it was so awful either. And usually he agrees with my radical feminist views.” (I know this sounds stilted. But I do talk this way. I like to say I'm a radical feminist, even if it does sound academic, or angry.)

“I know,” I say to Pete, “there’s no way that a man can experience the way a woman feels something like that. It’s your own body up there on a stage in front of those men. So, it isn’t just a rape case that is upsetting, it’s every single event that leads to a dehumanized, or violent way of seeing women. If things are going to get better, you're going to have to pay attention to, and trust, the way women see these things.” 

He is listening to us and we know that the event doesn’t seem as trivial to him any more. She and I start talking fast, sharing our information about the way women are treated — I think we started with economics. Pete says that he doesn’t...

Vermonters for Lesbian and Gay Rights (VLGR) is a group of politically active lesbians and gay men who work for the civil rights of lesbians and gay men in Vermont. At present, they are trying to get “sexual orientation” included in the fair housing bill in the Vermont House. Bill H254 is in the General and Military Affairs Committee of the Vermont House. You can write to: Ben Blais, Ralph Wright, Robert Harris and Peter Youngbear at State of Vermont, House of Representatives, Montpelier, VT 05602 to get “sexual orientation” included in the fair housing bill. VLGR is also working on registering people to vote and gathering information on our legislators’ stance on lesbian and gay civil rights. “VULGAR” meets the first and third Saturday evening of every month at Pearl's, for those interested in joining the project.