IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

By Elena

I live in a canton called Pacelin Abaj, a couple of miles off the Gringo Trail*, on the shore of Lake Atitlan, in Guatemala. A canton is a collection of houses: in my case, they belong to some five or six extended families, perhaps 75 people in all. My nearest neighbors are one such extended family of naturales, as most Guatemalan Indians prefer to be called. They live in five little one-room huts which face toward each other around a bare dirt enclosure, swept clean every morning. They wear handwoven clothing (traje) and among themselves speak only Tzutujil, a modern Mayan dialect. Indeed, the women and children speak nothing else.

‘A couple of miles off the Gringo Trail’ is not very far as the Modern world reckons, but when you live mostly on foot or in small canoes, it can be a very great distance indeed. Despite the fact that there is a (barely) drivable road to our one little tienda, which a truck carrying beer, Pepsis, and other modern delicacies plies about once a fortnight, uninvited gringos have rarely stumbled through during the two years I have lived here. Nonetheless, my neighbors have had ample opportunity to observe gringos at first hand, since some “ten years ago” a ladino gentleman bought the piece of property between the lake and their household and built a little house there which has been rented out to a succession of gringos. The first was a padre associated with the church in the nearby aldea (hamlet), about two kilometers away, but since then there has been a succession of long-haired young people, occasionally couples with children, and even a few single women, like myself.

There are three components to the local population: ladinos, naturales, and gringos. Ladinos constitute the ruling class in Guatemala — they own most of its land, run its government, staff its civil service, control its economy, etc. However, in most places around the lake their actual presence is negligible since they are statistically smaller than 5% of the population. In my canton, there are no ladinos (unless you'd count my absentee landlord, and various others who own the choicest lakeshore property but do not live here). Naturales know and resent the ladinos as overlords, but do not see their power as due to any intrinsic specialness, since ladinos are physically indistinguishable from themselves and have ‘always’ been among them. But gringos in sufficient number to be noticed are a recent phenomenon, and they (we) are perceived as specially favored: big, rich, healthy, beautiful, denizens of a mythic and magical country (albeit with such peculiar social mores as people living without families). Needless to say, gringos and their habits are a matter of endless fascination to my neighbors, which is also true vice versa, and as a meeting place between two very different cultures, my house has been a vantage point of more than usual interest.

Long hours have I spent sitting on my porch or walking along the pathways, debating the virtues of Ancient world versus Modern world. This debate is perhaps futile since the Future, in any case, is winning. Nonetheless it continues.

I sit on a rock and watch Michaela clear the water’s edge of floating plastic bags. She wades in and uses a long stick to draw them toward her, then pushes them into a pile among the pumice rubble. A pleasant enough task for a sunny morning. The lake is full of floating plastic bags, largely because the Modern world sees fit to provide speckled blue laundry detergent in them, as it provides other plastic bags in such profusion that they are dispensable. If you must have detergent, is there any solution? Provide trashcans at the lake’s edge (plastic trashcans, no doubt), with the whole sanitation apparatus to pick things up that that implies? Provide indoor washing facilities in houses well-equipped with a garbage pail in every room and a convenient driveway or back alley or incinerator to bring the full ones, where they will be magically emptied?

I have spent hours at a time thinking about plastic, counting the number of plastic objects in and around my house. Plastic toys, plastic shoes, plastic tinaja. Plastic pencil-sharpener. Plastic toothbrush. Not to mention all the plastic washtubs, plastic brushes, plastic tubes and bottles, so much better than glass for stashing in your bag or backpack (in protective plastic sacks). Really, it’s hard to think of anything that would be better than plastic for washtubs and shampoo containers, if not some of those other products. Yet I am sympathetic to anti-plastic sentiment, and when I read fulminations against plastic, they feel right to me. I hate plastic for its mode of propagation and for the litter it creates, but I can’t seem to quite eliminate it from my life.

I look around and it is everywhere — in the lake, along the trails, in the village. Pacelin Abaj is completely trashed out with plastic. Water ices are frozen in little plastic bags and sold to the children, the bags left behind when the drinks are gone. My neighbors, like most people locally, are in the habit of tossing their garbage in front of their houses, where it has always been quickly taken care of by their dogs and chickens, but this doesn’t work with plastic garbage. As in other instances, behavior patterns that exist ecologically for centuries become unecological within decades, due to the introduction of new products. Then more new products are needed to correct the original improvements.

A matchbook advertises some kind of pills for ‘all sorts of infections and irritations of the mouth and throat,’ including first and foremost tos de fumador, ‘smoker’s cough.’ Provide the malady and then provide the remedy, there it is again. (Ruin this planet, but set up space colonies.) Like those glossy plastic bags, drinks-to-go are poured into which are left everywhere.

The Indian woman and I exchange greetings and we gawk at each other for a minute. I consider trying to tell her not to wash her clothing that way, but give it up as hopeless. More and more of the lake’s rim is fouled, a mass of reeds and floating garbage. The rich gringos and ladinos (and also the few rich naturales) jump into their motorboats and move to remoter spots, heedless of the further fouling of the lake effected by motorboats.

A wrapper that covers a cylinder of soap floats toward me. Why must these cylinders be wrapped in plastic, why must there be so much of it? I remember that some years ago in the United States, a local supermarket advertised proudly that it was packaging even bananas in plastic bags, this obviously being considered a selling point. I think of the innumerable plastic bags freely offered in the produce departments of supermarkets. Why the overproliferation? Why must there be so much that the world chokes in it?

Living in Guatemala has been an untutored education in economics, though trying to follow through a train of thought about comparative ancient and modern economy often leaves my head spinning. My mind flicks back to those coffee filters. If everyone were to stop using coffee filters, a small business would be put out of operation. This would create unemployment (a peculiarly modern problem), and the unemployed, it is said, are a drain on the economy. What is needed, in fact, is more small businesses like the coffee filter industry, providing unnecessary-but-handy products, which enough people will have money to buy if enough such products exist to maintain employment. A slightly-different-sized coffee filter for every manufacturer’s coffeepot, and the economy goes humming, humming. If we drown in our own refuse, it only means more business for someone.

I unspin my head and try another: the proliferation of plastic. A substance like plastic appears in the world, a million uses are found for it; the production and distribution of plastic products provide millions of jobs, which generate money to pay the increased prices necessitated by the marvelous wrappings everything now comes in. Surely all those plastic bags they provide so lavishly in the supermarkets are not really necessary (as can be seen by the fact that the price scale as a whole is so much higher in places where supermarkets are accessible). Yet you pay for them anyway, so you might as well take them. A hitherto unnecessary product becomes the vehicle of employment for millions, whose lives might otherwise be spent making pottery or canoes or weaving, because somehow the plastics industry generates money and cottage industry doesn’t. Lots of jobs and goodies, though to me it all has this sleight-of-hand feeling about it, and the only possible objection is that fewer and fewer people have jobs that provide them with a sense of worth and dignity. A sense of worth and dignity seems to derive from direct participation in the provision of the necessities of life, and/or from any creative enterprise, but so few people in the Modern world occupy their working time with either. So few jobs are either creative or vital. Controlling some machine that stamps advertisements onto plastic bags? Giving people sample packets of Marlboro cigarettes? Carrying soft death between Atitlan and Mazatenango?

I contrast this with the way my neighbors spend their time. My neighbors have no jobs, except those that secure the needs and pleasures of life every day. Uneducated, they know how to provide themselves with food, clothing, and shelter. Uneducated, they know how to occupy their spare time, raise their children, reverence their elders. They live in a world of natural beauty, matched by the beauty of their own handiwork. Thus have they lived for centuries, with minimal alteration of this planet.

*The location “Gringo Trail” comes from the book title Along the Gringo Trail (Jack Epstein, And/Or Press, California), and refers to that psychogeographical ribbon through Central and South America that is heavily travelled by gringos.

**Though it is worth noting how all these things are interrelated. You don’t need shampoo containers if you don’t use shampoo, and if you wash your clothing with soaproot, you can wash directly in the lake without a washtub. But the lure of squeaky-clean hair and phosphorescently bright clothing is as irresistible to the naturales as it has been to gringos and these products have no trouble finding buyers. Even I buy them.