Reclaiming

My Class

Housecleaning as an occupation is really affecting me in a destructive way. I often end up coming home feeling very sad. This disturbs me. I wish instead I would feel angry, and although there is some anger towards these “nice,” “friendly” upper-middle-class people with their very “comfortable, sometimes luxurious houses, I mostly feel envious, sad and frustrated at the external ease of their lives.

I find myself fantasizing about living in fancy, warm, comfortable houses with lots of soft rugs, two inches thick on clean wooden floors; and soft cushiony chairs with lots of pillows in front of a big old stone fireplace; and great big windows overlooking the lake and mountains letting lots of sun in to nurture the many green and flowering plants all around the house. I imagine myself lounging in a great big queen size bed listening to the finest music of my choice, on the best stereo system money can buy. In the kitchen is a huge double-door golden refrigerator packed with all the foods I love most; and cupboards filled with grains and breads and herbs and nuts. And I don’t have to waste one ounce of my own precious energy to clean this big fancy house.

This was an excerpt from my journal. For me to have a fantasy like this is almost obscene!

I am a working-class woman. I CLEAN houses like that; I don’t live in them. I never have and never will live in a house like that. I grew up in a working-class family. A hard-working family who didn’t have lots and lots of “things” but wasn’t poor. I was lucky that my parents were able to buy a small house in a working-class suburban neighborhood on Long Island. It had four tiny rooms and an attic which they later converted into two more bedrooms. When I was very young my father worked a full-time job and all the overtime he could get, as well as some kind of second part-time job. My mother also worked full-time plus overtime raising three small children. They couldn’t afford the heat bills (let alone day-care).

Years later when my sisters and I were older and in school, my mother worked part-time while taking care of her new baby, and full-time later on, outside the home. They tried to make it on her job along with my father’s, but usually he was needed to still work overtime and another part-time job. When I was in junior high school he drove a school bus as a second job, which carried my more middle-class friends to school. He asked me once if I was at all embarrassed because my friends saw him, my father, as their school bus driver. I told him of course not! I didn’t care what they thought. But of course I did care, and part of me was even shamefully embarrassed, especially when other middle-class friends and their parents defined me by what my father did.

When I think back, most of my life I’ve been shamefully embarrassed, for one reason or another (and I’m angry now that I’ve allowed myself to feel that way, although it’s not me that I’m angry at anymore). There were many reasons. It was either because of the old, cheap, used looking cars my parents drove; or because I wasn’t very smart in school and my parents weren't educated and didn’t have any books around the house; and because when I left home after high school, partly in an effort to leave my working-class background behind, I realized I was becoming a bit more educated and articulate than my parents (with no thanks to the college I never went to), and I was embarrassed.

Leaving home and becoming part of the “upper and middle-class," downwardly mobile, alternative subculture seemed like the answer... or the escape! Until recently, I’ve had this illusion that I finally “fit in” with a part of middle-class America — “alternative style.” I went from a quiet, pacifist hippie, to an insecure radical feminist, floating into the radical left political community. That's when I became aware of the

(Continued on Page 12)

FAT OPPRESSION

MYTHS & FACTS

WHAT IS FAT OPPRESSION?

Fat oppression is the systematic hatred, ridicule and discrimination against fat people by this society. It is based on the belief that fat people are not as good as thin people, and that fat people remain fat because we are lazy, lack willpower, or are stupid. Several myths are the cornerstones of fat oppression — almost everyone thinks these are facts even though both medical research and the experience of many fat people contradict them.

Myth No. 1: People get fat because they eat too much, or eat the wrong foods, or maybe because their metabolism doesn’t work right. Over 100 studies have attempted to prove that fat people eat more than thin people — and every one of them has failed! On the average, fat people eat the same amounts, and the same types of food as thin people. In fact, in one study, a group of adolescent fat women said they ate more than their friends, even though an actual tally of food consumption showed that they ate less than their thin friends.

The myth that fat people somehow eat wrong is held not only by thin people, but by fat people ourselves. As long as we think there is something wrong with us, we don’t look so hard at the culture which keeps us feeling terrible about ourselves.

Myth No. 2: Fat people could change being fat if they would just go on a sensible weight-loss diet.

Medical research has consistently shown that diets have a long-term failure rate of 98-99%. This means that 99 out of 100 fat people who do lose weight on diets will gain all the weight they lost back within five years. Also, because dieting itself causes changes in the body’s metabolism, people usually gain back not only the weight they lost, but also more weight.

In fact, the dieting process itself is unhealthy; it has been shown to cause hardening of the arteries in rats, and is generally thought to be connected with higher risks of heart attacks and strokes in humans.

Myth No. 3: Fat people are unhealthy, or less healthy than thin people.

Fat people range from very healthy to very ill — just like thin people. Every attempt to prove that being fat causes more heart attacks, or strokes, or diabetes has failed.

Diets like the liquid protein diet have led to many known cases of death by starvation. One study, known as the Roseto study, showed that in a community where most people were fat, and fat was well accepted, that the rate of heart attacks was lower than the national average. These same people were studied as they left their community and went out to places where fat is hated, and fat people are oppressed — the rate of heart attacks climbed right up to the national average for fat people!

WHAT IS FAT LIBERATION?

Fat liberation is a political philosophy and a political movement which is based on the knowledge that fat people are victims of a systematic oppression, and that the way to end this oppression is to work together for radical social change. We see the oppression of fat people as part of the existing social order that oppresses people because of their age, race, sex, sexual preference, class and physical condition. We know that until the values in this culture are radically changed, fat people, and especially fat women, will suffer from fat oppression.

We especially want to develop and strengthen the connections between fat liberation and the feminist and lesbian movements. Fat women do not meet the accepted definition of women in this culture, and are especially singled out for ridicule, exploitation and hostility. Fat lesbians confront sexism, heterosexism and fat oppression as part of our daily lives. Fat women who are poor, or women of color, find this intensified in a culture which is both racist and classist.

What We Are Trying To Do

Ultimately, we are working to change society so that control is not in the hands of rich white men — and so that hatred of women, people of color, lesbians and gay men, poor people and fat people is eliminated. We are working towards a culture that recognizes that health issues caused by fat are all stress-related (like high blood pressure) and are more likely to be caused by the stresses of fat hatred in this culture, and the physical damage done by repeated dieting.

“Cures” for fat — like intestinal bypass operations, or staples to make the stomach smaller — have high death rates, and only make fat people sicker.

(Continued on Page 12)