an

Page 2

Peggy Luhrs,  
Wittenberg.

COMMONWOMAN FEBRUARY 1981

Marilyn, Robin Mide,  

Commonwoman,  

paid for her work,  

that of the collective.  

the contributor,  

yi  

six weeks,  

institutions.  

Attitudes  

(Note from the letter-writer: “This letter was sent to Commonwoman just after Joya Beattie’s article and the responses were printed. The paper never received the letter, so it was never printed. So many months after the first printing of the article and responses, I am concerned that my view will be seen as personally attacking Joya Beattie. That was not, and is not, my intent. (I stand behind what I said in the letter; I ask that readers deal with the  

COMMONWOMAN  

The women who worked on this month’s issue are:  

The Collective  

Dian Kendrick Mueller,  

Helping Hands  

Carol Altobelli, Carol Cohen, Vicki Smith Deva, Lee Douglas,  
Etane Finkler, Abby Hale, Suzanne Harkless, Betsy Keir, Gwyn  
Maxine Merrick.  
Lynn Vera, Carol W. Debi Ennis,  

Inc., is a not-for-profit corporation founded for  
the purpose of publishing Commonwoman, a Vermont women’s publica-  
tion of news, culture and dialogue from a feminist perspective. Common-  
woman, Inc., is made up of a small group of women who work together  

The committee meets again for its final deadline meeting; this deadline is intended for late-breaking news and this is the last time the committee can consider copy for publication in the next issue. This copy is also sent to the type-  

setters and is delivered to the printer on Monday. On Wednesday, we mail the paper to our subscribers and deliver it to our commercial outlets. We publish every  

Send all contributions for the next issue of Commonwoman to P.O.  
Box 242, Winooski, Vt. 05404 before the deadline printed in this box.  
Subscription Rates: $6.00/8 issues for individuals; $20.00/8 issues for  
institutions. Free on request to women in prison and women in mental  

Commonwoman, Inc.  
P.O. Box 242  
Winooski, Vt. 05404  

Typesetting: Sue Bali  
Deadline: February 17, 1981  

Copyright Commonwoman, Inc. 1981  

Julie Orvis, Linda  

Josi Schneiderman,  

We will consider for publication articles, poems, short stories, letters,  
cartoons, graphics and photographs submitted by women. All articles  
should be typed and double-spaced; we prefer articles that are no longer  
than three pages. We reserve the right to edit for length and clarity.  

Signed articles reflect the viewpoint of the author and not necessarily  

Commonwoman will not be responsible for returning any written  
materials, cartoons, graphics or photographs unless special arrangements  
are made in advance or a stamped, self-addressed envelope is provided by  

A Note on Procedure: We hold an editorial committee meeting on the  
date of our first deadline (printed in this box) and decide by consensus  
which of the copy we have received will be published in our next issue; this  

attitudes and issues in the  
letter.) J.S. 12/8/80.”)  
To Commonwoman:  

I just saw Joya Beattie’s  

article about money and class  

and the responses that were in  
the next few issues, and I have  
one to make that I haven’t seen.  
I am a Jewish woman from a  
middle-class background. I am  
committed to looking at my  
attitudes and assumptions that  
are oppressive to women from  
other class backgrounds, and I  
expect that same commitment  
from other middle and upper-  
class women. To me, this is part  
of our work as feminists, and  
not a topic of discussion that we  
can pick up and put down at our  
convenience.  
Oppressive class attitudes hurt women — they keep us divided and small.  
I know that it is not for anyone else’s benefit, but for my own  
growth as a feminist, and my  
own need to recognize and weed  
out my bad values, that I con-  
front classist attitudes in myself  
and in other women.  

I was angry and upset by  
Joya's article, and angry by the  
responses saying she was won-  
derful and brave and took great  
risks. Her article was full of  
attitudes and phrases that say “I  
am wonderful and generous, a  
feminist Lady Bountiful to all  
you poor unfortunates. I was  
overcome by false modesty and  
didn’t ask for true recognition,  
and now I want it.” Joya wants  
recognition for not only donat-  
ing her time (as did the other  
producers) but her money — and  
she says and implies that her  
money gift means more than the  
time or energy of other women.  
She put in more, and kept her  
mouth shut, and now she wants  
what she sees as recognition due  
her.  

It is true that money and  
time are both needed to produce  
women’s events, and to create  
the space which we so desperate-  
ly need to re-fuel ourselves for  
the fight. But that fight has got  
to include a fight against the  
patriarchal values instilled in all  
of us — and one of these values  
is that money is “worth more”  
than other things, so that  
someone who gives money is  
better than someone who does-  
n’t.  

People who give money are  
traditionally recognized, congra-  

tulated, and honored. People  
who give time, energy, and  
emotional support are tradi-  

tionally ignored. As feminists,  
we owe ourselves and each other  
honest recognition and valuing  
for work done. But this must be  
our own work, not merely the  
passing on of money which we  
have through no virtue or hard  
work of our own (like an inheri-  
tance). And this recognition  
must include what else goes on  
in our lives. (Does Joya have a  
lot of time on her hands because  
she doesn't need to or choose to  
work full-time? What about the  
woman who volunteers on top  
of her 40+ hours/week job, or  
the woman who has almost no  
time to help because she is  
raising children?) Questions  
about privileges, like money or  
lots of “extra” time, or cars, or  
fancy educations, are legitimate  
questions that we need to be  
asking each other. Joya’s  
assumptions ignore realities of  
the lives of many women —  
realities that place limits on how  
much time, or money or energy  
a woman has left over after  
trying to stay alive, to work on a  
concert.  

It is hard work to confront  
ourselves as oppressors. It is  
unpleasant, emotional, draining,  
and it is possible to avoid it.  
Joya, like me, or other middle-  
class women, is not responsible  
for the creation of patriarchal  
classes. But she is, like me and  
other women who have class  
privilege, responsible to carry  
that oppression no further. Her  

article, and the flippancy with  

which she faces class confronta-  
tions (“[my attitudes] may or  
may not [change]. Only time  
will tell, I have the control now  
and I can choose to do with my  
life as I wish.”) make me feel  
that she wants to change her  
attitudes only if it is convenient,  
or not too hard, or not demand-  
ed in anger.  

I am angry at attitudes like  
Joya’s. I am angry when I  
uncover/am confronted with  
classist attitudes in myself. But  
I know that only when I refuse to  
exercise my class-based choice to  
ignore unpleasant confronta-  
tions, only when I refuse to hide  
behind the difficulty of the task,  
only when I begin to do that  
real, hard work of changing my  
attitudes and my behaviors, can  
I hope for radical change in  
myself. For me, being a feminist  
means being open to change,  
even when it comes hard, or  
through pain, or at “the wrong  
time.” As we, as women, grow  
and change, and learn to treat  
each other with genuine respect,  
the power of the patriarchy to  
poison our minds, and to mani-  
pulate the interactions among  
us, decreases. And that’s what  

I really want for us, is that we  
learn genuinely new ways to  
relate to each other, based on  

recognition and affirmation of  

our differences, and on recogni-  
tion of our pasts.  

It is from my deep convic-  
tion that women can grow and  
genuinely change that I offer  
these criticisms.  

In struggle,  
Judith A. Stein  

CommonWoman:  

Praise and  
Problems  

Dear Wimmin of Common-  
woman:  

Happy Solstice! Well, time  
has really flown, and the Decem-  
ber Commonwoman has come in  
the mail before I've had a chance  
to respond to the November  
issue. But I feel strongly about  
some of the stuff in the Novem-  
ber issue, so I'll respond anyway.  

As a fat liberation activist,  
I really appreciated your articles  
on fat. The testimony of the  
“middiesized” woman was  
truthful and moving. The femi-  
nist press has been silent on the  
issue of fat oppression for so  
long (and, indeed, has tended to  
laud subtle forms of fat oppres-  
sion, such as Fat Is a Feminist  
Issue, compulsive eating groups,  
etc., without sufficient analysis).  
So your writings on fat oppres-  
sion were very welcome.  

I was also moved by many  
other of the articles on the same  
page. So why in the heck entitle  
the page “ism’s”? What a put-  
down. “Forms of oppression”  
would have been an equally  
descriptive but nonpejorative  
title. Where did your sensitivity  
go? For a fat woman (just to  
mention the example closest to  
my experience) looksism and fat  
oppression are not abstract  
“ism's,” they are constant, all-  
pervasive forces that make every  

(Continued on Page 11)  

As of the December issue - I am re-  
signing from the Commonwoman collective.  

I do not take this step light-  

ly -- I've been thinking about leaving  
for at least six months, but each time  
found the time and energy to go on  

a while longer.  

My resignation means that I will  
no longer do News Briefs or Atrocities  
or layout or editorial committee meet-  

ings.  

Nor do I feel open to doing  

other CommonWoman work at least for  

several months.  

There is no single interaction or  

chore that has pushed me to resign.  

I just don't have the energy or psy-  

chic space to continue being respons-  

ible for any aspect of publishing the  

paper.  
I may still write sometimes, as  

long as you publish -- I hope it will  

be a long time. I've donated a work  

book on small newspapers that may be  

helpful to new people.  

I hope the  

pledge drive goes well and you get  

lots of matronage.  

Thanks for continuing the work  

that is important.  

Euan Bear