COMMONWOMAN JAN/FEB 1980

(3

COMMONWOMAN ;

The women who worked on this month’s issue are:

The Collective

Euan Bear, Carol Cohen, Debi Ennis, Dian Kendrick Mueller,  
Bymmy Muller, Julie Orvis, Mary Schwartz, Linda Wittenberg.

Helping Hands

Patte Ghezzi, Suzanne Harkless, Betsy Keir, Robin Mide, Cindy  
Smith, Lynn Vera, Carol W.

Commonwoman, Inc., is a not-for-profit corporation  
founded for the purpose of publishing Commonwoman, a Ver-  
mont women’s publication of news, culture and dialogue from a  
feminist perspective. Commonwoman, Inc., is made up of a small  
group of women who work together collectively to put out this  
paper. At present, no one on the collective is paid for her work.

We will consider for publication articles, poems, short stories,  
graphics and photographs submitted by women. All articles  
should be typed and double spaced; we prefer articles that are no  
longer than three pages. We reserve the right to edit for length  
and clarity.

Signed articles reflect the viewpoint of the author and not  
necessarily that of the collective.

Commonwoman will not be responsible for returning any  
written materials, poems, graphics or photographs unless special  
arrangements are made in advance or a stamped, self-addressed  
envelope is provided by the contributor.

A note on procedure: We hold an editorial committee meet-  
ing on the date of our first deadline (printed in this box) and  
decide by consensus which of the copy we have received will be  
published in our next issue; this copy is sent to the typesetter.  
The following Sunday, the editorial committee meets again for  
its final deadline meeting; this deadline is intended for late-  
breaking news and this is the last time the committee can con-  
sider copy for publication in the next issue. This copy is also sent  
to the typesetter; the last of the typesetting for each issue is done  
the Friday before publication. The paper is laid out the weekend  
before publication and is delivered to the printer on Monday.  
On Wednesday, we mail the paper to our subscribers and deliver  
it to our commercial outlets.

Send all contributions for the next issue of Commonwoman  
to Box 242, Winooski, Vt. 05404 before the deadline printed in  
this box.

Subscription Rates: $6.00/12 issues for individuals; $20.00/  
12 issues for institutions. Free on request to women in prisons  
and women in mental institutions.

Commonwoman, Inc.  
Box 242  
Winooski, Vt. 05404

DEADLINE: February 5, 1980

Copyright Commonwoman, Inc. 1980

Subscribe to COMMONWOMAN today.

COMMONWOMAN  
BUTTONS

RISING

Order Yours Today!  
50¢

Who’s the Enemy?

As a feminist and as a man, I was somewhat disturbed by  
Robin Taylor’s article “On Being Anti-Male” (Commonwoman,  
December). I believe that to be successful in uprooting this  
sexist oppressive society, feminists must correctly identify  
their enemies and allies. The enemy to me is clearly the rulers  
of the political economic structure called capitalism that great-  
ly benefit from sexism. True, the rulers of this system are men  
and in this sense the enemy is men. However, to conclude from this  
that all men support, desire, and benefit from this system is a  
gross error.

One of the reasons the capitalist system is so strong in  
this country is that it has been very successful in dividing seg-  
ments of the population who have a vested interest in over-  
throwing it. The most traditional and successful means to create  
these divisions has been the perpetration of sexism and  
racism. By some feminists identifying men as the enemy and  
separating from them, they are in essence collaborating with the  
capitalists and weakening a potentially united women's  
movement.

Men, it must be noted, suffer greatly from sexism also.  
Our shorter life span is in large part due to the enormous stress  
and pressure men feel as they are socialized to succeed and be the  
breadwinner. I know many men who have an inability to express  
their emotions because of their role socialization. These too are  
scars from sexism.

I can support some women's choice not to deal with men.  
However, to point to the entire male population as the enemy of  
women’s liberation will only prolong sexism. The enemy,  
sisters and brothers, is the system. Women and men unite  
to fight sexism!

in solidarity,

PF.

Winooski, Vt.

Likes ‘Anti-Male’

Commonwoman:  
I have just finished reading  
Robin Taylor’s incredibly articulate article “On Being Anti-  
Male” (Commonwoman, December). I am touched,  
affected, by the connections she has made so clearly, so simply. It  
is an article I want to cut out and send to so many friends,  
womyn and men threatened by sentiments and feelings I have  
tried to express with the clear energy Robin has achieved.

And I want to encourage Robin to keep writing; I want to  
read more of your ideas. And in the same vein, I hope more  
womyn from outside (and inside) Burlington who have not  
written much or anything yet in Commonwoman, will do so. We  
all have things to say that will strengthen, soften, encourage  
and stimulate each other.

I respect and appreciate the work of the Commonwoman  
Collective.

Lynn Vera

Singing  
Praises

Dear Commonwimmen,

What follows is an excerpt  
from a personal letter I received  
from a friend in New York  
which I want to share with our  
community. The author is  
Gillian Booth, an artist and  
craftswoman.

“I really was delighted when  
you reminded me that the Alive!  
wimmin stayed in Burlington.  
Now I can share this: When  
Riannon talked at the concert  
the group gave at Columbia U.  
on November 10th, she sang for  
the whole group the praises of  
the strength and love they found  
and were offered in your com-  
munity: ‘unbelievably suppor-  
tive!’ It felt so lovely to have my  
own experience confirmed. I did  
not know any of you except  
yourself but I shall always  
remember how I loved you all,  
standing up on the hill together  
in that late afternoon Hesperia  
sunlight to have your photo-  
graph taken. Your strength and  
spirit are becoming a legend here  
in New York and, I suspect,  
across the nation if Alive! have  
their say!”

Euan Bear

Letters to the Editors

Goddess  
Gets Grant

Dear womyn —

Share in our excitement...  
the Mayan and Mexican goddess  
slide show has received a grant.  
Money for Women, Inc., coor-  
dinated by Morgana of the  
Pagoda (womyn’s Florida ocean  
retreat), decided to give us $250.  
We are using the $250 to make two  
reproductions of the slides and  
to produce the sound sync tapes  
with the show. We will then be  
able to mail the images and  
information to interested  
womyn. Explore and SHARE  
your womyn’s spiritual culture.

Vicki Smith Deva  
Lynn Vera  
Organa

Goodbye

Dear Burlington Womyn,

It is dawning on me that I  
am going away for a while —  
long enough to miss you. I just  
want to say that I love you and  
will miss you. And if you’re  
wondering — does she mean me —  
am I one of them she cares  
about — well, you are.

See you in a while. Enjoy,  
grow, love, survive.

Joyce C.

Tell our advertisers you saw it in  
Commonwoman!

NOTICE: Grover’s  
Records will now only  
be carrying classical  
records. For Burling-  
ton’s best stocked and  
best priced supply of  
music, see ad in this  
issue.

COMMONWOMAN can be  
purchased at the following loca-  
lities:

Burlington:  
Ben & Jerry's  
Bookstacks  
Everyday Bookshop  
Hargreaves  
Little Professor  
Origanum —  
Sunflower

Essex:  
Little Professor

Shelburne:  
Creamery Mental

Offices

Montpelier:  
Aquarian Grocery  
Bear Pond Books  
Horn of the Moon Cafe  
Hunger Mountain Co-op  
Women’s Center

Health

If there is a store in your  
neighborhood that will carry  
COMMONWOMAN, contact us.  
Women interested in helping  
with distribution outside the  
Burlington area, contact COM-  
MONWOMAN, Attention: Linda  
Wittenberg.