Y,

Page 10

COMMONWOMAN JAN/FEB 1986

CURING

VAGINITIS

By Deb Ennis

If you have a vaginal infection, yeast, trichomonas or “non-specific” (usually hemophilus vaginalis), there are some natural, home remedies you could try before taking a prescription drug.

This handout doesn’t cover every aspect of vaginal health and infection. It deals specifically with alternative treatments for yeast, trichomonas and hemophilus. If you want to know more about how to prevent these infections, how to diagnose them, how they are transmitted, what possible long-term complications could develop or how long to douche, you should do further reading on your own, ask other women, or make an appointment with a health care worker to discuss your questions.

This information is compiled from a variety of women’s resources listed at the end of this article. It is the result of years of self-experimentation by many women to find tried-and-true treatments for vaginal infections that are accessible and under our control. No one method is guaranteed to work for all women. We each have a unique biochemical makeup and so we must experiment to determine what will work for us. This article is intended as a guideline in that pursuit.

It is important to correctly identify the type of infection you have, since the treatment varies depending on the cause. Regular cervical self-exam with a speculum can show you what is normal discharge for you and help identify problems at an early stage. With practice, you can learn to recognize discharge which may be characteristic of the three types of vaginitis. Discharge can also be examined under a microscope to identify the type of infection.

Before you treat yourself, be sure you don’t have VD or an infection that involves your uterus, tubes, and/or ovaries. If you have fever or pain in your lower abdomen, see a health practitioner before treating yourself with anything. Use these home remedies after you are sure you really have a vaginal infection and nothing more serious than that.

Most vaginal infections can be passed through sexual contact. Depending on the type of infection, sexual partners should also be treated. Lesbians should avoid mixing your vaginal secretions with your partner(s). If you are heterosexual, it is best not to have intercourse for the duration of treatment, but if you do, use a condom. Even though a male partner may not feel any symptoms, he may need to be treated because he is carrying the organisms that are causing the vaginitis in his urethra. Men need not be treated for yeast. Generally, they will be treated for trich and hemophilus.

Remedies

PRESCRIPTION DRUGS treat the symptoms only, kill off the good as well as harmful bacteria, may cause a secondary infection, may have harmful side effects, require a prescription, are expensive and often ineffective.

NATURAL REMEDIES restore the body to its normal environment, may be time-consuming and messy, promote healing, have no serious side effects known, are readily available, allow us more control over our bodies, help us to learn about our bodies, are inexpensive, and are not always effective.

Reason for Infections

Change in pH. The normally acidic environment of the vagina keeps yeast, most bacteria and trichomonas in check. The following conditions cause the vagina to become more alkaline (increase pH) and therefore less resistant to infection:

too much sugar in the diet, antibiotic therapy, hormonal changes from birth control pills, other hormone supplements, pregnancy, menopause or menstruation, diabetes or pre-diabetes, baths, bubble baths, regular douching which can wash out healthy bacteria and cause infection.

Lowered resistance. Fatigue, poor diet, emotional stress, cigarette smoking, excess alcohol, pollution, another infection of the body, all these things can deprive our bodies of vitamins, nutrients and energy needed to stay healthy. Therefore, they can change the healthy state of the vagina.

Natural Remedies

Listed below are three commonly-used home remedies. There are many ways to use these methods; what works for one woman may not work for another. There are no rigid protocols to follow. It is possible to alternate or combine these treatments by the day or by the week. It is important to pay careful attention to your body’s response to the treatment and to adjust it accordingly. Douches and suppositories work best when they are inserted deep into the vagina as close to the cervix as possible, and when they are done before going to bed, so they have a better chance of staying in your vagina and being absorbed.

VINEGAR DOUCHE. The acidic nature of vinegar is similar to the vagina and helps to reestablish a normal pH balance in the vagina. Use two tablespoons of apple cider or white vinegar per quart of pure, warm water.

YOGURT. Yogurt contains a bacteria called Lactobacillus acidophilus. This bacteria is normally found in the vaginal flora. More of it is needed when there is an infection to keep yeast and trichomonas under control. Yogurt helps to restore the natural bacteria, lowers the pH and relieves itching. Plain, natural, unflavored, unsweetened yogurt containing live culture may be used (Lactobacillus acidophilus) as a douche by mixing two or three tablespoons in a quart of pure, warm water. Locally available brands include Dannon, Colombo and Rosedale Farms.

Yogurt can be inserted directly into the vagina using your fingers, an applicator, a diaphragm or empty Tampax holder. Yogurt also can be applied directly to the vulva or worn on a sanitary napkin for relief from inflammation and irritation.

The yogurt bacteria is also available in a liquid form as acidophilus culture and in capsules which contain the Lactobacillus bacteria. The capsules can be inserted deep in the vagina, one at a time or used as a douche by emptying the contents of two or three caps into a quart of warm water. The caps are less messy and do not contain the milk fats and sugars that are in yogurt. The liquid is available at Sunflower Natural Foods, Mother Nature’s and Origanum, all in Burlington.

GARLIC. Garlic is a natural antibiotic rich in sulfur. To use: peel one clove of garlic without nicking it (it may cause burning). Place it in the center of a gauze strip three to four inches wide by one foot long. Fold the gauze in half and twist it around the garlic making a kind of tampon with a gauze tail. Dip the garlic part of the homemade tampon in warm vegetable oil. Some women use no gauze at all, just simply the garlic clove alone. Insert it in the vagina. Douche with vinegar when this treatment is finished. Garlic is also available as garlic oil in capsules which can be used as a suppository or a douche. They are usually a gelatin capsule which dissolves easily.

Treating Infections

YEAST INFECTION

If it is in the beginning stage, use a yogurt douche daily for a week. In the later stages, use a yogurt douche at night and a baking soda douche in the morning. (Two teaspoons baking soda per quart of water). Or twice a day insert about two tablespoons of yogurt into the vagina.

TRICHOMONAS INFECTION

Use garlic suppositories, change every twelve hours for seven days. If the clove falls out, reinsert a new clove.

Or, Day 1: use garlic suppository twice (two in 24 hours). Day 2: douche once with a vinegar douche. Day 3: same as Day 1. Repeat for at least two weeks and up to one week after symptoms are gone.

These treatments are most effective as preventative measures or for treating early mild cases. They will reduce the infection and lessen symptoms. Once the symptoms have completely disappeared, don’t put anything into your vagina for at least three days, then have your vaginal secretions checked under a microscope to be sure that the infection is gone. This is important because trichomonas is known to cause cell changes in your cervix.

Sexual partners must be treated. The only drug available for male partners is Flagyl. Ask your local health center or physician about it.

HEMOPHILUS VAGINALIS INFECTION

Alternate vinegar and salt douches for a week. Vinegar one day, salt the next. Use a yogurt douche on the last day. Mix one tablespoon of salt in a quart of warm water to prepare a salt douche.

Or, Day 1: use garlic suppository twice (2 in 24). Day 2: douche with yogurt at bedtime; douche with vinegar in the morning. Repeat this cycle two more times (Day 1, 2, 1, 2). After your next period repeat Day 2 treatment twice.

Or, “douche one to two times a day for three to five days with one tablespoon vinegar and one garlic oil capsule in one quart of warm water.

A nonprescription iodine douche called Betadine is another good alternative. Consult the resource list for further information.

You can use the treatments explained in this paper when you feel susceptible to a vaginal infection or notice the beginning stages. Early action can prevent troublesome infections from developing.

These natural remedies are most effective when combined with a healthy diet: more fresh fruits and vegetables, whole grains and legumes; less sugar, fat, salt, caffeine, alcohol, processed foods; fewer cigarettes, more rest, exercise, and less stress.

Resource List

Vaginal Ecology (25 cents) and Natural Treatments for Vaginitis (15 cents) from the Portland Women’s Health Center, 4160 SE Division, Portland, OR 97202.

Self-Help Home Remedies ($1) from the Chico Feminist Women’s Health Center, 330 Flume St., Chico, CA 95926.

Vaginitis and Herbal Remedies from the Santa Cruz Women’s Health Center, 250 Locust St., Santa Cruz, CA 95060.

Home Remedies for Vaginal Health (75 cents) from the New Hampshire Feminist Center, 38 South Main St., Concord, N.H. 03301.

Herbal Remedies for Women ($2) from the Feminist Healthworks, 487 Hudson St., NY, NY 10014.

(continued on page 11)