Oct. 1978

Cameronwoman

———

BRATTLEBORO

WOMEN’S UNION

The Women’s Community Center in Brattleboro, Vermont, which was founded in 1973, closed its offices last June. However, several members of that group have reorganized into the Women’s Union for Political Action.

The members of the new group meet bi-weekly in private homes.

The change in the name of the organization reflects the evolution of the women’s group, an evolution typical of the feminist movement throughout the country. The Women’s Community Center, although founded mostly by radical feminists, became heavily involved in efforts to attract the entire community of women in the Brattleboro area. The center,

the first in Vermont, was successful in many regards. Among the center’s accomplishments was the founding of the Women’s Crisis Center, an organization that has received two federal grants (the only rural area in the U.S. to do so) of more than $40,000 each. The Crisis Center aids abused and raped women, and has a vigorous staff that operates separately from the feminist political group.

The original Women’s Community Center also helped found WEB (Women Employed in Brattleboro) for working women’s advocacy. Women active in the center also became involved with welfare advocacy, the center sponsored career counseling groups, a lesbian support group, and other activities. Much of the center’s life revolved around dances, a baseball team, and concerts and shows by local and visiting artists. Some members of the center joined the earliest anti-nuclear marches against Vermont Yankee in Vernon, Vt. Some members were also important in the efforts to support anti-war fugitives who were arrested in Brattleboro in 1975.

However, the very success of the women’s center was an indication of its diversity of interests, including political and social service interests. The feminists were gratified that the Crisis Center took over the major share of social services for abused and raped women — thus it was felt that the physical premises of the community center could be shut down and the group focus its primary attention on general political issues related to women.

Nearly a score of women met last May to vote to close the center, and to re-focus the local feminist movement upon its main purpose: political study and action. Most of the women at the meeting expressed concern about the rise of the “New Right,” its anti-abortion, anti-gay and, basically, anti-women ideology. The national backlash against the women’s movement persuaded Brattleboro-area feminists of the necessity of forming a group that is willing to take a stand on all issues that affect all women.

Among the current projects of the Women’s Union for Political Action are the quality of obstetrical and gynecological care that is locally available. The group is also extremely interested in other aspects of health care delivery to women.

The new organization plans to hold a seminar on the New Right, which will be open to the general public, and which will feature various panelists who are familiar with the subject.

Lesbian civil rights and social acceptance are also a major concern of the organization. A Lesbian Support Group has been formed as part of the Women’s Union for Political Action.

The group will discuss and act upon various political issues as they arise. It is interested in forming liaisons with other feminist organizations, and welcomes visitors from other women's groups who wish to exchange ideas, or to act jointly on various projects.

The address of the Women’s Union for Political Action is Post Office Box 1038, Brattleboro, Vt. 05301.

look at the lives and stories of 26 homosexual people, to Burlington. And then on Sept. 30, a film benefit for the defense of Kristina Berster featured a German-made film portraying the political repression in that country.

As these events were well-attended and there remains a clear need in Burlington for an ongoing cultural/political source of feminist stimulation and entertainment, Cinemawomen is encouraged to continue their work. The group is interested in planning more feature film events, possibly some short topic series such as womyn in prison, non-white womyn’s cultures, womyn and aging and more. There is also some interest in outreach work for womyn in high schools, community groups, and senior citizens.

This house is being built in Jonesville by Peggy Luhrs, a Burlington carpenter. The structure is beautifully nestled in a thick woods of birch, maple and pine trees. Peggy designed and is general contractor and primary builder for the structure which is a rectangle with a two-story octagon attached. The roof of the rectangular area is angled sharply at 60 degrees, the south side including six large windows affording optimal sun heat and light into the main living space. The octagon area is surrounded with windows and the second story rises high into the trees.

Peggy is building the house for her friend Glo Daley. The working relationship is complex, combining the ease of friendship connections and communication as well as the tensions of expenses, decisions, deadlines, etc. which sometimes intensify without the distance of “objectivity.” The womyn are learning and sharing an exciting feminist process as they work together in this capacity.

Linda with customers currently fighting a new city ordinance which states that a peddler must pay $500 to be licensed to sell goods on Church St. The ordinance deems that only 11 peddlers will be allowed and these will be issued spots on Church Street, many of which are not felt by the peddlers to be choice selling areas. Linda points out that the $500 fee and the 11 person limit excludes all but the most exclusive (wealthy) peddlers. For more information, and to look at some wonderful merchandise, stop at the peddlers’ tables next time you're on Church St. Support these small business people who deal directly with their customers; you will benefit.

For those interested womyn, CINEMAWOMEN WILL BE HAVING A PLANNING MEETING ON NOV. 7 AT 7:30 PM IN THE ORCHID FILMS OFFICE AT 90 MAIN ST. (Back entrance, Blue door). All womyn are invited and encouraged to come and share ideas and energy.

Of Equality — as if it harm’d me, giving others the same chances and rights as myself — as if it were not indispensable to my own rights that others possess the same. Walt Whitman, Leaves of Grass