NOVEMBER, 1981

A Consideration of Violence

The state National Organization for Women Conference honored National Battered Women’s Day by having an all-day conference entitled “A Consideration of Violence Against Women.” For groups all over the country, it was a day of celebration, of women coming together to fight to end violence, and a day of mourning for countless victims. It was a day of unity — a time to acknowledge that we as women are all being battered, that no woman is safe until we are all safe. All women are potential victims. Every eight seconds, a woman is beaten; every three minutes a woman is raped; one out of four children will become victims of incest; one out of every eight children will be raped. Our streets and homes are not safe — no woman is immune.

The Vermont Conference was held at the Congregational Church, in Middlebury, Vt. It was attended by approximately sixty women and several men, who traveled from all over the state to attend. The keynote speaker was Deane Brittingham, who discussed “Women in Vermont: the Case of Battering.” Linda Sanford gave an overview of the problems of Violence Against Women, emphasizing incest and child sexual abuse (child pornography and child prostitution). An overview of services in Vermont was presented by Laura Simons. Jean Rosenberg helped to generate prevention strategies and solutions from the groups. There were also films presented on battering and incest, and a speakout, in which women from the audience were invited to share their hopes, fears, and personal experiences. The group joined hands and gave silent consideration for the women being battered at that moment.

The first hour opened with a business meeting. Several women spoke about the National Convention in Washington, D.C. this week, giving a synopsis of numerous workshops which were held. A movement called “Change Your Life” was formed, focusing on the fight to pass the ERA in the last remaining months. They are looking for women to work in unratified states doing outreach and education. They feel that the best chances for ratification are in Oklahoma, Florida, Virginia, North Carolina, and Illinois.

After the business meeting, Deane Brittingham, an activist and former coordinator of Vermont’s Battered Women’s project, spoke, giving a moving and comprehensive view of the complex issues involved in battering. She stressed the importance of communication and support among women — how sharing pain and anger has the capability of giving strength, of transforming and empowering women. She pointed out the need to listen, hear, and begin to know each other, in order to form a base of support. Women must acknowledge their communality, seek and offer support and validation. As women talk and share with each other, they'll begin to uncover lies which have been accepted without question.

The issue for battered women is survival, Deane said. Battering includes slaps, kicks, punches, and can result in death. Women are being terrorized daily. They are often unable to leave, immobilized by the fear created in violent relationships. They are frequently economically tied to the abuser, have low self-esteem, children to consider, and nowhere to go. There is only one shelter open in the entire state of Vermont, in Rutland. Choices and options are hard to find. It takes incredible strength to survive in a battering relationship and incredible strength to leave.

Men batter because no one stops them — it is condoned by our laws and attitudes. Men often don’t feel that they have done anything wrong, illegal, or immoral. As women, Deane reminds us, we must respond to this by speaking out in rage, enraged!

Linda Sanford, feminist therapist and author of Silent Children and In Defense of Ourselves, is currently writing a book on low self-esteem in women. She discussed the rise of violence against women and children — and the common issues between them. There is a current move away from adult women, with the rise of the women’s movement — and abusers are turning to children, whom they find safer, less demanding, less powerful. Men are seeking another group to dominate. Offenders have difficulty accepting the responsibilities of their acts. As is frequently seen in violence against women, the victim is blamed. In cases of incest, rape, battering, child pornography, and prostitution, it is often insinuated that the children invited and chose their own victimization.

Violence, in our society, is an acceptable form of discipline, so men are able to feel justified. Isolation keeps these crimes going on — keeps them prevalent in our culture. The nuclear family is one form of isolation which allows for breeding grounds for acts of violence. Women must begin to reach out and get involved with each other — to end “the imbalance of power, knowledge, and resources between victims and their offenders.”

Laura Simons, coordinator of the Middlebury Battered Women’s Project, led a discussion on the remedies for battering and services for battered women. Laws protecting battered women were mentioned (the restraining order, in particular). Several volunteers working with battered women shared their experiences and advice in dealing with the legal system. Congratulations were given to the new shelter in Rutland, which offers shelter, support groups, after-shelter support groups, advocacy with the courts, welfare, etc.

Jean Rosenberg, Research Assistant on the Sex Offense Project sponsored by the Prison Research and Action Education Project in Addison County, and president of the Board of Advisors of the Addison County Battered Women’s Project, gave the closing speech, encouraging ideas and input from the group on strategies and solutions for ending violence against women.

Battering Awareness Day should only be the beginning of women coming together to share our information, our support, and express our growing anger. We can all continue to take a part, as women — reaching out, trusting ourselves and each other, in ending the violence against women. As Deane Brittingham stated, “We are all our sisters’ keepers.”

I feel that this nation is slowly headed towards racial warfare. The one sure way of preventing such a catastrophe would be the coming together of women of color and white women in true sisterly fashion.

If feminism is defined as “the development of women as a force which liberates women to be what they should and must be as human beings,” then every Chicana who helps herself, her sisters, and her brothers is a feminist. To include fighting the racist and classist oppression of her brothers is feminist; here is where I think many white women neglect to have a broad enough view of feminism. This is where racism limits the effectiveness of feminism.

It is therefore the philosophy of Las Feministas that in order for a movement to truly fight for justice for all its people, it must also from the beginning identify and fight the economic oppression delivered through racism as well as through sexism. It is the responsibility of people of color and white people to become politicized about the issues of welfare, employment, and education as they affect people of color.

I think that the analysis of the issues and leadership in fighting them should come from the oppressed and not from the oppressors.

I see women talking and reading to educate themselves about racism, and the result is personal and individual changes. So the time has come to make a commitment to take ACTION. Sisters work within your communities to fight back and make changes. Cuz you can sit around and discuss racism all you want, but that does not change the fact that racism is a fact of daily life in America, affecting all organizations and institutions.

By Ramona Monteverde