6261 ANAS NYWOMNOWWOD

Page 4

PAINDOIRAS IBOMX

—— Women Women Women

Where Has Betty
Been?

By Dian Kendrick Mueller

For me, Women Women Women Two was dominated by my disappointment in Betty Friedan, although the workshops I attended were exciting and worthwhile. Twenty-five hundred dollars worth of boredom, aggravation and fossilized feminism — $2500 being what the Creamery Educational Foundation paid Friedan to keynote the conference and lead two workshops.

I want to make it quite clear that this is entirely a personal opinion. According to Sara Packard, assistant coordinator of the conference, about 100 conference evaluation forms have been turned in so far and other women who attended the conference have spoken personally to the conference planning committee, and most of these women have said Friedan was good, or at the least “okay.”

Sara says that “a small but fervent number — mostly lesbians and radical feminists — thought she was awful."

I must be part of that small but fervent number, although I don’t think I’m a radical and I know I'm not a lesbian. It distresses me to have such a negative reaction, because I respect Hannah Dennison, coordinator of the conference, and have the same feeling about some other members of the planning committee. Also, I have a tremendous respect for Friedan’s groundbreaking work in the women’s movement. This is the woman who spent five years writing The Feminine Mystique, which I read in 1963 when it first came out — a courageous, painstakingly researched book which was one of the major catalysts for this second wave of feminism we are now so caught up in. This is the woman who was one of a brave few who founded the National Organization for Women (NOW) — an organization I now give much of my time to. This is the woman who has lectured, written and worked for the movement for the last 15 years, barely taking time out to publish her second book, It Changed My Life: Writings on the Women’s Movement.

Why, with all these credentials, was Betty such a bore? Why did she seem like a fly caught in amber, someone time had passed by? As Hannah said when she introduced Friedan’s keynote speech, this “woman has been out there a long time, taking a lot of risks.” Why was there no evidence of an evolution in her thinking?

Thinking about all this, I think of my own evolution — as yet unfinished. Two years ago, during the time of the National Women’s Conference in Houston, Texas, I remember watching the proceedings on television and reading about them in newsmagazines, and thinking: Why must the lesbians be so goddamned visible? Why can’t they be quiet until we get the Equal Rights Amendment into the Constitution? Hell, we have enough problems being accepted into the mainstream of American society without dragging in lesbian love.

Since then, I have been very active in NOW (which has its fair share of lesbians nationwide, although not that many locally) and I have been a member of the Commonwoman collective for a year. I suppose it was Commonwoman that did it to me (although there have been a few people in NOW who have made contributions) — I went from being a restrained homophobe into being what I am now. And what is that? I am still heterosexual and live with my husband and two sons (my daughter is living in another state with her husband and unborn child), but much of my life is lived with lesbians and lesbian principles. I now think of lesbians as being on the front edge of the sexual revolution — and by that I do not mean sex per se, but sexual roles and how we live every day. I mean that I now wonder how much energy I should give to men (although I need to continue giving energy to my husband and sons), because we don't get that much back from men, do we? I wonder if I should give more of my energy to women who will give it back.

All of this is a far cry from Betty Friedan. Although she said over the Women Women Women weekend that “lesbians have made enormous contributions to the women’s movement,” and that she has been “very impressed with lesbians” and that she respects some lesbians “tremendously,” on the whole she seemed very uncomfortable when questioned about her attitude toward lesbians. She seemed to evade every “lesbian” question put to her and to fall back on her old line about growing up middle-class and repressed in Peoria, Ill, and

Continued on Page 10

LO LEME LZ LED ALE FE LEAP IAD SLE AF LE LENE ELE SE LEAG LE SPILLED ELE SEM GP SFT AEE

LPL LE TLE EAE SEMI EEL EA

AA

Co-option &

I went through a lot of process and thought trying to decide how to cover Women Women Women Two. I finally decided that the story was not just in the events of that weekend, but in the surrounding events as well.

First I think I'd better say something about myself. I have been a member of the women’s movement for the past 10 years of my life. I say women’s movement and not community because with Mary Daly I feel community is too static a word for the process of feminism. I am a radical feminist and a lesbian, though my first involvement with women’s politics came when I was heterosexual. I know there is a body of feminist thought and analysis and that the women’s movement is more than the amorphous picture Nanci-Ames Curtis painted in the Vanguard. I am also aware that for the straight press Curtis has become the spokeswoman for the Burlington movement because of WWW. Yet in all my years of activism I never saw Curtis involved in anything until two years ago when she and friends conceived this conference. This is not to say that there is anything wrong with newcomers to the movement, but it is a serious question for me of how she came to have so much press and to define for the past two years the movement here.

This country is notoriously ahistorical and that is the path of co-optation. Forget your herstory and the media will rewrite it for you. And woe to any of you who were serious of purpose when they do. The media has taken a serious challenge by women to the entire structure of patriarchy, named it the lib movement and called women who participated in it bra burners. It is an important fact for feminists that male supremacist culture has continually buried women's advancement through ridicule, silence and even the burning of women themselves in the case of nine million burned as witches. In this electronic age when the media is so fast and pervasive, I believe the time needed to erase what has gone before is shorter and the methods more subtle.

We have read the women’s movement is dead as we worked in it and we have seen it reduced by ridicule, usually by men but of late by certain notorious anti-feminists, and now in the case of Women Women Women, by women who proclaim themselves part of the movement. It is not funny or incidental to me that WWW had a radio ad that said “I’m not a bra burner, but I’m going to Women Women Women.” This is the term of ridicule that men have chosen for us and this ad tacitly supports that ridicule. Perhaps it was done out of naivete, but it still stands as an insult to feminists and a silly defensive appeal. The general attitude of the WWW entrepreneurs was patronizing, or should I say matronizing. That is: there is this middle-class woman out there and she has fear of feminism, so let's soft-pedal the whole thing and make it palatable, not to mention salable. Following the therapeutic model (which may be more what this conference was about than anything), WWW organizers spoke of empowering this woman by giving her permission through this gathering. I was never sure how this was to happen, perhaps because I think that needing permission is a part of the problem in achieving autonomy as women.

Before the conference, especially before the ads and press statements, I thought some good things could happen there. Many women would be gathering and talking about their concerns as women and maybe they would be touched in some way. I couldn't get rid of the nagging questions by what and to what end and finally who benefits from this. The answers that came brought up the themes of co-optation and tokenism. So when Nanci-Ames Curtis said this conference was going to go across the continent, I thought of Kentucky Fried women’s movement. After that statement, the main speaker, Betty Friedan, came on. I'd read Friedan years ago and thought for all her years in the movement she must have some light to shed on the subject, but I was wrong. She was a poor speaker, something I didn’t expect, rambling and confused. In a room full of a thousand women, it felt like she addressed the four men in the front row. The Free Press of course headlined their article, “Friedan says women must work with men,” the kind of women’s movement they'd love to see.

She never addressed the issue of power, though she did note that it was usually men doing the oppressing, but attributed it to accident and labeled the enemy as the right. She also did radical feminism and the idea of sexual politics a disservice by equating it with sex and saying there’s been “too much talk about sex for something that takes just a few minutes in bed at night” (a decisively heterosexual view). Sexual politics as conceived by Kate Millet and others refers to sex as a gender class and was the beginning of the analysis of oppression of one sex by another. This is the central theme of feminism and the main one that the co-opters would like to bury.

None of that should have surprised me, because of the very theme of the conference: “Equality — How to Live with

Continued on Page 10

who ever loved a woman/ You oughta stand up and call her name/ Momma, Sister, Daughter, Lover.”

When they burst out and sang “Believe I’ll run on, see what the end is gonna be” I couldn’t just dance inside me. I had to get up and dance physically. That was the end. Or was it? After thundering applause and shouts for more, they came out and started to sing “Sweet