Page 6

LUMMUNWUOMAN MAY 1979

Americans, particularly women, are dieting as never before. One American ethic is “think thin.” So-called women’s magazines rarely publish without a new diet to expound. Feminists, however, are realizing that dieting and the thin ideal are pushed more for women than for men, reinforcing the idea that women are for decoration.

On Monday, March 12, the Champlain Valley Chapter of the National Organization for Women (NOW) sponsored three speakers on the topic “Women and Weight.” All three speakers were white middle-class women, none of whom could be called fat. Weight loss is a multi-million dollar business; each of these speakers makes her living to a large extent from selling weight loss.

Patsy Dunlop, a five-year employee of Weight Watchers, Inc., began, asking, “Are you one of those people, like I was, living from hand to mouth? I was one of those people who couldn't keep it out of my mouth, I did it in the kitchen, in the car; it’s everywhere, and I put it in my mouth as often as possible.”

"It," of course, is food. Dunlop implied that overweight people are necessarily overeaters and that eating is obscene. The Weight Watchers program includes weekly weigh-in meetings ($6 registration, $4 per meeting) and talks on good food planning and nutrition. Their idea of good nutrition includes saccharin, other artificial sweeteners, chemical additives, red and white meats and fish. Dunlop herself was gung-ho, sold on the ideal of every woman becoming a thin woman.

Ruth Beeken, a nurse practitioner in the obesity clinic at the Medical Center Hospital, presented a more statistical analysis of weight from the research findings at the clinic. Obesity is calculated in the clinic by the percentage of body weight that is fat. Between the ages of 20 and 74, 12% of men and 23% of women are obese. As age goes up and economic status goes down, a much higher percentage of women are fat than of men: 35% of women aged 45-64 and living below poverty level are obese, compared to 5% of men in the same age and economic group.

Beeken also said that, normally, all women have twice as much body fat as men do. Beeken theorized that women store more fat as emergency food for pregnancy. But the “Metropolitan Tables,” insurance tables listing “ideal” weights according to height, are calculated by men for predominantly male executives who buy insurance. These tables list much lower “ideal” weights for women than for men of the same height. Further, each person is born with a certain number of fat cells (20 billion to over 100 billion). If infants and children are overfed during their growth spurts, their fat cells duplicate themselves faster than other body cells. We can never get rid of fat cells, though we can shrink them.

Iris Bloom, a psychotherapist and member of the Growth Center, talked about compulsive eating and fat, referring often to Fat Is a Feminist Issue, by Susie Orbach. According to Bloom and Orbach, fat is a protective shield, an excuse not to take risks with our bodies or our emotions. Bloom urged us to “own” our fat and stop thinking of ourselves as basically thin people. We need to admit that all of the bulk in the mirror is us and make conscious choices about continuing to be fat.

Bloom suggested that people eat to alleviate three kinds of hunger: stimulus hunger (boredom), structure hunger (buying, preparing, eating food structures our time), and recognition hunger (eating food gives us “strokes” without risk of refusal). She said that she works to help people develop alternative ways to meet these hungers without food. Bloom offers all-day workshops on weight for $25. Group counseling sessions cost $15 each and individual counseling is $25 per session, though all fees are negotiable.

Basically, all three speakers accepted the thin image as ideal, and agreed that fat is unhealthy. There are really two problems being considered: compulsive food behavior and fat. There are Orbach, in Fat Is A Feminist Issue, points out that women’s compulsive food behavior (including anorexia nervosa, a disease during which women literally starve themselves, some to death) is a response to our powerlessness. Orbach, however, relates this powerlessness to a fear of our sexuality, a desire to deny our sexuality and remove ourselves from the sexual marketplace. As a fat woman, it is true that I have had to deal much less with my sexuality around men, but I resist the idea that at age three I decided to be fat so that I wouldn’t have to deal with men sexually. I mattered in my neighborhood, I had power because I was bigger than the other kids my age and I could beat them up.

For years as a fat woman, I have had clothes that fit badly. Not by choice, but because no other clothes were available to me. Ill-fitting clothes make me feel physically unfit and yucky, i.e. ill.

Janet Hicks

But as adults, all fat women are subject to a great deal of stress for their/our weight. The diets, diet doctors, researchers and therapists maintain the myth that fat people are lazy (or we wouldn’t be fat), we have no willpower, we don’t deserve to be healthy, and of course we aren't. When we go to health care workers, we are told that our problem is all or partly due to being fat. We are told to lose weight. We are made to feel ashamed of our bodies and ourselves and insulted and degraded by the examination. We tend not to get very good health care.

Fat people supposedly have more heart trouble, high blood pressure, digestive problems, hypertension, et cetera, than non-fat people. Most of these diseases are more closely linked to stress. Stress is “the personal pain of oppression,” according to the Fat Underground, a group in California which puts out information about fat. Studies have shown high incidences of the stress-related diseases in other oppressed minorities. “There is no disease that is caused by obesity and no disease unique to fat people,” according to the Fat Underground's medical information.

Your clothes are a conscious and unconscious part of your reality, your sense of yourself. When my clothes are constricting, my thoughts are sometimes constricted; I feel tight and grouchy.

When my clothes are loose and comfortable, my body feels whole and my thoughts flow easier.

Janet Hicks

It is stressful to have no positive images in the media, to be the butt of jokes, to hate buying clothes because of the attitudes of the sales help and the long search for stores where the sizes don't stop at 13 or even 18. The clothes made for us are expensive and poorly made of polyester stretch, which looks and feels terrible. It is oppressive to be offered so much food in advertising, then told to buy more pills, gadgets and plans for reducing. It is oppressive to get inadequate health care because of the worker’s own conviction that if only we’d lose weight, our problems would be solved.

Being fat is not necessarily something a woman can and should change. Most fat people are fat all their lives, no matter how much they diet. “The average fat person eats the same amount of food (calories) as the average slim person. There is no distinction between the eating habits of fat and thin people that can be considered a reliable cause of obesity,” says the Fat Underground.

A fat woman is her normal size. We need to remember that the medical, research, diet and drug industries want us to feel bad about ourselves so we'll buy their useless products. Fat oppression, like other forms of looksism, helps keep us divided and powerless. Fat women are strong, powerful, and beautiful.

Fat Underground Medical Information is available for a donation from Fat Underground, Box 597, Venice, CA 90201.

BODY LANGUAGE

More on Hormones

Are you taking any kind of hormone for birth control, menopause, menstrual cramps, infertility or endometriosis? Do you have enough information about what these hormones are doing to your body?

Almost every woman in America eventually makes a decision about the prescribed use of sex hormones such as The Pill (for contraception) or Estrogen Replacement Therapy (for menopausal symptoms such as hot flashes). This is a serious medical decision. Hormones are a powerful substance which alter the entire body chemistry.

The Pill, a combination of two powerful sex hormones — estrogen and progestogen — affects every part of a woman's body. Commonwoman listed some of the health risks involved with The Pill in our last issue.

Estrogen Replacement Therapy (ERT) can also present problems.

Menopause is the stage in a woman’s life when her hormonal balance changes, and some uncomfortable symptoms may occur, such as hot flashes, night sweats, vaginal irritation and dryness. There is an intense controversy about how to define the menopausal experience. Is it a hormone deficiency disease? Is it a natural state? Does a woman need hormone therapy to lead a happy, healthy life?

Recent studies report a direct link between ERT and cancer of the lining of the uterus: Estrogen users are six times more likely than non-users to develop cancer of the uterine lining. For women who have used ERT for more than five years, the risk is 15 times greater. New research suggests other possible health risks. The Food and Drug Administration warns women that if ERT is prescribed for severe menopausal symptoms, it should be taken in the lowest effective dosage for the shortest period of time.

The Pill and Estrogen Replacement Therapy are the two most common uses of sex hormones, but there are many others, including:

DES. Once prescribed to women to prevent miscarriage. Now known to have drastically affected the children they were carrying. Still being prescribed as a Morning After Pill for early abortion, and to suppress milk production in women who don’t breast-feed.

Depo-Provera. Considered by the Food and Drug Administration for use as a three-month injectable contraceptive, despite a definite link with cancer in dogs, despite very serious side effects such as severe bleeding, headaches and nausea.