IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Page 10

By Michiyo Cornell

Maria was a sophisticated fourteen-year-old girl and knew, as her mother told her, that men sometimes hurt girls. She never would have spoken to the brown-haired man whose groceries she helped carry except... the sun was so bright, the sky so blue, and the clouds so white that it seemed nothing would harm her that day.

Maria was on her way home from school; she had picked up another horse story and a science fiction novel. Science fiction was just starting to pull Maria’s attention from animal stories; most of the animal stories were about horses and dogs. Maria was thinking happily of the new readings she'd gotten when she saw the man struggling with two bags of groceries. The groceries didn’t seem very heavy but were awkward to carry; Maria stopped and watched the man for a while.

The man was cleanly dressed in a white tee shirt and beltless blue jeans. His hair was neatly trimmed. He could have been one of Maria’s older brother’s friends.

“I could help you carry one bag if you're not going too far,” Maria said to the man.

The man glanced at her then up and down the street. He shrugged and put down both bags of groceries. He was soft-spoken when he replied. “I would like that. I live a block down in one of those apartment buildings.”

Poor families lived crowded in those buildings, Maria knew, but Maria’s family didn't live any better, so Maria felt no alarm at helping such a kind-spoken man. She took the bag he handed her and it wasn’t very heavy at all.

Sure enough, they walked in silence one block down and the man turned into the basement door of an apartment. Still suspecting nothing, Maria entered the building a little slowly since she had trouble seeing the steps leading down over the top of the bag she carried scrunched against her two library books. Suspicion hit Maria the moment she got through the basement door; it was just a cellar, not a basement apartment. The man had put down his bag of groceries and his jeans and underpants were around his ankles. The man’s penis was sticking out from his body and some sperm dripped off the end of the penis. 

Maria took one look at the man, dropped her bag of groceries but not the two books, and bolted up the stairs and onto the sidewalk. Maria raced for home, half expecting the man to shout and chase her, but he didn’t appear. After two or three blocks, Maria slowed down and hugged the books to her chest.

Journal Entry

Journal Entry, May 6, 1980

By Zana

I’ve felt so bad physically, yet pushed myself to go to Grants Pass today for my car appointment. Tonight (it’s 8 p.m., and still not dark!) I feel vaguely sick, vaguely headachy. My nose is ice cold even though I’m wearing my heavy robe over wool pants, flannel shirt & turtleneck, wool socks & my sheepskin slippers & a cap. Plus I stayed in bed an hour or so after returning from town. I really feel shitty.

Glimmers of Bob and other parts of my life during that time at Western Microfilm keep coming to me. The photo of the man killed in a freight elevator. The big birthday cakes made of white sugar & lard & food coloring that Bob and Andre and I made ourselves sick on. All the people gone by the time I left: Natalia, Athan, Sarah, Gary, Daniel, Jack, Linda. Or were they? I can’t remember who left when—not even whether Bob left before I did—and I have so little from that year to jog my memory. It was the year I lost my date book. The year Rachel died, the year I broke up with Doug. The year I came out as a lesbian. So much to process & yet my life marches on, if now more slowly. At support group I couldn’t bring myself to once again tell my herstory. So much pain. So many things left untouched for later processing. Tonight I thought, maybe it’s near my time to die. My life lies so heavy on me now.

And though I tell myself that somewhere in my memory I do remember all that’s happened, so much seems irretrievable, lost. Reading over journal entries I’m often amazed at how I felt at the time, or the way things really happened.

All the relationships past, all the people I will never see again, braided hair at Western. Whatever happened with Steve and Melody? Doug—I wonder when I’ll be able to relive that? I feel old and tired. Yet there’s no way to really slow things down. Here I am with a whole new set of people, and even if I chose to be here a long time, they probably wouldn’t. I wonder if we are meant to change so? I think of the Eskimo book, how they must have lived their lives with so much less change & input. I have left jobs twice now partly because my friends left. I also left the Sentinel-Record, where old grooves were deepening. But Donnie and Janet & Joe had left the state. It was the negative, unsatisfying relationships that remained. And the threat of continuing pain with John.

Even if the cast of characters could remain constant & good here; events would keep happening. So fast, in this world. Maybe so in all societies; maybe if not a fight against the herbicide spraying, it would be a swarm of locusts or a baby’s death. Maybe I’d be bored if nothing happened. Will this mood pass? Maybe the possibility of my own change through the support group is frightening.

More & more spiders; they’re “taking over,” appearing everywhere & including more & more in their webs. I remember Abel toward the end of Green Mansions, his mood of hopelessness reflected in the fat ugly spiders sharing his abode.

May 11 Sunday morning—I have a recurring (new) feeling about being at the end of my life, despite my always believing I’d live to be very old. (Maybe I have, just not in this life or chronologically.) The thought of dying is not one I embrace, & I’m not suicidal as during my last days in San Francisco. Instead, I’m happy & content though the flames were rekindled a little by Carol’s letter yesterday, talking about two short stories she has in her. She’ll be the writer who never puts in years like I have freelancing but suddenly is “discovered” or gets one thing published big & then begins printing this huge backlog of great stuff that’s been in her closet. Yes, I feel competitive. Too bad—I can't just enjoy that prospect for her.

Perhaps an even more devastating “dead dream” is my wanting to travel, live abroad, and especially live in a tropical climate. Lately I’ve recognized that as my lost dream in the same way Grandpa lusts after traveling but has lost his opportunity to do it. It’s not just my arthritis, it’s knowing more positively—after some 15-20 years!—that my wait to find someone or some people who share that dream is in vain. Pat is the exception, but Pat is tied up with a man.

So anyway, I think, why am I continuing living? It’s nice; I’ll do some more emotional growth, learn some more edible plants, enjoy day-to-day contact with the earth & people. But in a way I’ve done all I’ll be able to do in my life & more years would only give me time to do more of the same. “I’ve lived a full life,” as they say.

Writing this makes me less sure of its validity; suddenly I feel more energy to get out of bed (It’s 10:30 & I’m recording my waking thoughts) and get back into sorting out my belongings—a way of molding my life in preparation for the future. But the thoughts have been lingering & I won’t discount them.

This is the third grey day after some two weeks of sun. I can’t believe it’s May. I burned a fire both days & wore my wool here a lot, as serene as I've ever been. I feel without goals, futureless. I have less conviction now that I'll ever be a famous writer. Also less desire for it.

So many people—my head is full of them. All with their own stories, unique personalities. Glimpses—Beverly, Jude, the solemn Asian woman with long johns yesterday. I don’t hate this endless winter, not yet. But it's so strange. It does make me feel that a dream of warmth has died in my life.

For answer see Chris at Nutshell, 104a Church St.