Margie Adam _ | Rape

By Earth Mother

This sunburst of a personality happened on April 29. She had come to help raise funds for the celebration of womanhood, WomenWomenWomen Two. Ira Allen Chapel was packed full, showing how much her giving and enthusiasm, her irrepressible good humor and compassion are appreciated.

Everything in her seems to be geared to building women up. She tells little things on herself between songs as well as during the music itself. It’s okay to show we can't always be perfect, sometimes worry we might not seem “normal.” It’s okay to have our nutsy moods and broody moods... fine to be in whatever mood we're in, wants us free to be ourselves at all times. Speaking, singing to the moods of all people she reaches out to women, gay or straight, especially feminists.

Enhancing it all with added dimension was a young woman named Barbara Finnerty, using Ameslan, the sign language for the hearing impaired. She expressed lyrics with all of herself as well, at times swaying her body to the music, her face a study in dreamy-eyed mysticism or sadness, sparkle-eyed with humor, livid with anger. All the while her hands spelled out lyrics in exquisite design. It was fascinating between songs as well, for Adam uses her hands expressively as she talks, and one’s eyes would stray to Finnerty’s hands which were making different shapes. How lovely the hands of women!

Margie’s voice is a pleasure to the ear. Not really very high or low, maybe termed in the middle upper, she can reach up or down nicely with no flat notes. Her voice is strong and clear. Listening with your heart you can be amazed at the depth of her understanding and wisdom for such a young woman.

She throws herself so wholeheartedly into her playing one doesn’t wonder how she manages to stay trim. Her piano is an extension of all her emotions, caressed gently, thoughtfully or struck with the exuberance of affection or anger at unfairness.

We heard the first public appearance of her newest piano piece, “Whimsy Salad.” She played songs from her album as well as others I hadn't heard before. Her song for Malvina Reynolds is called “Momma Lion,” showing tender respect. She played accompaniment to slides from WomenWomenWomen One, one of which was “Rag Bag," a favorite of mine. She sang a song dedicated to women on welfare or in prison, or lesbians, who worry about their children being taken away from them, called “Baby Child.”

She had us all harmonizing with her and each other — “WE SHALL GO FORTH” — a marvelous rallying cry. The row I was in was particularly lively.

Honey in the Rock.

When the concert was over, one of my friends came and pounced on my mother and shouted, “I’m a lesbian.” That kind of concert, with all that female power, makes me proud I’m a woman child.

We all held hands and swayed as we sang with her — “Seeing is believing in the things you see/ Loving is believing in the ones you love” — from “Best Friend,” one of the dearest songs ever written. Her warm concern for sisters is in evidence in all she sings. Margie manages to get the audience participating, which is always more fun than just being a watchful lump. We react with our feelings which we show unashamedly. There’s a sweetness in many womanly voices singing together that could not possibly be topped by the most glorious group of angels.

Margie announced that after the concert there would be a Take Back the Night Demonstration which she would join, and was told that sisters in Gainesville, Fla., would also be marching that night.

It was a treasure of an evening, happy expressions on faces as we filed out. If heaven doesn’t have that sort of atmosphere when we get there, let's not stay!

This article is written under the pseudonym given me at the first WomenWomenWomen Conference by Margie herself, with which many have agreed since then. I wanted her to know who authored this sincere verbal bouquet, sure some sisters will gladly send it to her.

Kennedy

Continued from Page 3

It’s Flo's belief that we often fail to act because of a defeatist, consent-to-oppression approach. “We always assume that it's going to be harder than it is. We can’t assume they’re going to stop us before we try. And most of us haven't even tried yet.”

“Everybody ignores the fact that every time they buy a bar of soap, they support Procter and Gamble, or that when they buy their shampoo, chances are it’s from Bristol-Myers. What good does it do to talk and talk without doing something specifically designed to bring it down? We should be committed to withdrawing our support from it [American corporate capitalism].”

A local bank (the Chittenden) which funds an arm manufacturer who sells to South Africa would be an “easy picket,” she says. When she was teaching at the Alternate University, Flo had a class of hers picket the Chase Manhattan. She endorses the idea of withholding payment on utility bills for the amount which is nuclear powered, and is pushing boycotts of General Foods, Procter and Gamble, Nestlé’s, Coca Cola, Chiquita, J. P. Stevens, and SmithKline. The idea is to withdraw support from the multinationals as much as possible, to bring down this economic system (the patriarchy) which bases itself on the subjugation of womyn and other minorities.

Consumer boycotts and like actions should be combined with violence. “Violence is an integral part of any radical technique,” she says. It should be performed in an “appropriate context of oppression.” Sports, part of the American ethic (along with sex and “love”) she considers to be an inappropriate use, since it has “zero social effect — except that it deflects from the proper use of violence.”

When asked about her sexual preference, Flo says, “I've never had a single, solitary lesbian experience. Partly because I have a bad body, partly because I never met anyone I was that attracted to who was female. But I think it’s crucial that everyone have choices. I support the gay community the same way I support Native American rights.” She was married for two years, when she was 41; the marriage terminated when her husband died. She does not usually volunteer the information about her sexuality, saying, “I think a declaration is no more necessary than it is for a woman who continues to use her given name after she gets married.”

She points out that many times people will climb on the bandwagon of a minority group whose strength is growing,

118 Pine St.

Neither did the court.

As the trial progressed and I became angrier and angrier, I began to think about the implications of an insanity defense and rape.

Violent criminals are often defended through insanity pleas. The two most common crimes in which this plea is entered are rape and murder. The insanity defense produces a lengthy trial. A murder victim is, of course, never subjected to the agony of reliving the assault. A rape victim, however, must suffer through a long judicial process, not knowing whether her assailant will be punished, forced to recount the attack again and again.

Insanity is a confused defense. On a “rational” legal basis it was developed in order to protect the insane or the mentally incompetent from being punished for a crime for which there was no intent. Though rational, the legal system is often illogical. Nor does it consider the societal connotations of the insanity defense.

An insanity defense in a rape trial is possible because of incorrect popular assumptions about rape. Men cannot accept that violence toward womyn is part of their socialization. Thus a rapist’s behavior is justified by the excuse that he must be so crazy that he didn’t know what he was doing. Not only that, but

“What happens is, when niggers get strong, people want to be niggers. Because the Black people in South Africa are challenging the power of the whites, a lot of white people say, ‘I’m African.’ Maybe they are. Nobody goes around saying they’re Black in America, if they're not.” The problem of liberal sympathizers “acting like they're more into your situation than they really are” occurs when there’s a change in the status of a “niggerized community.” The gay community has been niggerized, says Flo, and now there are some who come around “slumming” or “thinking that you [gays] are better than they are.”

Doing things solely to make other people happy is not something Flo Kennedy does. “I’ll change for my own comfort, I may pick up other people’s styles, but for my own reasons, not theirs. I’m not selling simulation.”

She is proud of the gay community for defying sexist role models, and says, “I’ll learn from the gay community, and hopefully they might even learn something from me.”

Burlington

unbecoming

MEN & THE HAZARDS OF BEING MALE, surviving the myth of masculine privilege, Herg Goldberg,

Page 5

the insanity plea says that the action, though wrong, is only punishable if the rapist knew it was against the law. No matter the extent to which he knew he was hurting his victim, if found insane, a rapist needs treatment, not punishment.

Another atrocity of the rape/insanity situation is the implications of the criminality of the act. Rape is still wrongly perceived as a “crime of passion.” Actually, passion has little or nothing to do with rape, since over 75% of all rapes are planned. But the “passion” argument remains, hand in hand with “all's fair in love and war.” Rape, then, is seen as a psychological aberration — but not a crime.

A third problem of the insanity defense is rooted in general male distrust/dislike of womyn. Most men believe that there is something about womyn that makes men crazy. It could be intentional — as in the example of the minister’s wife; indirect — as in the child's mother’s refusal to go out with Smith; or unintentional — as in the babysitter’s admittance of Smith into an apartment where she was alone with a child. Womyn ask for it. Men can’t help themselves — particularly not men who have unstable sexual histories.

But to have claimed that the young womyn was asking for it would have been too obscene for the Vermont Court system. Instead, another womyn and a potentially homosexual man drove Smith crazy.

It's a Pyrrhic victory that Smith was convicted. The editorial in the Free Press on June 1, 1979, accurately described the process:

“Smith's rights were protected all during the time it took for this case to finally come to a close... in protecting Smith's rights, the state subjected the young woman, her family and the parents of the slain child to reliving the horrors that Smith put them through five years ago. It must have been a terrible ordeal for them, but it was necessary to the cause of justice.“

Wonderful. Concern for a rapist’s rights supersedes victim's rights.

Obviously we cannot depend on the courts to protect womyn from sexual assault. Even liberal judges like Tom Hayes, who presided over the final trial, can only operate within the constraints of the legal system. When established systems can't help us, we have to help ourselves.

$3.95.

THE LIMITS OF MASCULINITY, male identity and women’s liberation, Andrew Tolson, $1.95.

A MAN'S PLACE, masculinity in transition, Joe Dubbert,

THE LIBERATED MAN, beyond masculinity in relationships, Warren Farrell, $5.95.

$2.25.

THE MEN’S CAREER BOOK, work and life planning for a new age, Joyce Slayton Mitchell, $2.25.

MEN: A BOOK FOR WOMEN, from sexuality to fathering, a compendium by James Wagenwoord,

MEN AND MASCULINITY, a collection of articles for the feminist man, Joe Pleck, $5.95.

$3.95

BOOK STACKS