COMMONWOMAN

The women who worked on this month's issue are:
WORKERS

CORE GROUP: Linda Wittenberg, Peggy Luhrs, Gwynn Marilyn,

Jean Palmer, Lynn Vera, Jane Dewey, Paij Bailey.

EDITORIAL COMMITTEE: Jane Dewey, Peggy Luhrs, Mandy

McDermott, Linda Comito, Laurie Larson, Lynn Vera,

BUSINESS: Jean Palmer, Gwynn Marilyn

SUBSCRIPTION MAILING: Joni AvRutick, Sherry Keefe, Glo,
Jean Palmer

DISTRIBUTION: Laurie Larson, Helen Greenspan, Linda
Siegel, Katty Texome,

ADVERTISING: Alverta Perkins, Ellie Jones

COPY PREP: Euan Bear, Linda Comito

LAYOUT: Carol Altobelli, Etana Finkier, Joni, Linda Wittenberg,

Gwynn Marilyn, Lynn Vera, Ellie Jones, Sherri Keefe, Katey Wolff
Typesetting: Sue Ball

2861 3NAT-AVW NYWOMNOWWOD

COMMONWOMAN is made up of a small group of women who work
together collectively to put out this paper. At present, no one on the
collective is paid for her work.

NOTES FROM THE CORE
At the core group meeting we decided to try and share some of our
process and decisions with readers, which we'll do in this box.

We want to expand our distribution, both throughout Vermont and
elsewhere. If you would distribute the paper (which may mean picking up
a bundle at the bus) in your area, even if to one outlet, please contact us at
the address below. If you live locally and have ideas for good outlets for
the paper, send them too.

We want to reply to women who send copy for publication when we
think our editorial suggestions and feedback would help get your point
across to readers. We realize some women never hear from us or see their
piece in the paper, and we hope to improve that communication.

COMMONWOMAN will not be responsible for returning cartoons,
graphics, photographs or written material unless special arrangements are
made in advance or a stamped, self-addressed envelope is provided by the
contributor.

PLEASE: articles submitted should be short and succinct. It helps us
a lot if they are typed, double-spaced.

We are working on a policy for reimbursing women for supplies used
to do a solicited assignment for COMMONWOMAN. Since our finances are
very tight, we would only like to reimburse women who can’t afford to
provide the materials (for example photographic supplies), but we cannot
afford to pay for gas, time, overhead, etc. We do reimburse in full travel
expenses for distribution, and mailing and phone costs.

We're happy to have two women with lots of energy working on ad
sales. If you know someone who'd like to advertise in the paper, have them
contact the address below.

COMMONWOMAN is published every six weeks. Subscription rates
are $6.00/8 issues; $20/8 issues for institutions. It is free on request to
women in prison and to women in mental institutions.

DEADLINES:
Tuesday, June 1 LAYOUT:
Sunday, June 6 June 12 & 13

The future as put forth by dominant males is pretty grim.
Nuclear annihilation on the one hand or a computer-run fascist
world state on the other. If this is the only vision there is, then
this is the only future there is. With the idea that it is vital for us
to imagine another future, COMMONWOMAN invites her readers to
send us your future visions. Don’t be intimidated by the vastness
of the topic. We would like to hear any ideas our readers have for
the future no matter how near or far into the future that may be.
Send typewritten double-spaced manuscripts to COMMONWOMAN,
Box 242, Winooski, Vermont.

SEND TO:

COMMONWOMAN

P.O. BOX 242
ONLY $6 PER SUBSCRIPTION

WINOOSKI, VERMONT 05404

Women Helping Battered Women
Vermont Women’s Health Center
Women’s Rape Crisis Center

658-1996
863-1386
863-1236

Planned Parenthood, Burlington.............. 863-6326
Middlebury........................................ 388-6779
Parents Anonymous (days).................... 864-0104
MARIE................................................ 864-7423
Champlain Valley NOW......................... 453-0146
Central Vermont NOW........................... 223-5819
Addison County NOW............................ 453-4483
ISIS (In Shelter Is Safety)..................... 229-9495
Central Vt. Women’s Center
151 Elm St., Montpelier

Governor's Commission on the Status of Women... 828-2851

I swear it to you

and will rise!

LETTER

Dear m,
I think COMMONWOMAN is
great. Here are some thoughts, maybe
to be put in your next issue,
maybe just for reflection...
In Sisterhood,
Meg

My dress is light, it flutters
with the breeze
tapping me out of my reverie.
My hat shades my
fairness
from the sun,
green eyes restful.
I pick a chance flower,
hold it close, breathing its fresh life.
It is part of me
I am of the same cycle, living in
the beauty of the sun.

A woman touches me.

I respond instinctively,
it is natural.
it is good and beautiful.
We lay in the flowers and
I love the way her
soft
dark
curls
brush my fairness...
all over.

She smells of sweetness.
She too has loved flowers.
We roll and fit perfectly,
I study the sky, so blue,
The sun warms my new body.
Bright grass tickles me, the
flowers bend to watch.

All is sensation and scent.

W.E.B.

newsletter

a survival network for wimmin
Oar cd aie es ae

ARADIA

1
GRAND RAPIDS, MI 49510
SUBSCRIPTION #4 (per year, 2 issues)

Respected by All!

= Olive + Heamano's best
Pal... I dedicated Heamana!
- Shakes -

I swear it on my common woman's head.
The common woman is as common as a common loaf of bread —

cut out your very own common uns.

STAR BOTTOM. COLOR if you want.

TAPE a Safety Pin to the back.

Gay Pride Day!
The annual NEW ENGLAND GAY PRIDE MARCH in Bos-
ton is June 19. Marching side-by-side with gay brothers/lesbian
sisters is a celebration/statement you may want to participate in.
Buses leave Burlington early Saturday morning and return
Sunday. Round trip price is $25.00 and must be paid by May
31st.

Also, rooms at the Copley Square Hotel are available: cost
around $80 for 4 bed “family suites,” and must be paid for by
May 1.

Fill out this part and mail it with full payment by the
required date.
Count me/us in for the Gay Pride March in Boston June 19
and 20.
( ) I/we want the bus trip, at $25 per person
I/we will be boarding in
( ) Burlington

( ) Montpelier
( ) White River Jct.

( ) I/we would be interested in a bus going down and back in the
same day, if available.

( ) I/we need accommodations at the Copley Square Hotel.
(Send in a deposit of $15 per person, and we will adjust the
final amount once we know who else needs accommodations,
and what the rooming arrangements will be.)

Total Enclosed:

Make checks payable to Bob Mundstock, Box 743, Burlington VT
05401.

Names: 

Address:

Any profits will be donated to the gay/lesbian group of your
choice. You will be given a form on the bus to indicate your

Don't worry.
There's got to be!
Nia solute,