COMMONWOMAN DEC 1979

COMMONWOMAN

The women who worked on this month’s issue are:

The Collective

Wittenberg.

Helping Hands

Consuelo, Joyce Cheney, Patte Ghezzi, Betsy Keir, Robin Mide,

Lynn Vera Jo Schneiderman.

Commonwoman, Inc.,

is a not-for-profit corporation

founded for the purpose of publishing Commonwoman, a Vermont women’s publication of news, culture and dialogue from a feminist perspective. Commonwoman, Inc., is made up of a small group of women who work together collectively to put out this paper. At present, no one on the collective is paid for her work. We will consider for publication articles, poems, short stories,

graphics and photographs submitted by women. All articles should be typed and double spaced; we prefer articles that are no longer than three pages. We reserve the right to edit for length

and clarity.

Signed articles reflect the viewpoint of the author and not necessarily that of the collective.

Commonwoman will not be responsible for returning any written materials, poems, graphics or photographs unless special arrangements are made in advance or a stamped, self-addressed envelope is provided by the contributor. A note on procedure: We hold an editorial committee meeting on the date of our first deadline (printed in this box) and decide by consensus which of the copy we have received will be published in our next issue; this copy is sent to the typesetter. The following Sunday, the editorial committee meets again for its final deadline meeting; this deadline is intended for late submissions before publication and is delivered to the printer on Monday. On Wednesday, we mail the paper to our subscribers and deliver it to our commercial outlets.

to Box 242, Winooski, Vt. 05404 before the deadline printed in this box.

and women in mental institutions.

Commonwoman, Inc. Box 242 Winooski, Vt. 05404

DEADLINE: December 30, 1979

Copyright Commonwoman, Inc. 1979

COMMONWOMAN can be purchased at the following locations:

Burlington: Ben & Jerry’s Bookstacks Everyday Bookshop Hargreaves Little Professor Origanum Sunflower Essex: Little Professor Shelburne: Creamery Mental Offices Montpelier: Aquarian Grocery Bear Pond Books Horn of the Moon Cafe Hunger Mountain Co-op Women’s Center

Health

If there is a store in your neighborhood that will carry COMMONWOMAN, contact us. Women interested in helping with distribution outside the Burlington area, contact COMMONWOMAN, Attention Linda Wittenberg.

$$$

The publication of Commonwoman is financially dependent on advertising revenues. It is therefore very important that those businesses and individuals who do advertise in Commonwoman become aware of the effects/results of their ads. Please support people who advertise in Commonwoman, and especially make a point of telling them you do business with Commonwoman advertisers.

Picture yourself in Commonwoman. Send us your photography. Box 242, Winooski, Vt. 05404,

Letters to the Editors —

Dear Commonwoman,

I want to thank all the women in the Burlington area women’s community who had and have connections with some or all of the members of the now defunct Redbird Collective for supporting our process of splitting up in what I consider to be the best possible way — by not enmeshing yourselves in the complicated inter-group and interpersonal tensions inherent in the splitting up of such a tightly knit group of people.

Many of us (Burlington area women), myself included, have seen and participated in active and destructive side-taking in the women’s community in the past. I had a lot of fear that the dynamic of side-taking would produce another “community war” in this situation. This fear of mine has contributed greatly toward my lack of connection with most women in the community for the past six months.

But apparently most women (especially those who were around for the last “community war”) have chosen to give personal support to individual ex-Redbird members and not directly involve themselves in the anger, tensions, and conflicts which have grown out of the past four years of struggle.

As I have communicated very little with most of the women in Burlington that I know, and as I still feel a strong need for lots of personal space, I wanted to find a way to let women know that I noticed and appreciate the way in which so many of you have remained friendly and neutral.

Martha Abbott

Postmaster: Please forward and send change of address to: Commonwoman P.O. Box 242 Winooski, Vt. 05404

Porn Tactics

Dear Commonwoman,

I was pleased to pick up a copy of Commonwoman while visiting a friend at UVM. I admire your efforts with the paper and wish you all the success and support to continue the expression of feminist concerns. As an aspiring feminist writer, I was compelled to respond to your article, “Feminism, Pornography and Violence."

Pornography, and ensuing violence, oppression and degradation of women, is one of my major concerns as a feminist. Nothing enrages me more than this institutionalized and legally sanctioned subjugation of women. And yet, as a feminist, I cannot succumb to violence as a tactic to eliminate it, and therefore, I strongly oppose the smashing of the windows of the Williston Adult Book Store. Violence is historically a masculine tactic used to conquer, control and annihilate people. Using violence, men have arbitrarily and successfully destroyed races such as the Jews and Japanese. I feel that all people have a right to express themselves, even the Nazis have the right to speak in America. But just as it is our responsibility to make known the horrors of the Nazi doctrine, it is our responsibility to make known the threat that pornography poses to the lives of women.

In 1977 I participated in a picket against Hustler Magazine with Women Against Violence and Pornography in the Media. We formed a line in front of a major liquor store carrying posters of Hustler’s current cover, a picture of a naked woman being fed into a meat grinder and emerging as hamburger meat. When confronted with calm but determined women demonstrating our outrage at the dehumanization of our sister, many people were likewise appalled and supported our petition denouncing such an offense. This was an effective non-violent method of raising consciousness and gaining sympathetic allies against pornography among the heterogeneous clientele of the liquor store that Saturday afternoon.

While my gut reaction to (especially violent) pornography is to castrate the bastards who create, buy and profit from it, I know this is not a viable way to affect change. By smashing windows, feminists alienate potential allies who could increase our power to change this sexist society. If we object to pornography because of the violence it subjects women to, I see no excuse for using violence as a means to oppose it. If a feminist is concerned with improving the quality of human life; it is hypocritical to use destructive means to achieve this end. When right-to-lifers bomb abortion clinics, are we any more willing to entertain their point of view? When feminists destroy the property of profit-motivated pornography dealers, are they any more willing to listen to our demands?

I hope that the Furious Women who Avenge Pornography will consider that rage expressed by force will only be answered with force, and it is both unwise and self-defeating to provoke violent confrontation with one of the most aggressive and violent male-dominated societies in the world. As feminists, our battles must be fought non-violently, and our fury must be channeled into constructive, not destructive actions.

In sisterhood, Robin Goldner Oberlin, Ohio

Moon Cycles

i 21 2 23 24 ©OCO 0S ee aed + lee)

©: e ]@

3 16 Ww 1? DEC. IF ree) 066 ¢ ¢ zoo 38h US pA se ee

COCC zw @ ww

u

670

med. cd P07 am