**VOL. III, NO. 8 DECEMBER**

Liz Galleran

At the national lesbians and gay men’s march on Washington; seeing blocks and blocks of lesbians, I remember gay pride in New York, 1973. There were maybe 40 womyn willing to march under the Lesbian Feminist banner.

Now, despite divisions and skepticism about being with men at all, there are tens of thousands of us. Friends and I rushed down to the Federal Triangle to turn the corner and see masses of dykes and faggots as Maxine Feldman’s voice filled the air with strains of Amazon Womyn. Perfect, it is very exciting. I see womyn I know from San Francisco, from Florida, Los Angeles, New York, Massachusetts, the Midwest. We are so beautiful and we do not see ourselves often enough in large groups, in public, out, in the media. We are not visible because we are in the larger culture most of the time. It is part of our eons of oppression that they have tried to make us invisible, but we are growing now in quantum leaps.

I think of our paranoia (from our experience in the dominant hetero culture) that they would drop a bomb on us and there would go most of the gay leadership in the country. Then I think of who we are and what we do with our lives, mostly I think of womyn and I know if we were decimated this country would have lost some of its best. This day at least I have no doubt.

At the rally, one of the speakers mentions that we are a group that cuts across race, class, sex, all lines. I am struck by this today as never before, though I know there are racist and sexist gays. But we are united by that same oppression that also divides us and we are a unique group with the possibility of healing race and class differences like no other group. I am more skeptical about gender splits and yet we have a common goal: Freedom from harassment and erasure because of sexual preference. Erasure.

Erasure is a very serious matter for lesbians and gay men, especially lesbians. Since the rise of patriarchy, homosexuality has been hidden in most cultures. It has always existed, it exists everywhere, including among animals. Lovers of their own sex have been subjected to burning during the Inquisition and witch trials of the Middle Ages. Joan of Arc was on trial for wearing men’s clothing, many witches were lesbians. The word faggot comes from the practice of using male homosexuals as fuel for the pyres that burned both witches and these men. Homosexuals were required to wear pink triangles by the Nazis and were sent to concentration camps and killed as undesirables. These are the most extreme forms of erasure that we have suffered. We have also had our history buried, our literature burned or misinterpreted or concealed in obscure language.

It happens again after the march. It is the largest gathering of gay people in the history of the world, newer news than most of what’s in the paper, but we are given little space, our numbers purposely underrated. Erasure again; it is depressing, but we must remember that part of the media program is to keep us feeling powerless and intimidated. Jerimiah, at six, sees the truth of it when he says, “We have good stuff to tell them and they have only peepy, poopy things to say to us.” It’s true.

A Travesty on Our Sex

When we womyn choose to appear as we are, complete with body and facial hair and muscles, we are told that we are a travesty on our sex and that to be a womyn we must shave our hair, paint our faces, squeeze our feet into unnatural shoes, our bodies into restrictive clothing, our gestures into a suitably small sphere of space and generally fit into the man’s idea of what is erotic. Womyn, lesbian and straight should not forget that his idea of the erotic is tied to our being victims, the conquered and the conqueror. The real travesty on our sex is the way men have defined and confined us to fitting their idea of the female, which includes such insane double binds as being mother or whore, on a pedestal or degraded, untouchable or raped, various projections of the conquering sickness that is the prevalent male sexuality.

It is only womyn-identified womyn, who are attempting to know who we are without the diminutive male definitions, who can begin to know what it means to be female.

Homophobia

Some hyphenated fool wrote recently in the Cynic that homosexuals are not oppressed because they can pass and that the hetero population should not have to be subjected to such shocks as having lesbians and gay men identify themselves as such. This is the essence of the homophobic mind (perhaps the number one mental illness in the world). If homosexuality is recognized at all, and the homophobe is perhaps the most acutely aware of it, then it must be relegated to some back corner of the mind while the homophobe passes for straight. Homosexuality is so threatening because somewhere it is attractive. Why else do the homophobes fear above all that we will recruit? Because the homophobe is likely to be most rigidly into sex roles, he or she cannot help but be aware of his or her alienation from the other sex. It is a double bind situation. The more one wishes to be a “real man” or “real woman” the more one must define oneself in opposition to the other (opposition).

(continued on page 10)