She tried hard.

They told her to be skinny, so she lost 30 pounds.

Two or three times.

Once she did it with little pills, half blue and half yellow.  
Poison.

Once she did it with Diet Rite Cola.

8 cans a day. Ten cans a day. 12. Maybe more.

Poison.

They told her to have babies.

Her body didn’t want to.

They gave her poison. DES.

She had babies. Babies with poison in us.  
Girl babies with DES poison.

They made her work double time.

They told her to fix wonderful meals.

They told her how — poison.

A&P instant mashed poison, instant frozen poison.

Poison mix. Canned poison. Poison toppings, poison additives.  
And for treats, poison desserts.

They said she was nervous.

They said her hormones were unbalanced.

They gave her poison to keep her in line.

Those pills made her feel bad in her body and in her mind.  
She told the doctors.

They said ‘keep taking them,’ so she did.

Then they cut her breasts off.  
She, like all the other women, went into the hospital

and went to sleep, and woke up by surprise with no breasts.

No breasts. No muscles between her chest and arms.  
Just a reassuring great white father, and pain and fear.

She showed her strength then.

She helped other women learn to cope with having no breasts.

I wonder — did they ever laugh at the frustration of their husbands,  
or was it all pain and guilt and shame?

She bought a bathing suit that covered her scars,

and she learned to canoe,

to generate those muscles.

She conquered. She lived.

No pain, no illness. 

Or at least nothing her poisons couldn’t handle.

Successful remission. 5 years. Recovery.

A positive statistic.

Then without warning the poison won her body.

One day she was gardening.

Seven days later she was dead.

They poisoned her.

She struggled long, but the poisons won.

What poison was it? The hormone poison, baby poison, diet poison, food poison —  
or was it anger poison that ate her away from the inside?

Was it anger poison at her life,

her prison for a strong woman?

What was in her head when she died?

Was it anger that they had stolen her,

or was it relief that she would finally escape

the contradictions and confines and pains and angers and palbous?

They poisoned my mother. They killed her.

They stole a strong woman.

They said she was a success, though.

They wrote her down — wrote her off —

as a cancer success, because she lived five years

after they first cut part of her womyn-body away.  
They poisoned my mother,

They killed her body. Her body is gone.  
Her spirit is around me sometimes, though.

Together we take that poison — their poison —

that she was raped with

that she was killed with

and roll it into little pills —

little balls of anger and venom and hatred and disgust  
to give back to them.

May they take them and implode.  
May they choke on their vomit and die.

And my mother and I will be sitting on our haunches,  
rocking back and forth and laughing together,  
strong,  
as we roll the pills to give to them,  
and watch them die.  
—Joyce Cheney

Muddy Mutterings of

Motherhood

By Anonymous  
(He keeps me hidden one more time*)

My first thought when I considered writing something  
about Mothers and Daughters for Commonwoman was, ‘But I feel like I’m up to my eyeballs in Motherhood — I have no perspective!’ And that’s how I feel much of the time about my relationship with my daughter.  
And yet today is different — she has been with her father for one whole week and will be there for another week still — summer visitation for him and her, the longest break ever from Motherhood for me! We have a date to be together tonight, my daughter and I. And I’m excited! This is the first time in a long time that I can remember being genuinely excited about seeing her — just like I would be about a date with any other friend. (I think I'll get dressed up!)

But as mother and daughter we normally don’t have enough physical or emotional distance from one another to be excited by one another’s company. We are both caught in the myths and realities of Motherhood and Daughterhood. We are not friends freely choosing to be with one another. We just are together, by definition — society’s definition.

AUDREY  
THAYER, daughter of Dian E. C. Mueller-Thayer and granddaughter of Dian Kendrick Mueller. Audrey was born August 4, 1979.

HAZEL

I was in my twenties when my daughter was born. In retrospect I was not then a freely-choosing womyn. I was trying to be the kind of woman this society wants me to be. I tried on the Wife role, but that wasn't satisfying. I tried on the Careerwoman role, but that still left me searching. So after a while I thought I’d try the Motherhood role. After all, I enjoyed and knew how to nourish. And being a Mother is a large part of being a Real Woman. It seemed like a good role to try, as roles went. But after only a few months I realized that this role didn’t give me what I needed either.

Luckily I was able to extricate myself from the Wife and Careerwoman roles years ago. Yet I still discover ways and extents to which those roles confined me. So with all of one week's distance on Motherhood — up to my eyeballs in it — here’s some thoughts about Mothers and Daughters.

In the eyes of this society, I am responsible for my daughter’s EVERYTHING. If she isn’t being “well-behaved” in public, I get those “Lady, will you please control your child” stares. As if I am responsible for her behavior. As if I am supposed to protect the world from my daughter, as well as my daughter from the world. What an impossible responsibility!

If she trips and falls it’s my fault (GUILTY) because I thought about reminding her that her shoelaces weren’t tied well, but I didn’t. If she cries at night it’s my fault (GUILTY again, and ANGRY too) because I only lay down with her for a few minutes after she crawled in bed and she wanted me to stay longer. I could always have done more to make her happy. After all, I’m her Mother, the one who nourishes. And there's an endless succession of her needs to meet — a trap.

But with a whole lot of help from my friends, for about five years now, I am realizing that I too am a person with wants and needs, just like my daughter. And no one makes me happy — I have to make myself happy. And Motherhood notwithstanding, I cannot make my daughter happy — she has to make herself happy (or miserable or whatever she chooses to make herself).

After almost a decade of Motherhood (how to take care of others' needs), I am learning how to meet my own needs: how to cheer myself up when I’m bummed out; how to fix my bike when it’s broken; how to make love to myself when I want sensual pleasure. Each time I learn a new way to take care of myself I feel like a more powerful and confident womyn in the world — less like the passive victim this patriarchal society wants me to be. Less like Mother. (Less like my mother.)

Continued on Page 8

I watch from the glass door, from the porch,

over the browned lawn and concrete tracks of driveway.  
You are six, and in the last days of winter bluster

and sun, your blue balaclava and tall blue boots  
mismatch the light sweater and pants.

You will not let me tuck round the scarf at your neck,  
so the black outlines the tiny patch of boy—

flesh between the tee-shirt and sweater-neck.

I think of your grandmother,

times when I was small she watched me

from behind a window, making faces

when I caught her, big fish lips or funny grins

or a silly flutter of lashes;  

sometimes I just had to wonder and laugh —  
a grown woman like that — even if she was

my mother.

Running like a linebacker

you take off across the street.

You swerve in those boots

as if they have you on a leash,

turn by the stoop

and lean casually round to peer at the cat  
we saw earlier, walking by the candy store.

You have pretended your aimlessness;  

neither I nor the cat is convinced.

The orange cat arches its back near the lattice,  
nods an invitation to approach.

You take two steps towards it,

look round, and almost

lose my glance. I see you pat it twice.

I almost miss your rapid traffic check.

Seconds later, you run back to our yard.

I stand at the window, waiting.

You never look at me, although I make a face.  
—Marcia R. Goldberg