Page 7

“My Body As Other: ILLNESS IN OUR COMMUNITY

In many ways we are the same; in many ways we are different. Many of us do not fit the Invincible Amazon Stereotype. We are physically differently abled, or developmentally disabled (new jargon for retarded), or addicted to drugs or alcohol, or chronically ill, or crazy. Commonwomon offers this article by a California ill woman as an invitation to more dialog — in the paper and in the community in general — about these differences among us.

I live and love in a lesbian society. I’ve joined my life to other women’s lives to create a new world safe for lesbians to grow in. I have a strong commitment to the change we're involved in.

I am also an ill woman. My life has been shaped by illness.

In the women’s community I’ve run into many different yet inter-related ableist assumptions/attitudes. Illness is a hidden disability and has been ignored, denied, and rejected. Lesbians have adopted many ableist assumptions/attitudes from patriarchal institutions that are harmful to ill women. By exploring oppressive behavior, we can hopefully begin to change it. I have identified some ableist assumptions I’ve encountered in the lesbian community to give you a chance to think about them.

Attitude I: We are all young and strong dykes fighting back against that which is different from us. We demand/assume homogeneity in dress, attitude, culture, and body. We must be identifiable and homogeneous for us — and others — to recognize dykes as an effective force.

Attitude II: We are survivors. Abusive institutions and individuals have battered us and attempted to separate us from each other and our bodies, minds, and emotions. We are taking back our lives, are learning to be strong, resilient, focused women living free from that which has (in the past) bound us.

Attitude III: The patriarchy has controlled our bodies for centuries. As we take control over our bodies, balance will be restored. Dis-ease (which comes from the patriarchy or somewhere else) will be eliminated and we'll all have control over our bodily functions.

Attitude IV: “Have you tried this diet? Seen this type of healer? Done your exercise? Expressed your emotions? Eaten your herbs? Done everything your M.D. ordered? Have you really stuck to it?”

“You have? Well, you must be doing something wrong, or not enough, ‘cause I can see that you're still really hurting. Anyway, I had this cousin with something like yours, and she was cured when...”

Attitude V: “Oh wow, you say you're in pain most of the time? You're fatigued? Don't function right? Hmm. It must be horrible to be like that. You're such a nice person. It’s funny, you don't look sick. Can I do something to help you?”

Every one of these attitudes has an assumption of control. We expect each other — and collectively — to be in control of our bodies. When the denial is broken through and illness is acknowledged, the ill woman is often blamed or pitied. Like the rape victim, she is often burdened with other people’s pain, fear, and guilt.

Society heaps hatred on people (especially women) who are viewed as out-of-control. Because illness is not immediately recognized, the ill woman never knows why or how she will be rejected. This creates a schism within the ill woman that is extremely hard to live with. Many women (fat women, old, disabled — illness is not mutually exclusive to any other attribute) are rejected before any interaction. The oppression is different.

Nothing which is me could cause me such pain.

My mind separates from my body. Mind-body dualism. Mind controls, denies, dominates, and disclaims body and bodily functions. Illusion of safety is bolstered by the absence of pain in my imagination. I do not feel illness.

Body rebels. Exacerbation of symptoms. Pain pours back strongly, intensely demanding recognition.

My being reacts with outrage and despair.

This cycle has continued for years. The way I am now able to effectively interact with my body is to give up the idea of control. I am not a beast to be tamed. I believe that my body has its own motives, responsibilities, and integrity.

Giving up control has meant realizing my restrictions and accepting them. It has meant a constant commitment to my rage, patience, humor, change, spirituality, acceptance, and creativity. It has meant being open to women close to me and ending the hiding, denying, and protecting of them.

INCEST SURVIVOR

By Michiyo Cornell

I think my family would have been a pornographer’s delight. For my upbringing after my mother’s death mirrors almost exactly the psychological process that Susan Griffin describes in Pornography and Silence as destroying O's soul and making her into a thing. The only difference between me and O was that my mother’s love for the first five years of my life gave me an inner light that refused to die out through the most extreme abuse. The process I am going to describe is how I managed to keep that light alive and eventually reclaim my body.

The first years after my mother’s death were pretty traumatic; we four kids (one older brother and two younger sisters) were farmed out with various friends and relatives until my Dad could leave the army. Once we were back with Dad, we kids all had our chores to do so the household could keep functioning. As a matter of course, Ron was expected to do yard work, take the rubbish out, and move heavy furniture when we needed to move from one apartment to another.

By the time I was nine, I had been molested more times than I could count by a family friend named John who boarded with my family. Not only did John molest me in my bed at night, he molested me in the pantry, the basement of our house, the bathroom, any place he could corner me alone. At the same time John threatened me into silence by telling me I would be punished if we were found out. John was partly right; Dad and Pat were solely concerned with whether or not I was still a virgin, not how I felt about being violated. So, I was given my first intimation that what somebody took from my body was more important than my feelings.

John’s molestation was the beginning of my catatonic states at the dinner table. In order to contain my “inexplicable” (to my family) rage and hatred of John, I had to divorce myself from my body. I literally went into a state where I did not feel, taste, hear, see, or smell anything; more importantly, John’s presence at our table was obliterated. Fortunately for me, John was forced to leave our home as soon as Dad and Pat, my stepmother, found out about him molesting me, but it didn’t help that my Uncle Jim and Dad (on separate occasions) tried to rape me.

In the meantime, my body was developing (hips first) and my father started making comments about my body and how much I resembled my mother. My stepmother was not considered “pretty” by society's standards although she had her own grace and dignity and she began to get jealous of me. Suddenly, she was beating me not only for failing to get all my chores done when she thought I should but also for not keeping my sisters in line and not doing my brother's work on top of my own if he didn’t do it. It was at this time that I could hear Pat raging at my father for his failures as a breadwinner (because of poor health) and at us kids as “Jap bastards.” I could already do all the housework and cook better than she could. Was I going to take her place sexually as well?

The only times I felt free or wild was by myself. I climbed trees, rode my clunky blue bicycle named “Stallion” and explored the spring in the woods near the city park. I also wrote a series of poems that I still have. How vital these alone times were to me, no one else knew. By this time, I was also being racially harassed by the boys in and ignored by the girls in my classes except for a black girl and a white working-class girl who became a friend and an acquaintance, respectively.

I spent high school doing housework and homework, hardening my already tight defenses for the competitive world of college. I sometimes puzzled over fleeting passions for girlfriends in junior high and high school without realizing I had crushes on these girls/young women. Or maybe I didn’t let myself know what was going on; I was already so alienated from my classmates that I might have sensed that being a lesbian at that time would have destroyed me altogether. I planned to have an established career, have a child or two, and work.

College destroyed all that. Once I left the obscenity of my family life and moved into a college dorm, I found myself opening out again. I could discuss all kinds of ideas, act on my needs and most important of all—rediscovered my body as an instrument of pleasure. I discovered this through Aikido, dancing, and swimming (which I did and still do awkwardly). Just walking was a pleasure and I didn't have my father’s gaze on me to turn me into an object. After college, my daughter's birth opened completely the sluice gates of my erotic feelings. For the first time, I experienced more than a “that’s something” feeling I got from sex with men; nursing my daughter was a sensual experience. I began to have sexual feelings for the first time in my memory and learned to masturbate, to touch my own breasts, to love me. After my first nervous breakdown, I came out as a lesbian. No wonder men didn't do much for me; I wasn’t asexual as I had thought. I'm a lesbian.

(Continued on Page 14)

Reclaiming My Body