RIEW INE WS °

Page 11

NEAR AND CHILD CARE BENEFIT

By Nancy Powell

Hundreds of vocal and excited people turned out for a concert featuring Holly Near, Witch 1, and “The Stars,” given at the Flynn Theatre in late March for the benefit of the Ethan Allen Child Care Center, a local, progressive day care facility.

The theme of the benefit might have been that of the wymyn's movement as a whole: the personal is political. The opening act of the afternoon was The Stars, the oldest group of kids from Ethan Allen. They sang, with help from the delighted audience, an African welcome song, “Union Maids” and “I Can Sing a Rainbow.” It was a reminder that we can include our children in art and politics, and need not dichotomize our lives.

Witch 1, a local womon’s band, followed. They performed two songs by Kathleen Hannan, “Peas,” a light-hearted song about finding solace in the pea vines of your garden, and “Autumn Water.” The confident tones of “Relationships,” by Debbie Venn, followed (“But let it not be said/ That the answers lie in bed...”), and they finished with “Freddie’s Cowboy Song,” written by Gana, which tells of the joys of country living.

The four musicians play various instruments. Kathleen Hannan and Gana both play guitar, bass, piano and do vocals. Debbie Venn can do more with a flute than many “professionals,” and in addition, she plays guitar and bass. Mica is the percussionist, playing the conga drum, marimba and others. Joyce Shailor recently started working with Witch 1 as its sound engineer and coordinator.

Mica called the band “a vehicle for other wymyn to come out musically.” She said the band wants to work with other wymyn to develop wymyn’s instrumental and vocal skills. “We're not seeking just a wymyn audience, we want to share it with a broader community — but our focus is definitely on wymyn and with wymyn.”

Two wymyn on a brightly lit stage. We look expectantly at the red-haired womon behind the mike and at her accompanist, who sits in overalls at the piano.

COMMONWOMAN, INC. INCOME STATEMENT July 1 — April 21, 1979

Income

Subscriptions 648.25 Cash sales 348.47 Misc. income 94.01 Advertising 1,347.50 2,438.23 Production expenses Printing costs 1,502.76 Typesetting 385.00 Layout 58.21 1,945.97 Gross Profit 492.26 Net Income or Loss 30.20

The Stars

Holly Near performs some of her songs a capella (without instrumental back-up). On the others, J. T. Thomas, who has been Near’s accompanist for the last year and a half, complements rather than competes with the vocals. Near’s voice, broad in range and full of exquisite feeling, reaches the audience unhindered.

Near leads her listeners through her music and the story of her life implicit in it, gently and with humor. “We're all exceptional and accessible,” she says, referring both to all wymyn and to wymyn performers. She has a reputation for a strong, versatile voice, powerful lyrics, and the unyielding feminist content of her music. Songs like “Mountain Song/Kentucky Woman” and “Nina” are memorials to all of us, reflecting our common struggle for survival and self-realization in male-supremacist society, and our simultaneous mother/daughter selves. “I sing.../ Songs of motherlove/ Songs of my lover's love/ Singing the songs of loving myself.”

Holly Near introduces Wendy Dragonfire, a black belt in and instructor of karate, who accompanies her next song. A prelude by Near — one out of every three or four wymyn in this country will be beaten, raped or otherwise abused in her lifetime — and then the song, “Fight Back," explodes out of her. It is an urgent call for self-defense: “Women all around the world/ Every color, religion and age/ One thing we've got in common/ We can all be battered and raped...” And then the chorus, “And so we've got to fight back,/ In large numbers/ Fight back/ I can’t make it alone...” The audience takes up the refrain and sings it with one collective voice. Dragonfire acts out a kata, a multiple-movement martial arts pattern, to the rhythm of the song, striking, kicking, and lashing out with her body.

Holly Near does not perform like the mass of commercial artists; she is not one. A major voice in wymyn’s music, she has recorded four albums.

Despite the fact that Commonwoman displayed our bumper sticker as an example of sexism in Burlington, and

Despite the fact that Commonwoman published an article advocating stealing from businesses, and

Despite the fact that Commonwoman disapproves of and threatens not to accept this ad because they fail to see the humor in it,

Ben & Jerry's would like to thank Commonwoman for its service to the community and would like to thank its many readers for supporting our store these

Best wishes for a successful summer.

[Sera toy]

NVWOMNOWWOO

646! AVN