QUBILIE X=PRIESS

WOMEN CHALLENGE THE SEA

By Pamela J. Greene

While vacationers across America flocked to the water to beat  
the usual August heat, two women began separate open water  
swim record challenges in the seas around Florida.

Diana Nyad, 28, had hoped to swim from Cuba to the Florida  
Keys, a distance of 103 miles, but had to abandon her attempt  
after being carried 40 miles off course by very turbulent seas. She  
had endured continual vomiting from extreme wave action,  
recurrent painful stings from Portuguese men-of-war and periods  
of hallucinations. Toward the end of her swim, her tongue and  
throat began to swell and there was some fear that her air passage  
would be obstructed. She continued on for a total swim of 90  
miles.

Despite the grueling battle with the open ocean, Diana was  
announced exhausted, but well, by physicians after being taken  
from the water. Ms. Nyad first gained marathon swim fame when  

she swam the more than 30 miles around Manhattan.

Another swimmer, Stella Taylor, a 46-year-old resident of Fort  
Lauderdale, Florida, attempted to swim the approximately 100  
miles from Bimini to the Florida Coast. She was pulled from the  

Solo  
~ Circumnavigation  

Krystyna Chojnowska-Liskiewicz, a Polish marine  
engineer, became the first  
woman to sail solo around the  
world when she crossed her  
track in the Atlantic in late  
March, 1978. Krystyna left Las  
Palmas, Canary Islands, in her  
32-foot fiberglass sloop on  
March 28, 1976, and completed  
her 28,696-mile westward  
circumnavigation via the Panama  
Canal in just two days less than  
two years.

Using a measurement of  

straight chronological time  
Liskiewicz beat 29-year-old New  
Zealand-born Naomi James for  
the title of first solo woman  
circumnavigator. But on June 9,  
1978, James arrived back in  
Dartmouth, Devon, England,  
with a record of her own, having  
just completed the fastest solo  
circumnavigation ever in a  
monohull via route Cape Horn.  
Her 272-day voyage in the  
53-foot fiberglass sloop Express  
Crusader made only ten stops in  
her eastward voyage.

39  
Months for ERA  

The ERA, which was sent to  
the states by Congress in March  
of 1972, is currently stalled  
three states short of the 38  
needed for ratification. ERA  
supporters say that ratification  
of the amendment by the  
current deadline is almost  
impossible; some crucial state  
legislatures won't even meet  
again to vote until after the  
deadline.

States which have not yet  
ratified are Alabama, Arizona,  
Arkansas, Florida, Georgia,  
Illinois, Louisiana, Mississippi,  
Missouri, Nevada, North  
Carolina, Oklahoma, South  
Carolina, Utah, and Virginia.  
The legislatures in Idaho,  
Kentucky, Nebraska and  
Tennessee have voted to rescind  
their ratification of the ERA; in  
Kentucky the attempted  
rescission was vetoed.

The ERA reads as follows:

Section 1. Equality of rights  
under the law shall not be  
denied or abridged by the  
United States or by any State on  
account of sex.

Section 2. The Congress shall  
have the power to enforce, by  
appropriate legislation, the  
provisions of this article.

Section 3. This amendment  
shall take effect two years after  
the date of ratification.

House Gives More Time to the  
ERA  

The United States House of  
Representatives voted in August  
to approve a 39-month  
extension of time for ratification  
of the Equal Rights  
Amendment.

The final vote was 233-189.  
Earlier, the House had voted  
227-196 to reject a proposal  
which would have allowed states  
that have already ratified the  
ERA to rescind their approval if  
they wished.

The proposal to give the ERA  
more time is now in the U.S.  
Senate, where opponents are  
threatening a filibuster on the  
measure. If the Senate follows  
the example of the House, the  
deadline for the ratification of  
the ERA will be extended from  
March 22, 1979, to June 30,  
1982.

water just 10 miles short of her goal, due to shark activity and the  
strong influence of the Gulf Stream.

Ms. Taylor had twice conquered the English Channel before  
leaving Britain where she had once prepared to become a Roman  
Catholic nun. In contrast to the Nyad swim, which had attracted  
considerable publicity, there was little fanfare surrounding  
Taylor’s attempt, which took place at the same time as Nyad’s.

Ms. Taylor was reported in good condition following the 90  
mile swim, although she had to scramble out of the water on at  
least three separate occasions due to shark activity. These  
swimming interruptions disqualified her official record-breaking  
attempt.

Diana Nyad and Stella Taylor have been praised for setting  
outstanding examples of endurance, stamina and courage for  
other athletes. It is expected that they will both make additional  
attempts to challenge the current official open water record, now  
held by Egyptian Abo-Heif who, in 1963, swam 60 miles across  
Lake Michigan.

SUNFLOWER  
NATURAL  

211 COLLEGE  

BURLINGTON  

862-3654