IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

PORTRY =

3
— >
<
- =
~A WORD SOFTLY SPOKEN x . 2
See Sea (For Ofilia) MASQUERADE — to shelly coming out in buffalo summer 1976 g
fe)
aie rine fact hece 1. A transcended night by the black eyes of Aries. s
has lived waiting for his country Beran extenti sa We look - eves ees nace his — all over a =
breathing the stale air of prisons Of vORE being niin “4 a ipa ecient tek Laon 3
under the heavy thumb A creation pik osama eagle : ge =
Fe dis Coins faadaivion Of youth I hear the two of you spar with sticks in the muddy yard
h ROS q : A bond behind the house. The voice of your relationship shatters
e studied his faith from smuggled books A e i
A spar! into muted war shouts all over onto the porch.
learned Hebrew and kept the rituals is ni i
: : It is night, hot and summer coming
imagined the sound of the shofar You stand there without any fingers, it strangles me
and now he comes down from the plane In your cotton dress - Seen cess
into the roar of welcome House dress ‘ ae
th 3 oe . os We are about to leave on new journeys but our spirits
ere is a great crowd rejoicing Dressing me ill wander, still W t hold on to the
Israeli officials have come With dreams pic Oeloeen Sunt eee - eee
eat, te : Reams of thread they crawl and prowl like cats in heat.
to give him his citizenship ‘ 1 .
Gold/Yellow/Lavender Again you tell of your mother’s death while we walk the
? a ; ilent, sweetfilled night streets
Tam filled with a rush of feel ; tne
Sk Pee ts slik Seepage Dreaming The screen doors flap in the wind, shut and open and shut
‘ j About words Aran You drink the last bit of your yogurt, ask if it’s raining yet.
what soil the ramp would have to touch That can fill a time/past : : :
for me to find Meg I cannot hear what you say in the obvious high sun
So long I took up the craft so we walk the streets all night
my country and my people Yearning j ing i
to keep my peace again falling in love,
—Nora Kerr To touch : : i >
Your tears to knit up a raveled life looking for the cat and your mother’s death.
That ache inside torn loose yy \ —jan shafer
when love left me ~eYS y ae 1. ;
Me/you and I wor ° 38
Watching almost left myself BL a ‘ N :
Tha Bivie Standing there my mooring ropes go unrepaired Bee - F i uch 4
e Night Strong/Alone/Hard but I have covered
me For me every significant other Se
blowin To reach out in endless quipu
the wind/like it was gonna And touch :
ovis fancy. stitches. — ——
_ emmaaenagent desaturated ere
tear the trees down ‘Your tears. : a thousand knotted thoughts to the inch
my heart —Consuelo
aie —Nora Kerr
thumpin’ <3 b .
at each sound The Morning After veal
listenin’ se . :
: i know the cows in hawaii slurp the mangos from the ground
for the crunch of gravel and i have awoken to yet another day. - - ect aint in haveakt :
snappin’ my mood is solemn. :
of twigs as he creeps near my body and mind feeling relieved, ‘hisusvaniiat
A . et still so alone.
where i lay stiff of and the thermometer in the bathroom reads 49°.

on frigid ground

awaiting — ohmygod i am worn, exhausted.

thick roving clouds my body, my home aches. By cee
cast shadows/like you unexplained pain. , f *
hidin’ my nerves have been stretched to the ultimate = Ringe: work more hours in a week?

behind that tree — now i am taking the time to heal them.

sleep do come

say, ‘well i guess some people can do it.’

it can't be worse than : i feel as if a stone ; like it’s no problem
here 3 tossed back and forth by the ocean’s waves, like it’s easy to survive and be poor. 5
suspended in this fear worn away until numb, soft and so very
imagining your return vulnerable to the rushing currents. 8 well, .
to where i maybe i could work one more hour a week to heat
make my bed but i have been caught in this whirlpool the bathroom

A es
pee ers “Z ag ae (and another hour to fix the window n another hour for
home like you said i need to reclaim my woman self, my strength

the door n another n another n)

one woman alone under ; : :
the night doesn’t i have never told another that i did not but ignesss bine nes ae
make you swell with want her in my life for awhile. that even if i cant convince myself to love the cold
power & hatred clearly one of my hardest decisions, i dont have to do any convincing to know
like some i have doubted myself a thousand times since. that i dont hate this cold like i hate that hour's slaving. ig
you’re just the symbol of
those some . i miss you. “i won't forget.” and,
«i fear as the sky i even thought about if,
rolls above and turns the i am confused: it has always been so easy if i could work one hour more a week to heat
moon on for me to check that for me to love women, and in doing so the bathroom AND eat mangos (like the cows in hawaii)
you're not behind that tree, and off i have never felt such overwhelming ya know,
for me to hide in the night, pain and hurt. i thought i might even do it.
angry for my fear = 2
and knowing all too well that you are beautiful, jodi woman. but they dont pay W@ that much.

it had to be there. you have done nothing wrong. —Sharon

—Patricia Jatezak none of us have wronged in this confusion. =
Putney, Vt. : 7 eB ot.
: ...we have only loved. : >&
: —celia : =