2 IPI OIISIPSAPIIPL DL AA eee eee ehhh dbdd ddd dd bbb he khhdadh hkdahahah ahah ahaa all alalal

1  
aol  
a  
a  
®  
>  

COMMONWOMAN AUGUST  

IDRINIDOIRASS IBOXX  

Men Can Be Feminists  

Deane Brittingham’s definition of feminism in “Can Men Be Feminists?” (Commonwoman, July) leaves out a social analysis. A feminist is not only a woman who has experienced her own oppression and the oppression of all women, but one who also recognizes the societal roots of that oppression. She realizes that the oppression cannot be overcome without a major restructuring of society. Restructuring is needed in relationships between the sexes, between classes, races, and cultures.  

As part of this process, oppressed peoples need to work among themselves to experiment with new lifestyles, self-definition, ways of working, raising children; partly as preparation, partly in order to gain the necessary power to restructure from a strong foothold.  

Just as white people need to recognize, challenge and overcome racism, men need to work on sexism. In order to do that they need to have contact with women.  

By Carol DoubleU  

By Jo Schneiderman  

I believe, however, that the decision to work with men needs to be a personal one. No women’s group should be guilt-tripped into including men, if their work would be hampered by societally ingrained roles. The women’s movement as a whole, however, needs the support of men who are working on personal and societal change.  

It is angering that some self-identified ‘feminist men’ criticize powerful submovements within the women’s movement because of their exclusion of men. Just as whites do not need to join the Black Panthers in order to support black struggles, men don’t need to be involved in all women’s organizing activities.  

Exclusion must be hard for men who, by virtue of their sexual privilege, have always had access to anything. The privilege is usually class-related as well, since most ‘feminist’ men are from the middle class. Yet men need to respect that one result of women’s destruction of sexual privilege is the exercising of our right to exclude men from some political processes, just as we have been historically excluded from theirs.  

Nevertheless, men can help us. We can use their privilege to our advantage. It’s hard to understand why men are unwilling to accept limitations on their involvement. Men belong in a support capacity in the women’s movement. And it’s not in our best interest to reject male support overall.  

Men Against Rape and Men Against Patriarchy are examples of men’s groups which have actively taken steps to raise their own consciousness, educate other men, and to reject their privilege which has oppressed women. We need these guys. There is a place in the women’s movement for men; they just should not expect to be included in all aspects of the movement. And we should not turn on the men who support us, just because their faults become more visible through proximity.  

Then I moved away when we were 12 — just before the boy craze started. We promised each other never to lose contact... but we did. So we went through a lot of changes separately — you went your way and I went mine.  

I never thought we’d meet again after 18 years — and at 30 be best girlfriends again. It's too good to be true! And now we don’t have to drop pencils to giggle loud together, or exchange gazes or embraces. And we still play together every day, and call for each other when we go out. We’re just best girlfriends, that’s all. It’s simple. My house is your house, and yours is mine. I tell you everything that happens in my day, and you tell me.  

Recognizing that it constitutes the major threat to our lives, the next question is necessarily, ‘What are we waiting for?’ To tacitly, passively refuse to support nuclear weapon build-up and energy is not enough — we must actively oppose it. Are we not falling into our traditional role of waiting for someone else to save us, to do it for us? There’s no more fatal mistake.  

EXORCISM  

By Jo Ann Hernandez  

My Dear Brother, I should feel more for you than I do, but I care more for my women friends here than for you. You're so full of everyone else’s shit that I don’t need you. And if ever you feel — because of your size and strength — you intend to beat me up again in front of my child — I will not put down the knife. It’s my power and if you ever threaten me again, I will kill you.  

Dear Mother, I have sorrow for you for all that you have suffered. But I cannot allow you back into my life. To you I am still that BAD, ungrateful daughter and I still respond. I long for your touch and to be told you're proud of me, but I know that will never be. I understand you better now and I do honor you, as a woman. But I will not allow your shit to dirty up my life anymore. I’m sorry. You're the only one I miss. You’re the only one I would really like to get to know. But I cannot be your scapegoat anymore.  

We laugh together, and feel each other’s joy and feel each other’s pain. Of course, we have no secrets from each other — except once in a while a fleeting fear in each of us about the other, that we can always make go away but never quite share. Yes, we each have fears, but they’re small compared to our love, and together we can make them disappear in the wink of an eye. And once they’re gone we run and jump through the fields of our minds, holding hands and laughing and singing. We both love to smell the flowers and hug the trees.  

But playtime still does come to an end, and we both have to leave the flowers and fields, and go in for supper. Usually we don’t get to play again till the next day — and sometimes that’s a long time for me. Sometimes the time apart brings more adventures and dreams for both of us, and then we have more joy to share. But sometimes the time apart brings fear or anger or pain. We share that too, and stroke and nourish each other. Then we can find that sparkle in each other’s eyes that fills us both with love and joy again.  

Magic — we both always leave with more than we came with! And where does that more, that magic, come from? Simple — from being best girlfriends since we were 6, and knowing each other all that well, and sharing everything, and all that love. That's all. It’s simple.