PANDORA'S BOX

FS MME AE ERE SP SE OE ED SECEDE LEE SE LG ALIE BE SEL MEF

Growing Up in the Boonies

By Julie Orvis

March is a good month to talk about being a rural native Vermonter. It has been a strange winter this year; I am ready to say goodbye to all my wools and long johns. Yes, cabin fever hits even the most sturdy of us. As soon as the thermometer hits 45 degrees, I roll down my car windows and wear my poplin skirt to work.

Many people have accused me of being provincial and at that risk I enthusiastically write this. Many aspects of growing up rural are much the same all over this country. A hick is a hick.

It is beautiful in the country, and Vermont has some of the most beautiful countryside in the world. But what is beauty if you can't find a job or you don’t have a car to get to the job in the Queen City? What is beauty if one’s education is lacking? What is beauty if you haven't got a next-door neighbor to play with? These have been my concerns.

Some statistics about living in a rural area — alcoholism and mental illness are much more common than in an urban area; per capita income is much lower; mass transportation is practically nonexistent.

This is not to say that all native Vermonters have it rough. Snelling, Pomerleau, and Paquette are all natives. Working people do have a hard time. Take for instance the much criticized tradition of deer hunting. I do not condone this as a sport; that is senseless killing of innocent animals. And it has been predominantly done by out-of-staters until very recently. But deer hunting by Vermonters was and still is done for survival. Venison makes a good steak at much less cost than beef.

Rural working people have often been called bigots and ultra-conservative. Growing up in Vermont I often felt that myself. After much thought I realize now that is part of the oppression — it's an excellent way of confusing issues and appeasing people. In reality, Vermont is one of the most democratic states in the country. How many of you who grew up elsewhere went to town meeting every year?

Town meeting was the social event of the year along with the volunteer firemen’s dance and the Fourth of July parade. And it comes at the most apropos time — the first Tuesday after the first Monday of March. Cabin fever is at its peak and Vermont's fifth season — “Mud Season” — is driving us bonkers. So we Vermonters get together and yell at each other for a day — a great release of tension. But we have a potluck dinner (or lunch) in the middle so we can reconnect after the winter. Much to my dismay, town meeting is now at night in many towns — mostly because out-of-state companies, like IBM, will not give their employees the day off.

The two hardest things for me have been lack of transportation (unless my mother drove me) and attitudes toward Vermont speech patterns. As a teenager, while my urban counterparts were delivering papers and working at McDonald's so they could become more independent, I was scrounging for babysitting jobs. While my counterparts were walking down the block to their friends, my best friend in high school lived 12 miles away in Shelburne. While my counterparts were complaining about being on a school bus that took an hour to get across town, the average ride to CVU, the neighborhood school for five towns, was at least an hour.

While out-of-state going to college, I was constantly harassed for my speech. For survival during those years, I lost most of my accent.

So before you accuse a Vermonter of provincialism, realize that much of it is a combination of Yankee bornness, pride, and a matter of survival. We are a dying breed!

ATROCITIES

Atrocities compiled by Maxine Merrick from stories in the Burlington Free Press and other sources.

Face Disfigured

A 19-year-old Chicago woman has claimed that her face is now disfigured as a result of beatings she received as a child by her father.

Christine Neilson, of Winfield, Ill., filed a U.S. District Court suit against her father, Richard Kane, 42, of Federal Way, Washington.

Ms. Neilson’s attorney, Aldo Botti, said Kane is accused of beating incidents in 1965, 1970, and 1975 resulting, for Ms. Neilson, in “great pain and mental anguish.”

Kane has denied the allegations in court papers and asked that the suit be thrown out.

Beaten to Death

A 2-year-old Chicago girl was beaten to death for wetting her bed and was then left in the blood-spotted bathroom of an abandoned building on the South Side, police said.

An autopsy showed Fleanice Gray died of a fatal beating with “extensive blunt trauma to the face and neck,” according to a spokesman for the Cook County medical examiner's office.

Parents Dorinda and Pedro Gray were charged with murder and making false police reports. The Grays reported to police the child had been abducted during an alleged robbery. The child had been missing several days.

Both parents were allegedly involved in several previous incidents of child abuse, police said.

Major Crimes Up 30%

Major crimes such as rape, robbery, aggravated assault, and murder were up 30% during the 1980 fiscal year, according to a Department of Public Safety report.

Many other crimes such as minor crimes and crimes against property are also up substantially. The reports show arson up 250 percent in the last five years.

Woman Killed

A White River Junction woman died after she was struck by a car while walking near her home on South Main Street January 23 by a man who has been charged with driving under the influence of alcohol.

Margaret Gour, 46, was hit by a car driven by Raymond Kessler, 21, of White River Junction, who pleaded innocent in Vermont District Court to causing a death while driving under the influence of alcohol.

Kessler was released on $1000 bail and personal recognizance with a condition that he not possess or consume alcohol.

Sexual Assault

A Lyndon State College student told police she was hitchhiking near the college about 9:30 p.m., February 14, when she was picked up and “forcibly sexually assaulted,” state police said.

Steven Marcy, 21, of St. Johnsbury, was arrested on a charge of sexual assault and is being held under $5000 cash bail at the St. Johnsbury Community Correctional Center.

The woman provided information and a description of the man that led to the arrest, police said.

Student Grabbed

A University of Vermont student reported she was grabbed by a man as she was walking on Spear Street near the Interstate 89 overpasses at about 5:30 p.m., February 16, South Burlington police said.

The student described her assailant to police and said the man ran into the woods when a car drove by.

A second car gave her a ride back to the university, where she called police, Cpl. Greg Mitchell said.

Struck in Eye

A 15-year-old Fairfax girl was struck in the eye by a plastic bullet from a toy gun fired by a juvenile, South Burlington police said.

The juvenile was among three 12-year-old South Burlington boys who were at the University Mall parking lot about 5 p.m., February 16, Cpl. Greg Mitchell said.

The girl was not injured, he said. No court action is expected.

Garwood Indicted

Marine Pfc. Robert Garwood, who was convicted by the military early in February of collaboration with the enemy while he was a prisoner of war in Vietnam, was indicted February 23 on charges that he sexually molested and attempted to rape a 7-year-old girl.

Garwood was arrested September 5 and charged with attempting to commit lewd acts on the girl and attempting to commit a sex offense. He was released on $10,000 bail and the case was delayed pending the outcome of his court-martial.

The indictment charged Garwood with taking indecent liberties with a minor, first-degree sex offense, and attempted rape. Arraignment was scheduled for March 9.