COMMONWOMAN

The men who worked on this month's issue are:

GROUP: Linda Wittenberg, Pe n Palmer, Lynn Vera, Nancy Powell, Peggy Luhrs, Gwynn Marilyn, Jamie Helen Greenspan, Paij Bailey.  
At COMMITTEE: Jane Dewey, Peggy Luhrs, Mandy not Lynn Vera, Nancy Powell, Kathleen  

ASSISTANCE: Jean Palmer, Gwynn Marilyn  
PRODUCTION, MAILING: Joknee Avrutik, O, Sherri Keefe  
SOLUTION: Jane Dewey, Wendy Bell, Marion  
ADVERTISING: Alverta Perkins, Ele Jones  
COPY EDIT: Euan Bear,  
OUTPUT: Carol Altobelli, Etana Finkler, Joknee, Linda Wittenberg, Lynn Vera, Jenny Peck, Ellie Tones, Anne Vera Keefe, Mari to, Peggy Luhrs  

Commonwoman is made up of a small group of women who work collectively to put out this paper. At present, no one on the staff is paid for her work.

NOTES FROM THE CORE

We printed just about all the copy we received for the last issue. If you noticed, we had a lot from one person. We needed to use it to fill the paper. Please, more people write for us so we can present that variety.

Joni needs help with the mailing every six weeks. She'd like a small, steady group of women to work with. It’s a short job. Call her at 863-3586.

We also need help with layout. It’s interesting, anyone can learn, and it's even fun sometimes. Check the date in this box and come to Everywoman's Place and join us.

There are no atrocities (at least not in our usual format) in this issue because the people who were going to do it didn’t. If you read the paper, send us clippings (be sure to give the source) and we'll ready them for publication. If there’s someone who wants to take on the whole job, write us a note and we'll get back to you.

We could use help on the next issue because a number of us will be away. Any past Commonwoman workers who could help put out the paper in January, please do. Editorial and layout assistance is needed for women who give presents in these next months (or ever): give gift subscriptions to Commonwoman.

We want to expand our distribution, both throughout Vermont and elsewhere. If you would distribute the paper (which may mean picking up a bundle at the bus) in your area, even if to one outlet, please contact us at the address below. If you live locally and have ideas for good outlets for the paper, send them too.

We want to reply to women who send copy for publication when we think our editorial suggestions and feedback would help get your point across to readers. We realize some women never hear from us or see their piece in the paper, and we hope to improve that communication.

Commonwoman will not be responsible for returning cartoons, graphics, photographs, or written material unless special arrangements are made in advance or a stamped, self-addressed envelope is provided by the contributor.

PLEASE: articles submitted should be short and succinct. It helps us a lot if they are typed, double-spaced. Three pages maximum please.

We are working on a policy for reimbursing women for supplies used to do a solicited assignment for Commonwoman. Since our finances are very tight, we would only like to reimburse women who can’t afford to provide the materials (for example, photographic supplies), but we cannot afford to pay for gas, time, overhead, etc. We do reimburse in full travel expenses for distribution, and mailing and phone costs.

We're happy to have two new women with lots of energy working on ad sales. If you know someone who'd like to advertise in the paper, have them contact the address below.

Our post office mix-ups are fixed up. We have our old address back.

We want to have a poster to call attention to Commonwoman, with space on it to fill in where it can be bought locally. We would like help and input on this, so we came up with a POSTER CONTEST. The winner will get a subscription to the paper or a renewal. The poster should be eye-catching, 11x22, with a logo of your design if you choose. It should also include our masthead. See classifieds for more info.

Commonwoman is published every 6 weeks. Subscription rates are $6.90/8 issues, $20/8 issues for institutions. It is free on request to women in prison and to women in mental institutions.

DEADLINE: Tuesday, January 5  
Sunday, January 10  

LAYOUT: January 16 & 17, 1982  
Commonwoman, Inc. Evaluation Meeting:  
Box 242  

Tuesday, Dec. 15, 7 p.m.  

Winooski, Vt. 05404  
Everywoman’s Place  

Typesetting: Sue Ball  

“Writing it down is a way to sweeten it to you and will rise!”

Letters

Dear Commonwoman:

Please continue subscription. Also, please tell Glo Daly that I greatly appreciated her article, “Questions on S & M.” I couldn’t agree with her more. I see S & M and the huge discussion that surrounds it as the prick in our heads taking over again, and those liberals among us who want to understand it, as being greatly mistaken. I think they should encourage alcoholism and drug addiction if they think S & M is okay, too. All are diseases of patriarchy.

Selma Miriam

Atrocities  
By Jean Palmer  

I have never read the “atrocities.” I know all the reasons why I should read them — am supposed to read them. And still I don’t — and probably never will.

Why am I telling you this you may ask. I’m telling you this because this is how I feel, and I want to validate my feelings. I brought this issue up at a core group meeting; we all talked. Peggy and Lynn explained the other side, about why it’s important to have the atrocities section in our paper. We must be reminded and remind ourselves always about what goes on in this world, what men are doing to women, children, and the land. This remembering stirs our anger and keeps it strong, giving us strength to continue with the lives and the battles we have chosen. We can write article after article of generalities of how men rape and maim — we do, and these are important. But to see the news clips of actual atrocities, to read the names and dates and ages is what really brings it home to us. It keeps us angry and strong women.

Unfortunately, even angry strong women can get an overload and become frustrated and sick and despairing. And that is what happens to me when I am confronted with an entire page of atrocities. Just looking at the title and knowing the stories there (after all, they are so similar — some men have no imagination) is enough to remind me of my anger. Reading them would make me sick. I don't want to be totally sickened — I don’t see what good it does.

So even though I know all the reasons to read atrocities — I probably never will.

Give Gift Subscriptions to Commonwoman.

* *

I swear it on my common woman's head  
The common woman is as common as a common loaf of bread —

Thursday,  
Dec. 15  

4:00.

NEW HOURS  
Tues. 9:30-1  
Thurs. 9:30-6:30  

Winooski  

$6.50 donation  
BENEFIT for Everywoman's Place  

Friday, Jan. 15  
6:30-9:00  
EVERYWOMAN'S PLACE  

Mon. 10:30-5  
Wed. 9:30-1:30  
Fri. 9:30-1:30,  
3:30-5:30  

TELL OUR ADVERTISERS you saw it in COMMONWOMAN!

RESOURCE NUMBERS  

EVERYWOMAN'S PLACE... 658-2422  
RAPE CRISIS CENTER... 863-1236  
WOMEN HELPING BATTERED WOMEN... 658-1996  
GREATER BURLINGTON WOMEN’S COALITION... 863-3586  
VERMONT WOMEN’S HEALTH CENTER... 863-1386  
GAY AND LESBIAN HOTLINE... 862-4296  

VERMONT CANCER INFORMATION SERVICE  
1-800-225-7034 (toll-free service for people with questions about cancer)  

HERSTORY HOUSE SHELTER, Rutland... 775-3232  
UMBRELLA, INC., St. Johnsbury... 748-8645  
or 3148