Focus on Racism

By Michiyo Cornell

The National Women’s Studies Association held a conference focusing on racism this year in Storrs, Connecticut, from May 30 through June 4, 1981. It was held in the impressive setting of the University of Connecticut and it was expensive to be there. It cost $40 for the registration fee even if one were coming to do a presentation and not just attend workshops. There was a contradiction between the stated objectives of the NWSA constitution and how NWSA operated in practice.

In theory, NWSA would provide travel money for low income Third World women; in practice, NWSA attempted (and failed) to get two grants at the last minute for travel money. They refused to waive fees for a low income activist Black woman who wanted to do a presentation on racism. I investigated further and found that NWSA had tried a sliding scale fee for registration, only to go virtually bankrupt on conferences because nearly everyone paid on the lower end of the scale. It seemed better to charge one fee to everyone rather than go bankrupt. I could understand that but why refuse to waive registration fees for one lone Black woman when she could have made a valuable contribution to the conference’s focus on racism?

Further contradictions came up in workshops that did not focus on racism but on theory, on literature and women, or some other abstract idea. There was very little to tell people what it was like to live on welfare, or how it felt to have limited job skills and want to earn more.

One workshop I attended had a majority of white women doing presentations on Third World women writers. The white women condescended and patronized the writers they presented, not on an artistic level but on a thematic level. Some participants in the audience argued back saying that the artist had a right to handle any theme as long as she carried it off artistically. One presentation in particular criticized a Puerto Rican author who chose to portray the starkness of Puerto Rican life in New York City and the longing it could engender for Puerto Rico.

Adrienne Rich and Audre Lorde each did an opening keynote address. Rich spoke first pointing out that NWSA had broken with the “dutiful daughter” role required of women by the patriarchy. She further pointed out the media could distort what was said or done by not portraying accurately what was happening with NWSA. The example she gave was from the Hartford Courant which chose not to report that the NWSA conference theme was racism and instead focused on a small controversy: whether or not lesbians should have separate housing from straight women as some lesbians had requested. Lorde spoke next and said that her response to racism was anger and until she found a more powerful response to racism, she would remain angry even if some white women were made uncomfortable by her anger.

A concluding panel of four Third World and one white woman evaluated what had gone on. It was agreed by all that a two-year focus on racism was important but there were several criticisms on how the conference was managed. Few Third World women especially Native American, Asian/Pacific and Hispanic women were involved in the planning of the conference. The conference was not accessible by public transportation and few provisions were made in the way of scholarships and/or low income housing to help low income Third World women make it to the conference. Minnie Bruce-Pratt, the white woman on the concluding panel, said that even if a white woman had been involved in civil rights work, she should listen to Third World women without patronizing or condescending. The conclusion is clear that NWSA still needs to work on its racism and lack of clarity around the issue of racism.

women and friends

Page 5

By Deane Brittingham

The recent hiring of a new director for the Project Against Domestic Violence by the Governor’s Commission on the Status of Women, and the ensuing controversy, deserve public explanation and evaluation. The prime issue and major cause of concern is the hiring of an inexperienced person to direct the second year of the Project.

Betty Jones, chairwoman of the commission, states this is a second year of the project with different goals. These goals, however, are based on the first year of the project, work completed, and work in progress. They include: setting up preventive education programs in schools, the documentation or treatment of violence, encouraging and developing quick uniform responses by state agencies, hospitals and police, and the encouragement of quick uniform responses by state agencies. The successful completion of all or parts of this project depends upon extensive and in-depth knowledge of the issue of battering and the context in which it takes place.

A review of the past is necessary to view the present circumstances. In 1979, commission director Anne Sarca and I (with input from others) collaborated in writing the proposal for the one year Project Against Domestic Violence. Approved by the Vermont Commission on the Administration of Justice and funded through the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration, the project provided extensive training and community education on the extent and severity of battering in our communities. The project was funded from February 1980 through February 1981.

As the director of the project, I developed and held two day training sessions on the issues of battering in nine Vermont communities. Four three-hour sessions were also held at the Police Academy in Pittsford for all new police recruits. I held sixty-four additional forums, meetings and educational workshops, directly contacting 2,371 people over the year. Countless others were reached through word of mouth, publications, phone and via the media.

In my work I also assisted in providing direction, coordination and technical assistance to the Vermont Coalition Against Domestic Violence. The coalition is made up of the 11 statewide, grassroots organizations providing direct services to battered women. Founded in 1978, the coalition meets monthly to share resources, skills and needs in order to develop a coordinated, long-range plan for battered women’s services across the state.

In addition to the public education component, along with coalition members, I initiated discussions with numerous state agencies and their representatives on the needs, past, present and future, of Vermont's battered women. For example, the coalition has been meeting with the commissioner of welfare and his staff to develop uniform financial support for women and children forced from their homes due to violence. These talks are highly technical and are continuing, led primarily by the attorney with the coalition.

With the Vermont Police Chiefs Association, I developed a

Continued on Page 10