IFIEATUIRIES

Previewer Rejects

‘WOMEN’S MOVEMENT’

The Previewer Magazine solicited an article on the Woman's Movement in Burlington for their April 20 issue, and then refused to print it because, according to Gerry Malavenda, the managing editor, the article was too political.

Before writing the article, I told Mr. Malavenda that I was a Feminist and assured him that the article was not going to be particularly objective. I made it quite clear to him that I was pro-Woman’s Movement. He asked me to write it for people who may not know much about the Woman’s Movement, and I'm afraid he should have included himself among those who have no idea about the scope and power of the Feminist Community in this town.

After looking through back issues of the Previewer for the last four years, I found that they are, indeed, political. In various issues they have written editorials strongly in favor of a new Civic Center, strongly opposed to Vermont Blue Laws, etc. According to a statement published in the February 11, 1976, issue:

Our expansion has enabled us to broaden our news scope. Besides entertainment related stories, we have brought our readers interviews with notable personalities, articles on health, sports and many other subjects. We would like to continue to diversify in the area of news and features.

Apparently this policy does not apply to organizations and activities that are connected to the Woman's Movement.

The Previewer is as guilty as most of the rest of the media in this country who have summarily ignored the Movement. In the last four years no mention has been made in the pages of this Burlington-based magazine of any of the 20 or 30 groups or activities mentioned in our article. (With the exception of a couple of paragraphs about last year’s WomenWomenWomen conference. Even the Previewer couldn’t ignore a gathering of 1000 women who brought with them nationally-known figures.)

The following is a reprint of the article that would have appeared in the Previewer if Gerry Malavenda hadn't been so afraid of women with “opinions.”

~Carol Cohen

Many Feminists are aware that men, in this world, control most of the money, make most of the laws and own most of the land. The term you may hear used to describe this state of affairs is called “patriarchy.” Many Feminists may not agree on how to remedy this problem, but most would probably acknowledge that women, who have lived under this system for thousands of years, are financially and psychologically oppressed.

By Peggy Luhrs and Carol Cohen

At a symposium for women held at St. Michael's College a few weeks ago (‘Women and Society’), Grace Paley, author of Enormous Changes at the Last Minute, warned us not to believe the myth that the 1960s were times of political activism, and that “nothing” has been going on in the ‘70s. She said that the Women’s Movement has been happening in the ‘70s, only the male-controlled media has not given these great moments in history much play. Once in a while, a major event like the ERA Conference in Houston, condoned by President Carter, or ten thousand Iranian women protesting the veil, might get some coverage, but the fact is the Women’s Movement is the largest single political influence of the past decade.

Though this is too short a space to do it justice, we will try to give a brief hint at the origins of the Women’s Movement in Burlington and list the organizations that represent it now. In the early ‘70s, the first women’s liberation meeting was held at the Unitarian Church. What energy and direction that momentous meeting catalyzed! There began weekly meetings at the Co-op, out of which many consciousness-raising groups began. The first Women’s Center opened on Church St. The women’s lobby split with the state political caucus because it wanted to support strongly the idea of safe, legal abortion. At the same time, a group was meeting to form the Vermont Women's Health Center. The two groups made Vermont one of the first states to offer legal abortion, an early and important victory for the Feminist movement. The Health Center opened its doors in Colchester in September, 1972, and has just celebrated seven years of service to women by women.

The Church St. Women's Center gave way to one on North Winooski Ave. which included a Feminist therapy group and a Lesbian rap group. In 1974 the Women’s Center closed and moved back to Church St. as the Women’s Switchboard to serve a growing need for coordination and communication among groups and individuals. They helped groups form, did situational political advocacy for local women and held the first women’s dances. In 1974, too, Women Against Rape began to educate the public to the fact that rape is a violent, sexist crime and to provide a hotline and advocates for rape victims. Several transitions have taken place in that group and a new group is currently operating as the Rape Crisis Center. As WAR members realized that a high percentage of their calls were from battered wives, groups began to meet to form a Women’s House of Transition. That organization now does the tough job of helping battered women out of their situations by offering shelter and assistance in readjusting their lives.

In 1975 My Sister’s Place, Inc., was begun with the purpose of providing a social and cultural, self-supporting space for women, but was stifled by the city fathers. My Sister’s Place fought City Hall and won, although the case is still tied up in litigation as the city appeals.

February, 1973, saw the first Vermont Women’s Festival in Charlotte. It generated a communications network for Feminists, as well as a lot of high energy. Successive festivals were held in Northfield and Brattleboro. Last year Burlington saw the first WomenWomenWomen Conference and will see the second one this May. Over a thousand women attended last year. Due to some dedicated women who work there, St. Michael’s hosted an historical women’s symposium in March. Cinemawomen, which grew out of Orchid Films, brought many fine women’s films to hundreds of people last year in their “Take the Bull by the Horns” series. These conferences have brought arts and entertainment for women that have greatly enriched the local cultural scene. Locally women have produced Feminist films and videotapes. There have been two all-women art shows. We have had the Unity Players women’s theater. There have been women’s poetry readings, Amazon salons that included poetry and music by local and visiting women. Women have produced their own plays, slide shows, puppet shows, dance and mime. Mission Possible brought us the WaterWomenWomen ferry ride on Lake Champlain. Witch 1, a women’s band, has been playing together for over a year providing music that draws women together both physically and spiritually. Commonwoman is a local newspaper that covers news and opinions of interest to Feminists. It is an excellent resource for finding out what is happening with women in Vermont. Burlington based, it is providing an important link with women elsewhere as well as generating the kind of controversy a good newspaper should.

Burlington has an active chapter of the National Organization for Women (NOW). We've had a women’s carpentry collective and therapy group. There is a housecleaning collective, a workspace group and sewing business. There have been various living collectives, the longest standing being the Redbirds.

Women are active in sports for recreation and for building strength. There have been all-women Karate classes and some of the women have gone on to teach self-defense to more women.

(Continued on Page 13)

FEATURES

Rallying Round

Daly

By Julie Orvis

“Patriarchy is the prevailing religion of the entire planet, and its essential message is necrophilia. All the so-called religions legitimating patriarchy are mere sects subsumed under its vast umbrella/canopy. All — from Buddhism and Hinduism to Islam, Judaism, Christianity, to secular derivatives such as Freudianism, Jungianism, Marxism, and Maoism — are infrastructures of the edifice of patriarchy. All are erected parts of the male's shelter against anomie. And the symbolic message of all the sects of the religion which is patriarchy is this: women are the dreaded anomie. Consequently, women are the object of male terror, the projected personifications of ‘The Enemy,’ the real objects under attack in all the wars of patriarchy.”

Mary Daly in Gyn/Ecology

The students of Mary Daly were concerned about her and enraged with the practices of Daly’s employer and their school — Boston College. The students, therefore, got together with the Boston University Women’s Center and put on a rally for Daly. About 15 Burlington feminists trekked to Boston for the event. It happened on Sunday, April.

“We have done with your education,” a quote from Virginia Woolf, was the slogan for the rally. And it is certainly true that Daly is done with patriarchal education — an education that trains us to pursue the fields of patriarchy and to follow their methodologies to the letter — no questions asked.

The event began with a choral reading by several students of Daly. They read prose from Adrienne Rich, Daly, Susan Griffin, and Virginia Woolf. The powerful reading ended with an excerpt from Susan Griffin's Women and Nature: ‘We say everything comes back. And you cannot divert the river from the riverbed. We say every act has its consequence, that this place has been shaped by the river, and that the shape of this place tells the river where to go.”

Photo by Julie Orvis

Mary Daly

Jan Raymond, a close friend of Daly and a scholar who recently wrote The Transsexual Empire: The Making of the She-Male, then got up and gave the Crone-ology (the herstory of a Crone or a survivor from the onslaught of patriarchal misogyny) of Daly. Ten years of harassment was the key to the lengthy and often sarcastically funny speech. Daly, she told us, has been refused tenure, fired, refused promotion, portrayed as neurotic and, most recently, monitored — a practice never before used by Boston College on a tenured faculty member.

Third up came Adrienne Rich, who made strong connections between the looming disaster at Three Mile Island and the necrophilia of patriarchy. “Never forget the connections,” she said.

This was the key to the evening. As feminists we must never forget the connections between patriarchal atrocities from one culture to another, from one area to another — they are all part of the global system of woman hating.

Fourth, Andre Collard showed us another connection — women and animals. I nearly vomited as she revealed the atrocities committed by animal experimenters.

(Continued on Page 13)

6L61L AVN NYWOMNOWWOO

Power Plant and the~~