Lesbian Ethics

LESBIAN ETHICS, a new jour-
nal to appear Fall 1984, invites your
articles, subscriptions, support and
comments. Three issues a year.
Charter sub, $10. Write to Lesbian
Ethics or LE Publications, PO Box
943, Venice, CA 90294.

SOONS

Kitchen Table Press

The following three books are new from Kitchen Table:
Women of Color Press, Box 592, Van Brunt Station, Brooklyn,
NY 11215. They can be ordered directly from the press or through
any bookstore.

Narratives: poems in the tradition of black women, by
Cheryl Clarke, with nine exquisite drawings by Gaia. $4.95. These
poems, read over and again, unravel stories of women who are
clear enough to see, alive enough to make me want to be there;
proud and strong, the women in these poems inspire, and Cheryl's
work more than once made me hoot. Her voice is direct and
caring, and draws the reader, thirstily, inward. A celebration
of women loving women.

Cuentos: Stories by Latinas, edited by Alma Gomez, Cherrie
Moraga, Mariana Romo-Carmona. 1983. $7.95. Describing the
varied lives, experiences and stories of Hispanic women, these
stories encompass love, pain, celebration, frustration, rage and
pride. Some in English, some in Spanish, some in a soft natural
mixture of both languages, the stories are an ethnic exploration
of women across generations, of a culture and tradition that we
rarely glimpse in written words. Open to these stories, and be
treated to a fullness of emotion, spirit, tastes, sounds and strug-
gles of a people surviving and resisting assimilation/genocide.

Home Girls: A Black Feminist Anthology, edited by Barbara
Smith, 1983. $10.95. I have not yet read this book (of the three),
but scanning the list of contributors, many of them familiar and
wonderful writers, I am amazed and impressed with the power
this book promises. A quick sample: Bernice Johnson Reagan, Pat
Parker, Beverly Smith, Alice Walker, June Jordan, Gloria T. Hull,
Donna Allegra, Michelle Cliff... this is only a fraction of the 34
contributors. Scanning the table of contents I am aware that this
is a crucial, landmark kind of a book — a black feminist antho-
logy. My turn to read this one. “Home Girls is one of the most
important books in the history of Black women’s writing.” Alice
Walker.

These three books are a joy. They make available a cultural
and ethnic feminist view of the world that is priceless for all of us
to have access to, to grow aware of. For me personally they are a
celebration of similarity and difference at once, a remembering
and expanding. If you would like to review any of these three
books for an upcoming issue of Commonwomon, call Lynn at
878-5835.

MORE...

Positively Gay. Dr. Betty Berzon. Mediamix Associates, 3960
Laurel Canyon Blvd., no. 340, Los Angeles, CA 91604, ($7.95 +
$1 handling). Provides how-to information on coming out to the
family, working with religious issues, being a lesbian/gay parent,
couple relationships etc. Guidelines for discussion with families
and friends included.

The Whole Gay Catalogue, a comprehensive, annotated
catalogue of gay and lesbian books. 100 pages with over 2000
titles covering a wide variety of topics from drama, humor,
sexuality and more. Catalogue is only $2 from Lambda Rising,
2012 S Street, NW, Washington, DC 20009.

ACLU Handbooks: 1. Rights of Authors and Artists. 2. The
Rights of Employees and 3. The Rights of Teachers (a revision).
The first deals with copyright issues, libel, selling one’s work and
more. The second handles discrimination, personnel files, notice
required for lay-off or firing, and labor laws. And the third book
examines a teacher's right to strike, become pregnant, and deter-
mine the content and manner of their teaching. The first two
books are $3.95 each, and The Rights of Teachers is $4.95.
Additionally, the first handbook has a $1 postage fee and the
other two have 50 cents per book ordered. Order prepaid from ACLU,
132 W. 43rd St., NY, NY 10036, Literature Dept.

Call for Material
Lesbians Over 60

Who are the “old” women
in the lesbian community? What
are the life experiences, the
strengths and needs of a group
of lesbians aged 60 and over?
What similarities and differences
exist in this seemingly invisible
group?

To help provide answers to
the above questions, a nation-
wide study of lesbians over 60 is
currently being conducted at the
Center for Research and Educa-
tion in Sexuality (CERES) at
San Francisco State University
in San Francisco. The newly
funded survey, which grew out
of Dr. Kehoe's previous study of
lesbians over 65, will extend its
coverage to include at least 100
individuals, in an effort to reach

a more representative
group of older lesbians.

Lesbians over 60 are needed
to answer an anonymous ques-
tionnaire. If you qualify or
know someone who does, please
drop a card to: Dr. Monika
Kehoe or Sheryl Goldberg at
CERES, Psych. Bldg. Rm 502,
San Francisco State University,
1600 Holloway Ave., San Fran-
cisco, CA 94132.

“Lesbians over 60: A
National Survey" is sponsored
by grants from the Chicago
Resource Center and The Gol-
den Gate Business Association.

For further information
please contact Dr. Monika
Kehoe or Sheryl Goldberg at
(415) 469-1137.

sample

Women and Computers

Seeking submissions for an
anthology about “Women and
the Computer.” Guidelines are
such that articles should be all
about some aspect, area or
specific function of computers
and computing. Looking for
theory, personal accounts, inter-
views, etc.; from academics and
non-academics; all races, class

At the UVM LIBRARY

Compiled by Aneca Corvo

Other books available at Bailey/Howe (inspired by Sondra
Corry). (Of course these show a bias towards my reading interests
and pleasures).

Feminist Theory: A Critique of Ideology, Nanerl O. Keo-
hane, Michelle Z. Rosaldo, and Barbara C. Gelpi editors, U. of
Chicago Press, 1982. A collection of essays from the journal
Signs. I especially recommend the essays, “Women’s Time,” by
Julia Kristeva and “The Way of All Ideology,” by Susan Griffin.

How to Suppress Women’s Writing, by Joanna Russ. U. of
Texas Press, 1983. An excellent, concise analysis of the ways
women’s writing has been suppressed and repressed in Western
literature.

Women and Language in Literature and Society, Sally
McConnell-Ginet et al. eds. Praeger Press, NY, 1980. A collection
of essays on women and language from many academic view-
points (psychological, sociological, anthropological, literary, etc.)

The Future of Difference, eds. Hester Eisenstein and Alice
Jardine, G. K. Hall, Boston, 1980. Proceedings from a Barnard
Conference of the same title. I particularly enjoyed the collage
essay by Rachel Blau DuPlessis entitled “For the Etruscans:
Sexual Difference and Artistic Production — The Debate over a
Female Aesthetic.”

The Collected Poems of Muriel Rukeyser. 1978.

New French Feminisms: An Anthology, eds. Elaine Marks
and Isabel de Courtivron, UMass Press, 1980. One of my favorite
books — I now own a copy. “By writing herself, woman will
return to the body which has been more than confiscated from
her, which has been turned into the uncanny stranger on display
— the ailing or dead figure, which so often turns out to be the
nasty companion, the cause and location of inhibitions. Censor
the body and you censor breath and speech at the same time.
Write yourself. Your body must be heard. Only then will the
immense resources of the unconscious spring forth. Our naptha
will spread, throughout the world, without dollars — black or
gold — nonassessed values that will change the rules of the old
game.” Helene Cixous, “The Laugh of the Medusa.” I like her
equation of the body with writing without the American obses-
sion with sexuality.

P.S. When I have requested a book (fill out a slip at the
reference desk) the Bailey-Howe has often ordered it. It may be
because I’m a UVM grad student but my lover who isn't a student
has had the same experience. I think they welcome suggestions
since most undergraduates don’t take the time to request books.

material received will
mission is October 1,
with SASE
LUNATECHS, 2845 N

(rear), Chicago, IL 60657.

McGraw Hill,

and ages; feminist/Lesbian femi-
nist/Separatist perspectives. Poetry
and artwork also considered.

acknowledged. Deadline for sub-
1984. Send-
to: PJ Graves, c/o
Racine

5th Strategic Center

Page 11

MEDIA

Women's Media

The 1984 Index/Directory of
Women’s Media has been released to
aid increased networking for the
movement through the use of all
forms of communications media.
Listed in it are: 408 women’s periodi-
cals, 101 women’s press and pub-
lishers, 79 women’s bookstores, 59
art/graphics/theater groups, 33
women’s film groups, 31 music
groups, 20 video and cable groups,
and 33 regular radio or TV programs
on women.

In addition, the Directory lists
women’s news services, columns,
speakers bureaus, writers groups,
editorial and public relations groups
specializing in women, courses on
media and women, distributors,
directories and catalogs on women,
plus 25 media organizations and 54
special library collections on women.
Entries are arranged geographically,
and the larger categories are followed
by an alphabetical cross index. Over
400 individual media women and
media-concerned women have listed
themselves in the Individuals’ Sec-
tion.

Each entry is written by the
person then includes addresses, phone numbers,
and contact people, along with their
15 to 25 word descriptions.

The Index/Directory of
Women’s Media is used in many
ways, a few of which are these:

—women with new books, films
or other media products who want to
get notice of their work out to other
women and to the public, can find
periodicals and other women’s media
interested in helping them get their
information out.

Writers can locate
periodicals and writers’ groups.

Publishers can locate women’s
bookstores and vice versa.

To order a copy, send $8 to
WIFP, 3306 Ross Place, N.W.,
Washington, DC 20008 (202)
966-7783. Founded in 1972, WIFP is
a non-profit, tax exempt research and
publishing organization concerned
with the expansion and restructuring
of the communications system in
order for media to be in the hands of
all people, not just the wealthy and
predominantly male media owners.

WOMEN’S MUSIC

Jasmine:

Holly Near

Margie Adams

Meg Christian,

Ale!

Ferron

Sweet Honey
in the Rock

Robin Flower

Chris Williamson
Heather Bishop
Linda Tillery &

more

Also:

Feminist Books
Fiction &
Non-Fiction

The Vermont

Book Shop

38 Main Street
Middlebury

Hours: 8:30-5:30 388-2061

p86 4Y42W =NOWOMNOWWOO