Photographers

I am writing to solicit photographs for a 1984 calendar that I am editing for the Crossing Press Feminist Series. It is entitled Women Friends.

I want to explore different kinds of female friendship in Women Friends: with one’s self and with other women; in work and recreational settings; between older and younger women; in traditional and non-traditional families. I would like to look at our friendships, in the Orwellian year of 1984, as a source of hope, inspiration and comfort.

I am particularly interested in locating images by and about women of color.

Women Friends will have an esthetic and political sensibility similar to The Strength of Women (1982) and Women’s Work (1983) Wall Calendars.

The photographs you send will help determine the scope of the calendar.

If you submit photographs, please note the following guidelines: (1) I must receive all photographs by October 1, 1982; (2) Photographs should be black/white glossies, preferably 8” x 10”. Both horizontal and vertical shots are okay; (3) Each photographer can submit up to 12 shots; (4) Every photograph must be labelled with your name and address. Enclose a SASE in order to have your work returned; (5) Crossing will pay $50 for each photograph used. We are buying one-time use with the photographer retaining the copyright. We assume that permissions have been secured; (6) Photographs should be limited to American rather than international settings; (7) Each photographer whose work is included in Women Friends will receive several complimentary calendars. In addition, you will be able to order calendars at the bookstore discount rate.

Please feel free to get in touch with me if you have any questions. I look forward to seeing your work.

Sincerely,

Nancy K. Bereano, Ed.  
Feminist Series  

The Crossing Press  
Trumansburg, NY 14886  
Telephone: 607-387-6217  

michigan  

«  
abe  
«  

3-2 234-44 -  
3-2 234-4 -  
44243424473  

Q Music  

The resources in women’s music and culture, We Shall Go Forth, is now available. Information includes production, distribution, bookings, record companies, coffee houses, festivals, choruses, women’s organizations and publications, and more. In celebration of women in music, and in recognition of cultures that women are creating, this book evolved to help musicians connect with each other, and with women who want to hear them. It lists names of women, what they do concerning music, and addresses and phone numbers of contacts. To receive a copy, send $4 to Toni Armstrong, 6208 N Hermitage, Chicago, IL 60660.

Travel Book  

Places of Interest to Women: USA & Canada 1983 has a helpful listing of bars, restaurants and services. The services include WOMEN's centers and gay centers (the exact nature of the bars and restaurants is indicated by a system of symbols).

The book costs $5.25 and is put out by Ferrari Publications and is available for every traveler to browse through at Everywoman’s Place.

The Crossing Press  

The Fall ‘82 catalogue of The Crossing Press, a publisher of trade books and distributor for 43 feminist (and other independent) presses, is packed with interesting titles and tempting descriptions of many hard-to-find books by and about women. Women’s calendars, gay literature and feminist titles are listed and described, with prices and ordering information. A copy of the catalogue is at Bookstacks (in Burlington) where you can also order any of the books at no extra charge. It’s exciting to find such a good selection of books, and to see that in fact there is someone distributing them again. The Crossing Press, Box 640, Trumansburg, NY 14886.

WIRE  

WIRE Service, the Women’s International Resource Exchange, is a women’s collective whose members believe that confronting sexism, racism, and classism in the U.S. requires an understanding of women’s struggles and gains in a global context. WIRE Service was created to reproduce published accounts and analyses by and about women in the Third World and make them available to those needing such information. Among the collected works available are Women & War/El Salvador, which includes articles, poetry, testimony and photos, and In Building the New Country We Become the New Woman, a collection focusing on Nicaragua. For a brochure containing a complete list of articles, write: WIRE Service, 2700 Broadway, Rm. 7, New York, NY 10025.