Page 14

Waitressing Continued from page 7

See

ourselves

COMMON WOMAN JUNE-JULY 1982

The money she earns is in

tips, which is somehow suspect. For the waitress there is a price for hard work and the freedom that a decent wage can bring in our society. The way this society views a waitress: she is loose; she is dumb (neither of which a waiter is).

Everyone deals with generalizations applied to them because of what they do to earn a living. However, “loose and stupid” is uncommonly terrible.

Still, it pays. Women continue to put on mini-skirts, black polyester dresses with white collars, short shorts and tight t-shirts and go to work. Because it pays.

I am not an expert. But, I am a woman and a worker. For ten years, off and on, I was a waitress. I have listened to the men and women I worked with. To question traditional views is only a matter of paying attention, or of not accepting, or of having expectations. In the gender struggle (which also encompasses class and race) women are told, in more or less obvious ways, “You don't belong here.” And they are told where they do belong. Where they belong is always in less-privileged, lower paying situations.

Is it possible to separate ability from conditioning, expectations from capability? Do women really make better elementary school teachers, secretaries, nurses?

Certainly men make good waiters. The 85.1% figure concentrates the men in more elegant, expensive establishments — making more money. Even in the same restaurant, the job is different. Waiters are not asked to wear a demeaning uniform. Can you imagine asking your waiter to smile?

And waitresses are, of course, aware of this situation:

—A counter restaurant. A man will fill out an application, but is never hired. A waitress comments, “Well, he’d be kind of cute in a dress.”

—A waitress at a pleasant dinner restaurant, overlooking a river. “Waiters can do it as they get older, they just get distinguished, not older.”

—A waitress at a family style restaurant explains that with a waiter the job changes. “That's where it becomes professional, in the sex switch.”

Whether we sit down at a table at home or out in a restaurant, most of the time it will be a woman who waits on us. This is not chance. It is because in this society where women comprise 42% of the labor force and earn 43% less than men earn (U.S. Department of Labor, 1980), waitressing is an occupation society specifies as being suitable for women. This field is open to women.

Waitresses wait on people. They serve food. They “make sure everything is all right.” Waitresses wipe up messes, clean up crumbs, smile when they are exhausted, look for lost hats and scarves, empty ashtrays, clean tables, look for water spots on glasses, explain how food is prepared. Constantly a waitress hears remarks that refer to her sexuality, from the seemingly innocent “Isn't she a pretty girl,” spoken by the grandfather at a family dinner to the arrogant, “What are you doing after work?” The waitress is reminded over and over that she is a female in an accessible situation. Is it logical to say that she is a female in a “traditional” situation? (There is nothing emancipating or progressive about a man telling a woman who is unknown to him how pretty she is.)

Waitresses earn a living. A decent living. They work hard; the job is physically, mentally and emotionally — (socially) demanding. In this article, I hope to pay attention to this work, to the lives of waitresses, to unravel some of the myths about waitresses and how these myths relate to the position of women in this society.

WINOOSKI DENTAL HEALTH CENTER

Jewish Issues, etc. Send us your

these and any contributions on the subject of importance to you

Coming

Explore your Creativity,

Use your Imagination...

THE

110 East Spring Street

Winooski, Vermont

655-2385

Charlies A. Seleen, DMD

The Issue CA W. prints drawings and articles by women who have never been printed before. How about you!

Future issues will focus on media, sexuality, menstruation, health, and much more!

Keep the Graphics

Photo by LYNNVERA

VERMONT’S

LARGEST

NATURAL FOODS STORE
Vitamins-Cosmetics

Herbs—Produce

Imported & Domestic Cheeses
Freshly Milled Flours

Hours - 7 days a week

Weekdays 9:30-7:30
Sat. 10-7:00
Sun. 12-6:00

Bring this ad in for 10% off any purchase over $10! Valid July 4

AN UNCOMMONLY GOOD
WAY TO LEARN ABOUT ...

ESTATE PLANNING, PROFESSIONAL BURNOUT,
CAREER/LIFE PLANNING, STRETCH FOR HEALTH,
BUILDING SELF-ESTEEM, LEGAL ASPECTS OF
DIVORCE, COUPLE COMMUNICATION, CAR REPAIR,
WEIGHT LOSS CLINIC, DANCE, AND MUCH MORE!

NOW REGISTERING + 135 CHURCH ST - 656-4221