s

2

¥
IAN JUNE JULY 198

ye 2

COMMONWOMAN

The women who worked on this month's issue are:

WORKERS
CONTRIBUTING GROUP: Linda Wittenberg, Peggy Luhrs,
Edimer, Lynn Vera, Paij Bailey;

EDITORIAL COMMITTEE: Peggy Luhrs, Linda Comito, Laurie Larson,
Lynn Vera

BUSINESS: Jean Palmer, Gwynn Marilyn.

SUBSCRIPTION MAILING: Joni AvRutick, Sherry Keefe, Jean Palmer.
DISTRIBUTION: Laurie Larson, Helen Greenspan, Linda Siegal, Kitty
Jerome, Megan Sondheim.

FUNDRAISING (DANCE) COMMITTEE: Lauren Berrizbeitai, Ellie Jones,
Eten Hill

ADVERTISING: Alverta Perkins, Ellie Jones.

COPY PREP: You?

LAYOUT: Carol Altobelli, Etana Finkler, Beay, Linda Wittenberg, Joyce
Chaney, Lynn Vera, Ellie Jones, LA Twigtive, Katey Wolff, Marita, Maglen.
BOSTON DISTRIBUTION: Ding Forist.

ALAN DER? ETANAT TYPESETTING: Sue Ball.

COMMONWOMAN is made up of a small group of women who work
together collectively to put out this paper. At present, no one on the

collective is paid for her work. =

Read This... It CHANGES!

NOTES FROM THE CORE

At the core group meeting we decided to try and share some of our
process and decisions with readers, which we'll do in this box.

We want to expand our distribution, both throughout Vermont and
elsewhere. If you would distribute the paper (which may mean picking up
a bundle at the bus) in your area, even if to one outlet, please contact us at
the address below. If you live locally and have ideas for good outlets for
the paper, send them too.

We want to reply to women who send copy for publication when we
think our editorial suggestions and feedback would help get your point
across to readers. We realize some women never hear from us or see their
piece in the paper, and we hope to improve that communication.

COMMONWOMAN will not be responsible for returning cartoons,
graphics, photographs or written material unless special arrangements are
made in advance or a stamped, self-addressed envelope is provided by the
contributor.

We are working on a policy for reimbursing women for supplies used
to do a solicited assignment for COMMONWOMAN. Since our finances are
very tight, we would only like to reimburse women who can’t afford to
provide the materials (for example photographic supplies), but we cannot
afford to pay for gas, time, overhead, etc. We do reimburse in full travel
expenses for distribution, and mailing and phone costs.

Help Help HELP! ! Advertising Salesperson
a work with El fierce cya es

every Six weeks No experience necessary. +» for you POSSIBLE
Call Ellie 964-7966 (Nights)

Please: articles submitted should be short, succinct, and typed, double-
spaced.

We need a copy prep person. This involves proofreading
minimal typing. It probably takes about 3 hours and needs to happen once
every 6 weeks on a Sunday night or Monday morning. A chance to get
involved in your women’s newspaper, and help it grow. Thanks to Euan
Bear for the great work she's done up to this point. Thanks Bear.

We have a new fundraising committee. They plan a dance at the Mill in
Winooski once every issue, and the first one was a roaring success (finan-
cially and socially). Watch for this issue’s dance and come support Com-
monwoman.

Commonwoman wants to acknowledge the skill and dedication of our
typesetter — she’s wonderful! We almost never have typos — time to thank
you, Sue.

Gwynn Marilyn, Jean

oe

Commonwoman would like to publish an issue on sexuality. We'd like it
to reflect the complicated and sometimes contradictory ideas and feelings
concerning eroticism, passion, pornography, anti-pornography, sadomaso-
chism, lesbianism, heterosexuality, bisexuality, butch-femme relationships,
bestiality... How do we evolve a feminist ethic/aesthetic around sexuality?
We want your stories, poems, essays, erotic fantasies... and what about the
centerfold? Some good catalyst material are the June '82 issue of Off Our
Backs, the Heresies sex issue, Susan Griffin’s Pornography and Silence.

If women would send their definition of “Feminism,” Etana is inter-
ested in compiling an article of quotes for the next issue.

Send typewritten double spaced manuscripts, B&W cartoons, graphics
and photos to Commonwoman, Box 242, Winooski, Vermont.

COMMONWOMAN is published every six weeks. Subscription rates
are $6.00/8 issues, $20/8 issues for institutions. It is free on request to
women in prison and to women in mental institutions.

EVALUATION/ CORE MTG

Wed. June 30 "aiple torunst. Gaceaaeen

For EVERYONE

BENEFIT

BENEFIT FINANCIAL STATEMENT: Commonwoman’s May
dance at the Mill:

$322 at the door

— 8.50 poster printing

It costs about $600 to put out an issue. Subscriptions, ads, and
contributions will supplement the dance money. Thank you all
for your support.

I swear it to you
I swear it on my common woman's head

The common woman is as common as a common loaf of bread —

and will rise!

Dear Commonwoman:
Recently I've been to benefit

dances at the Mill and they’ve been
really fun and lots of womyn have
come. The different benefit focuses
(one of which was Commonwoman)
have collected encouraging amounts
of money too, and that’s been great.
I feel that it’s important to choose to
spend our money to benefit
support other womyn’s efforts when
we can.

A lot of womyn also attended
Sue Schein’s happening (photos,
weightlifting, self-defense, body-
building...) in Plainfield recently. It
was a benefit for Aid to Incar-
cerated Mothers, a support group for
mothers in prison. Sue explained that
she set no admission price because
she wanted all womyn to feel free to
come regardless of money, but she
asked womyn to think about the cost
of a movie, or dinner out, or any
other form of entertainment one
might do in town, and then if you
had it, to contribute it. The evening
sure was a full one, and more inter-
esting and fun than most movies, and
there was a dance too. The women in
the demonstrations and the DJs
came from Boston and Montreal,
expenses donated.

There were at least 120 women
there, and $150 was collected, includ-
ing money for the xeroxed art and
silkscreened banners. I felt upset
about that based on the amount of
time, work and effort that went into
the project, the number of people
there, and the important “cause”
that could use so much more.

“makes twice the money: because an
admission price is set. Is it true that
because Sue left it up to individual
womyn (as the movie theaters and
restaurants never do) we chose to pay
less or nothing? I’ve been thinking
about this and wonder how other
womyn feel. Not everyone spends
money at movies etc., but I think a
lot of womyn do.
Lynn Vera

More Views

Dear Commonwoman,
I especially liked S. Linda
Merets’ article “How I Was Radical-
ized.” Because it was about her
personal view and growth, it touched
me more than a news review of a
march would have. I also liked Lynn
Vera’s review of Personal Best, ‘cause
instead of reading one more review of
the movie, I got a chance to read
what a lot of different women were
feeling. This type of article makes me
feel Commonwoman is all of us,
rather than giving news to us. Many
other feminist papers do that; I
think Commonwoman's strength is
its pulling in the “community” of
women to write and give input.
I would really like it if more
Commonwoman readers would write
letters to the paper. I want to know
your reactions to articles or graphics.
The letters column is a space readers
can dialog among us without having
to “write an article.”
I would also like to thank Sue
Ball for her consistently excellent
typesetting, as well as appreciating all
the women who work on the paper.
In creative struggle,
Etana

Every

RE

EWP HOURS;

iq them?

‘Rape Season

Women’s Place

10:30-3 weekdays

LETTERS

Resist
Controversy
Hello Commonwomen, [Editorial Comment:
Thanks for providing the space Commonwoman received | the

to share our thoughts. I have some
questions that I would like each
woman who reads this newspaper to
ask herself seriously:

How do we relate to oppressive
men? As feminists, are we scared of

following letter too late to get a
response from Susun Weed. We
realize that this represents only one
point of view and encourage you to
investigate the issue if this affects
you. (Let us know what you find)

To the Vermont Women’s Commu-
nity,
“Please be informed that the

circumscribed way, hoping not to
come in contact with them? When we do come in contact
with them are we fearful or angry?

Does the size of the oppressor
make any difference? Or is the fact
that we are oppressed enough for our
anger to remain anger, or does it
turn back into fear?

Please answer these questions
seriously, because I am talking about
a specific oppressor, a huge one, a
tremendous omnipresent oppressor.
Yes, the U.S. government, not only
are their policies and institutions
primarily male, patriarchal, genocidal
and misogynist, but their power is
global, and through their bulk they
are trying to force us to support
them. So, the question is that if your
answer to oppression by a specific
man is confrontive, strong and angry,
why not be confrontive, strong and
angry in relation to The Man.

How? War Tax Resistance has

undersigned, Billie Potts and River
Lightwomoon, have disassociated
from all business and educational
activity, conducted by Susun Weed,
our former partner in Elf and Dra-
gons—SUM. We are still bound into a
bank mortgage and collective land
deed with her. We have not con-
sented to and in no way support her
use of our commonly owned land for
the “1982 Heating Intensives,” being
advertised by her in the Common-
woman classifieds. Susun's mailing
out of a 1982 “intensives” announce-
ment that uses the format collectively
developed by the three of us in
past years did not have our permis-
sion or participation.

It seems this mode of adver-
tising is an attempt to give women
the idea that “everything is settled,
the land now individually owned by
Susun, that bygones are bygones,
that the tradition of being steadfastly
pacifist, religious and moral has
been primarily a pacifist, religious
and moral stance, the time has come
for us to be feminist. War tax resistance
movement. A member contacted us
wondering which workshops we are giving, for others
who are confused by the mailing and
ads, we hope this letter clarifies what
is happening.

There has been no substantive
movement on Ms. Weed’s part to
examine the physical abuse, racist,
and monetary exploitation behaviors,
that underlay the cancellation of half
of last year's weekends. Cover-up,
denial, and selective memory con-
tinue to be the agenda. She occupies
our commonly owned land, refusing
to sell on the general market, refusing
to sell her interest to us, and refusing
to concretely compensate us for our
interest.

This is ongoing classist abuse and
manipulation that has created daily
anger and bitterness in our lives, that
has made mockery of counseling and
feminist mediation and left us no
alternative but the patriarchal courts.

Dear Editor,
It is physically and spiritually

exhausting to have to pursue and
clarify these arrogant and mis-
conceptions.

Summer is statistically the season when most
rapes occur. I have verified this news
item and offer it as a public service.
Please communicate this information
so more women will have access to it.
Thank you,
Marcia Womongold
See News Briefs for more informa-
tion.

sentational advertisements through
the pages of wimmin’s publications
On a national level, and once again
bare the issues.

Billie Luisi Potts

River Lightwomoon

A Community Woman's Center
200 Main St. Burlington, Vt. 05401

AhOPESA

Saturday 802-658-2422

Dances for Everywoman's Place!

MUSIC BY SANDY and Joyce

SECOND and THIRD THURSDAYS - JUNE 24, JULY 22, AUG. 12, AUG. 26

SUGGESTED DONATION

8 p.m.