By Abby Hale

Abortions may be illegal again within a few years.

This basic element of our reproductive rights has been taken
for granted since the Supreme Court decision of 1973. But, since
that time, anti-abortion forces have mobilized a well-funded and
highly organized grassroots movement and they are beating even

their own timetable.

Reagan and significant Cabinet members are actively anti-
abortion. The U.S. Senate and House may already have an anti-
choice majority, and we can no longer count on this conservative
Supreme Court to uphold women’s rights on this issue.

In Vermont, every year several bills are introduced to restrict
women’s rights to abortion and each year they have come closer
to passing. Restrictive legislation on a state level cannot com-
pletely keep women from having abortions, but is aimed at mak-
ing them as inconvenient and therefore inaccessible as possible to
lower the number of abortions done.

It is on a national level that the ultimate measure, the Human
Life Amendment, must be passed. This amendment, which will
define the fetus as a “person” with constitutional rights, must be
satisfied, like the Equal Rights Amendment, by two-thirds of the

Statute or bill is pending which only requires a majority vote in
Congress. If passed, the bill could possibly be delayed a year in
court, but very likely will be upheld. The effect of this bill would
be to make anyone connected with illegal abortion — the woman,
counselor, or abortionist — subject to murder charges. Some ver-
sions would also prohibit IUDs and birth control pills. It would
be far worse than a return to the days before the Supreme Court
decision when there was popular support for abortion and a wide-
reaching underground abortion network. Fear of murder charges
would keep such a network from operating in any accessible

form.

We can no longer be complacent about abortion rights. We
must begin NOW to organize a strong and effective grassroots
counterattack. Write or call your legislators now and voice a
strong pro-choice stand. Contact NOW (National Organization for
Women), NARAL (National Abortion Rights Action League) or
the Vermont Women’s Health Center to plug in and turn this

terrifying trend around.

By Linda Wittenberg and
Carol Cohen

(The following is an inter-
view between Burlington mayor-
elect Bernard Sanders and Com-
monwoman staff members Linda
Wittenberg and Carol Cohen.
The interview took place on
March 24.)

LINDA: I'd like to start by
asking what your actual powers
as mayor will be.

BERNARD SANDERS:
That's a good point to start off
with. In a few hours I'm leaving
for Chicago — I was asked to go
on the Phil Donahue show and
the Today show. Their shtick
was — here’s a socialist that’s
been elected mayor of Burling-
ton. I rejected the chance to go
on the Phil Donahue show
because they would suddenly
make me the leading socialist in
America. That's how media
works. I would be asked my
views on Latin America, Central

America, China, Russia and
everything else. I was elected
mayor of Burlington to deal
with the Southern Connector,
and the Pomerleau Development
policy... I don’t want to be a
national leader now. We have to
try to pull things together in
Burlington.

What are my powers as
mayor? The powers are defined
very clearly in a book called the
City Charter. I have the very
important power of being in
control of the budget — of
creating a budget — which is
what we’re working on now. We
have the power to make a
number of major appointments.
We appoint the city attorney,
the city treasurer, the city clerk,
and a number of other positions.
Obviously these appointments
shape the policy — in other
words, in what direction do we
want the city attorney to work

in — I will determine that with
that person. On the other hand,
I'm one member of the City
Council.

There are 13 aldermen. I
have veto power. We can veto
and they can override unless we
have one-third of the board
behind us. What we also have,
and I intend to use, is not so
much the power of being mayor,
but the moral position: Some-
body like Mr. Paquette who had
a certain conception of what the
role of mayor was would not be
concerned about, say the Medi-
cal Center. He’d say, what does
that have to do with official city
business, and he’s perfectly
right, it doesn’t. I’m very con-
cerned about medical care in
Vermont and I will speak out on
that.

I will present — cultural
events, arts. We think we can be
a lot more creative than the last

administration in bringing artists
to the people. We're going to be
coming up with ideas for film
series for kids in all of the
schools around the city, a
summer arts festival with Ver-
mont artists out of neighbor-

hoods. We will initiate these
things... and the beauty of it is
that it will cost very little

money. ...Now when you get
down to the nitty-gritty fights,
the Southern Connector, deve-
lopment of the waterfront, the
wood chip plant, utility rates,
the hospital, then you're dealing
with several hundred million
dollars worth of development...
you're dealing with the power
structure fighting to take care of
these problems before I get
elected.

What I intend to be is a
strong mayor who's involved in
all aspects of the community. In
certain areas such as the parks

and dealing with kids we've
already put together an ad hoc
youth committee. We're going to
be talking to the kids them-
selves. Young people have not
had a fair shake in this city.

LINDA: You've put out
that you plan to have an assis-
tant and split your salary.

BERNARD: Now, I didn’t
say split the salary. My salary is
$33,000 and out of that I expect
I will take some of that and hire
someone to work with me as an
aide.

LINDA: A number of peo-
ple are wondering if it’s going to
be a woman.

BERNARD: O.K. Let me
deal very quickly with that. You
may like it or you may not like
it. I will not hire someone
because she or he is a woman or
a man. I'll hire somebody
because they can do the job. I’m
not going out of my way to hire

(Continued on Page 15)