Washington March

Washington

By Linda Gwizdak

Proclaiming “Gay Love Is Good Love!” and “We Are Everywhere!,” thousands of lesbians and gay men and their supporters marched through the streets of Washington, D.C., on October 14. Police estimated around 75,000 people took part in the Gay Movement’s first National March on Washington for Lesbian and Gay Rights.

Although the police estimated us at 75,000, many speakers were saying that we numbered 250,000 and that we outnumbered those who came to see the pope! I personally believe there were around 100,000 there.

The march, which took almost a year of organizing, commemorated the 1969 Stonewall Rebellion in New York City. It is now ten years later, and things have drastically changed in that time. We have had our victories and our losses. We still must endure laws enforced against us in an unfair way. Gay men are murdered in cities across the nation. Lesbians are assaulted in their own bar in San Francisco by drunken off-duty police. We were defeated in Dade County, Saint Paul, and Eugene. We are still attacked by the Anita Bryants and John Briggs of the country. But, the story isn’t all grim. We have lots to celebrate. We defeated the Briggs Initiative (California’s Proposition 6). We have some lesbian mothers winning the custody of their children and every year the nation’s Gay Parade gets larger and larger with the ranks of newly “out” gay people. And now, we celebrated our largest Gay Pride Parade and rally in the history of the movement.

As a lesbian, I am proud to have been a part of this historic event. For me, the experience was almost too intense to put into words. My roommate and I flew to Washington the day before. We stopped in the March on Washington office and found it jam-packed with newly arrived gays and staff who were bustling around to get March information to people. It was a strange sight to see a large storefront with the sign on the front. The streets were filled with happy, excited gay people. People openly sported T-shirts and buttons with gay slogans.

Nuclear Amazement

You rich boys amaze me. You pull your atoms apart. You smash them together. And just in case your atoms

—Photo by Lynn Vera

My friend and I stayed in a house with seven lesbians and a straight woman supporter. There were even three military dykes in our house. We all were excited from the time we all met until we all went our own separate ways on Monday.

This March was only the third time that I was in such a large crowd of gay people. Since the March’s inception, I could only guess what the experience would be like for me. Well, I was in for the time of my life.

As we walked the few blocks to the March assembly area, we passed many gays on the street. Everyone was in a festive mood as the crowd grew larger. People were covered with all kinds of gay buttons and they openly kissed, held hands and hugged. We felt safe. We were with our own people. We were blessed with dry, cool, partly sunny weather.

As we neared the assembly area, we could hear shouts and chanting and could see the thousands of brightly colored banners, flags and signs. The walls and lampposts were draped with people with cameras and bullhorns.

There were eight sections of the March. They were: Women (Third-World women leading), Physically Challenged (disabled), Children and Aged, International Gays, Parents and Friends of Gays, Regions of the United States, National Organizations, and Supporters. State representation ranged from Alaska and Hawaii to New York and as far south as Puerto Rico, and everything in between. Some of the largest contingents came from San Francisco, Texas and New York.

The rally was held on the grounds of the Washington Monument. As the March filed into the wet, muddy area, the marchers were greeted by a large group who ran ahead to beat the crowd. Music was being played by various bands on the massive stage. The March took almost three hours from start to finish and everyone settled down for an afternoon of more music and speakers. Some of the speakers were: Richard Ashworth, Parents and Friends of Gays; Steve Ault, March on Washington; Betty Santoro, keynote speaker from New York Lesbian Feminist Liberation; Arlie Scott, National Organization for Women (NOW); Sky Rose, Lesbian/Gay Youth; Lucia Valeska, National Gay Task Force. The rest were too numerous to list here.

It was reported that the crowd at the March and rally was so huge that the Washington Monument had to be closed for an hour because we disrupted the line of tourists. There were also reports of someone throwing a tear gas canister at the end of the parade. No one was hurt. The march and rally was totally peaceful even though there were some anti-gay signs seen along the parade route.

Approximately 155 organizations endorsed the March. They ranged from Gay Mormons to religious groups of all kinds to the ACLU (American Civil Liberties Union) to the hundreds of gay and lesbian groups — large and small, urban and rural. The list is too lengthy to put into this article, but if anyone says we have no support, we can tell them otherwise!

I don't know why you surprise me anymore. You’re crazy. Gone into your destructive power craziness. Crazed creatures, gone mad. Mutated, chewing your own tails, too frenzied and numb to feel the pain.

Trampling whatever or whoever gets in your way. And that happens to be me.

You're crazier than I thought. I feel sorry for you; lost in your craziness. I envy your comforts. I hate you. You hurt me/destroy me. I fear you.

You may pull apart or smash together off schedule, past your failing failsafe devices, off your charts/off your graphs, blowing us, the folks, all off the face of the earth, maybe blowing the face off the earth for that matter, just in case, you are prepared to give up on the face of Mother Earth. Leave it. Kiss it off.

And go into your underground cities, where you can breathe filtered air, and eat chemicals. Where you can analyze your data, design your systems, practice simultaneous orgasms with your computers. Disco in style. Dine in style. Fuck in style. Fuck us.

We — we are the regular ole people, the peons. The regular ole creatures of earth, the regular ole jewels of creation.

We deserve to live more than you machines of destruction, more than you assholes.

We are on the face of the earth — the one you are prepared to desert. We are going to have to stay here when your misguided judgments, your disgusting, perverted power trips allow your atoms to flash explosions so big that they light up four states at once.

If no one stops you at your games, you'll succeed in destroying Mother Earth and all her creatures... which includes me.

While you are underground, I'll be dying.

Why am I still surprised at your level of coldness? As a little boy, you always did like to pull the wings off butterflies. And you have soured with age. You fools will destroy yourselves. But I can’t be concerned with that. You are being crazy on me. I am afraid for my life. You make me angry.
—Joyce Cheney

MARCH FOR LESBIAN/GAY RIGHTS. Between 50,000 and 250,000 (estimates varied) lesbians and gay men marched on Washington on October 14 to demand an end to all social, economic, legal and judicial oppression of lesbian and gay people.

—Photo by Lynn Vera

Photo by Lynn Vera