COMMONWOMAN/DECEMBER, 1981

Page 14

STRAIGHT TALK/

LESBIAN TALK

By Lynn Vera

Burlington N.O.W. women arranged for a film strip about lesbian women’s lives that was shown at Everywoman's Place on Tuesday, Nov. 17. About 25 women attended, the majority were lesbians. We talked about the film, which most of us felt was a good P.R. educational tool for high schools but fell far short of a realistic picture of our lives. It was nice — nice, most women were constantly smiling, few were poor, relationships were portrayed as simply ecstatic and lasting years. But it was also a film that was fun to watch, full of music by lesbian women, ideas of women, images of women together. A good tool in our war against homophobia in the straight world.

What most of us came for though, a dialogue between local straight and lesbian women, never really got off the ground. Most of the talking that did happen left me with a bad taste in my mouth. As a lesbian, I was aware of being in the majority that night, and it felt good for awhile. The next day I felt bad; I felt like an opportunity for building understanding and coalition fell victim to misplaced anger and a severe lack of listening.

The issues are as complex as the long history of Burlington’s lesbian community. We didn't structure any way to deal with it. But we began by sharing thoughts on why there is tension, anger, and mistrust between straight and lesbian women. Some points were clear and good and saying them helped. It became clear that all of us felt a lack of support and recognition for the work we do, and for the fact that it is hard taking feminist risks, for both lesbians and straight women. We resisted pretty well the temptation to get into hierarchical oppression listing, but I don’t think we listened openly enough to really hear and understand the ways we feel scared or bad or need support.

I personally feel that it was mostly the lesbian women who didn't listen to the straight women. This bothers me. The fact that only 6 or so straight women came put them in the more vulnerable place that night. With the exception of one woman, I felt the straight women came with a non-righteous, honestly open attitude. Because there were more lesbians, and because we were comfortably vocal, and because one or two of us were very defensive and angry, the focus became more of how the straight women could “do good” or gain the support of the lesbians. We never really took the time to hear and understand the work we were each doing, and I feel we never took the space to give any personal support or empathy.

I think lesbian anger at the denial of our work, at the blanking-out of our presence, at the non-support of our actions by homophobic (“I don’t want them to think I’m a lesbian”) straight (feminist?) women is valid and needs a place to come out and be heard. I think for some lesbian women fast Tuesday’s meeting was the place for that, and it makes sense since the opportunity is so rare. But I also think it was short-sighted to focus there, and after awhile, misdirected. The women there could have made a time for putting out our anger and our feelings of non-support, and then move on to listen and give support. We didn’t. I own that I did my share of focusing too long on past non-support and betrayal I have felt.

I want to move forward though, not stay in my past experience. I need to believe that women can recognize we are each valuable in our different tactics, ways, appearances, focus.

There are some basic issues I have with straight women about trust, vulnerability, confidence. I want to talk about these. And I want to recognize and validate that there are some straight women whose politics I trust and whose work I support and respect even more than some other lesbian women. This is an important reality, and a big part of my growing perception of the need for coalition and decrease in self-righteous separatism.

So I want us to meet again. I want more straight women to come. More of all of us to come. We have so much to do and we really do need each other.

A Few Thoughts On Intolerance Of Difference

‘Cause it is authentic Asian American and there are so few songs that are Asian American. Well, it wasn't okay to sing that song because it was about a man. That whole view ignored me and blocked me out as an Asian American woman. I have never shared that song with a group of women again and yet if they all knew that song and what it meant to me, they would know a great deal about me.

In the women’s community, I don’t think of a mass, instead I think of individual women and how much I'm willing to risk or not risk with them as individuals.

Jerry Falwell and other sexist clowns are nothing we can control; we can take a defensive or better still, offensive position with regard to them but that’s not what I am more concerned about. 

All too often we seem to be too busy tearing each other down or apart to even have the energy to deal with other issues. It is a given that we all do what we think we need or want to do. It is also a given that we can misunderstand each other.

All this brings me to my main point which is that we all come from different places with regard to race, class, sexual orientation, and looks; it would be sheerest stupidity to assume that we all will choose to survive in the same way. Please, let us be as tolerant and loving of each other as we can in these trying times. I know it isn’t easy and we don’t love every woman all the time. I fear that our own intolerance of difference (learned from the larger society but rooted in us) could destroy us more thoroughly than any external force could do.

FRESH GROUND

COFFEEHOUSE

I am concerned about tendencies to dogmatism and over-conformity in this community. To cite one example from my own experience: a group of us from the Women's House of Transition spent a weekend in a cabin in the country. All was mellow and we started singing some of our favorite songs. Then I started singing ‘Wandering Chinaman,’ one of my favorites.

TBOAM- 9PM Mon- THURS
3 PM - 1AM Fri- Sat
* 10AM - 2:30AM SUNDAY (brunch)
WE SERVE HEARTY, HEALTHY, HOMEMADE FOOD
FEATURING LIVE MUSIC BY LOCAL PLAYERS,

FOLK, COUNTRY, JAZZ, CLASSICAL, GOSPEL.
WEEKEND NIGHTS & SUN. BRUNCH

175 CHURCH STREET - BURLINGTON

“C80- 5777 *

THE VERMONT WOMEN’S HEALTH CENTER

“get involved in your health care”

? Older women’s health evenings
? Annual exams, routine gynecology

=
? Cervical caps, contraception
? Pregnancy tests, abortion services

PhotoGarden

206 COLLEGE ST. 863-1256

8 years of women providing services for women!
336 NORTH AVE., BURLINGTON 863-1386