Page 2

COMMONWOMAN

The women who worked on this month's issue are:

The Collective

WOMNOWWOD

Peggy Luhrs,

Dian Kendrick Mueller,
Wittenberg.

Julie Orvis,

Helping Hands

Carol Cohen, Vicki Smith Deva, Lee Douglas, Deb Ennis, Etana
Finkler, Abby Hale, Suzanne Harkless, Betsy Keir, Roni LeBlanc,
Gwyn Marilyn, Maxine Merrick, Josi Schneiderman, Celia Vera,
Lynn Vera, Carol W., Katey Wolff. DL, Joknee. :

Commonwoman, Inc., is a not-for-profit corporation founded for
the purpose of publishing Commonwoman, a Vermont women’s publica-
tion of news, culture and dialogue from a feminist perspective. Common-
woman, Inc., is made up of a small group of women who work together
collectively to put out this paper. At present, no one on the collective is
paid for her work.

We will consider for publication articles, poems, short stories, letters,
cartoons, graphics and photographs submitted by women. All articles
should be typed and double-spaced; we prefer articles that are no longer
than three pages. We reserve the right to edit for length and clarity.

Signed articles reflect the viewpoint of the author and not necessarily
that of the collective.

Commonwoman will not be responsible for returning any written
materials, cartoons, graphics or photographs unless special arrangements
are made in advance or a stamped, self-addressed envelope is provided by
the contributor.

A Note on Procedure: We hold an editorial committee meeting on the
which of the copy we have received will be published in our next issue; this
copy is sent to the typesetter. The following Sunday, the editorial commit-
tee meets again for its final deadline meeting; this deadline is intended for
late-breaking news and this is the last time the committee can consider
copy for publication in the next issue. This copy is also sent to the type-
setter; the last of the typesetting for each issue is done the Friday before
publication. The paper is laid out the weekend before publication and is
delivered to the printer on Monday. On Wednesday, we mail the paper to
our subscribers and deliver it to our commercial outlets. We publish every
six weeks.
Send all contributions for the next issue of Commonwoman to P.O.
Box 242, Winooski, Vt. 05404 before the deadline printed in this box.
Subscription Rates: $6.00/8 issues for individuals; $20.00/8 issues for
institutions. Free on request to women in prison and women in mental
institutions.

Commonwoman, Inc.
P.O. Box 242

Winooski, Vt. 05404

Typesetting: Sue Ball

Deadline: April 1, 1981

Copyright Commonwoman, Inc., 1981

THANK YOU for holding
together and putting out the
paper. It brings to me the kinds
of topics and ideas I don’t
usually hear about out here. For
instance, I probably wouldn't
have heard about Michelle Cliff's

every

Mountain
Hi

Commonwoman &
Burlington community —

the

Dear

of our first deadline (printed in this box) and decide by consensus

I swear it to you
I swear it on my common woman's head

and will rise!

WRITE FOR US!

The common woman is as common as a common loaf of bread —

Commonwoman wants YOU to write for us. We want to
broaden our appeal and reach more women, and we can’t do that
without your help. We need your articles, poems, short stories
and letters. Pick any topic you think would interest women. If
you can’t think of anything, here are a few suggestions to get you
started:

Health issues (nutrition; exercise; food and herbs for specific
ailments; problems which uniquely affect women, such as breast
cancer and uterine cancer; etc.)
Bringing up free children (female and male).

Book reviews, movie reviews, play and concert reviews.

Gardening tips (indoor and outdoor).

Travel tips (how to get where you want to go and stay there
cheaply, how to pack a backpack, how to camp along the way).
Travelogues (reports on other places in the country and the
world and what they offer a woman).

How to’s (buying a car, repairing a car, building a house,
getting a divorce, going “back to work,” going back to school,
keeping your sanity with small children around, sharing child
care, making your own furniture, keeping a journal, etc.)
Hobbies
Sports

Recipes (for budget meals, for vegetarians, for sugarless des-
serts, etc.)
Unusual jobs for women.

Personal stories (“How I Became a Feminist,” “How I Came
to Choose to Have Children,” “What it's Like to Live
in Rural Vermont,” etc.)

We also want your photographs, cartoons and graphics —
you pick your topics.

Our address is Commonwoman, Box 242, Winooski, Vt.
05404. Our deadline for the next issue is April 1.
We're counting on hearing from you!

of the Gross National Product
was the best — it made so much
sense. Good to know you're up
to your same ole tricks! To the Editor:

On December 28, 1980, I
witnessed what I believe to be as
unconscionable and inhumane
an act as any I have ever seen in
my lifetime.

Love

Letters to the Editors =

Hello out there! I have been
receiving the paper ever since I
left Burlington — over a year
now — and I read it cover to
cover every issue. I don’t know
why, but this last issue inspired
me to let you know how much I
appreciate and learn from the
candid opinions, knowledge and
facts presented in each issue. I
can see each one of you clear as
day, speaking your thoughts,
letting your guts flow through onto
paper. I can see clear as day (and
Colorado days are very clear) the
collective sitting around Mary's
house discussing, arguing about
book if not for Commonwoman.
I thank you all individually for
being so honest and real in the
articles you write. It helps me to
continually feel you all inside
me, your troubles and good
times, and to empathize with
you. The sisters I know and love
the best.

Thanks again for continuing
such a hard task as the Com-
monwoman newspaper!

In loving sisterhood—
Robin S. Getter
(The “S” stands for
Sonja!)
P.S. Peggy — your analysis

Cartoon

Dear Commonwoman,
...Especially love Glo’s car-
toon strip...
All the best,
Barbara Hirschfeld

The place was Windham
Superior Court in Brattleboro.

A party appeared in court,
unrepresented by an attorney, to
tell Superior Court Judge Keyser
that her husband, whom she was
suing for divorce, had not paid
support money, as ordered by
the court, for her and her minor
child in the past six weeks.

The husband, in court with
his lawyer, gave no reason for his
failure to pay as ordered, and
was not required to give any
reason by Judge Keyser.

The judge, who had issued
the support order, knew that the
woman and child had no other
resources to live on except what
they received as support from
the husband and father.

The woman also told the
judge that lawyers she had
contacted to represent her
would not be interested to
represent her unless she came up
with a cash retainer. And
because she had no money she
was forced to appear in her own
behalf. She also told the judge
that she did not feel capable of
being able to protect her inter-
ests in a court of law without a
lawyer.

If you’re wondering whe-
ther the husband was too poor
to pay the support, take it out
of your heads. The husband had
testified before Judge Keyser at

Continued on Page 13