genocide, lest we, too, be his victims.  
After generations of conditioning and  
bribing, we follow Dick's rules as a  
reflex, without even noticing.  

One big rule is cover up genocide:  
ever see it, never admit it.  

We have to go back for a moment,  
back before patriarchal euro-capitalism  
reformed the world in its own image.  
White women don't understand who we are  
because we've blocked understanding the  
specific civilization that we belong to.  
We have to go back to that contact  
between semi-feudal Europe, with its  
wooden sailing ships and musket-bearing  
soldiers, and the rest of the world.  
That meeting was not like we think it  
was.  

The impact of expanding Europe on  
what is now called the Third World was  
supposedly a collision of advanced  
whites and undeveloped colored people,  
of euro-capitalism's superior science  
and economic power overwhelming primitive  
tribes. But in 1492, when  
Christopher Columbus’ expedition ran  
into the Caribbean islands, Europe was  
not advanced over the nations of Asia,  
Africa, the Middle East and the Western  
Hemisphere. Its technology and economy  
were different, but not advanced or  
superior. It's that difference that we  
gotta focus on.  

In many respects, euro-civilization  
was both technologically and economically  
backward. Europe was known as a poor  
barbarian region isolated on the periphery  
of the trade routes between the  
world's main civilizations.  

The level of development of the  
world-spanning Islamic trading civilization  
of the Turkish Ottoman Empire,  
the Han Empire of China, the Moghul  
Empire of India, the many African nations  
and the indigenous nations of the Western  
Hemisphere easily surpassed backward  
Europe. This is to say that Europe was  
not the center of knowledge and progress.  

Most Europeans had no idea of what  
sanitation was. The English, for example,  
seldom washed (their medicine-men said  
that bathing was unhealthy). Euro-men  
were backward compared to the rest of  
the world in the applied sciences/technologies  
such as medicine, textiles,  
nutrition, metal-working and agriculture,  
had an elaborate system of patriarchal  
superstitions which were enforced by a  
parasite caste of men who tortured and  
murdered women, and had the lowest  
standard of living of any region on the  
face of the earth. I mean, this was a  
poor civilization. What we did have (or  
what had us) were the beginnings of  
euro-capitalism.  

I know this is hard to believe,  
because everyone just "knows" that for  
whatever reasons, modern science and  
industry first came into being in  
Europe and settler Amerikkka. Let's  
fast forward from the start of the  
Witchhunt to check this out, say a  
century and a half after Columbus hit  
the Lotto, to colonial settler Amerikkka  
of the mid-1600s.  

There are British-trained physicians,  
men representing the most advanced  
medical science that euro-capitalism  
had. But they didn't seem to be able to  
do anything about smallpox, the most  
feared contagious disease of the times.  
Not only did smallpox, a viral infection,  
exterminate whole Indian communities,  
but it continued to kill and disfigure  
thousands of white settlers.  

White people did notice, though, that  
many of their African slaves didn't get  
smallpox even in the midst of epidemics.  
This was puzzling to the white doctors.  
It was accounted for by the supposed  
"beast-like" nature of the African race,  
which was thereby less vulnerable to the  
human diseases that afflicted the  
higher and more sensitive white race.  
Enslaved women merely nodded and said  
nothing.  

Of course, the reason that some  
African slaves didn't catch smallpox  
was that they had been immunized as  
children in Africa, or had been secretly  
immunized in the slave quarters. For in  
the region of West Africa that most  
slaves came from, smallpox was known  
and a crude inoculation against it was  
already known (using pinpricks to  
transfer some clear serum from a small-  
pox sore to the body of an uninfected  
person; what resulted was a milder  
infection, producing the antibodies that  
gave lifelong immunity to smallpox,  
although some still died from the crude  
inoculation). All slaves who knew were  
sworn not to tell Europeans.  

The Wonders of the Invisible World:  

TRYALS  
Hcberal AUAitejes,  

Lately Executed in  

NEW-ENGLAND:  

And of several remarkable Curiosities therein Occurring,  

Together with,  
the Nature, the Number, and the Operations of the Devils:  
Narrative of a late outrage committed by a knot of Witches in  
several Lend, eer Teleensing, and so far explaining, that under which  
Some Councils directing a due time; ble this  
improvement of the Terrible  
doe by the untold and amazing Range of Ev. bSpoiis nef  

iv. ai wie Discourse upon those Tmyzotime which are chemare ordinary Dest  

Roflia in New England, 30d Reprinted at Lie  

Printed first, at  
hem, £08 Jobw Denton, a Wwe Rates in the Lustin. 1693,  

Title page of first London edition (1693) of  
Cotton Mather’s Wonders of the Invisible  
World. From New York Public Library.  

So who was backward and who had the  
advanced medical technology? Just be-  
cause they were captives, laborers kept  
in rags, didn't mean that Africans had  
no science. Even though their science  
had to be practiced as a conspiracy.  

African slaves here were party to  
scientific knowledge that was shared by  
most of the world: with the Han Empire  
in China, with Arab civilization, with  
Greece and Turkey, with the physicians  
of the Moghul Empire in India (who are  
thought to have used smallpox inoculation  
since 1000 A.D.). Except in areas  
where the disease was rare, such as in  
the Western Hemisphere, the major  
civilizations of the world knew—but not  
backward Europe.  

African slaves had been secretly  
using smallpox inoculation for almost  
a century, before Amerikkans found out  
how to do it. And again, it wasn't any  
white male physician with his degrees  
and bank accounts who learned. It was  
a woman to woman transfer of science.  
British feminist Mary Wortley Montagu  
learned about inoculation from Turkish  
women (she was married to the British  
ambassador to the Ottoman Empire, though  
for her it was only an escape from an  
arranged marriage). In 1717 she wrote  
her friend, "Mrs. S.C.":  

"I am going to tell you a thing that  
will make you wish yourself here. The  
small-pox, so fatal and so general  
amongst us, is here entirely harmless  
by the invention of ingrafting, which  
is the term they give it. There is a  
set of old women who make it their  
business to perform the operation every  
autumn, in the month of September, when  
the great heat is abated..."  

In that same year Mary Montagu demon-  
strated smallpox inoculation on her  
son, and by 1721 it was being tried, with  
great controversy, by the medical patri-  
archs of England. There was much fear  
and superstition about this vaccine  
among white society, ordinary as it was  
to the rest of the world.  

Public fears about smallpox inocu-  
lation reached the point of hysteria in  
the Amerikkkan colonies. Amerikkka is  
always in a state of hysteria. There was  
even white mob violence by settler men.  
Even though the campaign for smallpox  
inoculation was led by Cotton Mather,  
the greatest of the New England Puritan  
ministers and the man who had earlier  
led the campaign to root out the hidden  
nests of "witches" among white women.  

Mather himself was attacked, and his  
home firebombed, during the inoculation  
controversy of 1721. Mather stuck to  
his guns because his African slave,  
“Onesimus," had advised him that all  
the slaves knew that inoculation did  
work, and that he, "Onesimus," had been  
inoculated himself as a child in West  
Africa.  

The science of what is now called the  
Third World was still leading and  
teaching the backward European civili-  
zation.  

Now, let's fast-forward three  
centuries after Columbus. The euro-cap-  
italist empire in North Amerikkka is  
breaking away from Great Britain,  
becoming a new world power. DR. BENJAMIN  
RUSH of Philadelphia was the foremost  
U.S. physician. Educated at Princeton &  
Edinburgh University in Scotland, Rush  
became a successful surgeon, teacher of  
chemistry, researcher, patriot, and a  
professor of medicine at the University  
of Pennsylvania. He personally trained  
3,000 white men (isn't that a  
war crime of some kind?), and is best-  
known today as the founder of U.S.  
medical science. The patriarchy has  
named hospitals and medical schools in  
his honor.  

Benjamin Rush was also one of the  
founders not only of the U.S.A. as a  
nation, but of white liberalism. He was  
a signer of the U.S. Declaration of  
Independence, and served as the surgeon-  
general in his friend George Washing-  
ton's army. It was Rush who found a