Chris Steele-Perkins, Female victims of death squad, Apopa, from El

Salvador

Harry Mattison, People trying to escape being hunted from El 
Salvador

them as property while getting their
rocks off. Trying to terrorize them
to suppress resistance. The personal
is very political.

The genocide which began with the
smaller Indian tribes of the coastal
areas grew into the Removal Act of
1830, during the administration of
the populist slaveowner president
Andrew Jackson. The Removal Act or-
dered that lands East of the Missi-
ssippi River be sterilized of all
Indian nations and peoples. While
many small groups of Indians hid out
and survived in dense forests and
swamplands (the Seminole in Florida
waged a 30-year guerrilla war that
eventually forced the U.S. to let
them stay), most were moved out West
by the Gestapo. On the infamous Trail
of Tears the captive Cherokee Nation,
marching under duress through the
winter of 1838 without food or winter
clothing, lost one-third of its peo-
ple en route.

Then, too, the genocide was
centered on women. President Andrew

26

Jackson told the Gestapo to finish the
business by killing Indian women as
their main target. We didn't hear that
in men's history classes or even in
women's studies. No wonder in 1990 we
still have people saying that you can
do genocide by killing men. "An endan-
gered species." No, to end a nation

or people you gotta kill the women and
children; that's obvious biological
fact and cultural fact as well.

Segregation, the removal of all
Eastern Indian survivors to concen-
tration camps called something else,
was a move in a long, protracted
200-year process of genocide. But so
was integration, for even way back
then there were loving white men
promoting the idea of peaceful
togetherness of Indian and white.
Indian women, of course.

U.S. President Thomas Jefferson
proposed integration as a final sol-
ution to the dwindling Indian nations.
In his negotiations with the Mohicans,
Munsees & Delawares, Jefferson urged
them to stop being so communal and join
settlers in Euro-capitalism:

"Westward the Women,"

"When once you have property, you
will want laws and magistrates to
protect your property and persons,
and to punish those among you who
commit crimes. You will find our laws
are good for this purpose; you will
wish to live under them, you will
unite yourselves with us, join in our
Great Councils and form one people
with us, and we shall all be Ameri-
cans; you will mix with us by
marriage, your blood will run in our
veins, and will spread with us over
this great land."

U.S. President Jefferson favored
the elimination of all Africans on
this continent, starting with the
children; believing that white men
would never be safe otherwise (a
view that's more popular than ever).
But when it came to Indians he wanted
integration. This was consistent.
Privately, Jefferson wrote his envoys
that any Indians who refused to join
“will be wiped out to the last
person." Notice he said, "person" and
not "man." I mean, our Founding
Fathers were real pros in the busin-
ess of genocide. That's what their
main business was as a society. Same
today with us.

When Jefferson was proposing
intermarriage and Indians' biological
cross-over with white society, he
sure wasn't talking about his grand-
daughter getting down with Crazy
Horse. No, no, we can be sure of
that! What he meant was that Indian
women should become sexually more
available to white men, that their
daughters’ bodies should be availab-
le to white men, and so on until
Indians vanished.

To this day, white men have a
fantasy love affair with Indian
women. Indians joke that every other
white man they meet says that their
great-grandmother was an Indian
princess. In public school, did we
learn about the many Indian sisters
who were extraordinary for their
strength and independence, but who were
part of societies where that was

-normal? Nope. We learned about 
Pocahontas, who supposedly loved white

men so much she saved Capt. John
Smith's life. That's the only thing I
can remember they taught us about
Indian women—how much (just like us)
they supposedly loved white men. And
isn't that what the rapist always
says afterwards? "She loved it."
"She wanted me to do it.” “It's her

fault."

When did genocide against Indian
nations and peoples end? Doesn't seem
to me that it's ever ended, but I'll
let Indian sisters answer that. What
I do know is that the process centered
on Indian women and children is still
alive inside us.

Last night I was flipping through
the latest issue of New Directions
for Women, and there was Lynn Wenzel's
a composite
review of seven books on frontier
women. She's into this story because
it's her family's, too: "Proudly, my
grandmothers and great aunts kept
alive the memories and exploits of
the hardy pioneer women who settled
this country..." She tells us:

"My great-great-grandmother Annie
Carr was living in Arizona in the