They mean business

With four women's prisons on line and a fifth near completion, prison population in Florida—a statistic that has doubled in the

Florida organized this all-female “confrontation squad” to deal

Associated Press’

last three years, officials said. The squad is shown during drills

with disturbances. Females account for 10 percent of the at River Junction Correctional Center at Chattahoochee.

this is going on. Some care intensely. But we can't afford to really see it. We've so constricted our own lives & thoughts as the tide of violence against us grows, as we try to at least stay personally independent from Dick, that we can't see how the system acts against "other" women. Have you heard any discussion in the women's community lately about how our police promote the rape & terrorizing of New Afrikan women & Latinas to keep them captive? No, for us that cuts too close to home.

Like the patriarchy has given us the wink and the nod, so we know we got Dick's permission to go after penthouses & hustlers. We're "anti-porn" ‘cause we're too terrorized ourselves to be anti-rape, anti-cop. Just think, though, isn't it true when we were first enslaved that men didn’t have no playboy, only the bible, the talmud & the koran? Millions more women have died ‘cause of the bible than hustler. But we're justly too scared to cross Dick, to get him mad at us. As long as we deny our own genocide, we will still trivialize ourselves & "other" women.

The failure of amerikkkan women to extract ourselves from patriarchy, from economic collaboration, from parasitism, from physical submission to the rule of men has led to the hostility and derision the masses of Third World women feel toward us & our movements. New Afrikan and Puerto Rican women conduct continuous guerrilla warfare as they come up against us in their daily lives. Whether we appear as case workers, teachers, cops, or university professors, they do not fail to see that we are the comb that divides the strands of who shall live and who shall die.

They are under no delusion that we are an independent community of women that can relate to their nations and peoples in revolutionary struggle. They hide their lives from us because they know that ultimately we will betray them to Dick.

We are weaker in the face of our male oppressor than they are in dealings with men of their nations. Even though we believe the opposite. Genocide against the New Afrikan nation has been held at bay by their strength. Else why do our boys flood their neighborhoods with armies of cops & gangs & drug dealers? They are as yet undefeated. Function much more as communities of women. Don't doubt it.

Quick pictures: I remember a New Afrikan woman on my block threatening to throw her caseworker head first down the stairs if that white woman didn't stop messing with her. Next day all the "welfare women" threatened the worker. Day after, no more worker.

Eleanor Bumpurs, elderly and alone in her project apartment. They sent an army of cops to do her, a six-pack of SWAT with flak jackets and shotguns and all. ‘Cause they were afraid of her. She might hurt them. They didn't doubt it.

Sisters think Miss Ann is one sad case.

And yet again, we are hurt and baffled when women of oppressed nations who used to be in and around our movements disappear back to their people. We sing a lotta blues about this. It's been seventy years since white women got the vote, twenty years since we built the women's liberation movement, and still no man is afraid of us. We killed no rapists & built no armies, took no territory & have no movement that can even begin. There is not a single street or park we can safely walk.

Meanwhile, our boys are moving night and day to inflict these conditions on women of other nations. Those sisters have to go home to fight because we will not fight.

There will be no international women's movement that includes us until we have achieved the status of free women. That is, that we can create armed struggle, a community, a nation, an ability to deal with genocide.

Articles from this newspaper may be reprinted in whole or in part by any women's publication, as long as it is credited to Bottomfish Blues: A Voice for the Amazon Nation. Other groups or publications may request permission to reprint through a classified ad in a women's publication, such as Off Our Backs, Womanews, Hag Rag or Sojourner.

amazon nation or aryan nation

16