Pee LAE ra

Ovando, governor of Hispaniola during Columbus’s fourth voyage im-
ported negro slaves to work the gold mines. From Theodore de Bry, 1595.

as Mexico and India, that were given
over to plunder. But even in the colo-
nies properly so-called, the Christian
character of primitive accumulation

did not belie itself. Those sober
virtuosi of Protestantism, the Puritans
of New England, in 1703, by decrees of
their assembly set a premium of £40 on
on every Indian scalp and every captured
red-skin; in 1720 a premium of £100 on
every scalp; in 1744, after Massachus-
etts Bay had proclaimed a certain tribe
as rebels, the following prices: for

a male scalp of 12 years and upwards
£100 (new currency), for a male
prisoner £105, for women and children
prisoners £50, for scalps of women

and children £50...

"The colonial system ripened, like

a hothouse, trade and navigation. The
"societies Monopolia' of Luther were
powerful levers for concentration of

capital. The colonies secured a market
for budding manufactures, and, through
the monopoly of the market, an increased
accumulation. The treasures captured
outside Europe by undisguised looting,
enslavement, and murder, floated back
to the [father]-country and were there
turned into capital."

Genocide is itself a material eco-
nomic force; not mere racism, but the
productive center, the heart of the new
euro-capitalist world order. It took
all the wealth violently squeezed out
of the European laboring classes for
centuries just to keep the ruling
aristocracy, the Church, and the rising
merchant-capitalists going; to pay for
their luxurious lifestyle, their waste
and speculation, and the always high
cost of their wars and their parasitic
State apparatus. On top of that, to
build factories and finance new indus-
tries was only possible by additional
super-profits from genocide.

Ernest Mandel shows how without
such super-profits, Europe would have
not had the capital to industrialize:

page 8

"a) E.J. Hamilton estimates in 500
million gold pesos the value of the
gold and silver that the Spanish took
to Europe between 1503 and 1660.

b) Colenbrander calculates 600
million gold florins for the treasure
that the Dutch East India Company took
out of Indonesia between 1650 and 1780.

c) Father Rinchon estimates as al-
most 500 million gold florins the
profit on only the slave trade of
French capital during the 18th century,
without counting the profits obtained
from the work of the slaves in the
plantations of the West Indies, which
was several times this amount.

d) According to H. Wiseman and the
Cambridge History of the British
Empire, it is considered that the earn-
ings obtained with the work of the
slaves in the British West Indies were
at least some 200 to 300 million gold
pounds,

e) Finally, in the pillage of India
in the period of 1750 to 1800 only, the
ruling class in Great Britain obtained
between 100 and 150 million gold
pounds. If these sums are added up, we
get more than 1,000 million gold
pounds, that is, more than the value of
all the capital invested in all of the
steam-operated industry of Europe
around the year 1800."

And Mandel does not even include the
great profits from the Afrikan slave
trade by the British, the U.S. settlers,
the Dutch and the Portuguese.

The cost in human lives is beyond
comprehension, particularly when we
want to pretend that it isn't happening
("I never knew anything about the gas
chambers. How could we know what was
happening to the Jews?"). Christopher
Columbus led the first European invasion
that occupied Hispaniola, the island
containing both Haiti and the Dominican
Republic. By his fourth trans-Atlantic

voyage in 1502, he discovered that the
once-large indigenous "Indian" popula—
tion was being exterminated:

"Columbus was shocked by the
change since his last sight of the
island, and he was right in saying that
the fortunes of Espanola [Hispaniola]
depended on the natives. Las Casas was
of the opinion that between 1494 and
1508 more than three million souls had
perished on the island— slain in war,
sent to Castile as slaves, or had been
consumed in the mines and other labors.
‘Who of those born in future centuries
will believe this? I myself who am
writing this and saw it and know most
about it can hardly believe such as
possible...’ "

Columbus was stunned at the magnitude
of the genocide he had witnessed, which
he thought almost beyond belief. Yet,
what he saw was only a warm-up. In Mex-
ico within one century the Spanish
occupation had depopulated the land,
reduced the indigenous population from
25 million to 13 million. And had burn-

ed the great Mayan library, killed the

priest-scientists, and deprived the
de-urbanized slave survivors of most of
their culture.

Together, the U.S. settlers, British,
French, Dutch, Portuguese and Spanish
co-invaders killed some 100 million
natives in the Western Hemisphere. And
still the genocide goes on. It has, in
fact, never even paused.

From Afrika, the Atlantic slave
trade sold 900,000 young women and men
into captive labor and death in the 16th
century; 2.75 million Afrikans in the
17th century; 5.5 million in the 18th
century; 4 million in the 19th century.
Add to these millions the uncounted
millions who died, packed like wood
side-by-side in the stinking holds of
the slave ships during the rough
"middle passage" across the Atlantic;
another 15-20% or more. Add to this
total an equal number of Afrikans
killed in the wars in the interior to
get the slaves in the first place, or
from the famines caused by these wars.

Finally, add onto all those millions
of deaths the millions of Afrikans who
were killed by the colonial powers to
extract the mineral and agricultural
wealth of the continent. Belgium, for
example, industrialized itself from the
super-profits gotten out of the great
slave-labor mines of Zaire, killing
over 7 million persons according to
their own historians. We know that the
slave trade and euro-colonialism cost
Afrika as many as 100 million lives
over four centuries. Isn't it hard to
picture 100 million deaths?

Walter Rodney said that genocide in
Afrika was more than body counts, just
as it was among the Mayan. Afrikan
society was distorted, thrown into

social chaos by the slave trade wars

and the selective kidnapping of the
young and able-bodied, with forced
migration of nations, loss of economic
roots, breakup of culture, and the
bloody feeding of new oppressive and

hierarchical Afrikan political empires

(the forerunners of today's neo-colonial
Afrikan nations). The negative effect
was so great, he pointed out, that the
population of Afrika as a whole
stagnated for centuries:

Comparison of Population (in millions)