Ed’s Sorry  
Over Arrest  
Of Woman  

Mayor Koch issued an extraordinary public apology to a prominent 71-year-old Queens woman who said she was roughed up by cops who mistook the peanuts she was eating for drugs.  

The woman, Anne Hamilton, is married to the Rev. William Hamilton of the Bethany Baptist Church in Jamaica — who happens to be a friend of Koch's.  

In fact, Koch said he was “ever grateful” to Hamilton for inviting him to last year's Martin Luther King Day ceremonies in Harlem after an anti-Koch group of ministers tried to block the mayor's appearance.  

Anne Hamilton was arrested and handcuffed on Nov. 18 after she visited her son's house on 139th Street in Jamaica and stopped her car a few blocks away to eat some peanuts.  

As a diabetic, she said she always carries the nuts in case she feels dizzy.  

Plainclothes cops, who had followed her from what they described as a suspected drug area, moved in to arrest her for swallowing potential evidence.  

POST, FRIDAY, JANUARY 6, 1989  

DECEMBER 16, 1988  

Leading Islamic Jurists  
Permit Birth Control  

KUWAIT — A leading body of Moslem jurists ruled yesterday that birth control is permissible “in order to separate periods of pregnancy ... provided that the spouses consult and consent in accordance with Islamic law.”  

The Islamic Fiqh Academy, which represents jurists from 46 Islamic nations, issued the ruling at the end of a six-day conference on ethical issues.  

Big Deal!  

Female Urban Guerrilla  
Gets Life in France  

PARIS — Pretty, middle-class Joelle Aubron was a normal teenager, psychologists said. But on Saturday, now aged 29, she was sentenced to life imprisonment for murder as a member of an urban guerrilla gang.  

With three other leaders of the Action Directe group, Aubron has embarked on a minimum of 18 years in prison for the murder of Renault motor company chairman Georges Besse in 1986.  

JANUARY 16, 1989  

When businessman Victor Einhorn got sentenced in federal court last spring for using two Brooklyn girls, ages 11 and 12, as prostitutes, his rabbi was there to support him? Guess that's his job, that's what they pay him for. Einhorn, who owned two local bus companies, was arrested by Ft. Lee, N.J. police after a cleaning woman saw him leaving the motel with the two children — New Afrikan children.  

In court his lawyer had a list of reasons why Einhorn wasn't to blame. Because the two girls allegedly “looked 18"; because they were allegedly "professional prostitutes"; because it was really his wife's fault for not satisfying him sexually (never fails, sicko man abuses girls & it's all women's fault). Then Rabbi Abraham Neiman of Khal Toras Chaim congregation asked the judge not to send poor Einhorn to prison, because by the Jewish religion Einhorn had already earned “forgiveness" (I think he should be forgiven with a 9 mm). No kidding, this man's spirituality is being wasted in Brooklyn, this rabbi should go right on television with Jimmy Swaggart and Jim Bakker.  

Rabbi Neiman also argued that Einhorn's own six children were, in effect, hostages for his freedom, since if he were sent to prison the Jewish community would then punish the Einhorn children by ostracizing them.  

Einhorn got the typical break: instead of a possible 20 years in prison, he was sentenced to three years (even less with parole).  

Zionist feminists are always talking about saving “our” wonderful Jewish culture. Well, there it is, the real-life Jewish patriarchal culture. You want it? Then take responsibility for it.  

All this has a lot to do with "Black anti-Semitism." Every time New Afrikans point out how Jews, just like other white settlers, play their own role in oppression, the Jewish patriarchy screams "Black anti-Semitism." And Jews nearly had a stroke when Channel 5 news showed Father Lawrence Lucas, the priest at Harlem's Catholic Resurrection parish on 151st St., telling a rally outside the Board of Ed last winter:  

"It seems each group of what we call Caucasians has a segment to do us in. Those who are killing us in our homes, falsely arresting us in the subways, murdering us in the streets, come primarily from the Catholic persuasion.  

"Those who are killing us in the classrooms, I do not have to tell you what persuasion they come from. You just have to look at the Board of Education; it looks like the Knesset in Israel."  

The Jewish community and their champion, Mayor Crazy Ed, attacked that as "outrageous" and “anti-Semitic" (notice no one was too upset about him naming Catholics). It is awkward in Amerikkka when someone just up and tells the truth. Most white cops in NYC are Catholic men, heavily Irish & Italian. Howard Beach and Canarsie aren't Zen Buddhist, that's for sure. And the NYC school system is run for the WASP ruling class by the so-called "Jewish Mafia," which is what Jewish administrators call themselves as an in-group joke. The "Jewish Mafia" runs not only the Board of Ed bureaucracy but the teachers union (the seven-person Board itself is nothing but a dummy appointed by politicians for public display, and doesn't even run its own self).  

The trouble isn't right-wing Hasids or right-to-death Catholics. Whole communities are involved in exploiting & killing New Afrikans. It's what being Amerikkkan is all about. Now Jews are finally real Amerikkkans, have made it to being real white people, and just have to do their share of the oppressing, too. Novelist Alice Walker of “Color Purple" fame says that liberal critics of Zionism should consider Amerikkkanism in the same light:  

"Many Americans will undoubtedly say that the settlement of Israel was an imperialist act... But those same Americans will have to concede the same thing about America: Am I ready to leave and give it back to the Indians?... Looking at Israel's 'settlements,' I think of all those forts that dot American plains. Israel's ‘settlements' look chillingly familiar to me."  

One good reason they look so "familiar and American" is that they are Amerikkkan. It isn't only that Israel is a Western imperialist outpost over the  

Members of the Lubavitcher Hasidim listen to Rabbi Menachem M. Schneerson give his televised talk.