"I've seen the sun set  
on the mountainside.  
Does that mean that I should mourn  
the day gone by?...  
So I say to you today  
: why not end the game we play?  
& learn a way to say good-bye."  

little esther  
OO  

It's only natural that patriarchal  
imperialism creates the need in us for  
an opposing culture, whether you think  
of that as women's culture or revolu-  
tionary culture. But our attempts at  
a culture of our own sputter, flare  
and never really catch fire, because  

_the minimum standard for a new culture  
today is that it has to confront the  
centrality of genocide. Otherwise it's  
not for real, not going to cut it.  

Revolutionary women's culture is  
usually thought of as uplifting &  
entertaining, having to do with the  
creative arts (music, painting, drama,  
dance, literature, sculpture). Kinda  
our counterpart to the patriarchal  
capitalist arts. They have: Michael  
Jackson and the Metropolitan Opera,  
we have Holly Near and Sweet Honey in  
the Rock. They got poems by T.S. Eliot,  
we got poems by Adrienne Rich & Pat  
Parker. This is misleading.  

When I speak here of culture I  
mean the distinctive characteristic of  
a stage of civilization or the distin-  
ctive way of life of a given society.  
In that sense, Michael Jackson & Holly  
Near are both parts of patriarchal  
imperialist culture. Revolutionary  
culture isn't something you go to  
visit (such as a concert) or buy (such  
as a book). It's much larger than that  
--which is why no matter how hard you  
shop or how many concerts you go to  
you can't get it. It's something you  
gotta create by living in it—or not.  
Revolutionary culture is a way of life  
that counteracts genocide civiliza-  
tion, a different way of seeing &  
answering problems, a set of product-  
ive & reproductive relationships  
between people. It's what some call  
communalism and others call women's  
liberation. Many haven't found a name  
for it, it's just a dumb vision in  
their pain.  

While listening to Holly Near may  
look like women's culture, when it's  

divorced from the real relationships  
of land & property & production, it  
becomes its opposite. Just as Michael  
Jackson came out of an oppressed cul-  
ture but is regarded by everyone as a  
talented entertainer in & for white  
oppressor culture. This isn't to  
criticize either entertainer. A Holly  
Near might sing of Chilean women who  
produce the fruit we eat, but if that  
isn't part of an opposing culture  
that says produce it ourselves or do  
without, then it's really an accept-  
ance of genocide culture.  

An outward show of a separate  
culture can be & is absorbed into  
genocide culture, a product that we  
can buy which makes us feel better  
about ourselves ("I care about other  
women, about oppressed people. I'm  
entertained by their struggles.")  
although we aren't better people.  

We can see this pretty clear when  

it happens to other people, to Indian  

cultures, say. We don't think that  
the tour bus pulling up at “AUTHENTIC  
INDIAN POW-WOW $3.00 ADMISSION" con-  
stitutes Indian culture. We don't  
think that robbing indigenous nations  
of their land and productive life but  
having them make rugs & belt buckles  
for us is building their culture.  

When it comes to us we got blind-  

ers on, however. We don't see it'll  
happen to us, too, without armed  

struggle, without territory & produc-  
tion. We think women's culture is  
somehow exempt from all this, but it  
isn't. We could end up with Adrienne  
Rich Blvd. and Andrea Dworkin High-  
way, too, just as this racist society  
has Sojourner Truth Elementary School  
and Malcolm X Blvd. Leaving us with  
nothing. It's only in going for all  
of it that you get to keep any of it.  

In the substratum beneath all of  
world history lies a conflict between  
two parent civilizations. One repre-  
sents in unbroken continuity many  
centuries of domination. It is in its  
nature patriarchal, class-ridden and  
property-driven, an oppressors and  
conquerors civilization. In its lat-  
est & greatest manifestation we know  
this civilization as patriarchal  
imperialism.  

The other is a shadow civiliza-  

tion. As old as the oppressor civil-  
ization is, having evolved over many  
centuries through different forms of  
class society, the shadow civilization  
is older still. It is the primal  
society, the first culture of human-  
kind. In opposition to the oppressor  
civilization it is women-centered,  
communal, non-owning. Broken by the  
rise of class-ridden society, the  
shadow civilization lives on as a  
fugitive among the oppressed. It rep-  
resents our own past & our own future,  
however fragmentary, blurred-over and  
unconscious it is.  

The conflict between the oppressor  
culture and revolutionary women's  
culture can also be seen as two diff-  
erent ways to answer problems, for  
what marks a culture is its own way of  
finding answers. This is the intersec-  
tion where a culture makes itself evi-  
dent in the rhythms of daily life; of  
producing food & clothing, providing  
shelter from the elements, shaping  
how we solve our myriad life problems.  
A culture is both a problem-solving  
tool & a survival guide for a people.  
Or it is left behind.  

SETTLER WOMEN & "OTHER"  

I want to talk about white women  
in Amerikkka both because that is what  

I am and because European women have a  

different herstory than ours. Although  
we often wish to pretend that we are  
the same. That is when we are not busy  
pretending that women of indigenous  
nations & Latinas & New Afrikan women  
are just us with different colored  
skin. All just sisters, right or  
wrong?  

We have a certain story that we  
tell, which we say is the story of  

how all women were enslaved & how  

patriarchal domination arose. In the  
past twenty years hundreds & perhaps  
thousands of like-minded articles &  
books have been written by white  

women outlining the fall of woman-  

kind, which our white Amerikkkan  

Fifty thousand women  
march down Fifth  
Avenue, August 26,  
1970 in celebration of  
the 50th anniversary of  
suffrage—the largest  
women's demonstra-  
tion up to that time.