‘1650 1750 1850  
Afrika 100 100 100  
Europe 103 144 274  
Asia 257 437 656  

The true cost of industrializing  
Europe and the U.S.A., the cost of  
powering up Western consumer society,  
was genocide on a world scale. Hundreds  
of millions of persons were consumed,  
whole societies burned up in the  
process.  

The patriarchy has long conditioned  
us on pain of prison or death to look  
the other way unthinkingly, to never  
see the genocide. Without breaking this  
lock, without confronting genocide, we  
can never know who we are and what we  
must become.  

What produces a system that bases  
its daily life on doing genocide? The  
answer is, a commodity civilization  
that formed itself through centuries  
of repressing and terrorizing its own  

"internal colony" of women, killing  
millions of us. How could sane Afrikans  
or Indians guess what this strange  
euro-capitalism would ultimately do?  
To white men, who were "made" by a  
social process in which they shared in  
the torturing and killing of their  
mothers, wives, sisters and daughters,  
doing genocide to other peoples was no  
big deal at all. Just another day at  
the office.  

Genocide against women cannot be  
separated from euro-capitalism, for it  
is both the father and the son of geno-  
cide against the colonized nations and  
peoples of the Third World. It is what  
led up to euro-colonialism, and what is  
the transformed and continuing wave of  
that genocide.  

Eur0-capitalism pretends to be the  
bringer of modern enlightenment—  
education, careers, and equality—for  
downtrodden Third World women. The  
white missionary lady of the 19th  
century has been updated by U.S. foreign  
aid and foundation feminism. Always,  
patriarchal imperialism says that the  

oppression of women is worse the darker  
the skin color, because it comes from  
the barbaric nature of less-developed,  
pre-industrial stages of human society  
that white people are nobly leading  
away from. Don't you agree that the  
sexism of Third World nations comes  
from "traditional native culture,"  
"tribal backwardness," or "primitive  
religions and beliefs"?  

Most of the oppression of women in  
the world is not primitive but modern,  
caused by the rise of class society in  
general and euro-capitalism in partic-  
ular. Women's oppression didn't begin  
with euro-capitalism, of course (it was  
the other way around). All class society  
began with the fall of womankind, and  
our condition exists to lesser or great-  
er degree throughout the world. There  
are few, if any, idyllic societies in  
history. Walter Rodney found that:  

"It is interesting to note that  
while the Oba (king) of Benin was will-  
ing to sell a few female captives, it  
took a great deal of persuasion and  

pressure from Europeans to get him to  

sell male African prisoners of war, who  
would otherwise have been brought into  
the ranks of Benin society."  

Women began in equality, in primitive  
communism or communalism thousands of  
years ago. The development of male class  
societies is also the development of the  
oppression of women, not the answer to  
it. Which is why the only societies  
that have rivaled euro-capitalism in the  
oppression of women have been other  
capitalisms—such as Islamic mercantile  
capitalism—or other well-developed,  
hierarchical class societies such as  
feudal Japan. It isn't any coincidence  
that both the Islamic model and the  
feudal samurai model have real  
attraction for Third World men who want  
what white men have.  

The equality that euro-capitalism  
tells us to jump for is the so-called  
right to play an equal role in men's  
class society. In some societies before  
the hijacking of the world by euro-  
capitalism, women had their own economy  
and women's society alongside that of  

men. Two societies in one, with differ-  
ent and complimentary roles and tasks.  
Of course, euro-capitalism tends to  

dismiss this as "native women doing  
their laundry together in the river."  

But it's a powerful fact that for  
many women in the past, marriage was a  
social obligation to have children, but  
one worked and lived in some real part  
in a women's society. How tangible and  
near in time this is, has been buried  
by our own colonialization.  

We should understand the implications  
of Judith Van Allen's research on the  
1929 Women's War (Ogu Umunwanyi)  

waged by tens of thousands of Igbo  

women in what is now eastern Nigeria,  
against the British Empire:  

"In November of 1929, thousands of  
Igbo women from these provinces conver-  
ged on the Native Administration  
centers—settlements that generally  
included the headquarters and residence  
of the British colonial officer for the  
district, a Native Court building and  
a jail, and a bank or white trader's  
store (if such existed in the district).  
The women chanted, danced, sang songs  
of ridicule, and demanded the caps of  
office (the official insignia) of the  
Warrant Chiefs, the Igbo chosen from  
each village by the British to sit as  
members of the Native Court. At a few  
locations the women broke into prisons  
and released prisoners. Sixteen Native  
Courts were attacked, and most of these  
were broken up or burned. The disturbed  
area covered about 6,000 square miles  
and contained about two million people.  
It is not known how many women were  
involved, but the figure was in the  
tens of thousands. On two occasions,  
British District Officers called in  
police and troops, who fired on the  
women and left a total of more than 50  
dead and 50 wounded. No one on the other  
side was seriously injured.  

"The British 'won', and they have  
imposed their terminology on history;  
only a very few scholars have recorded  
that the Igbo called this the 'Women's  
War.' And in most histories of Nigeria  
today one looks in vain for any mention  
that women were even involved. 'Riots,'  
the term used by the British, conveys  
a picture of uncontrolled, irrational  
action involving violence to property  
and persons, or both. It serves to  
justify the 'necessary action to res-  
tore order,' and it accords with the  
British picture of the outpouring of  
Igbo from their villages as some sort  
of spontaneous frenzy, explained by  
the general 'excitability' of these  
"least disciplined" of African peoples."  

Those Igbo women were trying to kick  
out British imperialism, but they were  
also acting, as was their right and  
duty in their Afrikan society, to  
defend their women's economy and  
women's society. For among the pre—  
imperialist Igbo, women shared an equal-  
ity that went beyond anything women  
have in even the most industrialized  
nations today.  

Each woman farmed her own plot of  
land, processed the palm seeds that men  
grew into palm oil (receiving the palm  
kernel as her payment), marketed their  
own agricultural surplus, as well as the  
baskets, pots and prepared foods they  

Page 9