Out and About

Entertainer Frank Sinatra has frequently  
performed in Sun City, South Africa, and  
doesn’t care if anyone likes it or not. The  
Norwegians don’t like it at all. On Monday  
they banned Sinatra from giving a sched-  

uled June 7 concert in Oslo. The proposed  
concert would violate a municipal law that  
bans entertainers who have performed in  
South Africa. Sinatra has a scheduled June 9  
concert in Goteborg, Sweden, which is in  
jeopardy for the same reason...  

Brooklyn. Never noticing that she  
was part of the "white tornado"  
ripping out women of color and  
their families. The question isn't  
where you are going to put Afrikan—  
Americans (this shelter or that  
project), the question is where are  
you going to put white people?  

Afrikan-American reservations are  
already here, just like Indian res-  
ervations. Isn't that what the  
Martinique, the Brooklyn Arms, and  
the other welfare hotels and shel-  
ters and projects are? A reservation  
is not a neighborhood or a nation of  
your own. It's an artificial place,  
without economic resources, where  
the oppressed are confined by  
imperialism as dependents. Bantu-  
stans in Azania (South Africa) are  
reservations. A welfare hotel is  
just a vertical reservation for  
Blacks and Latins. In NYC 13,000  
people live in them, with 10,000  
more in the shelters (the barracks).  
More in the prisons.  

Last July when the four Al-  
varez children, ages 13 to 7,  
died by fire in their Brooklyn  
Arms Hotel room, columnist  
Sydney Schanberg pointed out  
that the family of six lived  
in a room the size of two NY  
State single-inmate prison  
cells—in all 12 feet by 12  
feet. For that the city pays  
$1500 per month ($5 million  
per year for all the rooms) to  
Bertram Fields, the husband of  
opera singer Roberta Peters.  
Their hotel's well-paid lawyer  
is former mayor Robert Wagner.  
Welfare hotels, like other re-  
servations, aren't here to  
benefit those forced to live  
in them but the white ruling  
class.  

Have you noticed that everything  
that kills Black people is encoura-  
ged? Not just fatal diseases like  
AIDS, but alcoholism, drug addiction,  
and violence against each other.  

Flip on the TV and you can see Billy  
Dee Williams, the only Black man  
allowed in outer space, in a com-  
mercial telling young Afrikan—  
American men that the way to score  

Janet Méhlope weeping yesterday as she sat atop the  
rubble of the home her husband was building on  

S. Africa to NY.  

Associated Press  

Squatter Camp Demolished in South Africa  

demolished several shelters that were being used by  
some of the 5,000 squatters on the farm after farm-  

Weller’s Farm near Johannesburg. Security forces  
with a woman is to get her drunk on  
malt liquor. Alcoholism and crack  
are killing children as social dis-  
integration and hopelessness is  
spread. Last November 27th an  
Afrikan-American woman in the  
Bronx, irrational on crack, threw  
herself and her two kids out of  
their fourth-floor window. Afrikan-  
American teenagers in Newark are  

Newsday Dietrich  

Tashika Jones, 4, left, and Bernel Ayres, 7, in kitchen of Brooklyn home, where  
firebomb was tossed into basement early Thursday.  

killing each other for leather  
bomber jackets.  

This year the Children's Defense  
Fund reminded us again that poor  
Afrikan-American children are  
encouraged to die because of simple  
lack of food and medical care:  

“A Black infant born within five