~ LOU LOY ww tue cors

It is important for the police to
pretend to protect women, because
this pretense helps justify their
monopoly of organized force. This
police power is then used to disarm
women. Lou Lou Couch's murder is the
story of how the police disarmed a
woman so that a group of men could
kill her.

She was the 22 year-old loudmouthed
street dyke in the documentary
movie "Streetwise," always looking
out for younger runaways on Seattle's
First Avenue strip. Those who saw
"Streetwise" will never forget her,
in her alcatraz cap, fighting to
protect teenage runaways from the
pimps and men hitting on them. The
news that Lou Lou had been killed was
a blow to the heart, but not a sur-
prise.

The police had often hassled Lou
Lou. The day before her death she had
just gotten out of jail for posses-
sion of marijuana. The cops' petty
harassment. That had been the sixth
time that year the cops had busted
her. Imagine what they'd have done if
they had caught her with a .38?

Lou Lou Couch had been disarmed by
the threat of the police and set up
to be killed by men in an unequal
fight. But don't many women in Amer-
ikkka have weapons anyway, everything
from kitchen knives to shotguns? Yes,
and women are subtly pressured by
the police and courts never to use
weapons in self-defense. Most women
who use weapons against white men

Three Teens Charged
In Brooklyn Rape Spree

The rapists worked at night, lowering them-
selves by rope from the roof to open windows on
the top floors of Kensington Park apartment
buildings, police said.

While one man stayed on the roof as a lookout,
another would go through the window and, in-
side, open the fire-escape window to let in a third
accomplice. The two would rape the woman ten-
ant and burglarize her apartment.

After they finished, the men would call a gypsy
cab from the apartment and leave through the
front door, calmly carrying out such things as TV
sets and cameras, according to Sgt. Paul Byrd of

the Brooklyn Sex Crimes Unit.

On Feb. 12, police arrested a suspect, Darrien
Ruffin, 18, of 39 Argyle Rd., Brooklyn. On Sun-
day, they arrested the men they say were Ruffin’s
accomplices in eight or nine rapes and burglaries:
Timothy LaGuerre, 18, of 40 Argyle Rd., and Jah-
mal Kelly, 15, of 10 Argyle Rd.

All three are charged with rape, sodomy, bur-
glary, robbery, assault and sexual abuse.

The first rape was in November 1985. The next
was in July of 1986, but police saw a link, Byrd
said: Both times the women were alone, and the
rapists gained entry by rappelling from the roof.

After that, rapes occurred about once a month,
always in the same 15-block area.

The rapists apparently chose and watched their
victims carefully, Byrd said. Always, the women
were 25 to 32 years old.

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 25, 1987

Lou Ellen “Lou Lou” Crouch [night], shown with fellow
Seattle “street kid” Dawn, appeared in the documen-
tary film Streetwise.

are arrested and face trial. Many go
to prison for long stretches. That's
who's in women's prisons. That's
what deterred Lou Lou. And that's
what killed her. She had said:

"I don't use a weapon, I never have.
It's not worth it, to get busted for
stabbing somebody or beating the

"Oh no, not a knife. Not a knife.
But I didn't have a weapon."

Why is it so important for the
police to pretend to protect women?
They have community relations spec-
ialists who go to meetings, give
classes, hand out whistles. They have
rape specialists who will tell you
how to shrink your life to avoid
rape, who will hold your hand after
you've been raped, and some who will
even do their "I'll get him!" bit
after you've been murdered. None of
this protects women, of course, and
it isn't meant to. It lets the cops
say "leave it to us, don't carry a
gun." "Disarm yourself." "Let us de-
cide who lives and dies."

The publicized Regina Migdal case
in Manhattan is the system at work.
Migdal, a 32 year-old secretary, was
indicted for murder in the stabbing
of her former fiancé. After he broke
down her front door, forced his way
into her apartment, ignored her ord-
ers to leave, and then ripped out
her telephone when she tried to call
for help. When he came at her, she

said, "I don't care if I get
beaten up. I've been beat up enough
times that it doesn't hurt me too
much anymore..."

The night she died, Lou Lou and her
16 year-old friend Alwyn were being
harassed by a group of four men, who
had been drinking and had just exited
the porn theater. Both women were
shoved around, and Alwyn was physi-
cally hit on. One man punched Lou
Lou to get her out of the way so that
they could force Alwyn to come with
them and get gang-raped. When Lou Lou
began fighting back—shouting at the
men, "Don't mess with her, she's my
girl!"—one man fatally stabbed her.
Sinking to the ground as the four
men ran away,

Lou Lou said:

Man Tied to California Slayings

LOS ANGELES, March 28 (AP) — A
convicted murderer in Alabama told
the police Friday that he had slain as
many as 13 people nationwide and that
one of his victims was a Los Angeles
woman whose death was assigned to a
task force investigating the murders of
17 women.

The slayer, Daniel Lee Siebert, 32
years old, convicted in the murder of a
woman in Talladega, Ala., is awaiting
trial in the deaths of two other women
and two children.

Mr. Siebert is believed to be the killer
of Gidget Castro, 28, the Los Angeles
woman and a New York woman whose body
was found in Atlantic City, Sheriff Block said.

The investigation by the South Side
Serial Murder Task Force is looking
into the deaths of 17 women, mostly
prostitutes, who were killed from 1983
to July 1986.

Mr. Siebert has admitted as many as
13 killings across the United States,
Sheriff Block said, but he is not a sus-
pect in any of the 16 other slayings
under investigation by the task force.

Sheriff Block said Mr. Siebert dis-
closed his participation in the Los An-
geles killings to the Los Angeles sher-
iff’s investigators who traveled to Ala-
bama.

Sheriff Block said the Los Angeles
authorities would request Mr. Siebert’s
extradition to California.

Just like those child molesters al-
ways say how they love children, I
thought. Migdal said at her indictment:
"I just defended my life. Now I'm being
charged with murder. I don't understand this."

Manhattan prosecutors told the
press the fact that Regina Migdal
had stabbed her attacker five times
damaged her claim of self-defense.
Five was too many knife blows, they
said. How many times should a woman
be legally allowed to stab at a man
who breaks down her door and comes
at her—4, 37, 2, only 1?

Brooklyn Man Held in Death
Of Woman in Apartment Fire

By The Associated Press

A Brooklyn man, angry because his
girlfriend apparently had given him a
venereal disease, set fire to their apart-
ment, resulting in the woman’s death,
Fire Department investigators said
yesterday.

The man, Danny Smith, 46 years old,
was charged with second-degree mur-
der in the fire Friday morning that
killed Elizabeth Corchado, a depart-
ment spokesman, Efrain Parilla, said.
The couple lived together at 390 Gates
Avenue in the Bedford-Stuyvesant sec-
tion.

An investigation by fire marshals
determined the woman had been
“somehow incapacitated” before the
fire, making her unable to escape, he

MARCH 29, 1987