MARCH-APRIL 1990

HAG RAG

The Code of Silence

CLEAR is a group of womyn in Chicago doing anti-
racism work that formed following the anti-racism
town meeting at the 1989 Michigan Womyn’s Music
Festival. We believe that white womyn must assume
responsibility for actively challenging and confronting
racism on all levels, in ourselves, in each other, and in
the community at large. We feel that white womyn must
prioritize dealing with racism and recognize the in-
herent privilege we have obtained as participants
throughout history in an oppressor nation.

In our work we have often encountered a blockade of
silence among white lesbians that slows and erodes the
process of identifying and confronting racism in our
community. This is expressed in the way that we com-
municate about racism and anti-racism work, often
taking the form of code words that obscure and deflect
our focus from the urgent need to deal with racist acts.
These code words close down any meaningful com-
munication and keep us silent, allowing us to avoid
taking responsibility for our racist attitudes and be-
haviors. When confronting racism in the lesbian com-
munity we have encountered many examples of the use
of this code of silence as a smoke screen to cloud the real
issues. Here are a few examples of code words in action.

“We should be careful not to just POINT THE
FINGER.” The assumption is that there is something
wrong with confronting each other and that it is from
vicious or unjust motives. This allows us to continue to
feel like good people while condoning racism in our
community.

“Why are you GOING AFTER YOUR OWN?” The
idea comes up often that we should concentrate on
confronting racism outside and not within the lesbian
community. We should be working to confront racism
in society at large, but if we don’t deal with the racism
in the white lesbian community then we are building a
culture that will be no different than the patriarchy we
espouse to break with. Doing work with other lesbians
comes out of a commitment to build a strong lesbian
culture. Racism lessens our personal lives and in the
lesbian community isolates us, tears us apart and
thwarts our efforts to build a culture that nurtures and
liberates us. Prioritizing anti-racism work is vital to our
individual growth and the growth of womyn’s culture
and womyn’s community.

To confront someone in the community about racist
acts means that you care and you have enough guts to
say you don’t agree. There are a variety of ways of
confronting racism and it is important that we try to
find the most appropriate way in each situation. It is
more important, however, that we actively confront
it, not ignore it because we’re afraid of stepping on
someone’s toes, or fear of confrontation will keep us
silent participants in oppression.

“The controversy around this will DIVIDE THE
COMMUNITY.” Which community does this comment
refer to? Our community is already divided along racial
lines. Usually the concern is that conflict within the
white lesbian community will be somehow devastating
and/or we will hurt someone’s feelings. We should not

The Womyn of CLEAR

Reprinted from HAG RAG Wisconsin's lesbian—feminist press
Sample issue $2.00 P.O. Box 93243, Milwaukee, WI 53203

3712 N. Broadway Suite #202

accept the implication that the lesbian community is so
fragile that struggling through our racism will cause us
to be more divided than we already are.

“Why don’t you go after the REAL RACISTS?” If we
view racism as the white disease it is, and recognize that
it is institutionalized oppression, then we have to con-
clude that every white person has some form of racism
that needs to be dealt with. None of us escape this
disease because we reap the benefits of our privileged
position in society all our lives. In order to begin to undo
this we have to actively fight to identify and change
racist behaviors and attitudes in ourselves and each
other. A racist is a racist regardless of sexuality.

“We have to DEAL WITH OUR OWN personal
RACISM.” This is a fact, we do have to deal with our
own racism, but this is not a valid reason for not doing
anti-racism work. None of us are experts on racism or
the way to change it in ourselves and other people, but
we have a responsibility to learn.

“It doesn’t FEEL SAFE to deal with my racism here.” 
Often white women have a great deal of guilt and it
makes them feel defensive or threatened when the
subject comes up. Feeling safe in this context refers to
emotional safety and feelings of discomfort. This is an
easy out for white women, and is evasive in the context
of a discussion of racism or anti-racism work. We need
to remember that racism results in genocide against
people of color; women of color are really not safe
because of racism, not just uncomfortable.

These code words in the white lesbian community
allow us to talk about racism, agree that racism exists
among us, but stop us short of dealing with each other
about it. We give each other permission to rationalize,
minimize, deny and excuse. This results in a silencing
of conflict that we must challenge.

There is much resistance within us and against us in
confronting racism and we are going against a very old
and powerful pull in the dominant culture. We white
womyn typically react with defensiveness, hostility,
denial, and excuses when confronted with our racist
acts or attitudes. As soon as talk of anti-racism work
begins we start bantering code words back and forth
and soon conclude that there are other kinds of work
we should do in our community. To begin to change we
have to be willing to own our racism and be open to
dialogue and criticism.

If we are about building a lesbian culture that is not
just a microcosm of the oppressive society we live in, we
have to make anti-racism work a priority in our com-
munity. White culture has always been and continues
to be dependent for comfort and security on the institu-
tionalized oppression of people of color. We must make
anti-racism work a priority because racism is not just a
bad idea or bad attitude, it supports a system based on

the exploitation of and aggression against people of
color.

A first step in taking responsibility for our racism is
to refuse to participate in the use of code words as a smoke
screen. Another is to refuse to ignore racist comments,
attitudes and actions simply because the racist is a
lesbian, and actively confront racism in our community.
Absolutely necessary is an examination of our own
personal attitudes and behaviors to try to begin to undo
the process of racist indoctrination that we have
received from society.

As Malcolm X said almost twenty years ago, “Whites
who are sincere should organize themselves and figure
out some strategies to break down the prejudice that
exists in white communities. This is where they can
function more intelligently and more effectively, in the
white community itself, and this has never been done.”

Chicago, IL 60613