A teen-age Mexican girl was  
walking a street's center line, col-  
lecting coins in a tin can from motor-  
ists, when a U.S. quarter came sail-  
ing down from the balcony of a  
trendy Baja bar called Papas & Beer.  

The coin bounced off the can’s  
rim, and the margarita-drinking  
Southern Californians on the balco-  
ny got into the spirit: Let’s see who  
can make a basket.  

patriarchy ("We'll make a man of you,  
son") which got addicted to capitalistic  
values, including the oppression of  
women.  

This was done consciously, since the  
imperialists knew very well (much better  
than socialists did) that their system  
was impossible without the destruction  
of women as a people. They succeeded so  
well that even the very idea of genocide  
against women is missing from our minds.  

Nayar women in India's Kerala prov-  
ince had never personally experienced  
patriarchy or class exploitation until  
the British conquest in the 19th cent-  
ury. Nayar lived in the taravad, their  
large matrilineal joint households,  
where land and its products were used  
in common. Nayar women could have more  
than one husband in their household  
(i.e., polyandry), so there was no  
individual fatherhood in the way  
amerikkkans are used to. Family identity  
was only in the motherline. Men bequea-  
thed personal property not to their  
biological children, but to their sist-  

page 12  

er's children. Households passed from  
mother to daughter.  

British capitalism roughly broke all  
this up. New colonial marriage law re-  
placed the "promiscuous" Nayar women—  
centered household with the patriarchal  
monogamous family, just as new British-  
imposed inheritance law instructed  
Nayar men to leave their property to  
their first-born son instead of their  
maternal family. And the British made  
sure that Nayar men had private prop-  
erty of their own. The Nayar were not a  
primitive people, and the British  
occupation recruited Nayar men as white-  
collar clerks in their colonial civil  
service. This gave Nayar men alone a  
cash income. None of this was on acci-  
dent, of course.  

"Men and women are not sufficiently  
differentiated yet in Burma," warned  
Fielding Hall, the Political Officer  
for Burma in the British colonial serv-  
ice in 1887-1891. "It is the mark of a  
young race. Ethnologists tell us that.  
In the earliest peoples the difference  
was very slight. As a race grows older  
the difference increases..."  

As a Political Officer, Hall super-  
vised—with much personal satisfaction—  
the stamping out of Burmese women's  
independence and the remolding of  
Burmese culture: "In Rangoon the large  
‘English stores are undermining the  
bazaars where the women used to earn  
an independent livelihood. With her  
power of independence will disappear  
her free will and her influence."  

Hall then says that "it is inevitable"  
that women should lose their  
influence, for "the nations who  
succeed are not feminine nations but  
the masculine."  

* * * * * * *  

Which brings us here and now. A  
newspaper story poked me in the eye  
yesterday: "U.S. RANKS THIRD AMONG 99  
NATIONS IN STUDY OF EQUALITY FOR WOMEN."  
But isn't settler amerikkka the most  
"masculine nation" of all? For no other  
major nation has been built so purely  
on world genocide. Our whitelife has no  
history, no identity, no culture, no  
economy without genocide. Outside of  
genocide we are a blank.  

amerikkkans want to distance themsel-  
ves from genocide. Ya know, it's always  
something long ago ("You can't change  
the past!") or far away ("There's never  
been anything like the Jewish Holocau-  
st"). But genocide is running, right  
now. It's not far away. You see, we  
are the genocide. I mean that literally  
and precisely. Everything we are, our  
bodies and our education, our careers  
and our plans for our children, has all  
been made of genocide.  

That's why we don't want to know  
who we are.  

You can't re-form amerikkka. Oh, you  
can give things to white people or give  
a little more to some people and a  
little less to others. Ya know, more  
IRAs & coke, or more civil rights and  
less housing. You can't really change  
this nation. For if you removed the  
blood and dirt, removed the genocide  
from it, then the u.s.a. as an artific-  
ial nation would cease to exist. Which  
is why history, inexorable as a glacier  
marching down, is starting to break up  
amerikkka no matter what anyone says or  
does.  

Women have to prepare to leave ameri-  
kkka. We have to prepare the amazon  
nation & withdraw from amerikkka as a  
nation and as a way of life. For the  
u.s.a. not only must be broken up, but  
its gradual breakup as a nation has  
already begun. Beirut is the model for  
our own future.  

A new way of life is essential if we  
wanna do something about genocide.  
Right now we need a program to end our  
own unspoken genocide jones, our  
addiction to a way of life dependent  
upon genocide. I mean, we can't have it  
all different ways. Women who want  
liberation instead of equality have to  
build from jump street in a way that can  
crush genocide. In a long-term, armed  
political-military way. Not the rose but  
the cactus.  

TO BE CONTINUED  

amazon nation  

or aryan nation