where we're moving to. Ending  
this patriarchal soap opera of  
integration is a growing up  

“I will not resign myself to the lot of women, who bow  
their heads and become concubines,” said Thieu Thi Trinh in  
the year 248 A.D. She said, “I wish to ride the tempest, tame  
the waves, kill the sharks. I want to drive the enemy away to  
save our people.” By the age of twenty-one Thieu Thi Trinh  
had led thirty battles and liberated Vietnam, for six months,  
from Chinese tyranny.  

Restless as the moon, in every human epoch the female of  
our species has soldiered and adventured, to great sorrow,  
and great reward. An officer in a Minnesota regiment, Mary  
Dennis at six-foot-one was one of several women who we  
know fought in the front lines of the American Civil War.  
Kit Cavanaugh was not the only woman to become a  
dragoon, fighting with the British Army and taking wounds,  
at first disguised as a man but later fighting openly as a  
woman. She survived to a natural death and received a mili-  
tary burial. Many white observers noted with dismay the  
presence of women braves among various Native American  
peoples. In 1900 and 1901, Yaa Asontewa, an African chief,  
led her Ashanti followers into war. Queen Christina of  
Sweden cut off her hair, wore pants, abdicated the throne,  
and became a notorious adventurer throughout Europe in the  
sixteen hundreds. In Thirteenth Century Japan, the warrior  
aristocracy produced several women samurai. Among these  
was Tomoe. According to the Kamakura, she was a match for  
“god or devil” and in one long battle, “when all the others  
had been slain, among the last seven rode Tomoe.” The histo-  
ries of every nation, culture and society reveal, however re-  
luctantly, countless amazon figures. The difficulty in writing  
this introduction has not been in finding historic as opposed  
to mythic amazons, but in choosing so few representatives  
among so many.  

I would like to take the reader on a brief world tour of our  
amazon heritage:  

In the Sixteenth Century, Francisco de Orellana explored  
South America. He reported being set upon by a women’s  
army on the Marajion River, later called the River Amazon.  
Although amazons were never again described from the  
Amazon River Basin, tribal legends recount uniformly, an  
earlier era of women’s domination. The modern anthropol-  
ogists Yolanda and Robert Murphy found that even today  
Brazilian tribal women live apart from men “in convivial sis-  
terhood.” Their authority exceeds that of men in all practical  

rite for us. Only then can we  
explore how women in different  

INTEGRATION  

what it means in practice & how  
to relate as equals.  

what the damage looks like, and  
figure out based on reality  

"I've seen the clouds form  

OUR AMAZON HERITAGE  

Jessica Amanda Salmonson  

matters, :  

A veritable Robin Hood of Latin America was Doña Cat-  
alina de Erauso. At a young age she ran off from a Spanish  
convent, asking bitterly of her family, “Why have you made  
me manly and strong like my brothers, only to compel me,  
now that I am fifteen, to do nothing but mumble a lot of in-  
terminable prayers?” Earning her way to Central America in  
the early sixteen hundreds, she became a soldier of fortune of  
great sword skill and renown throughout Mexico, Peru and  
Chile. When she returned briefly to Europe, clad as a cavalier  
(“filling the hearts of girls with love, of their gallants with  
terror,” by one account) Pope Urban VIII granted her  
special permission to wear men’s garb and King Philip  
awarded her a pension for defending the Spanish territory  
and flag. She remains today an important folk hero of the  
Latino romantic age.  

Sir Walter Raleigh described amazons of Guiana, who met  
with men only on the ritualistic occasion of fertility celebra-  
tion. Sons born among the amazons were sent to the men’s  
tribes for rearing. At all other times the sexes kept to their  
own society. Better documented are the amazon forces of Da-  
homey in West Africa, described by Sir Richard Burton and  
others with the vilest terminology, revealing their personal  
dismay more than the specific nature of the soldiery. The  
commonly upheld French-devised explanation for this aspect  

of African culture (and one justification for conquest) was  
that these women served a brutal king who forced them into  
warfare. However, many African tribes had separate women’s  
governments which whites rarely knew about. Being ma-  
trilinear, even kings legitimized their rule through women’s  
lineage. Male chiefs were responsible to the queen mother of  
the women’s “secret societies” with little or no direct influ-  
ence over women or their armies.  

A specific African amazon was Madame Yoko: diplomat,  
organizer, agriculturalist, warrior—and ruler of fourteen  
tribes constituting the Kpa Mende Confederacy of the  
eighteen hundreds, largest chiefdom of Sierra Leone. Far  
from being a historic anomaly, she is fairly representative.  
In her day fully fifteen percent of all tribes around Sierra  
Leone were ruled by women. To this day, despite the imposi-  
tion of white values, nine percent of the tribes have women  
chiefs. Although their histories have been obscured, deleted  

, or mangled by the white man’s pen and interpretation, many  

It seems that beauty lives  
inside of change.  

nations can be united. Explore So I say to you today  
why not end this game  
we play  
& learn a way to say  
good-bye."  

in the bluest sky,  
And I've seen those white  
clouds come to mystify.  

little esther