_VOTING ne a GED ANYTELIN

Te) DMA er

- We have to ask people if Roe v. Wade was the defeat and Webster v. Reproductive Health Services the victory? Because when we gave the Big Nine the power to say yes, we gave them the ballgame.

And now we holler about women becoming wards of the state when they say no. Well, what the hell were we when we climbed the legal ladder to the Supreme Court in '73? Wasn't the Supreme Court the state?

And get this, the National Abortion Rights Action League wants us to spend the rest of our lives chasing white boys in state legislatures all over Amerikkka under the slogan "take our rights and we'll take your jobs." As if they hold our RIGHTS or those jobs should even exist. And aren't they the state? Doesn't that continue us, as wards of the state now that the fathers have deserted us?

It's kind of like this Webster thing. It blows us out of the water, uncovers our bullshit. It might even make us think. Think about how we have sat silent about the years we have gleefully participated in that state as it made one genocidal rule after another. Proud of ourselves when we elected women as representatives, judges, prosecutors over other people's lives.

Question? What if we "win" these elections sometimes? And those white boys go on letting us have our abortions so long as we allow them to go on committing genocide in a thousand different ways? If history repeats itself I guess it won't bother most white feminists too much.

Indeed, those elections take place about every two years and we aren't going to win them all. Probably not most of them. The protracted agony of chasing these assholes from state to state might make even our over-privileged souls think about how we ain't the whole world and that there is a lot of hell out there.

Another question. Could they really stop us from having abortions if we don't concede their right to do it? Be real. There are hundreds of thousands of us who could take care of that need. If we want women's culture we will build it, in our own way, in our own place. And we won't apply for a license to do it.

| EDITORIAL

186] ‘uopuo7 ‘uo}Bulppeg