believe the daily press on current events in the memory of us

all, much less the biased chronicles of times which bear no
witness. It must be allowed that mythology reflects a com-
mon experience handed down from antiquity, revised with ev-
ery century or civilization, combining that antique experience
with contemporary rationales and justifications for successive
generations’ realities. We can only speculate what the com-
mon experience may have been, which produced the univer-
sal myth of women’s previous rule—and in the fantasy story
especially this speculation can be imaginative and entertain-
ing, as well as, very possibly, as close to truth as any scien-
tific hypothesis. We can at least dismiss all detractors who
continue, sometimes hysterically, to reason that women were
never mighty. Amazons have lived and fought from the Neo-
lithic to the streets of Chicago, Belfast, and Peking.

Historic and prehistoric anthropology and social archeol-
ogy are one part fact to nine parts imagination. Our
“knowledge” of entire civilizations is often extrapolated from
a single spare clue via circuitous routes of highly subjective
assumptions. If the resultant conclusions sit well with all pre-
conceived notions (usually ethno- and androcentric), they are
incorporated into the traditional texts as true, irrespective of
the nine parts fantasy. If the results are shocking and sit
uneasily with traditional views, lay persons and academicians
alike will hasten to discredit the one part fact by indicating
the nine part invention. Such has been the case with those
who provide evidence of women’s power and rule in earlier
(and sometimes recent) periods. What we may say, however,
with total assurance is this: given the variegation in prehis-

“toric and early societies as dictated by ecological consider-
ations, a diversity of social and cultural institutions is
absolutely certain. This includes, of course, women’s domina-
tion and/or equal status, or any combination intellectually
conceivable. —

In this vein and of special note are a Eurasian people, pos-
sibly the first to war astride horses, known to us as Sarma-
tians. The women of this race gained a reputation for

strength and education, and are the earliest proven source of

amazon legends. The most plausible etymology of the word
“amazon” is that it is derived from the Circassian expression

“maza” or “moon.” There is every likelihood that a cult of

women who practiced warfare, equestrianism, and moon wor-
ship separated from the bulk of Sarmatian society to live on
the eastern and southern shores of the Black Sea and the
Caucasus. The Scythians, traditional enemies of the Sarma-

tians, called these women “Oiorpata” or “mankillers.” 

But it would be misleading to give this cult society credit
for the entire amazon archetype, for legends suggest an
amazon “race” of far earlier origin. The moon cultists them-
selves likely had a heritage reaching into their own antiquity,
epochs of which we know nothing. There are indications of

uniform gynecocratic rule up to and beyond the first millen-
nium BC, in Syria, Crete, Greece, Libya, Asia Minor and
Thrace. The image and reality of the amazon has been with
us since time immemorial, and specific women heroes appear
in every unrevised epic. Boudicca led a rebellion in the year
60 against Romans occupying England. Jeanne d’Arc, though
wielding banner in lieu of sword, led French soldiers against
the English, and drew the battle plans. Aethelflaed resisted
Danish invaders from 910 to 915, restoring Wales’ crumbled
defenses, Harriet Tubman operated an “underground rail-
road” to remove her enslaved people from Confederate
America, and served as a soldier in the northern Union
Army. Many of Russia’s combatants in the Second World
War were women, including Major Tamara Aleksandrovna
who commanded an airborne regiment on more than 4,000
sorties and 125 combats. “One-Eye” Hawkins, a patch on one
eye, escaped to New Providence after being sold as a bond
servant by her husband. She became a pirate in the days of
Blackbeard, Captain Kidd, Mary Read, Anne Bonney, and
similar folk heroes. Major-General Li Chen was a leader in
Mao Tse Tung’s campaigns. She stayed with the 6,000 mile
Long Walk. She engaged in battle even during pregnancy.

This essay is reprinted from Amazons!, an anthology
of fantasy short stories on women warriors in

every clime & planet. Edited by martial artist
Jessica Amanda Salmonson. Amazons! was a DAW 1977
paperback & has long been unavailable to us mere
bottomfish. Definitely pick this book up if you can
find it. We left out the last page of the essay,
dealing with fantasy as a literary field, for
reasons of space. "Our Amazon Heritage" packs much
truth about our past in its few pages.

Not all amazons were warlike, of course; some were
merely adventurous. Imbibing mystic learning in many orien-
tal countries, Alexandra David-Neel, a Knight in the French
Legion of Honor, was the first European woman to visit the
far, forbidden city of Lhasa in Tibet. Hungarian Florence
Baker returned to civilization after presumed lost, to report
the discovery of the once mythic “Source of the Nile.” The
list is simply endless. The amazon archetype is, then, both an-
cient and modern, psychological and real—born of an unin-
terrupted history of fighting women and adventurers. The
majority of their names have been lost to antiquity, or in re-
cent instances, to the tendency of modern chroniclers to over-
look or trivialize the continuing warrior strength of women.

Men-only curfew urged
to halt rapes, assaults

AUCKLAND, New Zealand — A
peace group called today for a cur-
few to keep men off streets from
dusk to dawn to prevent rapes and
assaults on women.

The proposal in Hamilton, 95
miles south of here, was a response
to police warnings that women
should stay indoors after dark fol-
lowing several vicious rapes in the
Auckland area.

Maria McMillian of Hamilton
said telling women to stay behind
locked doors was not a good way of

dealing with rape. “What is happen-

ing is that women would be pun-
ished for the crimes of men,” she
said. “We see a curfew as a viable
alternative to this.”

She said men might be allowed
out at night if accompanied by
women. Hamilton women will hold
a “Reclaim the Night” march Fri-
day to press their demand for
the male curfew.

California native Lillie Smith, now homeless: “Russia
is telling the truth about social justice in America.”