talented new immigrant, Thomas Paine,  
and persuaded him to write a pamphlet  
for the rebel settlers attacking  
royalty. Rush edited the pamphlet, the  
famous "Common Sense," and arranged its  
publication.  

As a liberal, Dr. Rush advocated  
teaching women how to read. He was one  
of the supporters of the first African  
Free Church. Rush went so far as to  
argue that slavery should be abolished.  
Africans, he said, were fully as human  
as white people.  

In fact, Dr. Rush developed the the-  
ory that Africans were white people.  
There was no such thing as African  
peoples or civilization, he said. Rush  
had "discovered" that Africans were  
only white people whose distant ances-  
tors had wandered too far south into  
the unhealthy African tropics. There,  
these lost European tribes had all  
become infected with a virulent type of  
hereditary leprosy, which gave them  
their "diseased" look of dark skin, "big  
lip," "flat nose," and "woolly hair."  

Until euro-capitalist science dis-  
covered how to cure their poor, diseased  
African relatives, Dr. Rush sadly  
concluded that Africans would have to  
stay segregated as a public health  
measure. And at all costs, he warned,  

white women must be prevented from  
having sexual relations with slaves,  
since he had also "discovered" that those  
white women who did so became infected  
themselves, and grew thicker lips and  
darker skins! This was the blastoff of  
U.S. patriarchal medical science.  

He told a special meeting of the  
American Philosophical Society on July  
14, 1792:  

"A white woman in North Carolina not  
only acquired a dark color, but several  
of the features of a negro, by marrying  
and living with a black husband. A  
similar instance of a change in the  
color and features of a woman in Bucks  
County in Pennsylvania has been observ-  
ed and from a similar cause."  

While Dr. Rush was experimenting  
with "medical" cures, such as using  
strong lye to repeatedly bleach a slave  
man's skin, the only sure remedy he said  
he knew of was hard labor. Pointing out  
that African skin color was lightest on  
the hands and feet, Rush said that was  
proof that the "pressure" of physical  
labor had worn or squeezed the darkness  
out. So for humanitarian reasons, he  
urged his fellow slaveowners to keep  
Africans at hard labor, as long as possible,  
to help them over their unfortunate  
condition. What heart, what a real man!  

That white women who got down with  
Africans would lose their precious  
whiteness and become “diseased" Africans  
themselves, was a telling fantasy.  
Oppressor nightmares offered up as  
biological fact, as science. More telling  
was that Dr. Rush never thought to  
question if white slavemasters who raped  
African women might suffer from this  
fantasy infection also.  

Don't trivialize this as old history.  
For this kind of theory is more widely  
believed by white men in 1989 than it  
was in 1750. Because it doesn't come  
from men's ignorance, but from the  
worldview of a genocide civilization.  

page 6  

Similar scientific theory was cooked up  
by the German Nazis after all, who were  
no strangers to modern technology. In  
1935 Julius Streicher, Nazi party boss  
in Nuremberg & their chief propagandist  
against Jews, said:  

"For those in the know, these are the  
established facts: One, the seed of a  
man of another race is a foreign pro-  
tein. During copulation, the seed is,  
in part or in whole, absorbed by the  
fertile mother-soil and thus passes  
into the blood. A single act of inter-  
course between a Jew and an Aryan woman  
is sufficient to pollute her forever."  

Am I saying that there's an ideolog-  
ical similarity between the Founding  
Fathers of U.S. science and the Founding  
Fathers of the Third Reich? That's the  
facts. Don't most white men in the U.S.  
today believe that if a white woman  
has sex with Africans she is "soiled"  
or even "diseased"? If Dr. Rush could  
be dug up and dusted off tomorrow, his  
ideas would still be perfectly in tune  
with Amerikkkan culture. Only if he  
came back now he'd be a professor of  
ob-gyn.  

While Benjamin Rush entertained the  
settler elite with his colonialist-  
sexist theories, he and his white  
medical colleagues couldn't cure a damn  
thing. Outside of crude, non-sterile,  
chop-it-off surgery, white "sawbones"  
knew nothing at all about healing.  
Rush's favorite treatment for disease  
was blood-letting, the classic European  
remedy used for over a thousand years  

with no success.  

When an epidemic of Yellow Fever  
struck Philadelphia, settlers hurried  
to flee the city and scatter to the  
countryside, where the chances of  
contagion were less. Dr. Rush publicly  
urged people to stay, promising them  
certain cure through his three-times-a-  
day blood-letting treatments.  

By cutting open the veins and drawing  
a pan of blood three times a day, Rush  
believed that the disease would be  
"weakened." Yellow Fever need not be  
feared, he told the press; greeting his  
patients with the line, "Don't be afraid,  
there is nothing wrong with you but the  
Yellow Fever."  

The scandal over the hundreds of  
deaths, at last forced the shaken Rush  
out of medicine. His friends in the  

patriarchy took care of him, of course.  

President Adams gave him a patronage job  
as treasurer of the U.S. mint. This is  
the man that the patriarchy names  
medical schools after, and honors as the  
Founding Father of U.S. medicine. It all  
fits, doesn't it?  

We've detoured through this story to  
get beyond the euro-capitalist reflexes  
drilled into us as our culture, to strip  
it away and see our civilization with  
fresh eyes. "Doctor" Benjamin Rush "M.D."  
was all: patriarchal trappings, liberal-  
ism and all, but there wasn't anything  
inside. Like those TV doctors who sell  
us stuff on the commercials ("I'm not a  
doctor, but I play one on television").  

Three centuries after Columbus,  
euro-capitalism had managed to create  
a highly patriarchal, institutionalized  
and profitable medical profession which  

had no "medical" Dr. Rush and his  

colleagues were backward by the world  
standards of the time. In Africa or in  
Tibet, women would have handed him a hoe  
and told him to find another way to  

support himself.  

There's a barbed point inside all  
this.  

When we strip away the mystique of  
euro-capitalist technology, we find that  
it runs on genocide. And it had its  
origins in conquest, not in the thrown-  

out musings of Greek philosophers.  

Euro-capitalism didn't colonialize the  
world because of its superior sciences  
and industry. That proposition has  
things upside down. Only from its ever-  
expanding conquests and genocide of  
other peoples and nations, did euro-  
capitalist civilization slowly gain the  
scientific and economic superiority  
that we now assume is only right and  
natural.  

Everything that we have (or that has  
us), from birth control pills to this  
nation itself, comes from doing genocide,  

and in particular from doing genocide  

against other women.  

The concept of a world economy came  
from the Islamic mercantile-capitalist  
civilization, which for the first time  
brought much of the world into one  
trading system. At Great Zimbabwe, the  
capital of the Rozwi federation in  
Africa during the 1500s, people ate  
from fine Chinese porcelain and the  
guards carried German firearms (crude  
muskets). All over three centuries  
before they ever saw a white man. This  
was possible because Great Zimbabwe was  
tied into the world-spanning Islamic  
trading system.  

Even the second of those capitalist  
systems, that developing within the  
belly of the Moghul empire in India,  
was in advance of Europe in many ways.  
Contrary to its own propaganda, the  
white men of Europe were not so  
successful economically compared to  
what is now called the Third World.  

Expanding Moghul industry threatened  
European trade, not only in Asia but  
all the way around the world in Europe  
itself. England had to erect higher and  
higher tariff walls to protect its own  
textile industry from superior Indian  
products, finally banning their impor-  
tation altogether in 1701. British  
merchants still had to buy Moghul goods,  
not only cloth but superior Indian  
high-strength steel, for without them  
they would have lost customers in  
other countries.  

Most of what Europe produced then  
was inferior or inappropriate in the  
eyes of other civilizations, so the  
main British export to Asia was money.  
Having little that Asians wanted,  
British capitalism had to ship tons of  

silver each year to purchase Asian  

cotton, silk, coffee, tea, steel, dyes,  
teak, medicines and other goods in one-  
sided trade. Sixty-five percent of  
British cargoes to Asia in 1730-1750  
was monetary silver alone. This smoked  
the British lords of commerce.  

Under the mythic rules of "free  
enterprise," in "fair trade," white  
people were not the winners. The British  
empire's countermove was to send its