Rote Zora

Until last Winter's unprecedented raids on the public West German women's movement by the BKA, West Germany's FBI, trying to find Red Zora, few women in the U.S. had ever heard of Red Zora's revolutionary feminist urban guerrillas. In West Germany, however, they are well known to aware women as leaders in the fight against sex-slavery of Third World women and the fight against the development of a new white master race biotechnology. As German women, they feel a special call to fight against the development of Nazi-like genocide in new and disguised forms.

And they warn German women that without underground armed resistance, the situation there will inevitably deteriorate to the level of the U.S.A., where covert bio-genocide programs against Indian, New Afrikan, and Puerto Rican women are going on. Red Zora is fighting our fight as well as their own. It is fighting a war we don't want to admit is going on.

The male world has reluctantly become used to women fighters in Third World liberation armies or women revolutionaries in male-dominated left parties, but Red Zora is something different. It points to a fresh page in world politics, as one small forerunner of the Amazon army.

In West Germany, there is an active and legal trade in Asian women for sexual purposes, what is called sex-slavery. Under the fiction of arranging marriages, brokers import poor "Thai girls" for German men who are willing to pay ($500-$700 each, plus airfare). Men are allowed to first “test" the women, who are isolated in a strange country and pressured to go along. Many of the women, primarily from Thailand and the Philippines, are later forced to work as prostitutes.

Sometimes a group of men, a drinking club or sports team, will chip in a few bucks each and buy a "Thai girl" to share. All legal so long as one man marries her and acts as her keeper. The police have said that under democratic laws there is nothing they can do. There are believed to be thousands of Third World women being held in semi-slavery in West Germany.

Der Spiegel, the newsweekly that is like TIME or Newsweek here, commented that because the government is unwilling to act, "These women traders have only the ‘Red Zora' to fear." For the women guerrillas of Red Zora have been the ones taking the fight to the enemy, targeting the women traders and encouraging German women to resist. In one widely-publicized action in August 1983, Red Zora found and fire-bombed the van of Gunther Menger, one of the biggest of the women traders, right outside his villa. And warned him that bombs could get even closer.

In October 1986, they attacked the offices of Lufthansa, the West German national airline, to publicize its role in sex-tourism (packaged vacations for men in Southeast Asia, where the men's tour group is provided each day with Asian women and children for sex).

The same abuses happen in the U.S.A. (I've noticed some classifieds advertising Asian women by women traders in liberal magazines like the misnamed Mother Jones), but here it isn't yet an issue. For there's no issue unlike West Germany, where Red Zora has attacked not only women traders, but countless porn shops, doctors’ offices, and genocide laboratories under the slogan, "FIGHT THE IMPERIALIST PATRIARCHY!".

The mass witch hunt by West German cops shows that Red Zora's small success has become a big emergency to the authorities. Last year the feminist guerrillas were credited with helping women factory workers in South Korea win a strike against the Adler corporation. One of the major German clothing manufacturers and chain retailers, Adler had moved its production facilities to low-wage sweatshops in South Korea and Sri Lanka. Instead of $700 a month, as it had been paying women workers in Germany, Adler was paying South Korean women only $30 or $40 per month (for 48-hour weeks) to keep its chain of stores stocked with discount clothing.

In the Summer of 1987, women workers in South Korea went on strike against Adler, calling on West German women to support them. The women's community held public meetings and protest rallies outside Adler stores.

On the evening of August 15, 1987, Red Zora struck with fire. As their communiqué humorously said:

"Even we couldn't pass by the attractive discount markets of Adler: on August 15th nine Adler shops were burned."

When Adler tried to assert itself by punitively laying off 1,700 Korean women and firing twelve women strike leaders, Red Zora used "burning arrows" on September 9th, destroying an Adler store in West Berlin. The corporation gave in, rehiring the striking women, promising not to interfere in free union elections, and raising women's wages by 25%. Well done, sisters!

THE WOMEN'S ARMY

In an interview they gave to