The Role Of Women &  
Children In  
The Armed  
Struggle  

Chapter One  

Among women who want change there is  

a deep and underlying confusion. White  
women are uncertain not just about  
strategies, but even about what the goal  
is. Change is what it's all about.  
Change is a constant, and change is what  
women want and need. But we are women in  
amerikkka, women trapped in amerikkka,  

loving amerikkka and hating amerikkka,  

staying on in amerikkka, still talking  
shit in amerikkka.  

In the seventies, white women talked  
of liberation, talked of socialism,  
sisterhood, solidarity with Third World  
sisters. Hey, we talked of women loving  

women and separatism and leaving men  
to drown in their own shit. But we  
stayed on in amerikkka and gained favor  
in amerikkka and we continue to produce  
for amerikkka. And our movement became  
an increasing ally of patriarchal  
amerikkka. Now we are confused and  
disillusioned with what we set out to  
do.  

Meanwhile, patriarchal socialism did  
what it could, spread out the income a  
little, evened out the distribution of  
health care and literacy and nutrition,  
but it couldn't produce freedom and is  
now collapsing back towards capitalism.  
And we are confused and disillusioned  
with what we set out to do.  

Well, there's nothing wrong with our  
disillusionment. "Disillusion," my  
dictionary says, is "to free from that  
which deludes or is illusionary." So  
what's wrong with that?  

The first question isn't what we  
“should do, it's who are we and where do  
we come from? For our confusion comes  
from not knowing who we are, where we  

are, and what time it is.  

We have an unspoken fear, a fear that  
we have no culture of our own, no  

culture that can defeat patriarchal  
violence. That whatever we had before  
patriarchy came was erased so long ago,  
was so primitive, that it has no  
practical meaning anymore. That the only  
really modern way of life is the culture  
that white men made, patriarchal imper-  
ialism, with its command of science and  
industry.  

"Why is capitalism so superior?" we  
ask ourselves, when we see even Third  
World socialist nations humbly turning  
to imitate the West. Is our only destiny  
to live out white men's culture, playing  
roles in their rules, seeking an  
ecological niche in their nations &  
corporations?  

Our unspoken fear that women have no  
culture resonates below words through  
everything white women do, no matter  
how much feminists try to pretend  
otherwise.  

The question of why patriarchal  
imperialism is so successful as a civil-  
ization has its polar opposite question:  
where does a revolutionary women's  
culture begin?  

We need to know that these two  
questions are interrelated. Patriarchal  
imperialism is the only so-called  
civilization that has always used gen-  
ocide as its primary fuel, its primary  
harvester. It ain't hard to spread the  
goodies on the banquet table and invite  
friends to dinner when you steal and  
kill the producers. And revolutionary  
women's culture begins when we leave  
the table.  

One school of feminist thought is the  
spiritualist-feminist stonehedge mystic  
school, who advocate a basic pacifism  
(armed struggle is male) while Rome  
burns. The other school of thought says  

women gotta make men do their job by us,  
gotta lobby 'em and march 'em until men  
equalize us and protect us like they  
shoulda. The exasperated housewife  
syndrome. Neither is responsive to  
genocide, which is the determining  
question for everyone. Literally, how  
we deal with genocide determines in the  
end who we will be.  

This is a crucial time because a  
social restructuring of some kind is  
about to happen in the U.S.A. For the  
present cannot hold. Not for New Afrikans  
and not for us either. Imperialism turned  
loose its civil rights and its  
equality and its drugs, but it isn't  
holding. The light at the end of their  
tunnel is only Afrika burning. Where's  
it going? Who's going to lead it?  

The restructuring will determine the  
ground that the next generation fights  
on. Right now white women are becoming  
increasingly patriarchal. There is a  
vigorous competing and sweating by  
white women to get in with the patriar-  
chy or as close as possible. The  
women's movement is pale and timid by  
comparison.  

And now we must know who we are.  

Women accept amerikkka as a large &  
wealthy nation, successful, the most  
highly "developed" on earth. And we  
think without thinking that this white  
life is what's normal, natural, the  
standard other peoples must try to reach  
and become.  

I say none of this is true in the  
bones. This most unnatural of nations  
is large only in stolen lands (which  
Third World peoples are insidiously re-  
claiming, smudging and redrawing  
borders), is rich only in stolen labor.