early 1870s. One morning she saw dust

and heard hoofbeats and realized Geronimo's band of marauders were 
approaching her homestead. Pregnant Annie grabbed her children. Terrorized, they hid in the root cellar... Only later did I come to understand what terrible treacheries had made a renegade out of a warrior."

I think that's a pretty average point of view for us: pride in our white foremothers & forgiveness for those Indians who got hostile at it all. But what was it like from women's point of view (as opposed to a white point of view), this Arizona frontier of the 1870s? And what were the things unnamed that turned Geronimo into a "renegade"? From a history book:

"More than anything else, it was probably the incessant kidnapping and enslavement of their women and children that gave Apaches their mad-dog enmity toward the whites... It was officially estimated that 2,000 Indian slaves were held by the white people of New Mexico and Arizona in 1866, after 20 years of American rule-- unofficial estimates placed the figure several times higher... ‘Get them back for us,' Apaches begged an Army officer in 1871, referring to 29 children just stolen by citizens of Arizona; ‘our boys will grow up as slaves, and our little girls, as soon as they are large enough, will be diseased prostitutes, to get money for whoever owns them...' Prostitution of captured Apache girls, of which much mention is made in the 1860s and 1870s, seemed to trouble the Apaches exceedingly."

Do you think the settler women in that small frontier community didn't know what was happening? Of course they knew. When the menfolk are laughing about what they did to the Indian girl yesterday while you're cooking their supper, of course you know. How could you not, as a woman? It must have burned in your guts, that anger & fear of knowing.

To be a renegade is to be a traitor, a turncoat, a person who abandons their principles or people for another. Geronimo and his small band of freedom fighters were not that. But there were people there who had changed their principles and people for another. There were people whose only life was to help white men build the community of rape & enslavement of "other" women and children. And if today we're proud of what they did, see them as brave models of what we should be—then what is our culture?

The point is we don't have a culture of our own yet. We have a role inside white men's culture; we have a niche inside patriarchal imperialism. It wasn't only Indians and Afrikans who were property, after all. When euro-capitalism invaded this continent, the settler men brought with them their most "precious" property, the white women that would be their homes, be available for sex, and that would reproduce their own children. In return for being so useful in euro-capitalism's Big House, settler women got to share in a higher standard of living than we had back in poverty-stricken old Europe.

Apache Baby

If we can see that many Indian men were lured by addiction and social bribery into taking part in their own destruction, we should be able to see even better that the most important group being socially bribed to take part in genocide were and are white women.

That's why we blank out of our minds the systematic rape & slavery of Indian and Afrikan women in genocide. We feel proud of the pioneer white women who were serving the rapists and slavers. Oh, and the

Articles from this newspaper may be reprinted in whole or in part by any women's publication, as long as it is credited to Bottomfish Blues: A Voice for the Amazon Nation. Other groups or publications may request permission to reprint through a classified ad in a women's publication such as off our backs, Womanews, Hag Rags or Sojourner.

imperialist patriarchy still owns us so deeply that we truly believe these attitudes are "feminism."

But it isn't just bribery in the material sense. We, too, are kept as property by terrorism. Every Indian woman or child raped & enslaved back then was also a salutary example for settler women. A real threat, like the burning of "Witches" was. Like Death Squads are. Like women's prisons are. We are conditioned to be loyal to Dick's genocide, to never see anything or say anything. Or else. Like those German Aryan women (our closest sis) who listened to those cattle cars full of Jews going by in the night, but never ever knew anything. ‘Cause it might be them in the cattle car, their daughter being raped, them in the Konzentrationslager. We know Dick will turn on "his" women in a flash if he feels threatened or betrayed or just for the hell of it. So we are used to purchasing our flimsy piece of safety with our conformity to all his rules for the property that we are. That's why we back down so often.

When we were culturally sterilized in genocide we lost much of what women are. Because when you become property you aren't what you were, you're made to become something else. That's the idea. Just as the livestock in the agri-factory are not even biologically anymore the wild & free animals they once were. I use this comparison deliberately. Now "women" has been redefined in us. "Women" are fearful, weak, possible

The Crack LEGACY

SYSTEM UNDER SIEGE

‘Sitting on a Time Bomb Waiting for Kids to Die’

D.C. Child Welfare Services Overmatched

Last of Three Articles

Marcia Slacum Greene Washington Post Staff Writer

Children whose families have been ripped apart by the District’s crack cocaine epidemic are being victimized twice: once by the drug scourge and again by a child welfare system beset with long-standing operational problems.

More than half of the system’s authorized social work past...