_ dock reminds sisters that Afrikan  
women slaves in Jamaica had not only  
used abortions to limit the supply of  
new slave labor but had resisted the  
slaveowner's attempts to impose  
monogamous marriage to Afrikan men on  
them. By controlling their reproduc—  
tive power those sisters played a big  
role in bringing down chattel slavery  
in the British colonies:  

"ll they were surprised by the  
resistance shown by the slave women  
who...recognized clearly their posit—  
ion as the property of the plantation  
owners. The fact is that for more  
than 100 years, the majority of slave  
women in the Caribbean were neither  
wives nor mothers and by exercising  
control over their reproduction  
capabilities were able to deeply  
affect the plantation economy.  

It's a fact that communities of  
Afrikan women had an early science of  
reproduction different from that of  
Harvard & Yale. A non-invasive wom-  
en's science passed on by healers  

~ es »Mrs. Fannie Lou Hamer of Ruleville,  

2 <-  
Mississippi. When Mrs. Hamer tried to register to vote, she lost her job as a  
plantation worker; in 1964 she ran for Congress in Senator Eastland’s district.  

from mother to daughter. They had,  
relative to the euro-patriarchy of  
their time, more science than we do  
now. Which is why college-educated  
white women who feel quite superior  
to "other" have to beg the Big Nine  
for Dick's permission to buy an  
abortion, while Afrikan slave women  
controlled their reproduction as a  
communal conspiracy despite the  
watchful eye & the lash of the slave  
overseer. We think we're so superior,  
but really we're backward & dependent.  

White women are just beginning to  
see the dimensions of our need for  
sciences of resistance. Our need in  
the first place because we have to  
re-invent ourselves as a people, al-  
most from scratch (and isn't that what  
we've been struggling towards for 20  
years now?). It isn't a matter for us  
of simply having equal rights, because  
free women's community with its cul-  
ture, its structure of relationships,  
its material foundation in production  
and reproduction, has long been wiped  
out in euro-civilization. White women  

Women overpower,  
hold assailant —  

GLENDALE, Calif. — A would-be  
purse-snatcher who threatened two  
women, saying he had a weapon,  
was overpowered and held by the  
women until police arrived, author-  

ities said.  

“He said, ‘I have a knife!’ So  
I gave up trying to hold onto my  
purse. But my daughter jumped on  
him and I had to help her. He was  
tall, but not strong,” said Rumiko  
Sera, 57, of the attempted robbery  
Wednesday.  

Bystanders helped the women  
hold onto the man, who “kept  
spitting on the men and saying he  
was going to give them AIDS,” said  
Mrs. Sera’s 31-year-old daughter,  
Ann Kunitake.  

._ » Police arrested Lino Ochoa, 28,  
for investigation of robbery.  

Mr. Ochoa pleaded not guilty Fri-  
day to unrelated charges of rob-  
bery and assault with a deadly  
weapon, said Deputy District At-  
torney Michael Pargament. He said  
Mr. Ochoa also is accused of two  
other purse-snatching incidents,  
and allegedly has been driving a  
car that was reported stolen April  
3. =  

of amerikkka have never known any  
other life here than as Dick's live-in  
assistants in capitalism's invasion &  
occupation. If you think for a moment  
of "white woman" as a job title or a  
military rank — you'll have a better  
sense of what I mean.  

The other reason we need science  
to the max is that our struggle does-  
n't take place in a neutral setting,  
but within a vast killer culture. Like  
all oppressed people we need to be  
able to deal with force, with massive  
violence, as a practical fact of life.  
Every inch of this country and every  
body & blade of grass in it is owned  
by patriarchal imperialism, a killer  
culture which will butcher you and  
me, too, our kids & 10,000 other  
women the day they think it necessary.  
We know it, too, which is why we back  
down so often. Even on that one night  
a year when white women promise our-  
selves that someday we're going to  
take back what we lost.  

Because we have no scientific  
understanding of genocide as a  
culture, no political-military science  
of our own (we are in fact still so  
colonized that many of us deny that  
women should even dare to have such a  
science), we are totally unable to  
deal with violence against women. We  
accept that as normal. The women's  
community has a great social analysis  
of rape, for instance, but hasn't idea  
one on what to do about it. No  
tactics, no strategy, no science.  

I say that the science of genocide can  
only be confronted by the science of  
war.  

THE SCIENCE OF GENOCIDE  

I'm interested in this, in the in-  
effectiveness of anything white women  
have done about rape. Why nobody thinks  
it's odd. To me that's so strange  
it really stands out. A sister who did