Ex-City Cop Charged With

Assaulting Stepdaughters

By Leonard Levitt

A former city police officer who married his radio-patrol partner a month after his wife disappeared was indicted yesterday on charges he sexually assaulted his second wife’s 12- and 13-year-old daughters.

The indictment charges Robert Fioretti with engaging in sexual intercourse with his 12-year-old stepdaughter “by forcible compulsion.” He was also charged with assaulting her, fondling her and her younger sister, and authorizing the 12-year-old “to engage in an occupation involving substantial risk of danger to the child’s life or health.” Specifics of that charge remain unclear.

Fioretti, who was identified as a suspect in the Hudson River two years later, was indicted on charges he forged Rita Fioretti’s signature on a Manhattan bank withdrawal slip for $17,000 two months after her disappearance. Charges were later dropped for lack of jurisdiction.

In April, 1987, Fioretti was dismissed from the police department for refusing to answer questions about his former wife’s disappearance.

In November, 1987, Fioretti was indicted on charges he filed false tax returns. Those charges were later dismissed for lack of evidence.

At a news conference after the indictment yesterday, Bronx District Attorney Robert Johnson said that the authorities at the girls’ school had notified the city’s social services, which removed all five children from Fioretti’s first marriage and the current marriage and daughters from Fioretti’s wife’s custody.

The late Bronx District Attorney Mario Mereola also had termed Fioretti a prime suspect in the disappearance of his wife, Rita Fioretti, in August, 1986. Fioretti never reported her missing, and as a result Bronx detectives refused to accept the case when they were notified by the woman’s employer, International Paper Co., that she did not show up for work.

A headless body that turned up in the river was identified as hers, but no charges have been filed in connection with her death. Fioretti married his second wife in September, 1986.

In January, 1987, a Bronx grand jury indicted Fioretti on charges he forged Rita Fioretti’s signature on a Manhattan bank withdrawal slip for $17,000 two months after her disappearance. Charges were later dropped for lack of jurisdiction.

In April, 1987, Fioretti was dismissed from the police department for refusing to answer questions about his former wife’s disappearance.

In November, 1987, Fioretti was indicted on charges he filed false tax returns. Those charges were later dismissed for lack of evidence.

At a news conference after the indictment yesterday, Bronx District Attorney Robert Johnson said that the authorities at the girls’ school had notified the city’s social services, which removed all five children from Fioretti’s first marriage and the current marriage and daughters from Fioretti’s wife’s custody.

The same distant early warning signal was true of Deputy Rickey Ross. In 1981 he too was involved in a sexual assault. There again the woman's complaint was dismissed and Ross was free to go his way. When he was on duty at the L.A. county jail, Ross and two other cops assaulted a clerical worker in the jail medical records section. They got her alone and forced her to strip, then they did a "skin search." They covered themselves with a false drug charge and she was fired the next day.

Rickey Ross was shown how easy it is for a cop to get over and get into the not so forbidden fruit of sexual violence.

Officially recognized serial murders are the smallest tip of the iceberg of men's secret life. The Seattle police say that "only" 40 killings are known to be by the Green River killer, and that the killings stopped in mid-1984. They speculate that the unknown killer might have died, might be in prison, or have moved on to San Diego or some area where serial murders are going on.

Yet and again, since the first Green River victims were found in July 1982, there have been not 40 but 120 anonymous murders of street women in the Seattle-Tacoma-Vancouver areas. One man? Ten men? Death squad?

Serial murders have drama and shoot up our attention span like some drug (though someday, like the deaths in New Afrikan communities, they'll be in small print, like yesterday's baseball scores). The official press treats serial murders as some sick man's extreme, far out crime. Check your library. There's a whole shelf of books devoted to the pseudo-psychology of the minds of serial murderers. It's even a growing specialty of writers and cops. But I say no. It's a problem of men's harvesting of women. And it's not new. It's part of the social institution. Now, there are women struggling against this and yet we have no response that makes sense--won't have until we deal with nation, class, and patriarchy.

Television networks like the Ted Bundy story because it was a clean-cut, white middle-class killer and victims. But it's not like that. Most serial murder victims are "superfluous" women or homosexual boys. The disposable people that patriarchal society places no value on. Teen runaways, drug addicts, prostitutes. New Afrikan, Native American, and Latina women are doubly disposable. Categories of women that aren't considered worth keeping as property (or as in the case of runaways and dykes "escaped from men") for any white man. Which is why they are considered "loose." And therefore some men feel free to use them up and get rid of the remains.

These are not simple problems. Ain't no magic answer, one that allows us to go on with our daily lives unchanged... No business as usual. No just going out to dinner, just going home to Amerikkka.

"It had to be a cop!" some sister says now. "Because hookers trust cops." But what about lawyers and so on. You name it. Why does it make a difference if it's a cop doing it? Why did you think they were any different? You thought there were men who should protect you. No men can do that.

Take back the night marches are nice but three hours once a year won't cut it. Feminist patrols won't work as long as we exist as modular units in the patriarchy. Are we supposed to start bedroom patrols of husbands and wives? Husbands and boyfriends kill more women than the Ted Bundys ever have. Or are we supposed to start feminist houses of prostitution? How can we protect a sister who insists on getting into twenty cars a night with strange men? The problem is a structural one. Many women play real close to men. They seek safety and support from men.

Hedda Nussbaum is just like the street women who got alone with the Green River killer--she chose to run the risk of playing to a sick man. Society sanctions certain kinds of playing to men with a double standard: "battered wives" (read "white") are "pitied" as respectable victims, while New Afrikan hookers or young runaways get "You deserve to die, Bitch."

It's not an easy question, how Amazons relate with women who put themselves in this situation. There's real political differences amongst us on this question. I think you can't put it all on the patriarchy, just putting it all on the oppressors. That's like saying whites are going to solve Black problems, not true. Only women can find our own answers. Asking the patriarchy for money--whether foundation grants or $30 for a trick isn't the answer. It's the problem. Only communal Amazon politics will work, allowing women to solve the problem.