people entered history. The world ain't  
been the same since. Other people's land  
and possessions were seized, used and abused.  
The women and children of other tribes  
were valuable labor to accumulate even more  
wealth, were badges of how big a shot a man  
really was.  

Slavery started with women and children.  
Started within the family. No wonder men  
made the family a holy thing.  

Men of other tribes were enslaved too,  
but usually adopted into the conqueror's  
tribe to provide more soldiers.  

Now when all this really got going  
these lords joined forces in combination  
and created nations. And then nations enslaved  
whole tribes, whole other nations,  
all the men, women and children. The further  
from home these enslaved peoples were,  

the more different they looked, the easier  
it was to say they were inferior, non-human.  

And truth be told it became easy to convince  
the original slaves that the new  
slaves were inferior. In fact it became,  
possible to ease the burdens on the family  
slaves. So long as we behaved. It pays a  
big dividend to belong to these strong  
lords, doesn't it? Get beat less, get raped  
a little less. Get to be straw boss. At  
least sometimes.  

~ DAILY@ NEWS  

crore ua pla amt oe  

: i  
Beat and they all started rapping to "Wild Thing"  

COVERAGE BEGINS ON PAGES 2-3  

But you know dialectics turns the wheel  
of history and even the strongest lord  
and the strongest nation doesn't rule forever.  
Enslaved peoples unite, become new  
nations—and begin to fight back. We've  
reached a point in history where our white  
lords can no longer assure their control  
and our privilege. Twenty-five years ago  
the struggles of New Afrikan people raised  

and complete. One seed hit the  

the ancient memory of our freedom, too.  
Stirred our blood a little...caused us to  
begin to see what we were, but we didn't  
see where we were.  

The sixties wasn't about Woodstock, you  
know. It was about New Afrika, Vietnam,  
NATIONAL LIBERATION AND FREEDOM. It was  
about the beginning of the new and the ending  
of the old. A nodal point in history  
where something's gotta change.  

White men saw it coming. They knew where  
they were. They understood empire and  
colonialism. Knew enough to kill Malcolm  
and the Panthers. Knew enough to defeat the  
Black Liberation Army. And most important  
they knew enough to make war on New Afrikan  
women. Everyone knows New Afrikan women  
play a much larger role in their nation  
than white women have ever played since  
the dawn of patriarchy in Europe. During  
the Vietnam War the movement spoke bravely  
about bringing the war home to Amerikkka.  
But what we failed to do, the White Lords  
did.  

The Lords saw in the armed rebellions of  
the sixties and seventies that they  
could no longer directly control New Afrika,  
but they knew enough to promote a neo-  
colonial pseudo leadership. And they knew  
enough not to defeat or kill off the war-  
lords who replaced the revolutionaries.  

THE WALL STREET JOURNAL.  

Heavier Burden  

Housing authorities say the head of  
household must take responsibility for the  
actions of everyone included in the lease.  
One Wilmington tenant twice tried to get  
her cocaine-using son to treatment centers  
and even locked him out of the house. That  

© 1989 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

kkk  

EASTERN EDITION  

THURSDAY, JULY 6, 1989  

WHITE OAK, MARYLAND  

fight drugs at many  

By JOR DAVIDSON  
Staff Reporter of The WALL STREET JOURNAL  

The nationwide push to oust drug users  
from public housing recently swept up Ma-  
bel Coleman, a 65-year-old grandmother in  
Omaha, Neb.  

Mrs. Coleman, who is raising several  
grandchildren, got an eviction notice after  
one of her grandsons was arrested on drug  
charges. She says she tried to control the  
behavior of the teenager, a high school  
wrestler, but couldn't. Finally, she put him  
out of her apartment because, she says,  
“He didn’t abide by my rules.”  

But because his name was still on the  
lease for Mrs. Coleman's unit in the Pleas-  
ant View development, the Omaha  
Housing Authority tried to evict her  
and four other grandchildren, ages  
two through 18, living with her.  

Government officials, backed by  
Housing and Urban Development Secre-  
tary Jack Kemp, are using tougher and  
speedier evictions to  

“Jack Kemp  

of the nation’s 12,000 public housing proj-  
ects. Many tenants applaud the moves. But  
the anti-drug drive also shows the diffi-  
culty of walking the fine line between pro-  
tecting residents and violating the rights of  
some. Sometimes that line is crossed; in  
Mrs. Coleman’s case, a court decided she  
had a right to remain in Pleasant View.  
Officials are “going to hurt some inno-  
cent people if they do it [evictions] in a  
haphazard way,” worries Herman Hol-  
loway Jr., a housing activist and former  
vice chairman of the Wilmington, Del.,  
housing authority. “Be tough as you want,  
but be fair.”  

Entire Household  

The crackdown is being pressed on sev-  
eral fronts. A federal law passed late last  
year allows the eviction not only of drug  
users, but a tenant’s entire household if  
any member of the family or a guest “en-  
gages in” drug-related activity “on or near  
public housing premises.” Omaha officials  
cite the law for justification of their action  
against Mrs. Coleman.  

Earlier this year, Mr. Kemp also began  

‘Public Housing Aides Push to Evict Drug Users,  
Sometimes Violating the Rights of Other Tenants  

‘Restoring Some Rights’  

Viricent Lane, the Chicago Housing Au-  
thority’s executive director, says residents  
tell him “I am restoring some of their  
rights that were taken from them years  
ago by the gangs and drug dealers. We’re  
taking these buildings back and we're hold-  
ing them.”  

But at least one Cabrini Green resident  
wasn’t so pleased. At about 9 a.m. Dec. 8,  
she says, housing officials and police  
knocked on her door and announced “we  
have a clean sweep.”  
The officials ordered everyone to the  
front room, and “before I could get out of  
bed, they were under my mattress, under  
my bed, in my shoebox, in my purse,”  
complains the woman, who filed a lawsuit  
against public housing authorities under  
the name Jane Doe. “I feel they treated  
me unfairly,” she says in an interview.  
Her Jane Doe lawsuit, brought by the  
American Civil Liberties Union, has  
prompted the housing authority to make  
changes. While the ACLU hasn’t any prob-  
lem with many of Clean Sweep’s proce-  
dures, its suit has ended the no-warrant  
searching of apartments and individuals  
by police, and a policy barring guests after  
midnight.  

Many tenants say the sweeps have  
made the projects safer. During one in-  
spection of her unit at the Cabrini Green  
project, 58-year-old Henry Lee Johns was  
frisked, but she says she didn’t mind the  
search, which didn’t turn up any drugs.  
Because of frequent drug-related shootings  
before the sweeps began late last year,  
“you could not sit in the kitchen without  
falling to the floor to eat,” Ms. Johns says.  
“Now we sit where we want. Now we look  
out our windows. It’s a big deal with  
us.”  

wasn’t enough, says Mary Ann Russ, the  
Wilmington Housing Authority’s executive  
director. The tenant should have removed  
her son from the lease, she says, then it  
couldn’t have been terminated.  

Ms. Russ agrees some unsuspecting res-  
idents are victims, “but they aren’t vic-  
tims of us [housing officials]. We are en-  
forcing the law. They are victims of their  
own children.” A state court recently  
blocked three evictions sought by Wilming-  
ton authorities, however, because they  
hadn’t shown the tenants had reason to  
know of illegal activities.  

Roberta Youmans of the National Housing  
Law Project argues that federal and lo-  
cal policies increasing the responsibility of  
public housing tenants for the actions of  
others put a heavier burden on them than  
on private renters. At the same time offi-  
cials are cutting back on tenant grievance  
procedures.  

Frank Keating, HUD’s general counsel  
designate, says the department is simply  
waiving duplicative procedures that “have  
paralyzed in many cases the ability of pub-  
lic housing authorities to rid their projects  
of the criminal element.” He says the ex-  

pedited waivers are granted only if court  
eviction procedures guarantee certain due-  
process standards.  

Local officials say strong steps are  
needed to protect the tenants who don’t use  
drugs. In Alexandria, Va., “We’re using  
young kids many times,” some as young  
as 14, to make undercover drug buys using  
marked money, says Mayor James Moran.  
The intelligence from the buys is used “to  
build up justification for the search war-  
rant which gets information for eviction,”  
he says.  

Mayor Moran says tenants are told that  
if they are evicted for drugs, “the city  
shelters will not accept them. They’re sup-  
posed to move to another jurisdiction and  
get help from family or friends and start  
life anew. I know it sounds like banishment  
{but] I want public housing residents to  
feel I’m the meanest, most uncaring son-  
to-death imaginable. I want them scared  
to death.