invading & doing genocide to others.  
But we can't see it yet, because if we  
saw how genocide worked on us then  
we'd also have to see how we've been  
reduced to helping do that same geno-  
cide to New Afrikan women, to Puerto  
Rican women, to women of indigenous  
nations. We're much less than women  
were yet we trivialize & deny our  

own genocide.  

Certainly we trivialize & deny  
“other” women's genocide, since our  
white privileges are 100% dependent on  
us doing that. When Dick used to tell us  
he wanted us to be "wives", to stay  
home in his pen & serve him & have no  
independent income or life, we protes-  
ted. That was marginalization &  
worse, being totally dependent on him  
& available to him. But we willingly  
attempt to force New Afrikan women to  
be marginalized & available to white  
men. Sure, when he does it to us we  
rightfully call it oppression, but  
when we help him do it to New Afrikan  
sisters we call it a “career.” Isn't  
that what welfare is, what being a  
client or a case is, being available  
to white men and the imperialist  
patriarchy? Just like marriage is to  
us.  

Isn't the mass welfare program for  
New Afrikan & Latin women part of a  
system whereby most of these sisters  
are from birth denied independence?  
And their nation is kept increasingly  
outside the economy historically built  
on their forced labor. Instead, to  
prevent uprisings during the dying,  
white men substitute the dishonestly  
named welfare. Which means these New  
Afrikan sisters are marginalized,  
hidden, available—subject to reviews  
& inspections & arbitrary commands &  
loss of their children. Dick has more  
profitable things to do with his own  
time, so traditionally he has left  
white settler women to operate his  

Agta are one of the few societies where women also hunt. Here a woman returns from a successful hunt.  

marginalization system for New Afrikan  
women. Just as he calls it “defense”  
when he invades Panama & "welfare"  
when he tries to dehumanize Black &  
Latin women, when we assist him in his  
crimes he lets us call it “social  
work" or a “career."  

We persist in trivializing "other"  
women's genocide in part because we  
still deny our own. We think of the  
housing projects that so many sisters  
are confined to as “housing”, when  
really they're more akin to reservat-  
ions or concentration camps. You don't  
really think they built projects  
because Black people needed housing, do  
you? Actually, that is what we wanna  
think even though it's a silly  
thought. They built projects because  
they wanted social prisons for Black  
women like they have criminal prisons  
for Black men.  

We force them to live there or be  
homeless, then we flood the projects  
with dope & alcohol & guns (none of  
which New Afrikan men produce but all  
of which are mysteriously freely  
available to them in any quantity no  
matter how poor they are) while our  
police threaten and disarm the women.  

Remember the Central Park Jogger  
gang rape last year, when angry white  
women wanted to know why police hadn't  
dealt with “those brutal teen-age  
rapists" earlier? Then it turned out  
in interviews with women in the proj-  
ects that these same accused guys had  
long been harassing, threatening &  
physically attacking Latin & New Afri-  
kan sisters, but the police protected  
them. Even to the point of warning  
project tenants that anyone who tried  
to stop them would be arrested.  

Once that got out white sisters  
shut down, looked the other way.  
Sure, political white women care that  

Woman allegedly  
fires at accused  
in W.Va. trial  

HAMLIN, W.Va. (AP) — The  
mother of a murder victim allegedly  
pulled a gun from her purse in a  
packed courtroom yesterday and  
fired at her daughter’s accused killer  
from the witness stand.  

Pearl Marie Abraham allegedly  
fired a single shot from a .38-caliber  
pistol at Stuart Martin Elliott during  
the third day of his murder trial in  
Lincoln County Circuit Court. She  
was charged with attempted murder.  

Mr. Elliott, 25, of Hamlin, is  
charged with Mrs. Abraham's  
daughter and raping her 10-year-old  
daughter in September.  
Witnesses said prosecutor Jay  
Hoke had just finished questioning  
Mrs. Abraham when she pulled the  
gun from her handbag. The bullet hit  
the defense table and ricocheted into  
a door, missing everyone in the  
standing-room-only courtroom.  
Mrs. Abraham of West Hamlin  

was subdued by a bailiff, and the  
chaotic courtroom was cleared.  

Mr. Elliott suffered a twisted knee  
in the melee. He was treated at  
Boone Memorial Hospital in Madison  
and was returned to jail.  

Lincoln County Magistrate Helen  
McCormick released Mrs. Abraham  
after she posted $25,000 bond. She  
was whisked away by family mem-  
bers through a rear door without  
commenting to reporters.  

Mr. Elliott is accused of murder,  
sexual assault, two counts of at-  
tempted murder and attempted ar-  
son in the death of Annette Abra-  
ham and the attack on the girl.