Calabar provinces—were occupied by  
government forces. Punitive expeditions  
burned or demolished compounds, took  
provisions from the villages to feed  

the troops, and confiscated property in  
payment of fines levied arbitrarily  
against villages in retribution for  
damages.  

Igbo women had laid the formal demand  
that "all white men should go to  
their own country." At the very least,  
they demanded that women be appointed  
as District Officers, in accordance  
with the equality of power customary to  
their dual-gender government system. To  
Oxford-educated Englishmen, this sounded  
irrational, like a satire or an insult.  
Accustomed to already-broken European  
women, they were unable to understand  
the extent of those Afrikan women's  
self-assertion and self-government. One  
man wrote back to London that it was all  
a hoax to make fun of the British Crown,  
that the Afrikan men had probably  
coached their wives behind the scenes  
on what to do and say.  

British moved to wipe out the mikiri  
and to reduce Afrikan women down to the  
powerless and dependent state of white  
women. Their colonial administration  
created an oppressive patriarchal mach-  
inery where none had existed before the  
20th century. Native courts and native  
government and native police were created—all male, in European uniforms,  
structured on Western lines, and under  
imperialist command.  

Use of force by women was outlawed;  
"to sit on" a man or to call a women's  
strike against him was made illegal. In  
the euro-capitalist way, all women's  
complaints had to be submitted to a  
Native Court of men, whose verdicts  
based on capitalist law would be enfor-  
ced by other men carrying rifles. So  
among the Igbo, while patriarchy was  

already visible in embryo form, its full,  

sickening rise didn't come from any  
traditional culture. It was done as  
government policy by white men, graduates  
of Oxford and Cambridge, from offices in  
London during the 20th century.  

I doubt that Igbo women thought they  
were in paradise, or that Igbo society  
was anything remotely like a utopia.  

Yet and again, they had—and fought to  
keep—something that we don't even  
remember we lost. In the U.S.A., "equal-  
ity" and "equal justice under law"  
(those mythical beasts no one has ever  
seen) are understood as women becoming  
lawyers and plaintiffs in the patri-  
archal legal system. Demanding that  
Dick's system should protect us and our  
children from Dick—please? 'Course we  
know how well that works. Igbo women  

had a different concept, their own  
communal justice system. All women  
personally joined in making women's laws  
and enforcing women's justice. No cops,  
no lawyers, no judges, no Dick. Of  
course, that's kinda communistic.  

Heavy taxes sucked the life out of  
the traditional women's farming for use,  
while the new imperialist economy of  
wage-labor, exploitative as it was, was  
largely reserved for men. Women's  
commerce lost ground as the new indus-  
trial products came in, sold by Western  
companies and their male Afrikan em-  
ployees and partners. For most Igbo  
women in the new economy there were at  
first only two choices of wage-labor:  

domestic servant and prostitute. This  
was for Afrikan women who once had a  
self-government rooted in women's  

economy that women in Amerikkka today  

don't even know is possible.  

There was one ray of hope permitted  
in the system, that of a better individ-  
ual life through Western education.  

This was provided by English women  
missionaries, the forerunners of found-  
ation feminism, who demanded as a con-  
dition that each Afrikan family whose  
girls entered school give up "pagan"  
customs such as the mikiri. Christian-  
ity, like its brothers Islam and Judaism,  
was the enemy of women's community, not  
merely in theory but in fact.  

If the white soldier was the "stick"  
to smash Igbo women's society, white  
women were used to dangle the "carrot"  
to lure desperate women away from their  
culture. Girls' school had a different  
curriculum than boys, blending the same  
Christian indoctrination with "home  
economics" training on how to be a good  
housewife for an upwardly-educated  
Afrikan man. Just as in the long cent-  
uries of the Witchhunt, euro-capitalism  
intended to wipe out "women" and replace  
them with "wives," if we understand the  
difference.  

Again, I ask, who was backward and  
who was advanced?  

It was euro-capitalism that was the  
bringer of backwardness, the destroyer  
of women's economy and land. Accelerat-  
ing and force-feeding all the patriarch-  
al and self-destructive elements that  
exist within each society: it overruns.  

Many Igbo women were surprised that  
any men, even savage Europeans, could  
be so perverted as to shoot into women's  
rightful demonstrations, which had been  
called by the full women's authority. To  
them this violated the most basic social  
compact that held the human race toget-  
her. But then, Afrikan women knew  
nothing about the Witchhunt, didn't know  
that white euro-civilization had already  
tortured and executed millions of their  
own women to lay the foundation for  
this new social order. Genocide against  
women is intrinsic to the rise of cap-  
italism as a world social system, just  
as it is intrinsic to neo-colonialism  
today.  

Euro-capitalism didn't simply occupy  
a nation or people militarily. It dug  
in and expanded its rule by invading  
the culture of the oppressed nation,  
like the HIV virus takes over the com-  
mand center of a healthy cell, altering  
its class structure and culture to mimic  

the oppressor. Everywhere, euro-capital-  

ism continued the Witchhunt in new  
forms, taking land away from women,  
destroying the women's economy and in-  
dependence, raising up a native  

entity yourself with the  
successful crowd  

a  

Dank with  
I WE BSS SS  

WS SG  
S  

PAN AFRICAN BANK  

Your new avenue to prosperity  

HEAD OFFICE SLIBERATION DRIVE,  
P.M.B. 5  

BROD-MEDIA