universal suffrage, giving the vote to  
them & New Afrikans at one stroke. At  
least, white women wanted the vote  
first if only one group would get it.  
For how, as one of their national  
leaders asked at a convention, could  
white men deny the ballot to the  
daughters of Washington and Jefferson  
but give it to "Sambo", white woman's  
servant? Good question.  

The U.S. ruling class temporarily  
wanted New Afrikan men to have the  
vote to elect pro-Union state govern-  
ments in the sullen ex-Confederacy.  
But a new electoral alliance of pro-  
slavery white men & white feminists  
like Susan B. Anthony fought the 15th  
Amendment in favor of woman suffrage  
first. That measure would have left  
New Afrikans outnumbered at the polls  
in the South by 2 to 1 (since white  
men already had the vote), ensuring  
the return to office of the forces  
of the Old Confederacy. With few  
exceptions, New Afrikan women accept-  
ed the 15th Amendment as a survival  
measure for their people. A permanent  
split came down between the white  
women's movement and the Black Nation.  

After 1869, white feminism flipped  
the switch from anti-racist to pro-  
racist. There had always been a real  
identification with the oppressed, but  
for the white women's movement as a  
political vehicle there was a calcu-  
lated dimension as well. They knew  
that patriarchy had no need or desire  
to give their women anything. It was  
only through some outside force or  
agency that white women could share  
white power. They hoped to be carried  
along by the Black Nation. That if  
Amerikkkan men could be forced to  
grant freedom & political rights to  
even the lowly Afrikan slave, then  
surely the educated & well-bred  
daughters of the better white families  
would get at least as much. Just like  
respectable Betty Crocker feminism of  
the 1960s also intended to ride on  
the backs of New Afrikans without any  
fighting or suffering on their part,  
to cash in on the reforms created by  
their rebellion.  

Both moderate & radical factions  
in the women's suffrage movement took  
up white supremacy as the best lever-—  
age they had. They reunited into the  
National American Woman Suffrage As-  
sociation (NAWSA) in 1890. The main  
argument used was that we should be  
enfranchised to double the native—  
born white vote, making sure that  
inferior peoples such as New Afrikans,  
Mexicans, and poor immigrant workers  
from Europe & Asia were kept out of  
government. A resolution at the 1893  
NAWSA Convention said:  

"...we call attention to the sign-  
ificant fact that in every state there  
are more women who read & write than  
all the illiterate male voters; more  

Quotations & Illustrations on the  
women's suffrage movement from Judith  
Papachristou's book, Women Together  

20  

Black Killers, Black Corpses: A  

By Jupy BeLk  

Earlier this year, I was almost mur-  
dered. If I had been killed, I would have  
been the third homicide victim laid to rest  
in the Belk family in less than 10 years. I,  
like my other two relatives, would have  
also been one more example of the in-  
creasing rise in black-on-black crime.  

In 1979, my sister Vickie, 28, was ab-  
ducted on her way home from her govern-  
ment job in Washington, D.C. Her body  

cially unsolved, law-enforce-  
tors strongly suspect she was one of  
several victims randomly killed by  
men on a rampage while...  

More recently, my cousin was murdered in a spray  
of bullets outside my aunt and uncle’s  
home in Alexandria, Va. His brother Di-  
on survived with 11 bullet wounds. The  
assailants, who were black, used  
machine guns and were believed to have  
quarreled with the victim earlier that  
day. Darryl just happened to be in the  
wrong place at the wrong time.  

My brush with death occurred on a  
Sunday evening this past summer while  
driving my friend Joel home through  
a predominantly black neighborhood in  
Oakland, Calif., often referred to as  
the “flatlands” in contrast to the  
more affluent and largely white areas.  

During the next few days, I replayed  
the incident over and over again to fam-  
ily members, police, reporters, and  
insurance adjusters—I couldn’t help but  
think about Vickie and the computer printout that had  
been generated about 10 years ago.  

That’s when I was asked to par-  
ticipate in an annual prevention  
assessment at work. Each year, I fill out a  
lengthy questionnaire that is input  
into a computer. The program  
detailing, among other things, the  
most likely causes of death, stated  
was that if your problem was a  
heart attack, lung cancer, or  
possibly preventable homicide, it would  
warn you enough to take the appropriate ac-  
tive steps.  

white women who can read and write  
than all the Negro voters; more Ameri-  
can women who can read and write than  
all the foreign voters; so that the  
enfranchisement of such women would  
settle the vexed question of rule by  
illiteracy..."  

These not-too-subtle appeals to  
bigotry were echoed even by radicals  
like Susan B. Anthony. In 1900,  
addressing a white racist men's trade  
union convention, she told them that  
feminism would serve them well:  

"By working to give your wives and  
daughters the ballot you would be  
working to double the representation  
of the home in the government; for the  
lowest men—the men who make up the  
slum vote—these men seldom have  
homes and women in them whose votes  
could be added to theirs."  

Survivor’s Story  

I was taken aback to find out the com-  
puter had identified homicide as one of the  
most likely causes of my demise. Why?  
Because I was a healthy black woman be-  
tween the ages of 18 and 35. “Don’t take it  
personally,” I remember the programmer  
saying. “It’s all based on statistics.”  

“Any suggestions for prevention?” I re-  
member asking sarcastically. At the time,  
I dismissed it all as just another racist ex-  
perience. A month later Vickie was dead.  
te Ie statistic.  

in the  
-up car  

has gotta  

Peeters,  

NAWSA was built on the principle  
of "States' Rights." It was publicly  
promised that white women would have  
the power to exclude New Afrikan  
women from the movement whenever and  
wherever they wanted. Most chapters  
were segregated, opposed to New Afri-  
kan women having the right to vote.  

Those white feminist leaders ad-  
mitted that white men decided their  
relationship to New Afrikan women.  
The price of being accepted by  
Amerikkka was to cede to the patri-  
archy the power to rule this relat-  
ionship. Ida B. Wells is famous today  
as the founder & leader of the anti-  
lynching movement of the 1890s. She  
was an advocate of woman's suffrage  
& a leader of the New Afrikan women's  
clubs. But in 1913, when NAWSA held  
a national march on Washington to