Peasants were being pushed off the  
land to make way for the capitalist  
agriculture of commercial wool and  
livestock production. Because of that,  
as early as the 16th century Northern  
Europe (Britain, France, Holland) was  
no longer self-sufficient in food, but  
had to import wheat and other grains  
from Eastern Europe.  

More people became "free" wage  
workers, which is a capitalist relation—  
ship, rather than tilling the land in  
hereditary service for their feudal  
overlord. Cities kept growing in size.  
Not only from commerce and the many  
workshops of skilled artisans (weavers,  
spinners, cabinet-makers, goldsmiths,  
dressmakers and shipwrights), but from  
the new phenomenon of dispossessed poor  
that capitalism had introduced.  

Class divisions had become wider as  
feudalism matured. The vagabonds, who  
were wandering masses of homeless kids,  
women and men ousted from the land by  
their former lords, swelled the labor  
market.  

Wages by the 15th century began to  
go down, not year by year, but genera—  
tion after generation. Meanwhile, the  
ruling triumvirate of the noble courts,  
the church hierarchy, and the rising  
merchant class competed with each  
other in a lavish lifestyle not seen  
by Europeans since the days of imperial  
Rome a thousand years before.  

Rebellion against the corruption  
took many forms. One that involved many  
thousands of women was the movement of  
voluntary poverty. That was a social  
and political struggle in religious  
form.  

Beginning in the 13th century women  
called Beguines appeared, living  
communally in groups of women's houses  
and wearing hooded robes of grey or  
black. They supported themselves by  
handicrafts or begging (from the Beguines  
and their male counterparts, the Beghards,  
come our present words "beggar" and  
"begging"). Some wandered from town to  
town as vagabonds, preaching a kind of  
liberation theology to other women.  

Voluntary poverty was not a renunc—  
iation of the world to Beguines as it  
was to many medieval nuns, but a means  
to revolutionize the world for women  
escaping the patriarchal family. Beguines  

The special prison for  
witches, or Hexenhaus,  
erected in 1627 by the  

Prince-Bishop of Bamberg,  

Gottfried Johann Georg II  
Fuchs von Dornheim, who  
burned a minimum of six  
hundred witches.  

Three feminine dames at—  
tached were.  
Whom Satan did infect  
With Belial’s spirit, whose  
sorcery did  
The simple so molest.  

Title page of contemporary  
pamphlet on the third  
Chelmsford trial of 1589,  
showing Joan Prentice, Joan  
Cony, and Joan Upney,  
hanged on the gallows.  
From the unique copy in  
Lambeth Palace Library.  

said that the acquiring of material  
wealth was an absolute evil. Owning any  
individual property, even jewelry or  
numerous changes of clothing, was  
considered wrong.  

In fact, many  
right of people to  
freely have sexual relations without sin.  
That was a radical idea for women in  
that age. As was their insistence on  
women educating themselves and writing  
their own religious doctrines.  

Beguines didn't  

Those women were not just critics of  
the feudal order, but were trying to  
organize women and men into an alternate  
culture against the encroaching  
capitalism. As part of the heretical  
socio-religious movement of the Free  
Spirit, they said that no one who was  
in the upper classes was without sin,  
while the oppressed classes were the  
sole bearers of righteousness.  

A religious historian writes that this  
alternative culture was a thorn in the  
side of the authorities:  

"The voluntary poor formed a mobile,  
restless intelligentsia, members of which  
were constantly travelling along the  

trade routes from town to town, operating  
mostly underground and finding an  
audience and a following amongst all  

the disoriented and anxious elements in  
urban society. They saw themselves as  

the only true imitators of the Apostles  
and indeed of Christ...  

"From the second half of the twelfth  
century onwards these multitudes of  
itinerant 'holy beggars' of both sexes  
showed themselves ready to assimilate  
any and every heretical doctrine that  
there was."  

Beguines numbered in the hundreds of  
thousands, primarily in France, Belgium  
and Germany. In the German city of  
Cologne alone there were 2,000 Beguines  
by the 13th century. They came to this  
culture of voluntary communalism and  
poverty from every class, craftswomen  
and widows of merchants, urban workers  
and former peasants.  

In some medieval cities a certain  
neighborhood would become the women's  
quarter, with most houses occupied by  
Beguines and other independent women.  

One historian estimated that the Beguine  
community in the city of Strasbourg,  
France, was at least 10% of the total  
population.  

Beguines were a non-hierarchical  
people, with each house making its own  
rules, electing its own leaders, and  
deciding its own finances. Many Beguine  
houses were led by peasant or working  
class women, in contrast to Europe's  
growing class barriers. The Beguine  
women's communities were really the  
only democracy anywhere in Europe. Some  
married women sent their daughters to  
be educated among the Beguines, while  
Beguine houses also took care of elderly  
Beguines in their last years. It was a  
way of life, a fragment of what we don't  
know that we lost.  

While the Roman Catholic Church  
tried to co-opt the Beguines, by 1259  
they began to be excommunicated. For a  
priest or monk to enter a Beguine  
commune, or speak to a Beguine on the  
street without a Church witness, were  
grounds for his own expulsion from the  
Church.  

"An east German bishop complained  
that these women were idle gossiping  
vagabonds who refused obedience to men  
under the pretext that God was best  
served in freedom."  

Women street orators, writers and  
theologians, conceded by even their  
Catholic accusers to be brilliant and  
unorthodox, were produced by the  
Beguine communities.  

That was more trouble for their  
ruling classes than it would seem to us  
in America. 'Cause all that religious  
b.s. was the philosophical guide for  
medieval social relations, for how folks  
were supposed to behave (like in Iran  
or white South African society today).  
Religious b.s. was the legal code of  
the courts. And the whole bag was an  
official monopoly of the church. All the  
writings were even kept in the dead  
language of Latin, readable only by the  
elite. To simply interpret the bible  
into common language, something first  
done by penniless Beguine scholar-outlaws,  
was to risk being burned at the stake  
for heresy (as many were).  

Page 3