Susan Meiselas, Soldiers searching bus passengers, Northern Highway

=

s

Ss s

Susan Meiselas, Mother and daughter killed by government bombing,

San Francisco Javier, from El Salvador

organization? No, our invading euro-
capitalism committed genocide with the
weapon of war and the weapon of cult-
ure. Drawing Indian nations and
peoples into its commodity civiliza-
tion as addicts & property. Arming as
many Indian men with guns as they
could. Addicting as many Indians to
rum and other trade goods as they
could. Decade after decade, in a
protracted war that was called some-
thing else. To get these commodities
they'd become addicted to & protect
their own safety, Indian men cooper-
ated with the settlers in warring for
Indian women of other nations.

Most of the fighting & capturing
was done, in fact, by Indian men. In

James Moore's 1713 expedition against

the Tuscarora, for instance, he had
only 33 white colonists with him but
a large force of 900 Cherokees,
Yamasees, Creeks, and Catawbas. More
often the settlers lay back & bribed
Indian nations to attack Indian nations
until both were decimated.

In explaining the triumph of
small numbers of settlers in destroy-
ing Indian civilization in the area
we call South Carolina, one author
says:

"By 1717 a white population of
only about 1,500 males had succeeded
in employing the larger tribes to
enslave and shatter nearly a dozen
coastal tribes and then had driven a
wedge between the Creeks and the
Cherokees at the moment when an
alliance between them might have end-
ed English presence in the region.
Throughout this process, covering
almost half a century, the primary
weapon of the English had been trade
goods."

In this process, rape as we know
it, as an ever-present fact of life
for women & a major structure of
society, was introduced to this con-
tinent. Many indigenous peoples say
that in their traditions they didn't
even have the concept of rape. I've
been told that in the whole
colonial English period--1620 to
1776--there is not one case of a
settler woman being raped by Indian
men. But if settler men freely raped
and used the bodies of their Afrikan
women slaves, as we know they did,
then why should we think it any
different for Indian women.

Christopher Columbus, in his
official reports to his royal patrons,

naturally makes no mention of rape. He
and his men did capture seven Indian
women for the return trip to Spain,
purely for chaste reasons he assured
Queen Isabella. None of them lived

to reach Europe. On his second trip
in November 1493, his ship captured
an Indian woman on the island of St.
Croix. We know this only because he
gave her as a gift to a friend on

the ship, Michael de Cuneo, who wrote
about it in his account of the voyage.
"I wanted to have my pleasure of her,"
de Cuneo wrote, but she fought him

fiercely, lacerating his face. But

after he beat and lashed her, de
Cuneo concluded with satisfaction,
"I don't mind telling you that she
seemed to have been raised in a
school for whores." I think it's
fitting that Columbus Day is an
Amerikkkan national holiday--only
shouldn't we call it Rapist Day?

A 1715 report from a Virginia
Indian slave trader to his London
agent mentions the rapes of Indian
women during his expeditions. The
London proprietors of the South
Carolina colony rebuked the settle-
ment's traders in writing for their
infamous practices, starting with
rape:

"...to ravish the wife from the
husband, kill the father to get the
child and to burn and destroy the
habitations of these poor people into
whose country we were cheerfully
received by them, cherished and
supplied when we were weak, or at
least never have done us hurt."

Almost twenty years ago our wom-
en's movement began, identifying rape
as an institution of political terror-
ism of the oppressed by the oppres-
sor. We said that rape is to women as
lynching is to Black people. It was
economically important back in 1900s
Alabama that most New Afrikans would
not be lynched. What was also import-
ant was that the ever-present threat
of lynching over them all, of a
sudden mob hunt & brutalization &
ritual white murder of a Black colo-
nial subject, was a constant pressure
to conform to all the rules of
behavior for the property that you
were. Same with women & rape. When
those settler men raped Indian women
& children P.O.W.s they were branding

Flathead Child 25