reopen the campaign for suffrage, they  
asked Ida B. Wells to not march with  
them. They said they were afraid of  
offending the racist male politicians  
and klansmen that the women's movement  
counted on to help them get the vote.  
Strong New Afrikan women who led the  
fight against lynchings were too  
strong for white women.  

We finally got that vote in the  
World War I days, ‘cause the U.S. was  
moving to become the world power &  
wanted a solidly united white nation  
underneath it. "Americanization"  
campaigns back then signed up millions  
of immigrant white workers as citizens  
& white women's unity with Dick was on  
the agenda, too. So on Aug. 26, 1920,  
the Nineteenth Amendment was ratified  
& white women got the vote. Whoopie.  

I say white because the great majority  
of New Afrikan women didn't vote until  
their national liberation movement  

started shaking Amerikkka again in the  

1960s. No thanks to white women, period.  

That first white women's movement  
represented women who were only start-  
ing to wake up as people. Brought over  
as property by white men, divvied up  
one to a man, they were blank from  
genocide. Out of it, literally, while  
white settler men ran around their  
"New World" wheeling & dealing,  
stealing & raping. They had no  
existence here separate from Dick  
& wouldn't have even been here with-  
out him. They were still dazed, just  
starting to come alive.  

The women's suffrage movement, because  
of that background, was still so  
blank from genocide that self-determ-  
ination and separation never occurred  
to them. It never occurred to them  
that women had to do things that hurt  
& lessened white men. Even if person-  
ally they didn't want to be near  
white men, they still defined themse-  
ives as in social partnership with  
white men. That partnership they  
called "America" & so do I.  

So they didn't question why they  
were "winning" the vote. How does  
that song go? "Think I'm winning, but  
I'm losing again." They had no scien-  
tific understanding of what defines  
winning and what defines losing.  
Anymore, I gotta say, than we do when  
we say that our growing "success"  

inside patriarchal institutions with  
our equal rights is winning.  

Will The Federal Suffrage Amendment  
Complicate The Race Problem?  

A little study will prove that the national enfranchisement of women will IN NO WAY complicate the  

race problem.  

In all of the fifteen Southern States, except Mississippi and South Carolina, THE WHITE WOMEN  
GREATLY OUTNUMBER THE NEGRO WOMEN.  
In nine of these States, THE WHITE WOMEN OUTNUMBER THE TOTAL NEGRO POPU-  

LATION.  

There are in the Southern States 2,017,286 MORE WHITE WOMEN THAN NEGRO MEN AND  

WOMEN PUT TOGETHER.  

The following table taken from the Census of 1910 proves this statement. The figures are for the total  
population of the States named. They may be found on page 100 of the Abstract of the 1910 Census.  

= | White Female Totals | States | 6,907,837  

In Mississippi and South Carolina, where negro women outnumber white women, negro men outnumber  
white men. There is no more reason why the presence of negro women should debar women from voting,  
than the presence of negro men debars men from voting.  

Mississippi imposes a heavy educational qualification; South Carolina both an educational and a prop-  
erty qualification. If women voted, these qualifications would apply to women exactly as to men.  

A FEDERAL SUFFRAGE AMENDMENT MERELY FORBIDS THE DISFRANCHISEMENT OF  
A WOMAN ON THE SOLE GROUND THAT SHE IS A WOMAN.  

There are today, in all our States, widely varying voting qualifications—some wise; some unwise. Wo-  
men did not frame these qualifications; and since women are disfranchised, they cannot change them.  
No one should be barred from voting because she is a woman.  

This will not make our electoral arrangements perfect, but it will remedy THEIR MOST GLARING  
INJUSTICE, THE ALMOST COMPLETE DISCRIMINATION AGAINST WOMEN.  

NATIONAL LITERATURE HEADQUARTERS  
NATIONAL WOMAN'S PARTY  

Lafayette Sq., Washington, D. C.  

We don't question why our equal  
rights is so much stronger here than  
in any other white nation—whether  
Great Britain, Germany or the USSR?  
It's because settler women here in  
Amerikkka have a special leverage—  
our ability to get concessions from  
Dick in return for helping him keep  
our New Afrikan property under  
control. Our willingness—no, eager-  
ness—to step up on Black women &  
children is what makes white  
"feminism" so white.  

It's still so hard for us today  
in 1990 to see ourselves as a people,  
who like any other must have self-  
determination (women's self-govern-  
ment). Who need our own army & laws,  
enforced by us, our own sciences & our  
own economy. This is where the road  

back from genocide runs.  

So in the decade of the 1920s two  
women's struggles came to conclusion.  
One we all know about & call a great  
victory, although it left us less than  
we were. The other, the 1926 Women's  
War in Nigeria, is unknown & unimpor-  
tant to us. It was easily kept from  
us. Yet again, when thousands of  
Afrikan women rose up against patri-  

archal imperialism, rose up specific-  
ally in defense of their women's  
economy & women's self-government, it  
was an affirmation of women's exist-  
ence as a people. But we can't see it.  
Forgot it before we could learn it,  
just as Dick culled us & bred us &  
conditioned us to do. He did that to  
us, you know.  

Audre Lorde writes in Sister  
Outsider: 'As white women ignore  
their built-in privilege of whiteness  
and define woman in terms of their  
own experience alone, the Women of  
Color become “other," the outsider  
whose experience and tradition is too  
"alien" to comprehend.'  

Let's break that down more. What  
I'm getting to is that it isn't being  

Afrikan that's too alien for us to  

comprehend, it's being women that's  
too alien for us to comprehend.  

SCIENCES OF RESISTANCE  

Women have relative to men today  
much, much less science than the com-  
munities of women did before Man's