waiting for developers. So last  
summer Morning Sunday (with a smile  
she says her Indian grandmother  
named her) tore down the boards and  
moved herself and two other families in. "Warehousing" is a sin, she  
says.  

The city's neighborhood progress  
administration, which owned the  
dwelling, refused to let the three  
homeless families have it. That's  
no surprise, since in amerikkka  
with a name like that we know they’re from outside the neighborhood  
and against any progress. City  
officials said that the brownstone  
must stay empty until they could  
find a developer to rehab it into  
condominiums for "middle-income  
families" (their own words).  

Morning Sunday was taken to court  
and the building was boarded up  
three times when she was out. She  
just tore the boards down again,  
and used large plastic sheets to  
insulate off one front room with a  
fireplace to live in through last  
winter. The NAACP began to support  
her. Evicting homeless women and  
children so houses can be "warehoused" for future January White Sales  
looks bad in people's eyes.  

Sunday said: "Why is the house too  
good to sell to a neighborhood person? I will go to jail first. I'm  
not giving this up. Martin Luther  

King said it's ok to fight and go to  

Luther King's birthday, homeless  
Afrikan-American women and children  
from the shelters temporarily  
occupied empty houses owned by the  
government. In Washington a dozen  
homeless took over an empty house  
at 903 Eighth St. NE. Metro Area  
Homeless Union leader LaVerne Walker  
said: "We the homeless are taking a stand, as we did for civil  
rights." In Baltimore two Afrikan-  
American women, Deborah Marshall  
and Michelle Pittman, moved from the  

shelters with their children into a  

Herald Center, the 10-story shopping mall at Herald Square in Manhattan.  

After a ten-day occupation, the  
government compromised around the  
two women and their children. City  
deputy housing commissioner Michael  
Seipp announced that just by coin-  
cidence Ms. Marshall had been found  
to be at the top of the waiting list  
for city subsidized housing. In two  
days, he said, she would be given a  
house (not a hotel room or an apart-  
ment, but a whole house) at city-  
subsidized low rents. Ms. Marshall,  
who had been on the 40,000 person  

waiting list since 1979, said she  
was "disgusted" with government lies.  
Ms. Pittman and her children were  
also given a house at low rent.  

fatto: v.a.-owned row house at 1406 N.  

Fulton Ave. The row house was one  
of 100 in Baltimore seized by the  
v.a., and had been empty for 3  

News of Sunday's initiative struck  
other homeless. To celebrate Martin  

cliques and gangs and messed up on  
drugs and alcohol, will attack each  
other. Who supplied the guns? Who  
supplied the drugs? Who supplied the  
alcohol? Why?  

other in an endless chain of white-  
instigated little wars. This, too,  
was no coincidence. "If we cannot  
destroy one nation of Indians by  
another," the governor of Massachu-  
setts wrote, "our own country is  
doomed.” Tonight more Afrikan-  
American youth, divided up into  

that "If upon a just war the Lord  
should deliver them (the Narragansetts) into our hands, we might  
easily have men, women, and children enough to exchange for Moors.  

They depended on manipulating  
Indians, many of whom were addicted  
to alcohol, into killing off each