Park Rape

Central

Lords & Warlords (us)

I am thinking about all the racist crap
that has been written since the April eve-
ning when some New Afrikan teenagers beat
and raped a white woman in Central Park; a
park which rolls from Harlem through the
richest white neighborhood in New York City.
Everything from "she shouldn't have been
there" to "they shouldn't have been there"
to "more cops should have been there." All
of that doesn't mean jack shit to me. Cent-
ral Park says it all, raises all the ques-
tions that we failed to answer in a move-
ment that stretched from 1960 to 1989.

What makes the Central Park gang rape a
national media event is absolutely that it
involves a white yuppie woman and New Afri-
kan teenage boys. Don't let anyone tell
you different. Just ask the millions of
women and children whose rape never caused

-one tear to be shed or one drop of ink to
be spilled. If you are a white man raping

white women you have to be Ted Bundy to get

the kind of publicity the teens got.

Well, I am a white woman, a lesbian, a
mother and a woman who's been raped.
I am also an Amazon, a bottomfish who needs
to bring my understandings together on a
whole different level. I can't go out there
without a framework that makes sense.

What is an Amazon understanding of rape?
How does it differ from the understanding
of white women who want to remain in
Amerikkka?

To begin with, rape is about territory
and property. It is now and always has been.

WIL

__ and it's street $

IMPORTANT

Saturday, April 22, 1989

Drifter Gets Life Terms for Slayings

MINNEAPOLIS—A drifter who sometimes
posed as an American Indian was convicted of mur-
dering and sexually mutilating three Indian women
and sentenced to life in prison.
“I’m not the serial killer,” Billy Glaze, 45, told
Hennepin County Judge Jonathan Lebedoff. But the
judge said he was not swayed by Glaze’s denial and
sentenced him to three life sentences to be served
consecutively.
Glaze was convicted of three counts of first-de-
gree murder and three counts of second-degree
murder in the slayings of Kathleen Bullman, 19,
Angeline Whitebird-Sweet, 26, and Angela Green,

teens held —
5 rape-beatings | UN-IMPORTANT

SO HOW MUCH CONTROL WOMEN HAVE OVER OUR
BODIES IS DIRECTLY RELATED TO HOW MUCH
TERRITORY WE CONTROL. TO HOW MUCH OF SOC-
IETY WE CONTROL.

Back before the dawn of "civilization"—
that is before classes and private property
and patriarchy—rape was non-existent, was
in fact, unthinkable. There were peoples
that didn't even have a word for it. RAPE

CAME WITH THE FIRST PATRIARCHAL SOCIETIES. When men rose to power by enslaving wo-

In matriarchal societies no man could have
remained with the tribe if he raped some-
one. And to be expelled from the tribe was
to die. Somehow men had no trouble con-
trolling themselves when to mess up meant
no warm fire, no shelter, no food and no
friendship.

Men and children, rape and child abuse ap-

peared on the scene. Cause what a man does

to his cattle, women and children is his
business. If he can extract profit from
their bodies he can extract sexual pleasure.

So the idea of superior and inferior

no. 4 summer 1989 |

$1.00.

A Voice for the Amazon Nation