YOU CAN’T |

GO HOME AGAIN

On January 19th the Washington DC  
Homeless Union and the Baltimore  
Homeless Union began takeovers to  
alert people about the veteran ad--  
ministration's further depopulation  
of the Afrikan-American community.  
The V.A. has been foreclosing on  
the homes of Black veterans who  

fell behind in their mortgage payments and then "warehousing" the  
homes for later sale to developers.  

They had been inspired by the  
actions of a single Afrikan—Ameri-  
can woman, 34 year-old Morning  
Sunday of Baltimore. She had been  

MORNING SUNDAY, at home  
unable to find affordable housing  
in Franklin Square, even though  
"I'm a third-generation resident in  
this area." She had noticed a vac-  
ant, boarded-up, three-story brown  

stone house. Three years ago the  

city seized it for code violations  
and unpaid fines, and had kept it  

Bit of history  

village by village, the white settlers  
"redeveloped" Indian land for  
over 100 years, pushing Indians back  
and hemming them in with no place  

to go. Indians found themselves des-—  
troyed by hunger, epidemic disease,  
overcrowding, forced labor for white  
society, drug addiction, and fight-  
ing amongst themselves. Does this  
sound familiar? Indian nations came  
to disappear while not only white  
settlers but also their Afrikan  
slaves swelled in number. That gen-  
ocide, while very gradual, was none  
the less selective and deadly.  

Professor Gary B. Nash writes in a  
U.S. history textbook that this sel-  
ective genocide was "not coincident-—  
al" but intended:  

"…Still another cause of depop-  
ulation was alcohol which, though it  
killed slowly in contrast to small-  
pox and other epidemic diseases, also  
counted many victims.  

"All the lethal factors that deci-  

mated Indian villages throughout  
eastern North America touched slaves  
only incidentally. This was not co-  

incidental. White colonists did not  
possess direct control over bacter-  
iological and demographic factors,  
but they eagerly sought to increase  
the Black slave population while re-  
ducing the Indian population. To th-  
is end they instituted policies  

"which influenced, if they did not  

control, population curves.  

"Blacks, for example, were inocu-  
lated against smallpox and given  
medical treatment in case of sick-  
ness. For a plantation owner to do  
this was only to preserve his prop-  

erty, just as he would attempt to  

maintain the health of his horses  
and farm animals. If Indians, how-  
ever, contracted an epidemic disea—  
se, the colonist could only give  
thanks that God had seen fit to dim-  
inish their numbers in order to make  
room for more 'civilized' persons.  

"European colonists only occasion—  
ally waged bacteriological warfare  
in a conscious way, such as by sp-  
reading smallpox through infected  
trade goods, but they were uninter-  
ested in arresting epidemic disease  
among Indians in contrast to their  
slaves. With alcohol it was the same.  
It was rationed out to slaves at  
holiday time and sometimes at week's  

end as a reward for work accomp-  
lished. But alcohol was distributed —  
among Indian tribes in order to cr-  

eate not only dependency but addict-  

ion. Rum was a liquid form of con-  

trol for white colonists in their  

dealings with both Africans and Ind-  
ians. But it was intended to sustain  
life among Blacks while destroying  

life among Indians.  

"War was the third killer and it  
was also controlled to some extent  

by whites. Black rebellion was, of  
course, quelled as quickly as poss-  

ible, for it was a direct threat to  

the labor system and to social dom-  

inance by whites. But war with Ind-  
ians and war among Indians was often  
artfully encouraged. As soon as they  
had determined that they could out-  
match local tribes, colonists in  
the 17th century found reason for  

making war on coastal tribes. For  

example, Emanuel Downing, John Win-  
throp's brother-in-law (Winthrop was  

first governor of the Pilgrim col-  
ony), thought a war with the  

Narragansett Indians would be of  
"very considerable" advantage to  

the colony...  

"He then predicted the history of  
the next century by pointing out