warships and soldiers to gain what its  
economy could not.  

As Sir Josiah Child, director of the  
East India Company, said during Britain's  
first, unsuccessful war with the Moghul  
empire in 1688:  

"The subjects of the Moghul cannot  
bear a war with the English for twelve  
months together, without starving and  
dying by the thousands for want of work  
to purchase rice; not singly for want  
of our trade, but because of our war,  
we obstruct their trade with all the  
Eastern nations which is ten times as  
much as ours and all the European nations  
put together."  

— Hijacking and international terrorism  
was invented by euro-capitalism. It was  
their No.1 Big Business. Bigger than  
steel, bigger than farming, it paid for  

looted the economy, taken the food, and  

"ransomed the farmland back to the Indian  
peasants for exorbitant rents.  

The British government's Select  

Committee reported in 1783:  

"When account is taken of the inter-  
course, for it is not commerce, which  
is carried on between Bengal and England,  
the pernicious effects of the system...  

‘will appear in the strongest point of  

view. In that view, the whole exported  
produce of the country, so far as the  
Company is concerned, is not exchanged  
in the course of barter, but it is  
taken away without any return or  
payment whatever.”  

Instead of tons of silver shipped to  
Asia each year before 1757, the British  
then took the wealth of India without  
sending even a single silver coin.  

oh mee,  

signalised the rosy dawn of the era of  
capitalist production. These idyllic  
proceedings are the chief moments of  
primitive accumulation. On their heels  
treads the commercial war of the  
European nations, with the globe for  

a theater...  

"...In England at the end of the  
17th century, they arrive at a systematic  
combination, embracing the  
colonies, the national debt, the modern  
mode of taxation, and the protectionist  
system. These methods depend in part on  
brute force, e.g., the colonial system.  
But they all employ the power of the  
State, the concentrated and organized  
force of society, to hasten, hothouse  
fashion, the process of transformation  
of the feudal mode of production into  
the capitalist mode, and to shorten the  
transition. Force is the midwife of  
every old society pregnant with a new  
one. It is itself an economic power.  

Indians pouring molten gold down Spaniards' throats as retaliation against Indians committing suicide rather than be enslaved by the Spaniards,  
the manhunting conquerors. From Benzoni, 1572.  

industrializing Europe by de-industrial-  
izing and looting the rest of the world.  

Europe's advantage was not technological  
but social, cultural. Military  
hardware was not the decisive factor.  
Older empires, such as Han China, could  
easily have matched these weapons. After  
all, Europe first learned of cannons,  
gunpowder, steel, and the mathematics  
needed for navigation at sea, from China,  
North Africa and the Arab world. Indian  
Moghul cannon in the 17th century was  
as good as English cannon.  

No, euro-capitalism's true advantage  
was in its social system, whose life  
was ceaseless capital accumulation  
through higher and higher levels of  
social violence, to which technology was  
driven as a mere servant by its master.  

After the British East India Company  
and its army defeated the Moghul empire  
at the Battle of Plassey in 1757, occu-  
pying Bengal, the British simply looted  
everything they could use from the  
region. Precious metals, textiles, all  
manufactured goods, rice and other crops  
and finally the land itself. Western  
history calls this the Rape of Bengal,  
in which British capitalism killed  
eight million Indians by famine, having  

Their trade with the rest of Asia was  
paid for by what was taken from the  
people of Bengal. What could be more  
profitable than that?  

It was an inevitable by-product of  
the looting that one-third of the pop-  
ulation of Bengal disappeared. And India  
was but one colony in the new economy  
of genocide that powered up  
euro-capitalism.  

Although the white male Left is  
voluntarily enthralled by the fiction  
that euro-industrialism came from  

exploiting white labor, the truth is  

otherwise. Karl Marx, in his writings  
on "The Genesis of the Industrial  
Capitalist," pointed out that the  
industrialization of Europe came  
directly from genocide:  

"The discovery of gold and silver in  
America, the extirpation, enslavement  
and entombment in mines of the aborig-  
inal population, the beginning of the  
conquest and looting of the East Indies,  
the turning of Africa into a warren for  
the commercial hunting of black skins,  

* We see that the most violent crimes  
of colonialism are like "intercourse"  
between men and women,  

From Benzoni, 1572.  

"Of the Christian colonial system,  
W. Howitt, a man who makes a specialty  
of Christianity, says: ‘The barbarities  
and desperate outrages of the so-  
called Christian race, throughout every  
region of the world, and upon every  
people they have been able to subdue,  
are not to be paralleled by those of any  
other race, however fierce, however  
untaught, and however reckless of mercy  
and shame, in any age of the earth.’  

"The history of the colonial admin-  
istration of Holland--and Holland was  
the head capitalistic nation of the  
17th century--is one of the most  
extraordinary relations of treachery,  
bribery, massacre, and meanness.  
Nothing is more characteristic than  
their system of stealing men, to get  
slaves for Java... Wherever they set  
foot, devastation and depopulation  
followed. Banjuwangi, a province of  
Java, in 1750 numbered over 80,000 in-  
habitants, in 1811 only 18,000.  

Sweet commerce!...  

"The treatment of the aborigines was,  
naturally, most frightful in plantation  
colonies destined for export trade  
only, such as the West Indies, and in  
rich and well-populated countries, such:  

Page 7