The Church had been put on the  
defensive by the growth of this women's  
communality, which was the mass base  
for the radical movement of voluntary  
poverty. Remember that the Church was  
itself a ruling class institution, with  
its own soldiers and plantations. Many  
bishops and priests lived the kind of  
decadent patriarchal lifestyle that  
television evangelists are famous for.  
Even nuns were usually from the upper  
classes, since they had to put up a  
large cash dowry to be "married to  
Christ" and live in the nunnery.  

A counterattack used not only the  
Inquisition, the torture chamber and  
the stake (the separate but parallel  
"Beguin" movement in Spain was wiped  
out by 1330 A.D.), but co-optation.  
Rome had already approved the founding  
of begging orders, such as the  
Franciscans, who wore coarse robes and  
lived simple lives as Beguines did, but  
who were loyal to the ruling classes.  

The Church gave protection to those  
Beguine houses that put themselves  
under the supervision of the Dominican  
friars, as lay associates. All others  
were outlawed. Beguines became co-opted,  
permitted to live by themselves without  
men so long as they avoided illegal  
activity or heresy.  

While the Beguines still contained  
a radical underground, hidden behind  
the cover of submission to the Church,  
they gradually died out. Not only  
because they became a privileged group  
of women separated from the masses of  
women, but because patriarchal capitalism  
took away their economic base of  
independent women's production  
of textiles.  

The Witchhunt was an institutionalized  
terrorism of women. Not only to  
extract unwaged capital accumulation  
to build euro-capitalism from our  
slaughter, but to compel our political  
conformity.  

No, not to compel our allegiance to  
this ruler or that, or to this govern-  
ment or that, for those were men's  
decisions. But to compel our submission  
to the nation-state's ownership of our  
bodies, and our conformity to euro-  
capitalism's rules for women. That is  
why millions of us were arrested and  
tortured and killed.  

The Witchhunt was aimed at all women  
in Europe, was meant to be felt by each  
one, with the intent of wiping them  
blank by generations of terrorism. The  
authorities, however superstitious and  
sadistic they were as men, knew that  

the larger issue was the elimination of  

women as a people.  

In 1486, two monk-torturers of the  
Dominican order wrote the book  
"Malleus Maleficarum" (or "the hammer  
of witches"), the Catholic Church's  
basic text on witchcraft. "Malleus  
Maleficarum" explained why Satan's  
servants were mostly women: We are by  
our basic nature as cunts inclined to  
evil, and are weaker in loyalty to God  

the Stepfather ("He steps on you, He  

steps on me... yah, yah, yah"). The very  
word “femina,” they wrote, can be  
broken down into the Latin "fe" and  

"mina," or "Less: faith."  

page 4  

Methods of torture in Germany in 1527, including burning, hanging, beheading, disem-  
boweling, breaking with the wheel, trussing, gouging out the eyes, cutting off the ear or  
hand, and flogging. From Cornell University Library.  

A big part of that burnable flaw in  
us, the two Fathers continued, is that  
women are more sexual and lustful, which  
leads us straight to you-know-who. They  
concluded in deep-down satisfaction:  
"Blessed be the Most High who has  
preserved the male sex from so great  
a crime."  

amerikkka's so-called "Right-to-Life"  
movement has its ideological forerunner  
in the mass burnings of women healers  
and midwives, who were a major target  
of the Witchhunt. Being suspected of  
helping in abortions was an automatic  
death sentence for a woman. In fact,  
any woman who seemed knowledgeable about  
the traditional peasant women's  
medicine or who refused to marry was a  
suspect.  

Now we can see why women's sexuality  
was so dangerous. For women's bodies  
were not ours but were property. Not  
primarily now of individual men, but  

property of the competing nation-states,  

which commanded women's bodies to  
reproduce ever larger numbers of new  
workers and soldiers.  

Jean Bodin was at one and the same  
time a leading French mercantile  
economist and a government consultant  
on torturing and executing "witches."  

In his euro-capitalist mind these were  
one unified concern. For the French  
nation-state to prosper, Bodin said, the  
new economy needed a more abundant supply  
of workers. Remember the de-population  
common from plagues and wars. It was  
women who used contraceptive methods  

and caused abortions who betrayed the  
new national economy, he said. In Bodin's  
doctrine all such women must first be  

tortured to learn their accomplices, and  
then, executed as "witches."  

While early feudal society, like Rome  
and Greece before it, saw women as lesser  
beings and the rightful property of one  
man or another, the emerging euro—  
capitalist order categorized women first  
as a natural resource of the nation—  
state. Biological factories like forests  
of timber and herds of meat. And this  
was as capitalist development itself was  
causing chaos, forcing migration and  
abandonment of the old ways, and as more  
women were rebelling. The Witchhunt was  
meant to destroy women as a people, so  
that the capitalist nation-state could  
rise up.  

White women still take all this with  
a grain of salt, as the saying goes.  
These are merely tales of the bad old  
past, which can be safely appreciated  

as comforting proof that "You've come a  

long way, baby!" "Cause it's so differ-  
ent for us now. In one generation we  
got women astronauts and women execs,  
women paratroopers and women mayors.  
Not only sex discrimination lawsuits,  
but Gerry and Martina, too.  

What's it mean, then, to talk about  
the Witchhunt and genocide against  
women? White feminists today like to  

identify with the "witches." That's  

what I mean, we don't know who we are.  
We aren't the "witches." We are the  
ones on the other side: the loyal  
sisters and wives of the euro-men doing  
the policing and burning. The sisters  
of patriarchy try to protect themselves  
from the terrorism by submitting,  
trying to be the unthreatening helpers.  

We were taught to join Dick in doing