Everyone who had demonstrated lined up in the parking lot nearby. A pickup truck came tearing down  
the street and drove straight into the crowd. We all scattered except this girl, who wouldn't move. The truck  
slammed on its brakes, then hit her. She got up after that. She wasn't hurt too badly.  

class society. Once most of the avail—  
able technology was manifested in  
textiles, pottery, horticulture,  
medicine and other women's terrain.  
Women were once the artists, technic—  
ians & scientists of the human race.  
Today, patriarchy has developed  
whole sciences of their own, an over—  
all male system of knowledge that  
gets things done the way they want  
it. However lumbering & messed up it  
is, it works for them this "B-52  
science." The patriarchy says that  
our only ambition can be to join  
these sciences men have made for  
themselves & their world.  

We are in the first stage of  
rediscovering and developing women's  
sciences in a modern context. There is  
no doubt that in, say, the year 1492  
that much of women's sciences in one  
part of the world or another was  
superior to the science of patriar—  
chal euro-capitalism. But they system—  
atically blocked off the future  
development of those earlier women's  
sciences by destroying the economy &  
culture they grew out of. At the same  
time, euro-capitalism looted women's  
sciences around the world to enrich  
men's sciences. The analgesic tea  
brewed from tree bark by American  
Indian women was looted to be “dis—  
covered" as aspirin by German scien—  

22  

tists, to use a household example.  

It's wrong to mistake the products  
of science for the science itself.  
White men, for instance, spent over  
500 years unsuccessfully trying to  
make alchemy work. Alchemy is the  
mythical secret of transforming base  

metals such as lead into gold. For 500  

years euro-scientists worked & lusted  
after this—and in vain. But out of  
all their factual accumulation, their  
experiments with reagents, their work  
organizing knowledge learned from  
other peoples, came modern Western  
chemistry in the 17th century. Sir  
Isaac Newton, the English discoverer  
of the law of inertia & a historic  
physicist and chemist, was also the  
last great alchemist. Sciences dev—  
elop from diverse attempts to organize  
knowledge, from religions, from  
crafts, from wrong & even fantastical  
theories. Women's sciences were denied  
that full dialectic of development.  

We are still beginners, not  
leaders. When it came to our own  
bodies, then we saw that women needed  
our own science. Wasn't the writing &  
publishing of Our Bodies, Ourselves  
such a milestone to us? Weren't  
feminist health collectives so basic  
to the early explosion of our women's  
movement? And isn't "Jane," the clan—  
destine abortion service operated  

the knowledge.  

illegally by feminists, in Chicago  
during the pre—Roe v. Wade dark ages,  
a prideful thing to us even now?  

Because we knew that we could nev—  
er take back control of our bodies  
from the patriarchy unless we had all  
Because we sense that  
that which we do for ourselves,  
communally as outlaws, outside of  
men's laws & structures, is what is  
most free. But most of us still don't  
understand that it revolves around  
the further development of our own  
communal sciences.  

It was customary in "other" socie—  
ties for reproduction to be controlled  
by the community of women. We know  
this, but we refuse to see what they  
did as involving science (i.e. an org—  
anized system of knowledge). A science  
that was political for women.  

After the defeat of the 1890s  
Herero Rebellion in Namibia against  
German colonialism, for example, those  
Afrikan women went on a birth-strike.  
They refused to provide more children  
to be slave laborers for the white  
plantations. Noting that the Herero  
population fell from 80,000 to only  
19,962 from 1892-1909, Maria Mies  
quotes a complaining white settler:  

"After the rebellion the native,  
particular the Herero, often takes the  
stand not to produce children...  

While the German farmers have been  
trying for years to remedy this sad  
state of affairs by offering a prem—  
ium for each child born on the farm,  
for instance, a she-goat. But mostly  
in vain. A section of today's native  
women has been engaged for too long in  
prostitution and are spoiled for  
motherhood. Another part does not want  
children and gets rid of them when  
they are pregnant, through abortion.  
In such cases the authorities should  
interfere with all severity. Each case  
should be investigated thoroughly and  
punished by prison..."  

Those Afrikan women in Namibia  
limited births as women's strategy,  

without any A.M.A. or Dr. Kildare, be—  

cause there, as in much of the world,  
women healers had learned to use  
native herbs and plants to induce  
abortion. Afrikan women in the Slave  
South used wild tansy. In Surinam they  
used a vegetable flower called “seven—  
broom" and green pineapple. Rhoda Red—  

Map leads to search  
for remains of girls.  

HODGENVILLE, Ky. — A 15-  
year-old girl killed a man who she  
said had chained her to a tree  
and raped her repeatedly for three  
weeks, and police used the man’s  
hand-drawn map to search for the  
remains of two other missing girls.  

The girl told police she was  
abducted by Phillip E. Clopton, 39,  
of Louisville and that she got free  
and killed him Thursday with his  
own shotgun while he slept.  

Federal and state police began a  
search in three central Kentucky  
counties after a map and a journal  
found Friday at Mr. Clopton’s back—  
woods campsite in La Rue County  
indicated two girls had been killed  
and dismembered. Divers also  
scoured the Rolling Fork River, but  
nothing was found, police said.