support work for rape survivors later  
said: "Once when I was speaking to a  
large group of women about ending  
rape, someone asked me if I really  
believed that rape could be ended in  
my lifetime. Silenced for a moment, I  
replied that even if I didn't live  
long enough, perhaps my daughters  
would be free from male violence some-  
day." She was brought up short  
because she didn't know what to say.  
Obviously, it had never occurred to  
her that she'd ever see an end to  
rape. And nobody thinks it's odd.  

Proof in science is defined as the  
ability to predict ( & hence to use in  
practice ), whether it's about the  
stresses distributed along an airplane  
wing or the evolution in the relation-  
ship of nations. So we have a backed-  
up mountain of good insights about  
rape, but no scientific understanding  
yet. We're stalled— because our practi-  
ce & thinking have to be kicked still  
deeper into the heart of our fears:  
"To be radical is to go to the root.”  
Rape can't be fully understood by  
itself, because it is a function of  
something larger—genocide.  

Genocide deals with gender. That's  

the first thing we have to put down to  
replace the Hollywood cliché of  
genocide as only a police roundup in  
the night. It's true that the Indian  
nations were destroyed so that white  
settlers could steal their land to put  
up "America the beautiful from sea to  
shining sea." But when we break down  
how the process worked we see how much  
it centered on women, how it used  
gender & how rape was introduced to  
this continent as part of the process.  
I want to trace this example, since  
it's so much a part of us.  

For much of the first century of  
white invasion, the small settler  
communities lived off of selling  
Indian women. Not only to support  
themselves, but to get the capital to  
buy the African slaves that would be-  
come the economic foundation of all  
white life. Genocide, after all, isn't  
an irrational “mad minute" but a vast  
economic activity. It must pay for  
itself & yield profits. Just as the  
butchering & looting of millions of  
women "Witches" did for the patri-  
archy in Europe from the 13th to the  
18th centuries. Just as the mass loot-  
ing of Jewish homes, shops and busi-  
nesses was like winning the lottery to  
many law-abiding German women.  

Settler men from Massachusetts  
down to Florida led bloody raids to  
kill all Indian men, wipe out those  
communities & occupy their lands,  
while paying for this war effort not  
with U.S. savings bonds but by enslav-  
ing & marching off all the Indian  
women and children they could find.  
In the colonial era hundreds of thou-  
sands of Indian women & children bec-  
ame ‘white property. Most Indian men  
were considered too risky to hold as  
P.O.W.s; most were massacred. While  
most Indian women & children P.O.W.s  
were sold to the West Indian slave  
plantations & a quick but profitable  
extinction. We built not only "New"  
York and "New" Jersey and "New" Eng-  
land, but New Auschwitz, too.  

Throughout the early colonial  
Amerikkka, Indian slave women labored  
in the fields & in the homes. In New  
York the settler government had to  
pass futile resolutions in the 1680s  
that peaceful Indians “are free and  
not slaves," because white men were  
simply taking Indian women & children  

for "lifetime servants" when they  

found them unarmed. In 1730 a census  
of Kingston, Rhode Island, found that  
the community owned 220 Indian women  

and children & 330 Africans. We can  
imagine the satisfaction that white  
men had, not only wiping out Indian  
communities but paying for it by  
having Indian women as their property  
to do with as they pleased.  

It was in the South, the Carolinas  
and Florida, that the slave trade in  
Indian women & children was most  
bloody. For the Southern Indian nat-  
ions and peoples were more numerous  
than those along the New England and  
Mid-Atlantic coast. North Carolina &  
South Carolina were founded as white  
settlements on the traffic in Indian  
women. In North Carolina's war against  
the Tuscarora all the settler armies  
were led by slave traders, and were in  
fact slave-raiding parties. One led by  
the veteran slaver James Moore is  
described this way:  

"Storming the Tuscarora fort at  
Nooherooka in March 1713, they sound-  
ly defeated the North Carolina tribe.  
Several hundred of the enemy were  
burned alive in the fort; 166 male  
captives regarded as unsuitable for  
slavery were slaughtered; and 392 Tus-  
caroras, mostly women and children,  
were led back to the Charleston  
slave market."  

Those Charleston slave merchants  
themselves touched off the Yamasee  
war in 1715, when they began the pol-  
icy of seizing & auctioning off  
Yamasee women and children to pay  
debts for rum allegedly incurred by  
Yamasee men. Already the slaver  
Thomas Moore had extended his raids  
into Spanish Florida in 1704. In on-  
ly six years after that, South Caro-  
lina settlers had captured some  
10,000 to 12,000 women & children of  
the Timucas, Guales, and Apalachees  
in Florida for the busy Charleston  
slave market.  

Were the small numbers of white  
settler men able to defeat far larger  
Indian populations because of more —  
advanced European weapons & military