(continued from page 17)

Jon was interrupted by mob violence and their hall burned down. The year before that the Congregational denomination had issued a Pastoral Letter read from New England pulpits, denouncing the "unnatural" activity of white women in the anti-slavery cause. The Pastoral Letter particularly objected to the "promiscuous conversation of females” on a subject "which ought not to be named." Namely, the white slavemasters' rape and concubinage of Afrikan women slaves.

The spark caught fire in 1840, at the international abolitionist conference in London, when the U.S. delegation learned that its white women members would not be allowed by the male British abolitionists to take part. Elizabeth Cady Stanton recalled the rage of that moment:

"As Mrs. Mott [Lucretia Mott, Quaker preacher and feminist] and I walked home, arm in arm, commenting on the incidents of the day, we resolved to hold a convention as soon as we returned home and form a society to advocate the rights of women."

So we started. Eight years would pass before they could plan & organize that meeting, which became the first Women's Rights Convention held at Seneca Falls, N.Y. on July 19 & 20, 1848.

The first white women's movement that grew from those anti-slavery roots was still part of the abolitionist movement. Its more radical members, such as Elizabeth Cady Stanton & Susan B. Anthony, embraced not only suffrage (the right to vote) but the entire spectrum of issues bearing on the "Woman Question." Free love, divorce rights, criticism of Christianity as anti-woman, white woman's right to wear "the bifurcated garment" (i.e. pants) and take white men's jobs at white men's pay--even as soldiers and sailors. This promised "Revolution" scandalized white settler men & for that matter the majority of white settler women for most of a century.

While envisioning a radical smashing of roles and rules laid down between white men and white women, feminists of that first movement didn't see themselves as separating from Amerikkka. They didn't fight to extract themselves from the settler society. They didn't see themselves as having self-determination, being a separate people.

APPEAL TO THE WOMEN NOMINALLY FREE STATES, ANTI-SLAVERY CONVENTION

AMERICAN WOMEN,

Held by adjournments from the 9th to the 12th of May, 1637.

OFFICIAL WEEKLY ORGAN OF THE NATIONAL WOMAN'S PARTY

Suffrag

VOL. V, NO. 93 FIVE CENTS

President Wilson Says, ‘Godspeed to the Cause”

This is for real, not rantin' & rhetoric. I'm not trying to trash those sisters for "not being radical enough." Don't we got the same dilemma in our dogma? Our ideas about our nationality & identity, however unconscious, and our actions out in the real world interact with each other. By seeing gender conflict in white Amerikkkan terms, even radical white women domesticized white women's struggle. Shrinking it to the changing or equalizing of relations between white men & white women inside their Big House. But outside, the patriarchy was changing everything.

Patriarchal imperialism was uprooting & transforming the globe during the years of the white women's suffrage struggle. The young U.S. ruling class was ruthlessly driving their settler empire outward bound & growing into an industrial world power:

Winning a fratricidal Civil War to do a stock takeover on their planter-capitalist brethren of the Old Confederacy; settling the New Afrikan revolt of 2 million ex-slaves by forcing peonage and neo-colonial manhood "citizenship" on them; taking not only the upper 40% of Mexico, but grabbing Puerto Rico and the Philippines from the Spanish empire; racing Westward to the Pacific planting forts & settler communities & railroads while crushing Indian nations by the dozen; setting up great new hellish industries and importing the wretched of Europe to labor in them; leaping into Asia to "open" Japan, take Hawaii, and push into China. Most of Amerikkka's women property were not even white.

By conceding to the patriarchy the right to transform the real world around us, we ceded to them the right to determine our economy, the size & shape of our society, the whole social context in which we belonged. Isn't that the ballgame? Everything else is just pissing & moaning.

To be truly radical as their hopes early white feminists would have had to deal with the reality of this juggernaut, have had to find long-range feminist guerrilla solutions for resisting it & subverting it & separating from it as a people. Or be reintegrated by the juggernaut as really did happen to early white feminists. It's hard to begin to do this, but harder still to lose. After all, they spent 70 years & generations worrying about the vote--70 years to learn and build in could have meant a lot to women's community.

Nothing better illustrates this than the realization that even radical white feminists of the first movement let the patriarchy determine their relationship to New Afrikan women. Women suffrage activists were angered in 1869 when the U.S. ruling class did the Fifteenth Amendment, forcing the ballot on disarmed New Afrikan men alone. White women had worked for