TUE WASHINGTON POST

Sunday, February 25, 1990

> Years in Jail Awaiting Trial

For Me, ‘Preventive Detention’ Is Turning Into a Life Sentence

By Laura Whitehorn |

“Liberty is the norm and detention
without trial is the carefully lim-
ited exception ....”

Ironically, those words are from a
1987 Supreme Court decision that
upheld the constitutionality of pre-
ventive detention and thereby guar-
anteed that the gap between the ideal
and the reality of the criminal justice
system would widen.

His words have given me little
comfort during the nearly five years
that I’ve been held in preventive de-
tention in Baltimore and Washing-
ton—with more years likely before I
finally go to trial. True, during that
period I served 19 months for con-
tempt and for a conviction on related
matters. But even if those cases
hadn’t existed, I would still have spent
the past five years in preventive
detention.

I’m still awaiting trial, yet I’ve al-
ready been behind bars far longer
than KKK leader Don Black, who
served 24 months for stockpiling au-
tomatic weapons and explosives for
an invasion of the Caribbean nation of
Dominica. I’ve been locked up longer
than Michael Donald Bray, who
served 46 months for bombing 10
abortion clinics. In fact, I’ve now
served more time in preventive de-
tention than the maximum three
years I could have received on the
original charge against me.

My case is complex and confusing,
and you may not be sympathetic to
my political views and activities. But
ask yourself: Should I be one of those
“carefully limited exceptions”?

The story begins in May 1985,
when I was arrested in a Baltimore
apartment by an FBI team searching
for a group of fugitive revolution-
aries. Although I was not a fugitive
and had no outstanding charges, I
was arrested, handcuffed and hauled
down to an FBI car. The initial
charge was assault on an FBI
agent—that is, resisting being
pushed into the car.

The magistrate who arraigned me
questioned whether the “assault” re-
ally happened but granted the U.S.
attorney’s request that I be held in
preventive detention. In theory, the

Justice Rehnquist: “In our society
government has the burden of show-
ing that bail should be denied; in
practice, magistrates and judges usu-
ally grant such requests and defen-
dants have the new burden of proving
why they should be granted bail.

Over the next few months, the
prosecutor added new charges—
possession of two guns and of false
identification—and preventive deten-
tion was reaffirmed.

Under the Bail Reform Act of
1984, a prosecutor can request pre-
ventive detention only if a crime of
violence is involved. In my case, the
unproven and contrived assault
charge served as the required violent
act. The prosecutor also must prove
that the defendant is either a “threat
to the community” or cannot be pre-
vented from fleeing by “any condition
or set of conditions.” To establish my
“dangerousness,” the U.S. attorney
cited my three prior arrests.

Laura Whitehorn identifies herself
as a political prisoner awaiting trial
in the Resistance Conspiracy Case.

18

JRA WHITEHORN—PHOTO BY JEB (JOAN E.

It was true. I had been arrested
before. Since the 1960s I’ve been
active in a broad range of human
rights and social justice issues. I’ve
picketed, protested, demonstrated
and defended myself and others when
we’ve been attacked by the police. In
1969, I was arrested three times in
anti-war and anti-racism demonstra-
tions. I was released on bail in each
case and appeared for all court dates.
I violated none of the conditions of
release. I successfully completed two
years of unsupervised probation.
Nonetheless, the judge in Balti-
more decided I should be held in pre-
ventive detention. At a later hearing,
the judge articulated his rationale: I
should be denied bail in part because
I had stated in court that “I live by
revolutionary and human principles.”
That decision has twice been upheld
by the 4th Circuit Court of Appeals.
Now the story gets confusing:
On Jan. 15, 1986, I began serving
a contempt sentence for refusing to
provide a handwriting sample in con-
nection with the charges.

On Jan. 26, 1986, a mistrial was
declared on grounds of illegally
seized evidence, but I remained in
preventive detention while the gov-
ernment appealed.

On Feb. 18, 1987, I began serving
a two-year sentence on a New York
conviction for making a false state-
ment in applying for a passport.
On July 15, 1987, my imprison-
ment for contempt ended.

In February 1988, I completed
one year of the New York sentence
and was paroled—back into preven-
tive detention.

Three months later, an entirely
new element entered the pic-
ture—and further delayed the
Baltimore trial. On May 11, 1988, I
was indicted along with five other po-
litical activists here in Washington on
charges of conspiracy and bombing
the Capitol and other government and
military buildings to protest the
contra war against Nicaragua and the
1983 invasion of Grenada. (No one
was hurt in the bombings.)

My codefendants had been arrested
at various times and in various states
in 1984 and 1985 on charges similar
to the weapons and identification
charges I face in Baltimore. They
since have been convicted and are
now serving outrageously long sen-
tences because of their politics—12,
35, 58, 58 and 70 years. We still face
trial on the bombing and conspiracy
charges and are being held in the D.C.
Jail.

I had a new bail hearing in D.C. on
July 1, 1988 before U.S. District
Judge Harold Greene, even while held
in preventive detention in Baltimore. I
was ordered held in preventive deten-
tion here, too—and the Baltimore
case was held in abeyance pending the
outcome of the D.C. trial.

In April 1989, the D.C. trial judge
dismissed the charges against three of
my codefendants for double jeopardy,
and the government appealed. Since
the appeal could take up to a year to
be resolved, I again requested bail.
This time, Judge Greene ruled that
detention for more than a year would
violate due process and ordered my
release on the same bail conditions
that the Baltimore courts had re-
jected. Again the Baltimore court re-

So now I am in the curious position
of being “free” on bail in Washington
but held in preventive detention here
for the Baltimore court. My Baltimore
case probably won’t come to trial until
I complete my Washington trial, and
my Washington trial won’t occur until
the government’s appeals run the
course—whenever that is.

Under preventive detention, you
start off with two strikes against you.
The decision on bail is made within
three days of the arrest—a time when
the defendant is lucky to find a lawyer,
let alone have time to prepare for a
hearing. And fighting against preven-
tive detention takes up much time and
energy that should be spent on the
case itself.

Being in prison before trial means
you can’t contact, interview and select
witnesses. It means making collect
phone calls to your attorney or wit-
nesses and having them monitored.
You can’t review evidence against you
or accumulate evidence in your de-
fense. And it’s practically impossible
to go to the prison law library.

When the Bail Reform Act was
passed in 1984, the government
projected that preventive detention
would apply to only “a small group of
detainees.” In 1985, the first full year
it was in effect in the federal system,
and the last year for which I could find
Justice Department statistics, preven-
tive detention was imposed in 29 per-
cent of all federal criminal cases—in-
cluding virtually every felony case
involving a left-wing political defen-
dant. From what I’ve seen, the other
groups over-represented in these sta-
tistics are African Americans, His-
panics and the poor. Every lawyer I’ve
spoken with believes that that per-
centage is considerably higher now. If
only 10 or 20 percent of those held in
preventive detention are acquitted
(the Justice Department will not re-
lease the actual figure), that means
hundreds, if not thousands, of people
are being arbitrarily imprisoned and
punished.

The prospect that more people who
should be “innocent until proven
guilty” will serve long pre-trial sen-
tences is frightening enough. But
more frightening still is the prospect
that our nation, instead of solving its
deep social problems and injustices, is
bartering its most important liberties
for a “law and order” non-solution.

Mother plays
detective

to help in
capture of
rapist who
pursued her

daughter

GRAND RAPIDS, Mich. (AP) — A woman
who staked out her 10-year-old daughter's
bus stop with a camera after the girl com-
plained of being repeatedly approached by a
stranger has been given credit for helping
catch an ex-convict who has been
charged with assault with intent to commit kidnap-
ping.

David Bruce Siebers, released last year
after serving nine years of a 10- to 21-year
term on several charges, including rape, was
arrested Thursday and arraigned Friday.

The Kent County Sheriff's Department
would not release the woman's name yester-
day. She talked with the Grand Rapids
Press Friday on condition of anonymity.

The woman told police her daughter was
approached three times by a man at her bus
stop. Officers watched the bus stop for a few
days before giving up. After that, the woman
watched the stop with binoculars and a
long-lens camera.

The first time she became aware of the
man was May 16, when the woman said she
happened to be watching her daughter and a
man in a car drove up to the girl.

“I went right out there to ask who that
person was, and she said, ‘He told me to get
in the car. He'd drive me to school. He
showed me money, Mom. A bunch of it,’”
the mother told the newspaper. “When she
said this was the third time he's done this, I
was flabbergasted.

“She said, ‘He’s stupid to think I'd fall for
something like that.’ I don’t think it occurred
to her how dangerous it was until she saw
my reaction.”

Police put unmarked surveillance cars at
the bus stop for a few days, but when that
ended, the mother armed herself with binoc-
ulars and a camera with a zoom lens and
placed her car in view of the stop. She said
she spotted the car near her daughter Thurs-
day.

“I watched him pull up,” the mother said.
“She [her daughter] turned and looked at
him and ran for the house. . . . He took off,
and I took off after him at about 70, 75
mph.”

If convicted, Siebers could face up to 20
years in prison. Bond was set at $25,000,
but Siebers was ordered held because of pos-
sible violation of his parole.

The mother recorded the man’s license
plate and snapped a blurry picture of the car
as she followed him. That led to Siebers’
arrest.

In 1980, a plea-bargain entailed
allowing Siebers to plead guilty but mentally ill
to the August 1979 gunpoint rape of a store
clerk. He also pleaded guilty to armed rob-
bery and possession of a firearm during the
commission of a felony, stemming from a
November 1979 restaurant robbery.

In 1984, a judge reduced his sentence
because he was described as a model prison-
er.