Grandmothers Bear a Burden Sired by Drugs

After all, someone had to control the  
streets of New Afrika. And they knew they  
couldn't suppress the new women's movement  
either. Too many wars, too many fronts.  
Besides they had a use for us, a role in  
the destruction of New Afrika. They knew  
enough of our weaknesses to buy us off.  
Knew our weaknesses better than we knew  
them ourselves.

A women's movement that was supposed to  
be about world freedom, ended up being  
about a career for Liz Holtzman and a prom-  
otion for Sandra Day O'Connor. Ended up be-  
ing about deputy this and chairman that.

And that brings us to Central Park at  

the close of the eighties. A New Afrika  
dominated by warlordism and the Huxtables.  
A white Amerikkka where white women play on  
Wall Street and bemoan the defeat of the  
Equal Rights Amendment.

Central Park was a happening thing where  
one blind group crashed into the other at  
our unfenced but very real inner border. Our  
sister of patriarchy, working off her ner-  
vous high from Wall Street deals, her walk-  
man turned up, didn't see she was in any  
trouble. She ran into some junior warlords  
in basic training, who also didn't see that  
they were in trouble.

Up until the New Afrikan struggles of  
the sixties white women depended on our  
lords, the kops and klan to control the New  
Afrikan Nation. We've not only always op-  
pressed New Afrikan people, but counted on  
New Afrikan women to raise their sons and  
daughters not to attack us on the few oc-  
casions we came into vulnerable contact  
with each other.

We, of course, never raised our sons  
and daughters not to kill & attack New  
Afrikan women. Or New Afrikan men and  
children either. We were the mistresses  
of the lord of the land. We can't even get  
enough control in white Amerikkka to raise  
our sons not to rape us. And we sure don't  
care if they rape New Afrikan women.

Warlordism is a society without any real  
civil government, a chaos where gangs and  
armies of armed men not only have a free  

run but are the only true authority. It's  

what you see in much of the Third World,  
say in Beirut or Colombia—or, increasingly—  
in New Afrika. Warlordism is created in  
the social vacuum when an oppressed people  
have thrown off colonialism or made direct  
colonial rule impossible, but do not yet  
have national liberation and effective  
self-rule. It is a natural form for neo-  
colonialism.

White settler Amerikkka can no  
longer patrol & control the daily ac-  
tivity of millions of New Afrikans. It  
gets harder and harder for them to police  
the giant New Afrikan cities (can you see  
a few dozen klanners or skinheads coming  
into Overtown or Bed-Stuy and trying to in-  
timidate folks—would they last five min-  
utes?). What imperialism does do is to  
zero in on all attempts at New Afrikan  
self-government, to stop New Afrikans from  
reorganizing themselves into a stable  
society of their own. And to do that it  
targets New Afrikan women & their children.

The practical result is no government  
for New Afrikans, only a neo-colonial vac-  
uum in which posses and drug gangs of men  
and boys take over any block or project  
they can temporarily hold. Alternating  
with the cops. These armed gangs are foster  
parented by imperialism, in the same way  
that the C.I.A. pumped millions of dollars  
in modern arms into warlord armies that  
would destabilize & terrorize Afrikan  
nations such as Mozambique.

There's all the people trying to pin it  
on the kids gone abnormal. The real deal is  
that these boys aren't abnormal (nor was  
the white gang that raped the retarded girl  
in N.J. just a deviation). Normal doesn't  
mean healthy, it just means what's usual,  
the standard. And this is all normal. You  
know what they say: "Amerikkka—love it  
or leave it."

New Afrikan children can buy a 9mm  
Browning or a Colt .38 in NYC cheaper than  
a white man can in a Miami gunshop. And  
wholesale dope is easier to get than that.  
Posses and drug gangs are our backyard  
equivalents of Jonas Savimbi and UNITA.  
Just 'cause neo-colonialism is indirect  
rule doesn't mean there's anything non-  
violent about it.

We've all heard that the Schomberg boys  
who did Central Park had been protected by  
the NY cops up until then. For several years  
they'd been harassing and beating up people  
at the Tres Unidos housing project. Not  
just other kids, but older women, too. This  
was encouraged by the NY police, who wanna  
see New Afrikans and Latins mess over their  
people. Cops refused to arrest the Schom-  
berg boys despite many women's complaints,  
but kept reminding the Tres Unidos tenants  
that they would be arrested if they harmed  
the posse. You could say Mayor Crazy Ed &  
his cops set up the Central Park gang rape.  
Their only accident was that the victim was  
supposed to have been a New Afrikan woman  
or a Latin woman (sorry, they'll do better  
next time).

Everyone says the kids are out of con-  
trol, gone wild, but it isn't true. These  
are only children responding to what's out  
there, learning to solve their wants and  
problems according to the social culture.  
And warlordism is the dominant culture out  
on the streets. And cops and posses and  
drug gangs and criminals are the main play-  
ers. If you're an Arab boy in Beirut—you  
wanna join one or another militia, get  
your own AK-47 and be a player. Fact, a  
lotta girls wanna do that, too. Not too  
different here. Everyone's going to solve  
her or his problems some way, going to find  
their answers with what's out there. They  
aren't going to just go sit in the deep  
freezer 'cause that'd be more convenient  
for white folks.

Central Park isn't something strange  
that we have to figure out. It's just how  
it is, because white people set it up that  
way. White people stripped New Afrikan  
women of the power to raise their children  
their way, to control much of anything be-  
yond their apartment door. Mothers say they  
can't even control their hallway. At the  
same time, everyone says New Afrikan women  
are at fault if they don't keep pulling  
their role of raising more kids and in-  
stilling good values—somehow.

Lots of young New Afrikan women are  
just saying "fuck it." This has really  
shocked the older generation, that there's  
New Afrikan women who are blazing away out  
there, partying and doping, ripping and  
running, leaving their kids to grandma or  
no-ma. It's equality. It's their share of  
the same warlord culture. If the boys are  
in 1989, the girls aren't going to be in  
1960.

It all comes down to what's out there.  
Because men have organized the world into  
their territories, their systems of con-  

CHA Checks Charge of Sex for Services

The CHA may launch an investigation to determine if its employees are demanding sex from tenants in exchange for services and goods, CHA Chairman Vincent Lane said Wednesday.

He said he has no proof of a sex-for-services scheme but said numerous residents have complained to him about it.

“We have heard charges that our employees have extorted sex from women who need work done in their apartments,” said CHA spokeswoman Katie Kelly. “Vince wants to find if what we hear is indeed true.”

Another allegation is that tenants have been asked for sex in return for appliances.

No particular employees or developments have been cited, Kelly said.

CHICAGO SUN-TIMES  
Thursday, May 23, 1989 3