Isn't that a nutty argument? We  
have the right to fricassee him like  
a chicken with a flamethrower, if we  
got one handy. The courts and cops  
—and prosecutors are making threats,  
very public threats. Women, they  
say, don't use a weapon against a  
man. If you do the burden of proof  
is on you. They keep working to  
condition us not to resist male vio-  
lence in any effective way.  

It may be hard to break down, but  
—the police have never had anything  
to do with helping people or even  
stopping crime. In the U.S. there  
wasn't even a professional police  
force for the first 200 years, just  
constables and sheriffs leading vig-  
ilante mobs of whatever white men  
were around. The Slave Patrols,  
volunteer road patrols of poor white  
men who hunted runaway Afrikan slav-  
es, were the most common police in  
early settler Amerikkka.  

Professional police forces were set  
up to keep down subject or colonized  
peoples—at first only Afrikans,  
Indians, Mexicans, and later immig-  
rant European laborers in the mines  
and mills. Amerikkka's first city  
police department wasn't in NYC but  
in Cincinnati, Ohio. It was formed  
in the early 1800s to watch over the  
large community of free Afrikans  

who had emigrated there from the  

Janitor Held in Slayings  
The Associated Press:  

A janitor from the Bronx was in custody yester-  
day accused in the stabbing deaths of a pregnant  
woman and her 2-year-old daughter.  

Joseph Castro, 36, of 3424 Knox Place, was ar-  
rested at his apartment Thursday afternoon and  
booked for the slaying of Vilma Ponce, 20, and  
her daughter, Natasha Otero, police said.  

Ponce, who was five months pregnant, was  
found dead in the living room of their apartment  
at 3415 Knox Place when her husband came  

home the para ee Feb. 5. Their daughter was  
found dead in the bathtub, police said.  

A police spokesman, Sgt. Norris Hollomon,  
said physical and circumstantial evidence led  
detectives to Castro, who allegedly made sexual  
advances toward Ponce while he worked as a  
janitor in her building. MARCH 7, 1987  

vol-.  

amazon nation or aryan nation  

Slave South. Eleanor Bumpers and  
Michael Stewart.  

What the police have always been —  
about is protecting the property of  
the ruling class. Not only the real-  

estate and businesses, but the gen-  
eral system of property relations,  

including men's historic ownership  
of women and children.  

This is a much longer subject than  
I can get into now, but I'm just  
trying to lay some background to  
what's going on with the police and  
violence against women.  

Mother, Girl Slain;  
Ex-Husband Held  

A woman and her 13-year-old daughter were  
found slain in their South Bronx apartment, and  
the woman’s estranged husband was picked up by  
police hours later and charged with the murders,  
police said.  

Officers of the Bronx Detective Task Force ap-  
prehended Chauncy Reidout, 39, at West 179th  
Street and Amsterdam Avenue in Manhattan  
and later charged him with second-degree mur-  
der in the bludgeoning death of Denise Reidout,  
30, and the strangling of her daughter, Thelmia  

Williams, 13, according to a police spokesman,  

Sgt. Raymond O’Donnell.  
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 11, 1987