The Role Of Women &  
Children In  
The Armed  

Struggle  

Chapter Two: -  

Which Will You Be— Hammer Or Anvil?  

Women and children's war against  
the armed rule of men is the most tab-  
oo thing there is. Yet it is coming.  
It is so taboo, so threatening, that  
not only do generals and popes and  
bankers shrink from it, but even fem-  
inists, socialists, anarchists and  
national liberation movements try to  
suppress any thought of it. Still, it  
must come. Women's political violence  
is thought unnatural, a violation of  
the most basic sex roles, contrary to  
the social customs of ages, almost  
unthinkable. Still, it is something  
that is necessary, natural and  
inevitable.  

To individual men it will seem  
uncomprehensible, as though his table,  
his chair, his t.v., his bed all  
started attacking him. Because the  
ownership of white settler women by  
settler men has gone on so long, this  
property relationship appears normal  
to him. While he acknowledges that  
other nations and colonies will rise  
up and seize territory and the right  
to self-determination, will kill him,  
settler men see their antagonisms  
with white women as easily handled.  

A personal thing. Dealt with by a  
fist or a divorce or getting a re-  
placement part. Because Dick sees  
other nations and colonies as danger-  
ous groups, but us as a pacified  
individual "piece." And in the past  
300 years so did we.  

The beginning of consciousness  
for us came with the rebellions in  
the 1960s of New Afrikans, Puerto  

Ricans & Native Americans. Concepts of  

genocide and self-determination kicked  
a hole in the wall that surrounded us.  
Because we lived so deep in amerikkka  
we hardly noticed national struggles  
which took place on other continents.  
But when rebellion started here we  
were put on notice that not everybody  
saw amerikkka as eternal verity—that  
nations existed before the white man  
came here and that new Rabies could  
be built.  

The problems of the white women's  
movement have much to do with women's  
unwillingness to admit the centrality  
of genocide for women's politics.  

Even the concept of genocide aga-  
inst women is missing from our minds.  
We need to keep coming back to this  
point because we've been conditioned  
to never figure it out, to keep for-  

getting about it, to accept the  

barren aftermath of genocide as what  
is normal. Look at how women reviewers  
of Margaret Atwood's novel, The Hand-  

maid's Tale spoke respectfully on it  

as a fictional warning, about how  
genocide might befall women in some  
perverted future if today's rightwing  
trends continued. But isn't the point  

that in real life it already happened  

long ago? It's history, Jane, just  
history.  

What I'm saying is that white  
women now are only a pale shadow of  
what free women used to be.  

And because we haven't broken our  
bonds to the patriarchy, we still  
don't know how our world works. Most  
importantly, we don't yet know how to  
start an opposing culture of our own.  
The imperialist patriarchy understands  
genocide in a scientific way, though  
they won't cop to it. They have a map  
& an owner's manual, and have had long  
experience at operating it. We need an  
opposing camp of theoretical & pract-  
ical clarity, which is why key concep-  
ts such as "genocide," "property," and  
"integration" have to be dealt with in  
a scientific way. We're going to talk  
about all this.  

Genocide is above all else a prop-  
erty relationship. The propaganda that  
it's an “insane” aberration, a frenzy  
of racist killing, is untrue. Genocide  
is a cold deal. It's what's normal in  
our world. The U.N. has defined geno-  
cide as the destruction of a nation  

or people, either physically or by  
destruction of their culture. Often  
the victims survive because their body  
is needed. But they survive as some-  
thing else.  

Indian women who survived "King  
Philip's Rebellion," the first major  
white settler vs. Indian war in 1675,  
were mostly sold into slavery to the  
Jamaican sugar plantations.  
They didn't live long although their  
descendants still survive. But not as  
Indians in what our gestapo called  

"New England." As Afrikans in Jamaica.  

Biological survival of individuals is  
not the same as the survival of a  
people, who are a people because they  
have an identity, a collective person-  
ality & culture.  

Biologically and socially, those  
Indian sisters were integrated by  

capitalism into the West Indian slave  

economy. Their lineage goes on but not  
as those specific Indian nations.  

Isn't that what happened to women as a  
people? Integrated into the male  
economy, the male home, the male stru-  
ctures. For property ownership gives  
the right to split apart & integrate,  
to reshape & restructure, to use up,  
disperse & destroy. This is what war  

is about.