made, keeping whatever payments they  
got. To protect themselves from the  

slavers, Igbo women always travelled to  

market in pairs, carrying the stout  
wooden pestles used for grinding which  
were also each woman's personal weapon.  

Now, Igbo society as a whole was  
organized into patrilineal clans, and  
was to outward appearances at least  
nominally a patriarchy. We could say  
that patriarchy had appeared but only  
in embryo. Men grew in their economy  
the most profitable crops and controlled  
the long-distance trading, while  
women controlled the local markets.  
Formal political leadership was held by  
men, although any women who wished to  
could take part in meetings of the  
village council (they had a saying:  
"Wisdom does not have a sex.").  

This is in a different context than  
amerikkka. The Igbo didn't have the  
civilized conception of political lead-  
ership as control of the State, with a  
central authority enforcing decisions  
on the people, but governed by  
persuasion in a process of face-to-  
face discussion and consensus. Posts of  
leadership were honorary status and  
not positions of command.  

More importantly, the Igbo women had  
their mikiri, or village women's  
meetings, which existed as a parallel  
women's government to the mostly-male  
village assemblies. In the mikiri,  
Afrikan women shared their thoughts and  
troubles, coming together to defend  
women's self-interest as a people for  
the good of the larger society. Men who  
abused women or women's property (such  
as by letting their livestock fatten  
up on women's land) were stopped by the  
mikiri.  

The mikiri wasn't like a women's  
group in the U.S. It was a form of  
women's self-government, with real  
powers. Coming together in the mikiri,  
Afrikan women would make rules, both  
economic and social, that were binding  
on the whole village—men as well as  
women. Violators were subject to the  
women's strike, whereupon all women  
would refuse to trade with the man,  
cook food for him, have sex with him,  
or care for his small children. In a  
close-knit Afrikan village, such a sen-  
tence was much heavier than it would be  
in our mass-anonymous society, like a  
sentence of social death. Such ultimate  
punishment was rare, since men recog-  
nized the mikiri's authority.  

More common was the mikiri acting to  
"sit on a man," usually one who was  
beating a woman. All the women would  
surround his house, their faces decor-  
ated with ashes and carrying ferns and  
ceremonial sticks invoking the power of  
their women ancestors. Chanting insults  
and demands, singing ridicule, they  
would wear the angry man down. Any  
physical resistance by the man would be  
beaten down by the massed women. If nec-  
essary, the women would pull his house  
down and destroy its contents.  

It could go on for days. Only after  
he gave in, criticizing himself and  
promising to act differently in the  
future, would the women leave. This is  
the mechanism, named women's war by the  
Igbo, which many mikiris acting together  
invoked against the British in 1929.  

page 10  

The British colonizers, products of  
centuries of euro-capitalist terrorism  
and conditioning of women, knew nothing  
about Igbo women's self-government.  

In 1900 they had swallowed Northern  
Nigeria, where the Afrikan communal  
culture had been weakened by Islamic  
capitalism, and where Afrikan women  

were therefore already stripped of their  
freedom and identity. So the British  
expected no trouble from Igbo women when  
they conquered the rest of Nigeria.  

District Office and succeeded in getting  
written assurances that they were not to  
be taxed. After several days of mass  
protest meetings, they also succeeded  

in getting Okugo arrested, tried, and  
convicted of ‘spreading news likely to  
cause alarm' and of physical assault on  
the women. He was sentenced to two years  
imprisonment.  

"News of this victory spread rapidly  
through the market-mikiri-ogbo network,  
[ogbo were women's associations based  

Palm Oil and Liquor: Staples of Pre-colonial Southern Nigerian Commerce—  
Illustrative Lithograph. Source: a label from a bottle of trade gin consumed in  
Southern Nigeria in the late Nineteenth Century, CO/554/59. The cases marked  
“WH&C” are cases of gin manufactured by the firm of William Hasekamp &  
Co., of Scheidam, Holland. The message of the label seems to be that the ex-  
change of liquor for raw materials is fair, equitable, and just.  

What at long last provoked the Women's  

War in 1929 was the rumor that the  
British, having already laid a heavy tax  
on men's livestock and produce, were  
planning to do the same to the separate  
women's economy. In a mikiri of Oloko  
area, the three women leaders there  
decided, with general agreement, that  
any woman approached for taxes must  
spread the word so all could deal with  
it collectively.  

"On November 23, an agent of the Ok-  
olo Warrant Chief, Okugo, entered a  
compound and told one of the married  
women, Nwanyeruwa, to count her goats  
and sheep. She replied angrily, ‘Was  
your mother counted?' at which ‘they  
closed, seizing each other by the  
throat.' Nwanyeruwa's report to the Ok-  
olo women convinced them they were to  
be taxed. Messengers were sent to  
neighboring areas, and women streamed  
into Oloko from all over Owerri Province.  
They 'sat on' Okugo and demanded his cap  
of office. They massed in protest at the  

on lineage or natal village] and women  
in many areas then attempted to get rid  

of their Warrant Chiefs and the Native  
Administration itself. Nwanyeruwa be-  
came something of a heroine as reports  
of her resistance spread. Money poured  
in from grateful women from villages  
scattered over a wide area but linked  
by kinship to Nwanyeruwa's marital  
village. Nwanyeruwa herself, however,  
was ‘content to allow' leadership in  
her area to be exercised by someone  
else. The money collected was not used  
for her but for delegates going to  
meetings of women throughout southern  
Igboland to coordinate the Women's War.  

"The British ended the rebellion  
only by using large numbers of police  
and soldiers—and, on one occasion, the  
Boy Scouts. Although the shootings in  
mid-December and the growing number of  
police and soldiers in the area led the  
women to halt most of their activities,  
disturbances continued into 1930. The  
"disaffected areas"—all of Owerri and