merchants selling produce and handicrafts, women farmers. In some cities women had their own guilds (early form of unions) of artisans. Endless royal wars over land and trade routes had left numerous widows with small houses, perhaps a shop or other property. And peasant families, unable to feed all their children, sent their girl-children away to the cities to find their own livelihoods as artisans, prostitutes or peddlers.

& stolen lives. amerikkka is really an artificial nation, an empire that makes its living by looting and destroying other nations and peoples in ceaseless cycles of genocide.

as ollie north or ed koch and you know him): .

“If only your Lordship would be willing to start the burning, we would gladly provide the firewood and bear all other costs, and your Lordship would earn so much that the bridge and also the Church could be well taken care of.”

amerikkka is driven to do genocide every day, because if it ever stops killing their whole top-heavy, Babylon would come crashing down. Bob Marley & the Wailers only sang what's truth: "Moreover, you would get so much that you could pay your servants a better salary in the future, because one could confiscate whole fortunes and especially the more well-to-do ones."

"Babylon system is the vampire, real sucking the children, day by day." It was independent women who were the main targets of the Witchhunt. When Catherine Hernot, postmistress of the German city of Cologne, was burned at the stake as a witch, it was because a powerful family wanted a monopoly on the lucrative postal business. Unmarried women, who were not owned by a man, were a majority of those burned as witches, with widows being 40-50% of the victims.

Genocide is itself a basic economic activity, what lies behind commodity production under the capitalist system. Genocide, I say, begins with the global wiping out of women's society and women's economy, and the resulting slave labor of hundreds of millions of women and children.

It wasn't just that cash, however... No, they had to do it. The Witchhunt was real to them because there really were "witches" they had to hunt down—radical women and women seeking knowledge forbidden to us.

You gotta keep in mind that religion was the main medium of ideology in feudal Europe. That everything was explained or justified by religion. It was all "God's Will" this and "Divine Revelation" that. Political and social issues were dressed in religious drag. Like those "Crusades to free the Holy Land," which were just about invading and looting the Arab world.

In the Witchhunt all the property of arrested women belonged to the State, with the court system taking part of the loot as fees to the male lawyers, bailiffs and soldiers. But the lion's share of this wealth minted from slaughtering women went to the State treasuries. It paid for the armies of men who produced nothing useful, for highways to carry trade, for expeditions.

euro-capitalism first arose through the era of the Witchhunt—the institutionalized terror against women in Western Europe that lasted over 500 years, from the 12th through the 17th centuries. Women accused of being witches were arrested and tortured by the authorities until they confessed to being agents of Satan.

A LOVE AFFAIR THAT BEGAN WITH RAPE—AND GAVE BIRTH TO AN EPIC PASSION

Mary Elisabeth was young and innocent when she was abducted, wed, and ravished by handsome, arrogant Diarmid MacLyon. She should have hated this man. Instead she loved him. And when the British threw him into prison, Mary Elisabeth vowed to save him with the only means at her disposal — her lovely young body...

Of course, not confessing was also taken as a sure sign of guilt, since the priests (the cardinal O'Connors of their day) proclaimed that only Satan's magic would keep a woman from confessing while her bones were being crushed. Only made sense to them. The "witches" were then burned alive at the stake.

The total number of women imprisoned, tortured and/or killed by the Witchhunt was in the millions. One German prosecutor alone, Benedict Carpzov of Saxony, signed 20,000 death sentences of accused women in his career. In the patriarchy's history books all this is trivialized as a bit of religious hysteria or merely a colorful case of how ignorant people were back then.

What is real is that the Witchhunt was a social institution, in which the killing of women was tied to the birth of euro-capitalism. This is where our amerikkka began, in the first "Right to Life" movement.

Women were attacked in so violent a way not because of feudal backwardness, but because of the needs of the new capitalism gradually being born within the old European society. The patriarchy's Witchhunt was in the first place directly economic, a means of unwaged capital accumulation. Special bodies of armed men seized women's property to help finance the growth of nation-states.

There were many independent women in feudal society. Craftswomen weaving silk and other fine textiles, small street vendors, and others who contributed to the economy.

page 2

to “discover" the Third World—in short, the pre-conditions for capitalism to grow.

In unwaged capital accumulation from the looting of outlawed and marginalized people, Europe was learning the methods that it would use in colonialism. Women were euro-capitalism’s first colony, the "inner colony" as European radical feminists have termed it.

The Witchhunt was also kin to the anti-Semitic pogroms against the Jews. They, too, were said to be servants of Satan and the "Christ killers" themselves. In fact, until the 16th century the authorities called illegal women's meetings "synagogues" to associate them in the public eye with the Jewish pariahs. Then such meetings were called a "Witches Sabbath" (now they're called "terrorist conspiracies").

About the only thing most of us remember from grammar school is "1492," which was drummed into our heads as the wonderful year that Columbus "discovered" the Western hemisphere. But in Spain, 1492 is better known as the year that the Spanish nation-state entered the modern age by simultaneously ousting the Moors (Afrikans) and financing itself by expropriating all Jewish property. Oh, and all the Jewish women who didn't convert to the pope were killed or driven out of Spain.

It wasn't superstition, then, but cold, cold business that led one German official, bailiff Geiss of Lindheim, to write his lord for permission to kill a new batch of women (just think of him).

When the rulers said "Satan" they really meant communism or communalism.

When they hunted "witches" they meant hunting down women who might be out of control.

Just as those lords and merchants and cardinals needed armies to put down the peasant revolts that broke out, so they needed the Witchhunt to search out and destroy women's resistance. Young Joan of Arc had to be burned alive because she was a bad example. I mean, looking like a dyke and winning all those battles, too. During the Middle Ages there were lots of radical women, probably many more than there are today among white women in amerikkka (did you just assume it was the other way around?)

The need for an elaborate institution to loot and slaughter millions of women grew out of material changes in the feudal mode of production and distribution. Beginning in the 12th century, the growth of a pre-industrial capitalist activity began to transform feudal Europe from within. The merchant and money-lender class swelled on the trade in spices, dyes, silk and other new luxury goods from other continents. Shipping fleets, large navies, ports, shipyards, and other new industry all appeared.

On that economic basis modern nation-states began to emerge, uniting by sword and cannon the crazy-quilt of little patriarchal domains—duchies and church estates and principalities—that Europe had inherited from its white tribal past.