of the greatest warchiefs of Africa, as well as the peacemak-
ers, were Women.

The Trung sisters, with thirty-six women generals, led
eighty thousand troops against the Chinese in 40 AD, freeing
Vietnam for the first time in a thousand years. Women war-
riors of today are said to be descendants of the Trungs. Of
the major insurrections against China to follow, half were led
by women. Were the amount of information currently avail-
able regarding Vietnam provided as well for other nations of
the Orient, we might expect similar revelations to surface.

White invaders cast a jaundiced eye upon the great number
of women warriors among the Native American Indians. One
of the few approving accounts comes to us from Edwin T.
Denig, who in 1855 wrote the biography of a woman chief
among the Crows: “Long before she ventured on the warpath
she could rival any of the young men in all their amusements
and occupations, was a capital shot with the rifle, and would
spend most of her time in killing deer and bighorn, which she
butchered and carried home on her back when hunting on
foot.” In a battle confrontation, “Several Blackfeet came to
meet her, rejoicing in the occasion of securing an easy prize.
When within pistol shot, she called on them to stop, but they
paid no attention. One of the enemies fired at her and the

any man who couldn't watch his manners. In 1880 she wrote
in a diary for her daughter, Jane Junior, of an adventure with
Wild Bill: “Everyone blamed the Indians but they were white
men who did the killing and murdering and robbed the boys
of gold dust. Your father dared me to drive the stage that
trip after the killing. I did and found it was myself in one
hell of a fix, Janey. The outlaws were back of me. It was get-
ting dark and I knew something had to be done, so I jumped
off the driver’s seat on the nearest horse, then on my saddle
horse which was tied to the side and joined up in the dark
with the outlaws. Your father was bringing up the rear but I
couldn’t see it in the darkness but after they got the coach
stopped and found no passengers but heaps of gold they got
careless. Your father and I got the whole bunch. There were
eight of them and of course they had to be shot for they
wouldn’t give up.”

All of these extraordinary women may provide a tanta-
lizing glimpse of the potential roles and positions of women
in lost or forgotten ages. On every inhabitable continent and
isle, myths of a totally matriarchal heritage as well as of leg-
endary amazons are pervasive. A major example: the ancient
verse Aethiopis tells how the amazon queen Penthesilia tem-
porarily liberated Troy. The aid of Penthesilia’s amazon na-

Cubans Begin Withdrawal From Angola

Sgt. Vivian Hernandez Caballero, right, with other southern Angola, they are heading home tomorrow,
members of the Cuban women’s antiaircraft battery _ part of the first detachment of 450 Cuban soldiers to
in Luanda. After a year spent guarding these 3of be withdrawn from Angola.

rest charged. She immediately shot down one with her gun,
and shot arrows into two more without receiving a wound.
The remaining two then rode back to the main body, who
came at full speed to murder the woman. They fired showers
of balls and pursued her as near to the fort as they could.
But she escaped unharmed and entered the gates amid the
shouts and praises of the whites and her own people.” When
councils were held, this woman ranked third in the band of
160 lodges. She had a long career of hunting and warring un-
til, by treachery alone, her traditional enemy the Blackfeet
murdered her during her attempt to secure peace between
Blackfoot and Crow.

Native American attitudes soon bent to the pressures of the
narrow and rigid white conquerors. What was a commonplace
account for early Spanish, French, and English ex-
plorers became less ordinary in the classical “old west” era.
All the same, the sex-role-rigid whites were not devoid of
amazons of their own:

Muleskinner, stage driver, range rider, gambler, sharp-
shooter, midwife, railroad woman—the life of Calamity Jane
was not as unusual for a woman as some would prefer to
think. Partly because she shared her fame with an equally ex-
traordinary man (Wild Bill Hickok) and partly because, un-
like others of her breed, she was literate and could write part
of her own story, we have more knowledge of Martha Jane
Cannary Hickok than of most Old West amazons.

A gentle healer and Samaritan on the one hand, who cured
the sick and “couldn't eat a mouthful if I saw some poor

10 little brat hungry,” Calamity would yet shoot off the hat of

tion may well have been elicited by Hecuba, Queen of Troy,
whom, contrary to Homeric and Euripedian retellings long af-
ter the historic defeat, was the powerful ruler of Troy. Achil-
les’ retaking of the city marked the demise of the last
stronghold of goddess monotheism which had been extant
among the Mediterranean nations since Mesopotamian settle-
ment. It may also have marked the downfall of the last great
societies which women governed and defended.

From a scholarly basis, we can show only that the jural
and social systems of many early peoples were matrifocal,
matrilocal, and matrilinear and that the position and power of
women under these societies was greater than it is today. Evi-
dence from studies of present-day aboriginal peoples reveals
that, before white intervention, Melville Island Tiwis, the
Australian Pitjandjara, certain Eskimo peoples, the G/wi
and !Kung of Kalahari, Congo pygmies, and the peace-
ful people of the Philippine rain forests have been egalitarian,
or sometimes at least partially woman-dominant. This contra-
dicts the previous and discreditable theories of women’s in-
herent, biologically linked inferior social status and physical
ability. It is tempting to from these modern an-

The mythological evidence is vast and helpful, but it is
dangerous to interpret “myth” as “history” (just as it is dan-
gerous to interpret “history” as “fact”—we can scarcely be-