ME ee

trol, their solutions. Having created
warlordism, white people take advantage of
it to push their solutions to the problems
New Afrikan children and women have.
Schools are becoming more regimented & -
there's more kids in foster care, group
homes, homeless shelters, welfare hotels

and juvenile prisons. A growing concentra-_

tion camp subculture for New Afrikan
children.

This system is the training camps for
warlordism, all run by white people. And
they are drafting the youngest New Afrikan
children into this army of genocide. Or do
you still wanna call it "social work"?

Many New Afrikan women have been
terrorized by warlordism into going along.
Just as many New Afrikan parents endorse
Joe Clarkism, with its baseball bat
mentality, as the best hope for their
children. Or the new program of turning
public housing projects into "protected
hamlets," as the U.S. Army called them in
"Nam, where all the New Afrikan residents
need ID cards around their necks to move
around & no outsiders or political activ-
ity is allowed.

Tenants Cheer
After Shooting —
- Of 2 Guards

OAKLAND, Oct. 9—Residents
of a crime-ridden public housing
project cheered when the body of a
security guard was carried to an
ambulance after he was gunned
down,

“When they brought [him] out,
people started clapping and saying,
‘Hurrah,’ ” said Acorn housing com-
plex resident Gustina Hamilton, 51.

Residents of the 673-unit com-
plex have been complaining for a
year that guards hired by Prostaf
Security to chase out drug dealers
have instead brutalized residents.

—

4 October 10, 1988

dA

The comparison to the infamous South
African passbooks for Afrikans is obvious.
This trend began with Chicago's "Operation
Clean Sweep" at the Rockwell Gardens
project, which H.U.D. Secretary Jack Kemp
says is his government's “model for the
rest of the country."

A Rockwell Gardens tenants group that
opposed the new police station faded away,
because most New Afrikan women there went
for it as the best of the bad choices
they were offered. Yoletha Woodard, 33,
told reporters that the gangs "used to be
outside your door all the time. They'd be
drinking, smoking reefers. If you had
somewhere to go, too bad. You stay inside.
It's a lot better now." Freedom wasn't a
choice, only a choice between two kinds
of male regimentation over you.

In Washington, D.C., Mayor Marion Barry
and federal drug czar William Bennett kick-
ed off "Operation Take Charge" (even
sounds like ‘Nam, doesn't it?) at the
Arthur Capper housing project. There the
new rules forbid even immediate family
from visiting or entering at all without
a photo ID card, or from staying more
than two weeks a year.

The contradictions that powerless women
have was expressed by one resident:

" I think it's beautiful,” resident
Barbara Hunter said on the ID system.
Complaining of crowds of youthful drug
dealers who keep her up all night, she
said the only snag is that city officials
hadn't explained the mechanics of how her
grandchildren can visit her. And touching
the new laminated photo ID card on a chain
around her neck, she added, ‘It does
remind me of South Africa.‘ “

Women have no influence or power un-—
less you join one patriarchal system or
another. That's why Gloria Williams, that
New Afrikan sister in Los Angeles, was
hanging out with her children's gang. She
was the first woman arrested under the
Street Terrorism Enforcement & Protection
Act, which makes it a felony for New
Afrikan and Latino mothers to "permit"
their kids to do crimes. Her arrest came

_ after her 17-year-old son was arrested as

part of a gang rape of a 12-year-old girl.

ovr

NEL 6HBoRHcondE

Prosecutors dropped charges when her law-
yer proved that she had completed a white
settler government "parenting class" for
underclass women. This is all the way
deep, think about it. (And are the mothers
of all the white boys who sexually assaul-
ted that retarded girl in N.J. going to be
arrested?)

But wasn't Gloria Williams just doing
what the 28-year-old Central Park jogger
did, joining one or another of men's
systems to be a player, to get a role,
resources or influence? —

I'm not thinking about the boys right
now, I'm thinking about the mothers. Men
go on about the "Black matriarchy," but
New Afrikan women have much less power
to raise their children than they did 25

- years ago. Less control of their commun-

ity. While white people have more say and
power in the raising of New Afrikan kids
than they did 25 years ago.

It's about solutions. New Afrikan boys
smashing and raping a woman as part of
their basic training, while somewhere
else New Afrikan women sit in the living
room of a house or apartment, many in their
seventies. In rooms are children, some
under five and some in their teens. These
are her grandchildren & great-grandchildren.
She is their No.1 caretaker, the bedrock
of the house. But she's afraid to go to
the store after dark, to go out there.

But they will have to go out there, that's
life. It's all one string, all part of the
chaotic warlord culture that the captive
New Afrikan nation has been plunged into.

It's all about whose territory, about
whose systems of government, about whose
solutions. There is no way within white
people's system for New Afrikan women to
deal with warlordism, with being occupied
by alternating currents of cops and gangs.
This is reality whether anyone likes it
or not. :

So when we wanna know what's happening,
we should first ask ourselves who we are,
where we are, and what time it is? And
before we call for more protection from
our white lords, it's good to be able to
tell our friends from our enemies.

amazon nation or aryan nation