women's studies departments say took -
place 3,000 to 5,000 years ago. It

was so long ago that we can't remem-
ber it & no one we know is responsible
for it. This is a typical example, as
written way back in 1971 by Charlotte
Bunch and Rita Mae Brown:

"The first division of labor, in
pre-history, was based on sex: men
hunted, women built the villages, took
care of children, and farmed... men
conquered women with the weapons that
they developed for hunting... Although
there have been numerous battles over
class, race and nation during the past
3,000 years, none of them has brought
the liberation of women."

This story, while it has truths
within it, is as a whole untrue. It
slides into a pre-conceived world
view that amerikkka has put into our
heads. It's very understandable that
in the early days of the women's
movement this stick figure sketch of
how women were enslaved was a radical
beginning, because it helped us see
how patriarchy was born in systematic

In the first chapter we discussed
how the long rise of euro-capitalism,
beginning in the 13th century, led
masses of European women to fight
back by re-grouping themselves into
the Beguines, a communal working
women's culture with women's houses,
women's neighborhoods, and women's
fortified towns. This community shel-
tered a radical women's conspiracy
against the ruling classes. The rising
euro-capitalism only gained its
unique powers by genocide against
women, by the institutionalized
killings and terror and looting of
women in the centuries-long Witchhunt.

And, when armed with this power,
euro-capitalism expanded to invade
other continents, it encountered many

had real power & real equality. We
used one example of Igbo women in

Nigeria, where within a society with
patriarchal trends those Afrikan
women still had their own separate

women's economy & women's self-gover-
nment (parallel to that of men), 
whose rules were enforced by what in

violence against women. But now,
twenty years later, we should have
developed a more scientific picture.

We haven't because amerikkkan
women still believe that men's own-
ership of women is something near
eternal, begun before history even,
something associated with dark and
primitive societies, and that only in
our lifetimes are educated women in
"developed" (i.e. white) countries
beginning to get equality. And don't
we believe that amerikkkan white
women are the most independent, the
most feminist of all? White men say
that to us all the time, so we think
it must be true. But it's us who are
backward, who are dependent.

I see it as a measurement of how
wiped blank we are by genocide that
we can recite racist anti-woman lies
that Dick has taught us—and think
it's our feminist theory.

our terms would be a women's militia.
Enforced on men as well as women.

It was to resist the British
colonial taxation on their women's
economy that tens of thousands of
Igbo women began the 1926 Women's War,
burning down colonial offices and
freeing Afrikan prisoners from jails.
Their defeat by British imperialist
troops meant the destruction of their
Afrikan women's economy & self-
government. That was in 1926, not
3,000 years ago. But we didn't notice
them.

We are so unlike those free women
that we can't recognize them. They are
less real to us than dolphins and
redwoods. Nor are we the European
women who waged their own communal
conspiracy against capitalism for gen-
erations, and were only defeated by
the Witchhunt after millions of
deaths. amerikkkan feminists wanna
believe we are those women, but we
aren't.

For one, those women’s communities
were anti-capitalist. That is, they
had communal worker economies and in
both cases their political struggles
were against the invasive euro—
capitalism. To stay separate from it.
But during most of the herstory of our
white women's movement, it's been
accepted as fact that patriarchal
imperialism is something we have to
"live with," accommodate to. We've
spent much of our energies getting
into it. It's so good for white men
that most white women always think if
we can just smooth out the rough
edges it'll be great for us, too. So
free women were fighting to get out
while we're fighting to co-exist
within it. Not the same at all.

The other thing is genocide. Those
free women were fighting genocide,
while white women in amerikkka are the
sterilized result of genocide. We must
describe genocide as a culture preci-
sely because it is an accepted way of
life to us. Which is why white women
don't want to see that the first
genocide is against women. It cuts too
close to home.

We're still afraid to see that we
are not what women were, that we are
stripped of being women. In communal
non-class societies women were a
people, strong physically & strong
ethically & strong as community. We
made human community, and controlled
reproduction as our science. Women as
a people were self-reliant. What we
needed we did for self, whether it was
weaving textiles or developing agri-
culture or teaching our young. Produc-
tion and reproduction and other
sciences were shared by women's comm-
unity.

There are millions of us but we
don't have a housing program or a
transportation system or a foreign
policy. Wars go on all around us &
over us but we have no army & no
defense plan. We're not on any map &
no one has to take account of us
because we're not even in the
ballpark. One white woman today may
be a karate blackbelt or a cop, but
that doesn't mean she can defend her-
self from a surprise attack or a
gang attack, or that a hundred other
women on the next block are any
safer. That's proven fact. It's not
the same as a community of women
that didn't permit any strange or
unapproved men to live around them &
expelled men by force if necessary.
Yet we are taught to never have
communal women's solutions to our
problems. Just individual white
solutions.

Genocide doesn't always mean total
physical elimination of a nation or
people, when the oppressor needs your
body live. Euro-capitalism in the
Witchhunt burned millions of women,
remember, to destroy women as a peo-
ple, with our own communalism and
culture. The terrorized survivors were
needed as property, for our labor &
our reproduction. But we weren't per-
mitted to gather together or live
together in any numbers. We were split
up and parceled out to men while the
patriarchal State appointed itself
our guardians & the regulators of our
bodies.

Then we became settler women in
amerikkka, Dick's junior assistants at