The Blue Lantern

COMMENT from page 5

The Committee's primary objective was, and remains, the provision of preventive self-health care techniques to students. Sexuality education is designed, at a minimum, to prevent problems from developing. By providing basic information, the Counselors Committee helps individuals to avoid sexual problems and decreases their dependency on clinic services.

There is ample evidence of the need for these information and clinic services. Virginia Zero Population Growth, Inc. and the Virginia Bureau of Family Planning report that illegitimacy and abortion rates are on the rise in Virginia. The national VD epidemic, in spite of public and private organization attempts to check its spread, does not appear to be receding appreciably.

There is no reason for UVa students to consider themselves immune from these state and national trends unless they are provided with and avail themselves of such preventive sexual health services as regular check-ups, information, and education. While the Counselors Committee does not provide medical services per se, it offers information, counseling, and referral services for students. These services are available to both men and women, and all services are absolutely confidential.

In order to ensure the non-discriminatory provision of these services to all in need, the Counselors Committee supports the right of each individual to sexual self-determination. This simply means the self-awareness, openness, and honesty with oneself and others presupposes that each person will do what is most comfortable for him/her, conditional upon an assumed responsibility for one's behavior and actions.

Some find this approach to sexuality education to be an abdication of society's "moral safeguards." On the contrary, the Counselors Committee eschews those attitudes and beliefs that inhibit rational dialogue and education and that penalize free sexual expression between consenting partners. It provides services to aid individuals in avoiding the sexual pitfalls that are encountered through ignorance, misunderstanding, and fear. To this end, the Counselors Committee's dorm seminars and peer counselors provide unassuming perspectives on masturbation, heterosexuality, homosexuality, and personal relationships.

The Counselors Committee offers dorm seminars, peer counseling, and outreach to all UVa students free of charge. In addition, it provides team presentations to the surrounding community on a variety of sexuality-related topics on request, and outreach is available for purchase. Interested persons should contact the Counselors Committee, 924-2773.

cont.

Not For Burning

cont. from page 6

"All of Life Is A Cycle"

Your coven gathers together at the solstices, equinoxes, full moons, and for the zodiac change. Why?

"When you are a witch you are a pagan. It is a paganism built on the respect for nature. One respects the purposes and cycles of Mother Nature. You try to find out what the soil needs rather than use a chemical fertilizer. You try to find out what the needs of the earth are. By treating Mother Earth right, she will treat you right."

What are some of the symbols in witchcraft and what part do they play in the rituals?

"The mirror is very important. It has a five-pointed star on it and five is a feminine number. The star is a symbol of drawing down the cosmic power. You will use symbols of the astrology. Now, water is a symbol of the female and the unconsciousness. The sea and all the waters of life are female. The incense represents the elements fire and water. The candle represents fire.

The band with the moon is worn by the one who draws down the Lady. The moon, of course, is always a female symbol. The person who draws down the Lady chooses to do so. It can be done by a man or a woman. The horned helmet is worn by the one who draws down the God force. Once again, it can be worn by a man or a woman.

In the older traditions, it was done by the high priest or priestess. We do not have this. Every witch is a priest or priestess of Wicca. There is no hierarchy. This does not mean that one doesn't have a structure. I don't believe in unstructured things because it leads to chaos. The structure is based on people with similar feelings who don't regard themselves as being the center of a show."

Witchcraft seems to emphasize the development of the anima side of human nature. It not only gives credence to the feminine aspects of life but worships them and can call forth a diminishment of the bias on masculine aspects. By worshipping a Goddess before a God, will not another imbalance occur or does witchcraft celebrate the androgynous self?

Page 15 E

"The evolution of civilization is coming into a third stage. The first stage was one of matriarchy. During this stage, woman was the center because the origins of life formed within her. Then, one was surrounded by the need for a new life and one had to respect it. I think that the excesses of matriarchy led to the patriarchy. And the excesses of the patriarchy have led inevitably to equality (the third stage).

Human society has experienced the excesses as well as the advantages of both patriarchy and matriarchy. As witches, we must form a craft for the future. We must develop the myths which will fit in with our philosophy of equality. In doing this one must not overly stress the female. But it is necessary, because we are still living in a patriarchal system, to emphasize the female while giving respect to the male."

> KK

Portrait cont. from page 19

Some younger Spaniards feel they are more free than were previous generations. Cook tells about a young man who says, "It's all right if my wife has an affair." But the same man expects his wife to have a college education and to earn a substantial income. He also expects her to do all the housework and child-rearing.

Addressing the dichotomy between her thoughts and her feelings, Cook explains, "I'm a product of my upbringing. If John cleans or cooks, I feel like he's helping me. I can't relinquish control of those jobs."

She hopes her children will feel differently. "One day one of my girls expressed her desire to be a doctor's wife; so I told her, ‘if you think being a doctor is desirable, plan to be one yourself.'"

biodegradable, non-allergenic household cleansers, vitamins, toiletries, moisturizers

Delia: 295-6582