Page 2  
The Blue Lantern  

&  
volume 1  
number 3  

march 1, 1977  

Arts Editor/ Debra Susan Abbott  
Features Editor/ Lisa Wood  
News Editor/ Patty Ochs  
Business Manager/ Rosie Romanowski  
Advertising Manager/ Robin Frav  
Classifieds/ Genii Jennings  
Circulation Manager/ Pat Stabler  
Public Relations/ Judy Bauerle  
Photographer/ Ellen Hawkins  

staff  
Celestine Walker, Debbie Galant, Nancy Cooper,  
Rhonda Simpson, Gimmer, Madge Williams, Walton  
Vaughan, Cindy Swiatlowski, Stefani Pericone,  
Muffy Burns, Leslie Blizzard, Melanie Moore,  
Paula Weiss, Kathleen Foster, Jean Stark  

friends  
Jerry, Ginger, Brenda, Ann, Joan, Betsy Brinson, Bev,  
Dot, Rosemary Farmer, Bill, Mark, Annette, Jon Hunt,  
Betty Long, Rey Barry, Cindy, Marsha Blakemore, Carman O'Brien,  
Claudia Woody, Jenny Roddy, WCC, Ralph,  
Celia, and the other loved ones who have lived with  
our madness and creation.  

The Blue Lantern is published monthly in Charlottesville  
at an annual subscription rate of $3.00. Our  
‘to be' office space will be located at the Prism  
but you can reach us any time at P.O. Box 3343, Char-  
lottesville, Va., 22903.  

Copyright by The Blue Lantern, 1977. Articles may be  
reprinted or excerpted with the permission of the  
staff.  

printer  
The Valley Banner, Elkton, Virginia  

You can help us by:  

1) A subscription to The Blue  
Lantern for yourself or a friend.  

2) Contributions to The Blue  
Lantern in the form of articles, news,  
calendar items, advertising, photo-  
graphs, GRAPHICS, or poetry. This  
journal will not exist without your  
insights and help. We welcome con-  
tributions from men.  

3) Joining the Staff. We survived  
this edition in the hands of a few  
and want to now build the Staff to  
include any woman who wants to join  
us. We specifically need a Lay-Out  
Editor, a distribution staff, and  
people to work in advertising.  

4) Preparing our office. We  
have been given space in The Prism  
which needs work done with it. If  
you are interested in helping the  
revitalization of this facility,  
please call Rob Cochrell, or 973-2077.  

Cover Photos by Ellen Hawkins  

Forgotten “Roots”  

Roots, last January, was a major sociological e-  
vent. It sparked much commentary in the press, focused  
the attention of white people on black concerns, and  
provided black people with new pride in the black iden-  
tity. Most important, it got people talking, and car-  
ing, about an issue that was supposed to have been be-  
nignly neglected since the early seventies: what it  
means to be a black person in America. Roots' author  
Alex Haley vividly demonstrated to us the importance of  
history to our identities. His genealogical research  
fulfilled his own personal need for self-knowledge.  

The product of that research, Roots, was Haley's gift  
to other blacks who similarly seek their own identities.  

In the history of his ancestor Kunta Kinte, Haley  
also showed us the importance of our own names to a  
sense of personal pride and freedom. Kunta's refusal  
to give up his African name represented in a very real  
and not just symbolic way his refusal to become nothing  
more than the white man's property. His owner's deter-  
mination to strip the black man of his name and substi-  
tute it with one of the owner's own choosing showed us  
the importance of name to control and dominion.  

Like black people, women have lost their names in  

history. Although loss of identity for women did not  

coincide with the wholesale brutality of the slave ex-  
perience, the effect of this loss is very similar. In  
giving up their names, women have renounced their right  
to their personal pride and reinforced their status as  
men's property.  

It would be only a little less difficult for a wo-  
man to trace her female line back to the eighteenth  
century than it was for Haley to trace his black history.  
Women have an odd way of dropping out of family trees.  
Once they have married, and are not even recorded by  
name in the early U.S. census takings. Each of us,  
male or female, is half the product of a woman's past,  
and yet the female "roots" are too often forgotten.  

The women's movement, like the Black movement of  
the sixties, has been pronounced "dead" in the media.  
No one wants to call herself a "feminist", or worse,  
a "women's libber", even if she supports the Equal  
Rights Amendment, joins rape crisis groups, or enters  
businesses previously restricted to men. If it is true  
that women are now guaranteed equal advantages, women  
have yet to learn the personal pride of self-knowledge  
- we have yet to learn the meaning of our names. What  
women and men both need is a women's Roots to get us  
talking and caring about what it means to be a woman in  
the world today.  

Writers  

Articles should be typed,  
double-spaced, from 200 to 1200 words  
long and accompanied by (1) your  
name, address, and phone number, (2)  
a self-addressed, stamped envelope,  
(3) suggested headline and subheads,  
and (4) photos or graphics if possi-  
ble. Poetry should be typed in final  
form.  

If we accept your article, you  
will receive a free copy of that  
month's issue. If we cannot use your  
article, we will be glad to provide  
constructive criticism when we return.