13

She Dreams Books While He Drinks

I bent over my hands. I was looking
for, listening to, a sad kitchen day. Pok-
ing my head into a hazy face, falling
back into her so she is just a girl. She
was curled up the same Friday reading
books from the library and eating chips.
Upstairs. She had a glass of soda with
the ice cubes whining and popping in
her ear. Burrowed, buried, hiding
behind a page, hiding from the one who
gets who got she thought, he always
goes away.

She was curled up in a house, a salt
box dark one that faced shadows in the
dusk in the corner. Lots of kids still live
in houses like that. They come creeping
out of darkness, running into the laun-
dromat for a week’s worth of dirties.
They come running from where there is
an uncashed check and a bill-calling
collector, where mom or dad have
worked all week, on their feet or
seated, answering phones, punching
tickets, exhaust, noise, slush, boots,
coats, doctor's appointments only to
come home.

And the lights are off. He is slumped
in the armchair. Love is some bakery
box with the strings hanging off. The
neighborhood quiet and tired from a
week of work. He'll sleep a long time.
He'll wake up in a rage. And shadow
box. Unleashed, he'll spar. He’ll prob-
ably punch. Her. His mate.

She waited upstairs. She couldn't
help anticipating. She never read about
it but the cat curled at the foot of the
bed and the overhead light with its
white plastic cover burned so hot she
was sure. The light bulb would melt a
hole and make a dent there. She stared.
The houses were dark along the street.
She thought, ‘How could they be sleep-
ing?”

She never thought life could be com-
pact, but when she was on the bus, she
thought, maybe. Dreaming when she
was neatly tucked into a bus with win-
dows, that whisked her into a city of
wet sidewalks and the public library.
Sometimes, she thought, just to see
another face, some eyes. Sometimes
just to see another someone else who
stands in the rain even when the wind
rages and the tree branches shake, um-
brellas clam up, bend and some even
escape like wiry black monsters. “And...
the stream pours out of the pores of the
black barking afternoon.

Stormy afternoon and windy,
because it’s windy she thought, I'll go
on home. She had her books. She got
off the bus. She circled the house. She
had her foot in the driveway. She
wanted her shoe to be patent leather,
she wanted to hold her shoe forward
and say, “Fix it.” But he didn’t. Doesn't.
No, he can’t fix it. He still can’t fix it.

I was bent over my hands, I was
listening. Thinking about growing up
but my throat had a shout that grew
backwards. Grew huge and arched
back. My stomach felt like it was full of
baking soda then. Empty soda glass.
And hot tears on a white page. I saw
how her library books went back spot-
ted, with pockmarks sealed inside.
Never noticed how the other books on
the shelves smelled. Maybe like houses.
Maybe some smelled like frying fish
and separation, divorce, the restless
hour by hour dissolve of dialogue. The
t.v. off and someone’s mom on the
phone, her voice trembly but clear,
making a change.

I see the kids running down the
sidewalk, hoods up, running into Satur-
day morning, the sun shining. Where
are they headed, I wonder. How can
they be dreaming? But they do. They
still do.

Selena Fitanides

by Catherine Sullivan