continued from page 4

Joy Harjo’s poetry is rich with the  
tradition of Native American women.

Irene Klepfisz, born in Poland and a  
survivor of the Nazis, has chronicled  
her experiences as a Jew, a lesbian, a  
survivor in the poetry of Keeper of Ac-  
counts.

Lee Lynch writes particularly well of  
what being a lesbian was like in the 50’s  
and 60's, before the current wave of  
lesbian-feminism. She’s published two  
novels and a collection of short fiction.

Isabel Miller’s Patience and Sarah is a  
must-read lesbian romance, based on a  
true story of two women in early 19th  
century America.

Pat Parker has been for years one of  
our strongest poetic voices, writing as a  
Black lesbian political activist. Her  
work is widely anthologized; her  
published volume is Movement in  
Black.

Adrienne Rich’s prose and poetry is  
essential to us. A new collection of her  
poetry has just been published. Entitled  
The Fact of a Doorframe, it contains  
both new and selected previous poems.  
Try also The Dream of a Common  
Language.

Jane Rule is one of our best prose  
writers. She’s been publishing novels,  
short stories and essays since the early  
60's. Try Desert of the Heart, a fine les-  
bian romance, and any of her other  
works.

Sappho. I wanted to make sure Sap-  
pho was listed here. One of the saddest  
facts of our history is the destruction of  
most of Sappho’s poetry. Only  
fragments remain, but those are  
beautifully presented in a paperback  
called Sappho: A New Translation,  
edited by poet Mary Barnard.

May Sarton is a poet and novelist  
some of whose works, particularly The  
Small Room and Mrs. Stevens Hears the  
Mermaids Singing, have significant les-  
bian content. Like Sarah Aldridge,  
whom she does not otherwise resem-  
ble, Sarton writes often of older les-  
bians.

Ann Shockley is a Black lesbian  
novelist and short story writer many of  
whose works are, as of this writing, un-  
fortunately out of print. One volume of  
short stories, The Black and White of It,  
remains available.

Gertrude Stein. Start with QED, and  
move on to her later and more complex  
prose and poetry.

Renee Vivien, a French lesbian writer  
of the late 19th and early 20th century,  
was also an ardent feminist. Much of  
her work will feel ‘decadent’ to us to-  
day, but it is nonetheless an important  
part of our tradition.

Gale Wilhelm, a lesbian novelist of  
the 1930’s and 40's, is having her works,  
long out of print, reissued by Naiad  
Press. Available so far is We Too Are  
Drifting, an elegantly written romance.

This should get you started. Yes,  
most of these works are available at  
Golden Thread Booksellers in New  
Haven, and at other feminist  
bookstores around the country. Some  
will be in libraries. Enjoy!

Rhea Hirshman