To whom it may concern:

I am a male undergraduate, a senior at Yale. I am writing to
you so that I may express some of my feelings about the women's
movement at Yale.

Firstly, I would like to state that I am not a male chauvinist pig.
As a matter of fact, I feel that women are generally saner and more
humane than men; for this reason, I would even go as far as saying
that women are in many ways superior to men. Now I know that this
may already seem repugnant to you; namely, that I am presumptuous
enough to differentiate so strongly between men and women. But this,
in a way, is precisely the point I would like to make.

Perhaps I am mistaken, but I have always interpreted the main goal
of the women's movement to be the reduction of all unwarranted

and superficial differences between the sexes. It is true that men
are different from women psychologically and emotionally; perhaps
not as a direct result of biological differences, but certainly

as an indirect result. Many of these differences, I may add, are
not only here to stay (i.e., will not ever be eliminated by social
reform), but are also healthy for the human race. Many, however, are
unnecessary and prejudicial. I have always assumed that the task

of the women's movement was to eliminate these unhealthy differences,
to foster better cooperation and understanding between the sexes.
This is the task of the women's movement, isn’t it? The elimination
of socially imposed differences so that women may someday live
without antagonism toward men? 

Why, then, all the antagonism toward men? Why do so many women
activists feel that separatism is the answer? Will this really
solve our problems? I am acquainted with several female activists
who perceive men in an entirely different way than women. I thought
the women's movement was supposed to eliminate unhealthy differences,

not propagate them. Why does the women’s movement, especially at
Yale, have such a separatist flavor?

I would like to conclude with a few more questions and comments.

Are the sexes so different that women require a feminist film
society, a feminist theatre, a feminist magazine, a feminist coffee
hour? I thought the utopic goal was to unite the sexes. Also, I
would like to comment on the role of lesbianism in the feminist
movement. It is my impression that there is a schism within the
movement, an underlying breach between straights and gays. From
what I've read in feminist publications, lesbians consider themselves
“more feminist" because they have made a total break from men. I

have also read certain feminist essays which rationalize this break
with claims that women are more responsive to the needs of women,

and separatism is the answer. I would like to point out that
homosexuality is not the real issue here; if someone is inclined
towards their own sex, then so be it. But let us not delude ourselves
into believing that lesbianism and feminism go hand in hand.

Feminist lesbianism is separatism, and this to me contradicts
everything that the women’s movement should be striving for.

Thank you,
Sincerely,

(names withheld at
request of the authors.)

(Editor's note: the following letter was written in response
to an original version of the above letter which has since
been slightly altered by its authors.)

We appreciate your writing to the Women’s Center to express
your responses to feminism. We sense that your feelings are shared
by many women and men at Yale. We would like to address some of
your questions and criticisms because they represent certain
patterned misperceptions of feminists and feminism.

Your rejection of the feminist approach seems to assume,
rather naively, that if we simply stopped paying attention to the
"differences" between men and women, those differences would dis-
appear. The goals of the women's movement — immediate or “utopic” —
cannot be expressed in one simple sentence. Your desire to resolve
the “unhealthy differences" without a clear sense of women's distinct
experience and culture amounts to an affirmation of the male norm.

Ms. Phyllis Schlafly also wishes away the issues feminism
addresses by insisting that any woman can go to law school, as she
did. Pointing to token women professionals in male dominated fields
not only embraces male concepts of competence and success as those
toward which women should strive, but encourages women to compete
among themselves for positions that they know are scarce. As
feminist Catharine MacKinnon said in a recent colloquium, “the
message is, ‘these women made it, why can't you?’” when it is pre-
cisely because these women made it that you cannot." The prestige 
of a few such women does not represent progress for women in general.

Inviting women to try for “male“ success only adds another

possible requirement to the agenda that male culture has drawn up
for women. Even as men expand that agenda, there remains a disparity
between what a woman knows to be her experience and the way that
men identify her. The roles that women fill relative to men —
as mother, wife, daughter — have not only defined women insufficiently,
but have served to isolate them from one another. Popular stereo-
types and cultural portrayals of women are inaccurate and destructive
precisely because they are offered to women by men, precluding the
idea of self-identification and validation by women.

The women's movement attempts to restructure society by validating
women's experience; this necessitates goals as diverse as that
experience has been. How can we even know whether, and how, it is
"true that men are different from women psychologically and
emotionally” until women have had some experience working with other
women? Feminism proposes that women explore their own experience,
and from there define their social identity. Feminism necessarily
involves an examination of the attitudes that both validate and
obscure women's status as it stands.

All of your questions and perceptions reflect the point of view
of a society evaluated by men, in accordance with their own priorities
and needs. What you see as “women’s antagonism towards men" is
often simply the exposure of institutionalized examples of men's
“antagonism towards women.” Men perceive as violent women's speaking

of rape, wife-beating, the denial of the sexual and reproductive
freedom of women (through anti-abortion legislation, involuntary
sterilization, clitoridectomy), pornography, sexual harassment, the
exploitation of women in advertising, etc. Perhaps it is fright-
ening to identify the fundamental misogyny in our society because
such awareness threatens the society as we know it — as a structure

that enforces men's power.

Your characterization of “women's antagonism towards men”
attempts to trivialize anger that is fully justified by the misogyny
feminists identify. Furthermore, such anger serves to externalize
the pressures which otherwise make women feel guilty and humiliated,
by allowing us to see our victimization as part of a larger system.
For example, the battered wife often blames herself, but her
anger is her recognition that she does not deserve such abuse. Though
outrage is painful, it may be the necessary first step in an affir-
mation of self. Condemning a woman as just an angry feminist is
a defensive reaction which enables you to avoid examining the true
nature and extent of women's oppression. Feminism attacks this
systematized oppression, not individual men. Men can, and some
do, share our anger.

It is simply not true that “so many women activists feel that
separatism is the answer." Nor is feminist lesbianism necessarily
separatism; many lesbians value the company and cooperation of men.
Your exaggeration, (and it is a common one), conveniently dismisses
feminist activity. Labeling lesbian feminists “insecure” is again
a projection of your own reaction, rather than an insight into the
psychological and emotional experiences of these women. You see
feminism, lesbianism, and separatism as strategies to reject men,
when in fact they are ways of devoting oneself to women as affirmation
of friendship and love for women. The fact that you see lesbianism
as the unfortunate outcome of women being together reveals that
in our society there is no affirmation of sisterhood, of women
identifying themselves primarily through their relationships with
women (rather than with men), and loving women emotionally and
sexually. When you say "he can also satisfy a woman in ways that
a female cannot," you must be referring to the penis. Whence your
certainty that good sex presupposes the penis? 

Finally, the institutions that you claim violate the “utopic
goal...to unite the sexes” are necessary at Yale and elsewhere
because other forums for women's art, film, theater, writings, and
sentiment have proved lacking. Where else can we see films such as

Three Women, Girlfriends, Killing Us Softly, Dora, etc.? Certainly
not at the Yale Film Society which screens such films as beneath

the Valley of the Supervixens. Alternately, the American Film
Heroes series features Clint Eastwood and Woody Allen: such heroes
are celebrated predominately because of their inability or refusal
to communicate with women. These men are not our heroes.

While we have presented responses to the major questions raised
by your letter, there is also, of course, a large body of literature
on each of these topics, and many others we did not address.

Susan Searing, reference librarian in Sterling, knows a great deal
about works on feminism and can lead you to them. The students
who staff the Yale Women's Center can also recommend books and
articles. A sincere inquiry would lead you to such sources before
you place further demands on the women around you to explain

what you do not immediately see for yourself.

Sincerely,

Ellen Hertz

Cilla Smith

(coordinators of the

Yale Women’s Center)

Nina Pillard

Rebecca Saletan

(members of the Undergraduate
Women's Caucus)