Reflections

WOMEN MARCH

TO TAKE BACK  
THE NIGHT!

Fighting Back, Speaking Out

ENDING VIOLENCE AGAINST  
WOMEN

8:30 PM  
Andrea Dworkin

July 28

By Rona Wilensky  
adapted from an article in the YGP

I don’t sit by myself on the Green on a warm  
summer day because I know that some man, any  
man might join me uninvited and curse me if I am  
aloof.

I don’t walk across Wooster Square thinking  
about tomorrow’s exam because I know that some  
man, any man, riding by on a bicycle might catch  
me unawares and place his hand in my crotch.

I don’t study in a carrel in the stacks of Sterling  
Library because I know that some man, any man  
might parade by to steal my attention—or look up my  
skirt.

And I don’t run alone up Prospect Street in broad  
daylight because I know that some man, any man  
might grab my breast as he passes, delighted at my  
outrage.

But most of all I don’t go out when it is dark,  
because I know, if I know nothing else, that the  
night is my enemy, and that some man, any man  
can make me into a victim.

How do I know so much, you ask? What has  
made me so smart? Nothing other than the fact that  
I am a woman who has tried to sit in the park and  
move from here to there after the sun has gone down and  
been terrorized.

Each time some man has taught me a lesson. He  
has taught me that the streets are his not mine, that  
privacy is his not mine, that my body is his not  
mine, and most of all that the night is his not mine.

But on a recent summer night I ignored my  
lessons. On July 28th, I went out after dark. I sat on  
the Green and I walked down the street. But I was  
not alone. With me were more than 500 other  
women. And we had come to take back the night  
together.

Without the familiar trappings of a demonstra-  
tion, onlookers and reporters were at a loss to make  
sense of the gathering. But we women knew why  
we were there.

We were there because no individual woman,  
alone in her rage, can sustain the daily hourly  
battle against every male intruder without having  
her spirit ground to dust, and so as individuals we  
had had to give up the streets and the night.

We were there because no court order, no Senate  
bill, nor any police directive can have any  
jurisdiction over the particular interactions that  
assault each woman in her daily life, and as laws,  
curfews, and police patrols have multiplied, so too  
have rape, assault and abuse.

So we came to try something new, something  
collective and something political. But I don’t think  
we knew that when we drifted as individuals onto  
the Green. We came intending only to find an outlet  
for our inchoate but relentless anger and frustra-  
tion. But soon the event began, and our understand-  
ing was honed by the women in the Theatre of Light  
and Shadow, who seared our minds with a poetry  
that evoked the violence that is the everyday  
experience of women, and by Andrea Dworkin who  
brought us to our feet with an impassioned  
dissection and riveting analysis of the mysteries of  
the night. At the same time the women with white  
armbands, acting as marshals, showed us strength  
with a new face. Like antibodies of the body politic,  
they surrounded disrupters and spirited them away.  
The evening itself was giving us a new purpose and  
that purpose was realized when we began our  
march.

As sisters with a common will we staked out the  
streets and made them our own. We measured  
them with our footsteps. We surveyed them with  
our candles. And then we lived in them. We  
strutted and skipped, we jumped and twirled, all  
within the perimeter of our new domain. We sang  
and we chanted, we laughed and we smiled and we  
held each other in joy at the discovery and  
exploration of this new frontier. We felt the power  
of each other’s presence in warding off the sneers,  
smacks, whistles and touches of the night. Chapel  
Street, Howe Street, Crown Street and the Green all  
became part of our world that night, if only for a  
few hours, because we had made them so. No one  
had given us the night; we had, in a real sense,  
taken it back. We were no longer asking for an  
alteration in the ways of the world, we were  
making one. Acting together, animated by our  
anger, but in control of it, we had changed our  
lives.

Although we had gathered out of frustration and  
bitterness, when the candles had been doused and  
our microphones unplugged we went home, arm in  
arm, strolling down our streets assuaged, knowing,  
in a heartfelt way, that it is possible in sisterhood to  
reclaim the forbidding provinces of the night.

TAKING BACK THE NIGHT  
CONTINUED

Project for Battered Women provides shelter for  
battered women and their children.  

Hotline for battered women, 789-8104, 24 hours a  
day. The Project also works to change the attitudes  
and policies of police toward domestic violence.

One result of the high rate of violence against  
women is that our fear limits our choices of jobs,  
housing, and recreation. Women in New Haven are  
starting a night-time transportation service for  
women, to increase our mobility and prevent rape.  
The service will be modeled after the Women’s  
Transit Authority in Madison, Wisconsin, which  
provides free rides for women every night between  
7:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. It is run by more than one  
hundred volunteers and three part-time paid  
coordinators, and receives funding from the city, the  
county, and the University of Wisconsin. In New  
Haven, we are starting small, using our own cars  
and minimal funding, and operating Thursdays,  
Fridays, and Saturdays from 8:00 p.m. to 12:00  
a.m. The New Haven Women’s Transit Authority  
will go into operation on January 3, 1980; interested  
women should call the New Haven Women’s  
Center, 436-0645.

Through  

Universal Travels  

Call (203) 562-4557  

See The Universe The ‘Universal’ Way  

1026 Chapel St. New Haven, CT 06511  

Other Services Include: Cruises, Tours, Amtrak And Limousine Service  

Self-defense training provides a different kind of  
prevention. Women have been taught that we are  
incapable of defending ourselves; many of us are  
very weak, and we have been told from early  
childhood that girls do not fight. We also have been  
taught to be nice to men; we feel guilty when we  
don’t want to have sex with our boyfriends; we  
know we should not let a strange man in our homes,  
but feel guilty if we insist that a repairman give us  
convincing identification before we open our  
doors.

Self-defense classes can help us learn how to avoid  
potentially dangerous situations by cultivating a  
healthy, reasonable mistrust of men, and by  
developing the confidence to say no when we mean  
it without feeling guilty. Self-defense also helps us  
gain physical strength and agility, and teaches us  
techniques for fighting back if we have to. In New  
Haven, the Women’s Self-Defense Alliance is  
working to make self-defense classes available to all  
women and girls in New Haven, and to start a  
Women’s Martial Arts center, where we can  
continue to develop ourselves physically and  
mentally in a supportive environment. For more  
information about the Women’s Self-Defense Alli-  
ance and its class offerings, call: 787-0031 weekday  
mornings.

Helping women to reject our role as willing  
victims is an important contribution to ending  
violence against women. Perhaps more important,  
and certainly more difficult, is changing  
men. One approach to this is attacking porno-  
graphy. Feminist organizations against porno-  
graphy, including Women Against Violence in  
Pornography and Media in California and Women  
Against Pornography (WAP) in New York, do not  
generally seek to close down pornography establish-  
ments or to censor printed material. Rather, they  
try to raise the level of consciousness among  
men and women about what pornography is and  
what it means. WAP, for example, runs tours of the  
porno area around Times Square, and shows a slide  
show which analyzes both hard-core pornography  
and pornographic images in the general media. A  
conference sponsored by WAP this past year  
attended by several hundred women dealt with  
such issues as pornography and the media, child  
pornography, the meaning of pornography in  
relation to our own sexuality, and pornography and  
politics. On October 21, about 5,000 people marched  
through Times Square in a feminist demonstration  
against pornography. Pornography is extremely  
difficult to fight. The male-dominated liberal  
establishment and the male left, our allies in some  
areas, have exposed pornography as an issue of civil  
liberties, to be protected as free speech. (The  
ACLU, for example, has shown films at the same  
time groups who oppose abortion and homosexual-  
ity. The links that we draw between certain kinds of  
male sexual liberty and oppression of women  
threatens these men. I do not believe there is any  
real danger of right-wingers identifying us as  
allies; we are clearly the people who are fighting for  
abortion and gay rights. (The few religiously  
motivated people who joined the October March on  
Times Square were horrified by the speeches that  
followed.)

Violence against women is an issue of utmost  
urgency for feminists; women are being beaten,  
raped, and killed every day. It is also an issue that  
reaches to the heart of the nature of the oppression  
of women in our society. Women and men alike do  
not generally appreciate the magnitude of the  
problem and are reluctant to face the ways in which  
it affects their own attitudes and sexuality. Taking  
back the street one night a year is just scratching  
the surface. Join with women in New Haven and all  
over the country in marching to take back the night  
on August 2, 1980. See you there!