Liz’s Editorial

“But I thought there already was a lesbian magazine on campus.” No, folks,  
Aurora is not a lesbian magazine; this is a common misconception. Aurora is a  
feminist magazine, which at times addresses matters that concern gay people,  
but is not devoted specifically to lesbian topics. However, Tender Buttons is a  
magazine created especially for gay women. Although Tender Buttons is appear-  
ing for the first time as an insert in Aurora, we consider it separate and hope to  
publish independently in the fall.

A few months ago, Dom and I were talking about Aurora: its changes in direction  
and aspirations over the past five years. We agreed that it was moving away from  
an earlier focus on sexuality in an attempt to broaden its audience and grow away  

from its separatist reputation. I don’t doubt that that’s a good idea—if Aurora is to  
be the only feminist magazine on campus, it certainly has to cover a wide range of  
subjects and be accessible to as many people as possible.

But we feel a need for representation. There is a large lesbian population on  
campus that is both out and invisible. For a variety of reasons, the community is  
disjointed. This probably has to do with off-campus living, closetedness, and the  
fact that a student environment is young and transient. By the time many women  
realize they are gay and start to create a comfortable social space among  
themselves, it is time to graduate and leave. We hope that Tender Buttons can pro-  
vide a source of continuity for the lesbian community.

Joan Nestle, one of the founders and caretakers of the Lesbian Herstory Ar-  
chives in New York City, talks a lot about the importance of preserving and  
unearthing mementos of past lesbian culture: books, magazines, art, letters,  
photographs, journals. The Archives make lesbians of today feel as though there is  
continuity with the past, that we are not alone, that there is a whole rich history  
and tradition that accepts us and can give us strength. When Joan gave her slide  
show during GLAD week last month, she emphasized the connection between the  
lives of past generations of lesbians and our lives today. She said that each one of  
us has a part to play in making the lesbian culture of this age: “Save your old  
papers, journals, art. We will accept them; we don’t care about bad grades. If you  
break up with your lover, don’t burn those love letters—give them to us!”

In a way, I feel that this magazine is a contribution to Joan’s Archives in two  
ways. First, as an attempt to set down the ideas and interests of lesbians at Yale in  
the spring of 1985. And as a place where hopefully next year and in years to come,  
lesbians can work out and record their ideas and express their creativity. Second-  
ly, Tender Buttons can become a focal point around which lesbians who don’t  
necessarily socialize with one another can get together and talk, debate, and feel  
powerful in the way that Joan Nestle makes us feel powerful by giving us a past  
and a tradition of community.

A lesbian magazine has a lot of possibilities. There aren’t very many precedents  
hanging around at Yale for easy inspection. Our magazine doesn’t have any expec-  
tations to live up to; it doesn’t have to be serious all of the time, and it doesn’t  
have to waste time being defensive about “having lesbian overtones” (as some-  
one’s mother once said about Aurora). Tender Buttons hopes to delve beneath the  
overtones and explore issues pertinent to lesbians both at Yale and elsewhere. We  

also want to provide a forum for humor and creativity.

One thing we want to make clear is that this magazine really isn’t aimed at  
straight people. Of course, we hope everybody on campus will read and learn from  
it (and even contribute), but the contributions are really geared toward a lesbian  
audience. We don’t want to spend a lot of time explaining and justifying being gay  
to anybody. We want to get on with it and expand our own understandings of  
what it means to be gay women at Yale and in the big world.

We could have toned the magazine down by calling it “woman-oriented” in-  
stead of lesbian. That is what happened frequently during the last two decades  
when there was a real push among lesbian-feminists to make lesbianism  
understood as an experience common to all women, something friendly, harmless,  
and somehow contained in every female, regardless of her attitude toward men.  
Del Martin, one of the founders of the first lesbian/activist magazines, The Ladder,  
explained in an interview that the early lesbian/gay rights activists tried to  
discourage women from adopting a butch attitude or way of dressing. By the  
seventies, the lesbian “look” was not drastically different from a general counter-  
culture look.

The term woman-oriented and others like it tend to mainstream the reality of  
lesbianism and make it more palatable for the heterosexual world. Adrienne Rich,  
in her essay “Compulsory Heterosexuality and Lesbian Existence,” attempts to  
create an inclusive definition of lesbianism by coining the term “Lesbian Con-  
tinuum.” For Rich, “lesbian existence comprises both the breaking of a taboo and  
the rejection of a compulsory way of life ... a direct or indirect attack on the  
male right of access to women.” She explains:

The term Lesbian Continuum includes a range of woman-identified ex-  
perience; not simply the fact that a woman has had or consciously desired  
genital sexual experience with another woman. If we expand it to embrace  
many more forms of primary intensity between and among women ... we  
begin to grasp breadths of female history and psychology that have lain out  
of reach as a consequence of limited, mostly clinical, definitions of “les-  
bianism.”

I don’t object to Rich’s attempt to rethink history with attention to woman-  
bonding and silencing by men. However, Rich's use of the term “lesbian” seems  
misplaced here. By using “lesbian” to mean any intense relationship between  
women, she shortchanges the importance of the sexual experience. Here and  
elsewhere, the phrases woman-oriented, lesbian continuum, woman-identified  
have been adopted to include all women under the heading of lesbian. But while  
my mother believes in the importance of “having a good woman friend,” she  
believes as well that sex between two women is “abhorrent and unnatural!” My  
mother and I just aren’t the same kind of lesbian. In fact, I’d be willing to say that  
in spite of the close friendships she’s had with women, she is not much of a lesbian  
at all.

So, woman-oriented isn’t enough. It makes lesbianism sound somehow  
“purified” of its very crucial sexual component, calling that sexual aspect  
“clinical” (doesn’t that sound dirty?), in an attempt to include all women in “the  
club,” which is a terribly clean club at that. Writer Cherríe Moraga observes that  
“while lesbianism is certainly accepted in feminism, it’s more of a political or in-  
tellectual concept. It seems feminism is the last rock of conservativism  
(moralism?) it will not be sexualized. It's prudish in that way...” Woman-oriented  
isn’t enough. It takes the sexiness out of loving women. It takes the saltiness, the  

smoothness, out of the whole picture. It makes it sound as if breasts are only good  
for nuzzling up to when you're feeling sad and needing to be nurtured. While that  
is indeed a nice way to be cheered up, breasts are not by definition comforting.  
They can really drive a girl wild. Keep her up nights.

Tender Buttons wants to explore lesbian sexuality and break through lesbian  
“prudishness.” In past generations, lesbians in the United States have had to lead  
lives of secret survival. The early lesbian magazines reflect the pain and anger  
caused by heterosexual oppression. Their titles alone project an unmistakable at-  
titude: Purple Rage, Lesbian Power, etc. Right now, at Yale, gay people have much  
more freedom than they have at other places or have had at other times. We want  
to use this freedom to explore the unsaid and to try to talk about what things get  
people uptight and why. We also want to express our sense of humor and accept  
the outlandish whenever it comes our way. Putting this issue together has taught  
me a lot, and it has also made me laugh a lot....

Welcome to Tender Buttons... and I hope you experience some laughing and  
learning as you poke through our articles, stories, and artwork.

Dom’s Editorial

I am a big fan of women’s basketball. I love the sport as a sport, but the games I  
went to this year became something more than sporting events for me. I don’t  
know how it happened, but somehow weekend evenings at the gym became times  
when I could enjoy the company of large numbers of lesbians.

I usually went with a certain friend. We enjoyed the games well together. We'd  
sit with a good view of everything and comment wildly. It was difficult not to ex-  
press our feelings about beautiful, muscular women moving gracefully and ag-  
gressively on the court, not to mention the fans, a quarter of whom were lesbian  
friends and acquaintances.

It was a real field day for us. We speculated about every short-haired woman,  
gossiped nastily about every lesbian who walked in, and scoped shamelessly.

We sighed over the rounded, tan shoulders of the center from Brown. Licked  
our lips at the taut, wide thighs. Laughed and exclaimed in awe at a brazen, feis-  
ty foul committed by an admired dyke.

We were having such fun—giggling, teasing, rib-poking, ogling. I hadn’t behaved  
that way since eighth grade. As a matter of fact, I missed that stage altogether.

Despite our ostensibly immature and spiritually low behavior, that atmosphere  
was deeply inspiring and sustaining for me because it was a place where my lust  
was allowed expression. Yes! I want to scope women. I want to agree almost tear-  
fully with my friend that the center from Brown does have the most delicious  
shoulders I have ever seen. And such behavior doesn’t make me feel like an objec-  
tifying pig on the street corner either.

Lusting after women doesn't feel hollow to me. It feels heavy. I sweated at  
those games; I was so full of adrenaline. And when I walked out, I was elated and  
eager because my greenest, most primary desire had been set free. This happens  
rarely, but when it does, I remember that I can want, that I do want, and suddenly  
a much-suppressed source of energy is tapped.

My lust for women expands and retracts circumstantially. In the company of  
large numbers of men who would hit me if they knew I ever thought about kissing  
their girlfriends, my lust retreats instinctively. These basketball games, certain  
bars, and exceptional dances coax my timid lust to expansiveness. It is no longer  
limited to the back of my brain, or even between my legs. It reaches my fingertips,  
the strands of my hair, behind my eyes.

I am filled with deep anticipation because I sense a promise. I sense at those  
games the potential for an erotic relationship with another. And that means the  
potential for the infinity of experiences contained in an erotic relationship.

To be denied the energy of erotic desire and the promise of erotic love by a  
heterosexist culture is subtly demoralizing. Basketball games have been essen-  
tially nourishing for me, but now the season’s over. So I’m helping to make this  
magazine. My hope is that Tender Buttons will help our community at Yale and in  
New Haven combat imposed heterosexuality by asserting the specificity of our  
sexuality and the right to our desire.

CONTENTS

Editorials

A Lesbian Voice  
Dis-covered 2

The Girl With The  
Black Eye

Lesbian Reading  
Heterosexism in Sport

Cartoon

Dyke Pioneers in the  
50's

Nob W

©