The Most Revolutionary Aspect

Michael Cowan “Mobilizing Women: Revolution in the

Revolution” concludes:

working as volunteers. Before the
Revolution less than 20% of Cuban
women received medical attention dur-

crucial roles in the leadership of the
Revolution before, during and after the
struggle,

And if they were to ask what
the most revolutionary aspect of
this Revolution is, we’d tell them
that the most revolutionary
aspect is precisely this: that is, the
revolution that is taking place
among the women in our
country.’

—Fidel Castro, 10 Dec., 1966

There is a tradition of women’s
revolutionary activity in Latin America.
Almost every nation has several ex-
amples of heroic women who played
important combatant roles in its strug-
gle for independence. However, the
guerilla movements of Latin America
have varied in their levels of commitment
to women’s rights and the libera-
tion of women specifically as women,
rather than simply as members of the
state. The degree to which a movement
concerns itself with women’s rights and
liberation seems to be directly related
to the degree of participation by
women in the revolutionary struggle.
Women’s participation and women’s
liberation were essential parts of the
revolutionary movements of Cuba, Col-
ombia, and Nicaragua.

Both the Cuban and Colombian
revolutionary movements made ex-
plicit commitments to incorporating
women into the revolutionary struggle
and to demanding their equal status
with men. The Platform of the United
Front of Colombia includes the follow-
ing provision: “Women will be part
of the Country.” In a speech delivered
in 1963, Fidel Castro proclaimed:

When we talk about women’s
rights we see that in our America
there can’t be women’s
rights...without revolution. In the
world she lives in, the woman of
the Americas must necessarily be
revolutionary!

Norma Stoltz Chinchilla, in her article

There are two aspects to the
question of mobilizing women
from a Marxist-Leninist perspec-
tive: one is the question of how
women can be mobilized on
behalf of or as part of the working
class; the other is how they can be
mobilized on behalf of their own
liberation in ways that also ad-
vance the movement for
socialism. For socialists who see
socialism as irrevocably commit-
ted to the emancipation of
women, the two questions must
be interrelated and addressed
simultaneously.

Women’s participation in the Cuban
Revolution was extensive, but few of the
women who were active in the struggle
were combatants. Of those who were,
very few were in leadership posi-
tions. The women who were in leader-
ship positions did, nevertheless, occupy
major roles in the direction and leader-
ship of the revolutionary struggle.

Three women stand out as crucial
figures in the Cuban Revolution: Célia
Sánchez, Haydée Santamaría, and
Vilma Espín. All three were very well
educated and came from comfortable
petit bourgeois families. Vilma Espín
even attended MIT and took chemistry
courses.

Sánchez, Santamaría, and Espín were
three of the Twelve who survived
the disastrous landing of the Granma in
1956. Santamaría had been fighting as
women became integral members of
the revolutionary vanguard... Castro
eventually appointed Sánchez
“second-in-command;” Espín helped
organize the November 30th uprising in
Santiago with Frank País and took
charge of the 26th of July movement in
Oriente province after País’ death. País
actually designated Espín as head of
the movement before his death.
While all three women played

it is significant that all these
women are closely linked to im-
portant male leaders—Célia as
secretary to Fidel, Vilma as the
wife of Raúl Castro and Haydée
as the wife of Armando Hart
Davalos, party leader.

Nevertheless, the leaders of the Cuban
Revolution, both male and female,
sought to mobilize women and incor-
porate them into the revolutionary
struggle.

Sánchez, Espín, and Santamaría were
by no means the only female com-
batants. Most of the women who did
participate, however, did so in the more
traditional ways, i.e., in giving medical
aid, sewing uniforms, cooking and car-
ing for soldiers, education, and liaison
and organizational work.

The tremendous gains made by
Cuban women after the revolution
were a direct result of the high rank
that women achieved in that struggle.
The three female leaders of the Cuban
Revolution all occupied very high posi-
tions in the revolutionary government.
Célia Sánchez was Castro's ad-
ministrative secretary and later was the
Secretary of the Council of Ministers.
Haydée Santamaría sat on the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of
Cuba and later became the director of
the Casa de las Américas and head of
the Organization for Latin American
Solidarity. Vilma Espín served as
the founder and president of the
Federation of Cuban Women (FMC).

The FMC, founded shortly after the
Revolution, has been the pioneer
women’s organization in Cuba. Its ob-
jectives were “to raise the ideological,
political, cultural and scientific level of
women in order to incorporate them in-
to the tasks assigned by the Revolution
and so, to allow them the role they are
entitled to play in the new society.”

Two decades after the Revolution,
the FMC is significantly more powerful
than it was at its inception. At the time
of its formation in 1960, the FMC had
17,000 members. In 1980, it claims 2.8
million Cuban women as members; ap-
proximately 80% of women old
enough for membership belong to the
FMC.

A major early accomplishment of
the FMC was its role in the literacy
campaign. 91,000 women participated
as alfabetizadoras in the literacy cam-
paign, which succeeded in reducing the
nation’s illiteracy rate to a mere 3.9%.
The FMC organized the women’s
militia, which took part in the defense
of the island during the Bay of Pigs in-
vasion. Other accomplishments of the
FMC include training over 100,000
women a year for jobs in all fields of
work, and an active campaign to com-
bat machismo. Representatives from
the FMC attend sessions of Cuba’s
legislative body and work closely with
the Committees for the Defense of the
Revolution (CDRs).

The FMC has directly helped to ef-
fect many changes in the lives of
Cuban women. In 1953, just six years
before the Revolution, only 9% of
Cuban women were in the work force;
of that 9%, most were employed as
domestics in slave-like conditions. But
in 1975, 23% of Cuban women were in
salaried positions, with many more

engaged in childbirth. In 1974, it was 95%.
Other gains in health care include the
reduction of the rates of infant mortali-
ty and women’s death in childbirth to
the lowest in Latin America. Women
have also made striking educational
gains; in 1974, women comprised 50%
of scientists, 60% of biochemists and
biologists, 22.7% of technicians, 35%
of agriculturalists, and 50% of doctors.

The FMC has played an important
role in securing legal changes that af-
fect women. Abortions are both legal
and free, child-care is readily available.
Furthermore, the use of women as
domestic servants and in prostitution
has been outlawed. Prostitution has
been almost completely eradicated,
though it still continues in several
isolated sections of Havana.

Although the progress of Cuban
women has been truly revolutionary,
there remain some problems. The
emergence of a “second shift” or “double
day” has been chief among these.
Women who work a full day outside
the home are still expected to perform
the traditional women’s tasks of
housework and childcare. This double
day is at the base of several of the pro-
blems confronting Cuban women, such
as a high drop-out rate (76%) from jobs
after only one year of employment.
Another problem is that women are
underrepresented in leadership posi-
tions. A survey conducted by the Con-
federation of Cuban Workers to find
out the causes of this imbalance showed
that 85.7% of the women said that
the time commitments of their
domestic duties made it impossible for
them to assume any leadership role.

To combat the detrimental effects of
the second shift on the level of political
participation by women, the FMC
helped to enact the Family Code in
1975. This Code was very controversial
and there was a great deal of discussion
on its recommended programs. Briefly,
the Code seeks to ensure increased
equality between husband and wife.
The major aspect of the Code
stipulates that husbands must share
50% of housework and childcare with
their wives. Failure to comply is
punishable by law.

The FMC and the Cuban Revolution
have had a profound effect on Cuban
women. Before the Revolution, most
women aspired to be no more than
mothers and wives. Many were
domestic servants. Since then, there
has been a total transformation in
women’s lives and social status that
would have been unthinkable without
the role that women played in the
Cuban Revolution and without the
Revolution itself.

The Nicaraguan Revolution presents
perhaps the most remarkable example
of women’s participation in a revolu-
tionary struggle. The pattern of
women’s involvement in the Nica-
raguan Revolution, both before and
after the Sandinista victory, closely
follows the model of the Cuban
Revolution; but there are some fun-
damental differences between the two
revolutions, and between the two
groups of women who helped to make
them.

There were two major differences
between the Cuban and Nicaraguan
Revolutions. One of these is duration:
Cuban guerillas achieved victory
relatively quickly, while the
Nicaraguan Revolution was a pro-