Page Four

Random Diatribe

By TRINIDAD L. TONIES

The essence of religious experience is
the celebration of life. Often, in-
stitutionalized religions have warped this
area of expression. Similarly, the essential
experience of interpersonal celebration is
perverted in too many instances by in-
stitutionalized forms of love.

I find concepts such as monogamy, arbit-
rary filial responsibility, and sexual prefer-
ence, to be wildly oppressive to human life,
and I am bored by melodramatic gossip.

What do you mean by saying that “we're
just friends” or “they’re lovers” or that you
“love” someone because s/he is related to
you? 
Many people are so afraid of emotional
vulnerability that they've contrived
categories in which to file their interac-
tions and elaborate codes from which to
draw their expectations. They have created
“physical attraction” and “serious com-
mitment,” and the almighty Relationship
to absolve them from devotion past the
point of convenience or honesty beyond
the point of “falling in love.”

Too often, it is taken for granted that
people will attempt to gain control over
one another and themselves by pledging
territorial rights and labeling everything
in sight.

Distinctions between “lover” and
“friend” and other personal and interper-
sonal categories center around sexuality.
It’s ridiculous to separate this form of ex-
pression from the rest of human interaction
and to accord it such pivotal significance.

The energy that is expended on manipu-
lation, gossip, jealousy, intrigue would be
better spent on straightforward, caring,
exchanges — whether in the classroom, in
politics, or on the dance floor. And as we
cease to diffuse our energy through the
former, the divisions between the latter
categories will gradually dissolve.

By indulging ourselves in script playing
rather than relating creatively to one
another, we “save” ourselves from emo-
tional pain and transcendent fun, simul-
taneously.

Autonomy

Don’t want sugar  
Don’t want meat  
Don’t want any dependency.  
Don’t want friends  
Don’t want you  
Don’t want no one to listen to.  
Don’t want movies  
Don’t want pills  
Don’t want no more boring thrills.  
Don’t want bills -  
Don’t want work  
Don’t want to need money to go berserk.  
Don’t want jewelry  
Don’t want clothes  
Don’t want the “real me” in those.  
Don’t want boys  
Don’t want hets;  
Don’t want dykes in bourgeois jets.  
Don’t want fucking  
Don’t want cars  

Don’t wanna go fast when I can’t go far.

Don’t want Reagan  
Don’t want nukes  

Don’t want death it makes me puke.  
Don’t want pop -  
Don’t want punk  

Don’t want to hear that vapid junk.  
Don’t want dates  
Don’t want romance  

Don’t want those games I want to dance.  
I WANT TO DANCE  
I WANT TO DANCE  

LOSE THOSE GAMES  
I WANT TO DANCE  

Summer ’81

P.A. Non-
Discrimination Ordinance

Voter registration for the November
election. Palo Alto City Council members
Eyerely, Witherspoon and Fizzano were
opposed to putting Measure B on the
ballot.

The Palo Alto Coalition for Equal
Rights (PACER) was formed to work
for the passage of Measure B. They
have developed six working commit-
tees: Finance, Education — to prepare
written materials in support of Mea-
sure B; Media, Women’s Caucus, Out-
reach — to involve people in the cam-
paign; and Precinct — to organize an
efficient method of contacting voters.

The precinct committee has been re-
gistering voters during September; Oc-
tober will be devoted to telephoning
registered voters and walking pre-
cincts (in pairs).

Those who want to join committees
or contact voters should call PACER
856-1920. Contributions can be sent to

September 28, 1981

Discrimination

By SHARON SILVERSTEIN

In less than two months, Palo Alto voters
will go to the polls on Measure B, an ordi-
nance designed to prevent discrimination
based on sexual orientation in housing,
jobs, and business services within the city.

Employers and labor organizations with
five or more employees, and all employ-
ment agencies will be required to post
notice that such discrimination is prohi-
bited. Failure to comply with the notice
requirement will result in fines.

People or businesses which discriminate
based on a person’s sexual orientation, ac-
tual or rumored, will be liable for damages
suffered, court costs, attorney’s fees, and
will be enjoined from continuing the viola-
tion.

The ordinance defines sexual orientation
as “having manifesting an emotional
and/or physical attraction to another per-
son or persons of the same and/or opposite
sex.” Nothing in this definition shall be
construed to include practices which are
unlawful under state or federal law.

Employers with less than five workers
(less than 6% of the Palo Alto work force),
owner occupied homes or duplexes (less
than 3% of PA rental housing), religious
organizations, and domestic services
employment (including childcare) within
the home of the employer are exempt from
the provisions of Measure B; a necessary
political decision according to Ed Christ-

politics, or on the dance floor. And as we
cease to diffuse our energy through the

Following is Stanford’s
official policy on
sexual harassment.

It is the policy of Stanford University to maintain the
University community, as a place of work and study for
staff, faculty, and students, free of sexual harassment
and all forms of sexual intimidation and exploitation. All
students, staff, and faculty should be aware both that the
University is concerned and prepared to take action to
prevent and correct such behavior, and that individuals
who engage in such behavior are subject to discipline.
Conduct between students is governed by the Fun-
damental Standard.

The determination of what constitutes sexual
harassment will vary with the particular circumstances,
but it may be described generally as repeated and un-
wanted sexual behavior, such as physical contact and
verbal comments or suggestions, which adversely af-
fects the working or learning environment. Coercive
behavior, including suggestions that academic or em-
ployment reprisals or rewards will follow the refusal or
granting of sexual favors, constitutes gross misconduct
and will not be tolerated. In such cases, a single incident
would establish grounds for action.

Anyone who is subjected to offensive sexual behavior
is encouraged to pursue the matter through the informal
or formal procedures described below. Generally the
informal procedures afford an opportunity to explore a
problem and consider alternative means for its
resolution.

Informal procedures
1. The Ombudsman's office procedure

Without feeling constrained by specific definitions,
faculty, staff, and students should feel free to make
complaints concerning allegations of sexual harassment
to the Office of the Ombudsman. If requested, complaints
will be held in confidence, and counseling will be provided
by the Ombudsman’s office. No investigation or action
against the person accused will be taken on behalf of the
person complaining, however, unless the complainant
consents to be identified to the one accused in
connection with the investigation.

On the request of the person making the complaint,
the Ombudsman will consult with the designate of the
Provost (in the case of a member of the faculty or
academic staff charged with sexual harassment) or the
Office of the Dean of Students (when the person accused
is a student).

Appropriate sanctions or other corrective measures
will be decided upon by these officials, if it is determined
by them that proscribed behavior has occurred. As in
any other case in which official action is taken, if an
accused employee disagrees with the determination or
the appropriateness of the corrective measures, that
individual may contest them through the regular faculty
or staff grievance procedures. In the case of students, if
corrective measures are not accepted by the student, or
if disciplinary action is considered appropriate, the
student judiciary process will be followed.

2. Other informal processes

Staff complaints may also be brought to an Employee
Relations Representative in the Personnel Office for
informal handling, in which the procedure will resemble
that for the Ombudsman’s Office described above.
Requests for confidentiality will be observed by Employee
Relations Representatives to the extent consistent with
protecting the welfare of other employees.

All employees should also feel free to discuss sexual
harassment problems directly with their immediate
supervisors, or with the next-level supervisors (including
department chairs and deans in the case of faculty and
academic staff), and ultimately with the cognizant vice-
president, if the situation has not been resolved to the
satisfaction of the complainant. Supervisors have
general responsibility for the maintenance of the working
environment, and have the authority to institute
disciplinary procedures when appropriate.

Similarly, students may wish to consult directly with
the Office of the Dean of Students, with the supervisor of
the person complained of, or, for support and advice,
with the Title IX officer (Sally Mahoney, Registrar and
Associate Provost), their advisors, resident assistant, or
a counselor at Cowell.

Formal grievance procedures

Depending on the University position of the individual
who feels he or she has been sexually harassed and the
particular circumstances, one of the established formal
grievance procedures for faculty, staff, and students may
also apply. In those cases, the formal procedures may be
used either instead of or in conjunction with the informal
procedures. Informal procedures will not, however,
extend the normal time limit for making formal complaints.
If the individual concerned wishes to pursue the
grievance, he or she should be sure to check the rules for
the applicable procedure and file on time.

Formal grievance procedures at Stanford are

Nonacademic Staff Grievance Procedure (see
University Guide memo 22.10) 

Collective Bargaining Agreement for unit members

Academic Staff Grievance Procedure (see Academic
Staff Handbook)

Faculty Grievance Procedure (see University Guide
Memo 21.4)

Student Academic Grievance Procedure (see
Stanford University Bulletin, Information and Regulations
Governing Student Conduct and Procedures for Their
Enforcement)

Student Employee Grievance Procedure (see
University Guide Memo 61)

Student Nonacademic Grievance Procedure pursuant
to Title IX (consult Sally Mahoney, Associate Provost and
Registrar)