An Interview with Hazel Carby-

my own history, except what was told  
to me by my family. Later, I became in-  
volved in wanting to find out more.  
After undergraduate school and having  
worked in advertising for a year (and  
hating it!), I decided that one of the  
things that fascinated me most was  
what constituted my own education. I  
went to the Institute of Education at  
London University, and found that in-  
deed I was intrigued with what I learn-  
ed about my own education.

I taught in a high school for eight  
years and became involved in fighting  
not only for anti-racist education but  
for Black Studies programs. In Britain,  

they decided early that they were going  
to learn from the experience of the  
United States and decided not to have  
Black Studies programs in high schools.  
Instead, they have what is called a  
‘multi-cultural education’. It is actually  
printed in government documents that  
what they want to avoid is black  
teachers teaching black kids. The high  
school I taught at was located in a poor  
area of East London, where there was a  
high immigrant population. Being the  
sympathetic black teacher, they took  
me off the timetable, which meant that  
I did not have to go around and  
substitute for other teachers when they  
were absent. They gave me a room of  
my own, and I was sent black kids who  
were thrown out of their classes. I was  
placed in a punishing situation, but I  
started to teach these students the  
equivalent of Afro-American Studies  
here. That was seen as a political act,  
and everyone knows that politics are  
not supposed to merge with education.  
There was no room for what the head-  
master described as ‘Black Power’ —  

Even though I was head of a depart-  
ment, I became more involved in  
fighting the administration. After much  
frustration, I decided to go back to  
graduate school.

In terms of an inspiration for unear-  
thing a black women’s history in par-  
ticular, I can say that it stems back to  
my participation in the black women’s  
autonomous movement. Together we  
realized that it is not just black history  
we were seeking, but more specifically  
a black women’s history. I have always  
been in Literature and had read many  
works by black women writers. This  
body of literature has been influential  
to me, for practical reasons, initially. It  
has proved useful to us as women in a  
movement. You could say that it has  
been a political motivation, which I  

POCO  
LOCO  

Mexican Restaurant  

also consider to be a motivation for my  
dissertation, Black Women Writers in the  
Diaspora: The Caribbean, USA, and  
Great Britain.  
M: How long have you been at Yale  
and what support have you received  
for your work?  
H: I first met Charles Davis (former  
Chairman of the Afro-American Studies  
Department) when I was visiting a  
friend of mine here at Yale. I was work-  
ing on my PhD, and by then had drained  
the British Museum of its resources. He  
suggested that I come to America for  
my research. I came to Yale as a  
Special Student in fall of 1980. I work-  
ed with Skip Gates, Bob Stepto and  
John Blassingame. John Blassingame  
introduced me to the historical  
methodology which I lacked for ex-  
amining black women in slavery.

I was asked if I could come back and  
teach for a year. If it wasn’t for the sup-  
port I’ve received from the Afro-  

American Studies program at Yale, I  
wouldn't be here. Even my studies were  
partially paid for by the department.

I've also received support from some  
of the women in the Women’s Studies  
and American Studies departments. I  
belong to a Women’s Studies faculty  
seminar, which in fact, has a seminar  
this semester dealing with race and  
gender, and is examining literature by  
women of color.

Most of my intellectual and emo-  
tional support and inspiration has been  
from women associated with the Afro-  
American Studies department,  
especially Mae Henderson, Caroline  
Jackson and Susan Willis.

H: No, I will be teaching at Wesleyan  
University.

M: How many women does that leave  
teaching in the Afro-American Studies  
Department?

H: Unless they employ another woman  
full time, that will leave only Silvia  
Boone and Nancy Stepan.

M: Will the “Black Women and Their  
Fictions” course be taught next year?  
Who will be teaching it?

H: The course will be taught by Henry-  
Louis Gates.

M: How do you feel about a man  
teaching this course given that it’s an  
Afro-American Studies/Women’s  
Studies course? Do you feel that it  
would be more appropriate for a  
woman in the field of literature to  
teach the course?

Full Bar—Sizzling Drinks  

“The Best Mexican Food in New Haven”  

8 Whalley Ave. at Broadway  

H: The Women’s Studies department  
has no objection to listing courses  
taught by men. Their primary concern  
is that the question of gender should be  
raised as a central issue.

It would be beneficial if Afro-  
American Studies had a black woman  
concerned with teaching black  
women’s literature at some point in the  
future. I’m glad the course is being  
taught at all, instead of it disappearing.  
I think a problem will arise with the  
relation of these female writers to the  
constitution of an Afro-American  
literary tradition. This returns to a point  
I made earlier; the solution to black  
women’s absence from history is not to  
seek black women writers and insert  
them into a tradition that has already  
been formed, without making changes  
in the assumptions on which that tradi-  
tion is based.

There are many interesting questions  
that these black women authors ask.  
This goes from Linda Brent and the  
slave narratives onwards. These are  
questions that the Afro-American  
literary tradition has overlooked. If  
such questions were actually con-  
sidered, they would transform the very  
basis of this tradition, the notion of  
what we think this tradition is.

If you look at Robert Stepto’s  
Beyond the Veil, you'll see that it traces  
the roots of an Afro-American literary  
tradition, and quite correctly, to the  
slave narratives. Nevertheless, because  
the primary agents of the book are  
male, it means that a lot of the ques-  
tions asked by female slave narratives  
are not present. You would simply have  
narratives in ‘male’ terms.

In fact, it will be very interesting to  
see if those questions raised by  
teaching Afro-American women’s  
literature will actually reflect back on  
the general work of a very established  
and very successful black male literary  
critic.  
M: What inspirational thoughts can you  
leave us with?  
H: We can’t expect that pressure for  
courses which encompass the history  
and experiences of women of color will  
be applied from the top down. Both  
Afro-American Studies and Women’s  
Studies were introduced in response to  
a demand, not only from students and  
faculty, but from movements outside  
of universities. The latter is perhaps the  
most decisive. It is doubtful that  
Women’s Studies would exist had it not  
been for the women’s liberation move-  
ment. The notion that Women’s Studies  
is not necessarily related to feminist  
organizing is a recent, and I think  
disturbing phenomenon, for where else  
does it have its roots? The necessity of  
proving that Women’s Studies can pro-  
duce excellent scholarship must not  
lead to its divorce from feminism and  
the Women’s Liberation movement as  
sources of energy and inspiration.  
Despite economic recession which  
most acutely affects marginal  
disciplines within universities and  
marginalized people in society, I am  
still optimistic. Women of color are  
organizing themselves and demanding  
an end to all the forms of oppression  
that circumscribe their lives. This voice  
has strength, it is not that of a victim,  
and it will have to be recognized. Those  
of us who press for recognition  
within universities cannot afford to  
ignore the majority of our sisters who  
will never have any relation to  
permeate their lives. We need to use  
any knowledge we gain for our collec-  
tive advancement, not just for the  
enhancement of our individual  
academic reputations.

Welcomes contributions  
on politics, fiction,  
poetry,  

Erbl Teoue  

2575 VOLE  
STATION -