My own experience at NHPBW  
leads me to believe that women in the  
Yale community are going to outside  
agencies. We have received calls from  
graduate students, married students,  
faculty wives, and undergraduates. Yet  
we estimate that for every woman who  
calls us, there are six who do not.  

Another explanation for the  
underutilization of Yale counseling and  
legal resources is the fear that the Yale  
structure will not serve the battered  
woman. Sharon said, “I didn’t seek help  
from Yale because I had been denied  
help from authority figures before.”  
Valerie did seek help within Yale, but  
“didn’t like mental hygiene” at the  
Department of Undergraduate Health.  
“I didn’t like the name, I didn’t like the  
people who saw me. They seemed  
bored and did not project a feeling of  
creativity. I asked myself, ‘Are they go-  
ing to be able to support me?’ ”  

To a certain extent these doubts con-  
cerning the various Yale support struc-  
tures are well-founded. Even when the  
university administration does act, the  
efficacy of official sanctions is limited.  
“My dean and I informed my  
boyfriend’s college master about the  
situation. His master said she would  
call him and write him, telling him he  
wasn’t allowed in my residential col-  
lege any more and if he did enter my  
college, he would be taken before the  
Executive Committee. I thought it was  
all taken care of, and then about a  
week later I came in my room and he  
was standing there.” Nonetheless, he  
was not brought before the Executive  
Committee.  

Moreover, there are structural  
mechanisms at Yale which work direct-  
ly against a woman who is battered by  
a Yale student. “The reason I didn’t  
have my second boyfriend arrested,”  
explained Sharon, “is the Yale bonding  
fund.” The bonding fund is a financial  
resource set aside specifically to bail  
out any Yale student who has been ar-  
rested. The severity of the charge is not  
a criterion: the fund can be used on  
behalf of a Yale student arrested for  
civil disobedience, shoplifting, or for  
beating up his girlfriend. “I heard about  
one woman who had her boyfriend ar-  
rested. He was bonded through the  
fund, was out in a matter of hours, and  
he went back to her apartment and  
beat her up again. I knew that would  
happen to me, too.”  

Yale University’s official  
policy regarding battering is stated in the  
Undergraduate Regulations under  
“General Conduct.” The Yale College  
Faculty “affirmed... its belief that  
physical restriction, coercion, or in-  
timidation of any member of the Yale  
community is contrary to the basic  
principles of the University ...and that  
such action will ordinarily result in tem-  
porary or permanent separation from  
the College.” The Undergraduate  
Regulations further states that “these  
regulations are concerned with con-  
duct on campus, but students must  
recognize that the College exists within  
a larger community that has its own  
laws and standards of behavior and  
that membership in the College confers  
no exemption from those laws and  
standards.”  

Assault is a criminal offense in the  
State of Connecticut, yet most bat-  
terers are neither arrested, convicted,  
nor sentenced. Batterers at Yale, an in-  
stitution which exists within this larger  
community, receive similar lenient  
treatment. This leniency exists despite  
the fact that New Haven Police  
Specific Guidelines mandate an arrest  
in a domestic dispute where there is  
probable cause, whether the injured  
party wishes to press charges or not. I  
attempted to contact two Yale women  
who had had difficulty reprimanding  
their Yale boyfriends through the Yale  
administration and the New Haven  
system. For personal, quite understan-  
dable, reasons, they chose not to res-  
pond.  

Their silence is precisely what I want  
to end. The problem will not disappear  
if we keep quiet. The effects of batter-  
ing go beyond the incident of violence.  
Battering produces negative repercus-  
sions which affect the way victims  
relate to other people. A four-year  
hiatus at Yale College, an advanced  
degree, or the promise of a successful  
future does not alter this situation.  

“Joan feels that, “my rage isn’t so  
enclosed any more. I pretty much know  
that the battering wasn’t my fault, yet I  
still have the tendency to think that  
everything is my fault. I have a lot of  
guilt. My father potentially ruined for  
me my ability to love and be loved.”  
Sharon says, “Part of it was my own  
problem. I was too quick to excuse his  
behavior because he came from  
a violent home. I no longer have the  
self-destructive egotism to think that I  
can help someone who is that messed  
up. I am now involved in a very loving,  
supportive relationship, but it has been  
a lot harder to trust my new boyfriend.  
I worry about men taking me as a sex  
object, and I doubt their intentions.”  

The emotional scars last a lifetime,  
and unless they are worked out, the cy-  
cle could repeat itself. “I’m still afraid  
of my mother, I wish I wasn’t, I wish I  
could talk to her about it. It’s very bad  
going home. I regress to the age of six  
and am horrified and terrified of how  
much power she has over me. My  
mother was beaten by my grand-  
mother. I’m sure I won't repeat the cy-  
cle, but I may have to work hard to  

cont. on p.29°  

onEAR  
ZNOWLEDE,,

=<  

<>  

Disex paircuw™  

1146 Chapel St,  
New Haven, CT  

Why get just a good  

“You shall or meyer b  

EDITH SODERGRAN: TWO POEMS  

Translated by Alissa Shethar with thanks to Professor C.G. Schoolfield and  

Christina Buchmann  

Edith Södergran was born in St. Petersburg in 1892 to Swedish-Finnish  
parents and lived for most of her life in Raivola, Finland. She attended a  
German school in St. Petersburg until 1907 when her father died of  
tuberculosis. In 1908 she suffered the first attack of tuberculosis and  
was sent to a sanatorium. By this time she had written a great deal of  
poetry in German and a little in Russian, but because of her health she  
was forced to give up plans to study at Helsinki. In 1916 she sent her  
first collection of Swedish poems, Dikter, to be published, which won  
her the attention of literary critics and the support of Hagar Olsson,  
whom she referred to as “my sister” in many of her later poems. These  
poems are taken from Dikter, which is considered to be part of her  
“naturalistic stage,” and is followed by her “Nietzschean stage” and her  
“religious stage.” After a very isolated, but courageously lived life, she  
died of tuberculosis at the age of 31. She is acknowledged as one of  
Scandinavia’s earliest and foremost modernist poets.  

FIORE IOI III UII OR IOI IOTO TOR II ted IO  

untitled  

I saw a tree which was taller than all others  
and hanging full of unreachable fruit;  
I saw a great church with open doors  
and all who came out were pale and strong  

and ready to die;  

I saw a woman who smiling and painted  
threw dice for her happiness and saw that she lost.  

A circle was drawn around these things  

which no one can transgress.  

sorrows  

Fair sister, don’t go up into the mountains: they deceived me,  

they had nothing to offer my longing.  

For remembrance I broke a branch of the pine  
which shadowed the path as bountifully as a plume,  

and sought my way back  

to the sea  

in my old tracks.  

The sea has broken a thousand toys and thrown them up on the sand—  
In vain I seek an ornament that would give my beauty luster  
Come, sit down beside me, I shall tell you about my sorrows,  

beauty  

and I shall offer you my habit of listening.  

from  

Samlade dikter  

by Edith  

Södergran. © Holger Schildts, Forlag,  

1957.  

One of the resolves of feminist literary criticism is to “unearth” the  
history of literature written by women, and to cultivate an awareness  
of it by republishing and reconsidering women writers of the past. Un-  
til the academic and popular conceptions of “classic literature” are  
revised to perpetuate and venerate a tradition of women writers, a  
constant effort must be made to keep a proper perspective ourselves.  
Since female authors are also translated less frequently, it is often dif-  
ficult to be aware of foreign literature written by women. With this in  
mind Aurora invites translations, histories or criticism of literature writ-  

ten by women in foreign countries.  

DAVID GILL  
A Florist in the European Tradition  

250 Church Street  
New Haven, Ct. 06510  
Phone: 624-4243