very low with under-wiring and one broken strap,  
pinned with a tiny gold safety pin. Over everything,  
I wore an enormous, frayed London Fog, a tan one  
with endless pockets and a belt that I never tied. I'd  
found it in a train, a bic pen in one pocket, a train  
schedule in the other.  

I cut my own hair, chopping it haphazardly around  
the neck. Yet every month when Eva performed the  
mysterious ritual of dying her hair with henna, I  
allowed her to do my own, to feel her fingers on my  
scalp, to pretend to be her twin, to share in her world.  
She boiled the water on the tiny stove in her apart-  
ment and mixed the powdered leaves, the bark, the  
dried root of the Persian plant, always the right pro-  
portion to get the inky-black that set off her pale skin.  
I laughed at her, said, “My raven-haired lovely, O  
thou of ebony tresses, O dark one!” I crawled through  
the disorder surrounding the bookcase, my head  
shellacked with the excrement-colored paste that  
smelled so much like fresh clay, and dug out the  
Thesaurus.  

“O, beclouded, obscured! O, black-blackish-brackish,  
inky atrament! Nigrescent-coaly-cocoa-creme! Sooty  
Cimmerian!”  

She pulled the book from my hands, her own head  
caked with the paste; wrapped in cellophane, “Your  
words are unclear,” she cried, elegiac, “livid, fuliginous,  
obscure. Come my black-sheep, my ne’er-do-well;  
blackout with me, syncopious one!”  

She tossed the book back into the chaos of the  
shelves and pulled out one of the shoe-boxes hidden  
in the closet (she always saved them, stacking each  
one in the recesses of the narrow cabinet, filling  
them all with the bits of trash she couldn’t do without:  
photographs, newspaper clippings, old horoscopes,  
religious medals she had found in the streets) and,  
sitting on the floor, legs folded under her flower-  
printed kimono, using the footstool as a table, she  
would prepare a pipeful of hashish, lighting it  
with one of the long wooden matches she also kept  
in the box.  

I bought the pipe for her one day, in a shop in the  
Arab quarter, near the art museum. A tiny pipe made  
to be cupped in the hand, to hold only a shaving of  
the drug. We loved the haziness of hashish, the  
Delacroix voluptuousness, the golden sweetness.  
Sebastien sneered at us, calling us the Assassins, the  
cloud-dwellers. He of course preferred coke, because  
it was beat, because it was jazz. But we laughed back  
at him; Eva coolly, letting it be known that she pre-  

While she unwrapped the hash from its tin-foil shell,  
I made a pot of jasmine tea and set the alarm to go  
off in an hour. The steam and the smoke twisted  
around Eva’s arms when she handed the lit pipe to  
me. After a while, I saw eels in the waves, otters  
sliding through warm currents.  

By the time the buzzer rang, we would be giggling  
for the hundredth time over her enormous copy of  
Little Nemo in Slumberland. When the alarm  
sounded she cried, “Nemo, Nemo, don’t wake up!”  
falling on the floor in helpless laughter. And I said,  
“But Princess, I don’t want to go home!” reaching for  
the buzzing clock.  

We'd both sneak out into the hallway, lit by a bulb  
covered with a dusty, glass shell, and run into the  
bathroom, giggling like children in an empty house.  
I put a franc in the slot by the shower stall: always my  
job; I loved sliding the heavy coin warmed by my  
hand into the cold metal groove. We threw off our  
robes and both jumped into the shower, dizzily  
rubbing the half-dried henna paste from each other’s  
hair. Inevitably forgetting a towel, we would run back  
to the room, leaving wet footprints on the linoleum  
of the hallway, our wet hair shining, an identical  
shade of black. For those hours we were happy,  
atemporal, but the tension returned with hunger, with  
darkness: “Will you stay for dinner? Will you stay the  
night?”  

I was tired, eating what was offered, but I left my few  
things at Eva’s. Early on she gave me a key to her  
room, strung on a long bit of scarlet floss that she  
demanded I wear around my neck. Often, after I'd  
been gone for several days, perhaps hitching a ride  
to Normandy, just to walk between Bayeux and  
Caen through fields of poppies, fields of mustard, I'd  
come crawling back, late at night, having walked for  
an hour or so through the city streets, reacclimating  
myself, trying to persuade myself to return to the  
door my key fit.  

I would come in the door silently; on a good night  
she would already be in bed, asleep, silent. Then I  
would strip by the door, fumble for a franc on her  
dresser and go to the bathroom: to shower. When I  
came back, wet, shivering, the key still dangling  
between my breasts, the cord sticking to my skin, I'd  
slip in beside her, fill the space that she never filled,  
even in her sleep.  

Then I could be tired, could feel small and alone.  
She slept so deeply; it was impossible to wake her up  
abruptly. Pulled from her dreams, she was like some-  
one drugged for surgery. She would fight frantically  
against sleep, but I knew that she did not  
want to be disturbed. With her mouth open, her hair  
tangled around her head, she was so beautiful. I  
would allow myself to respond to her, let her incense  
smell overcome me. I smoothed the hair from her  
eyes, woke her slowly, whispering. She floated slowly  
to the surface, aware of my presence before she was  
aware of being awake, and she would roll softly into  
my arms, the twin points of her breasts meeting mine,  
flattening like warm balloons as we pressed close in  
welcome.  

I knew I could stay there whenever I wanted, that  
she was always glad to see me, but it was just that  
that kept me away, that drove me out into the streets.  
It took me a certain amount of strength to live the  
life I'd created for myself, to always be breaking links  
of a chain, to step into trains without a look back-  
wards, to wake up in a strange city and try not to  
remember the streets of another. Eva reminded me  
of what I considered my weakness: a desire for  
stability, for home. I who never wanted to stop, who  
slept for four hours a night, would find myself run-  
ning out to buy croissants, coming home to make  
coffee before she woke up (she always slept late into  
the morning), and then waking her up gently with  
breakfast in bed, getting her up early enough so that  
she wouldn’t be late for class.  

If I stayed with her I would soon become disgusted  
with myself, with the contentment I felt, with her  
calm. I would wake up after having crashed out,  
exhausted after a few nights without sleep, only to  
find her sitting beside me on the bed, watching me  
sleep. I would come back from the library, having  
spent a day reading ancient history, to discover all of  
my clothes cleaned, my things set in order. I could  
only spend a few days with her and then things  
would begin to go wrong. I'd wait until a minor disa-  
greement was an excuse to slam the door and I'd  
walk out, forgetting her, knowing she wouldn’t cry  
till later.  
Then, after a few days, even a week, I would show  
up at Paolo’s and she would be there. She would try  
not to notice me, continue laughing, mystifying Alain  
with her theories about Egyptian Art and Her-  
meneutics, but I would see the tension in her hand  
trying to hold the empty glass steady. I would walk  
across the room silently, acknowledging greetings  
with a nod, and then settle into my chair, the one that  
by unspoken agreement I possessed. Paolo would  
bring me a cup of his wonderful coffee, a cinnamon  
stick floating in it, and I would follow him to his tiny  
studio to admire his latest work, I would sit on one  
of the high, unpainted stools and he would hand me,  
one by one, each new drawing or perhaps place a  
body in the different costumes she wore. He first