AURORA September 28, 1981.

OPINIONS  
ARE YOU SCARED  

Page Two  

(YET)?  

item: A bill is signed into law which prohibits the use of Legal  
Services by an individual or group “advocating a homosexual  
lifestyle.” The Supreme Court held that parents have no right  
to a court-appointed (free) lawyer in a hearing to determine their  
fitness to raise their child. Plans are underway in Congress to  
eliminate Legal Services entirely.  

item: The Immigration Department prevents known gays from  
entering the country. Gay bars are raided in every city. The  
leaders of a gay civil rights organization are arrested on morals  
charges in cooperation with the FBI. Gay servicemen and  
women are drummed out of the Armed Services.  

item: Federal affirmative action guidelines are scrapped. The  
President proposes to eliminate sexual harassment regulations  
and Title IX Equal Opportunity in Education guidelines as well.  

item: Federal abortion aid to indigent women is eliminated,  
including the elimination of aid to victims of rape and incest.  
Forced sterilization continues to affect at least a quarter of all  
Native American and Puerto Rican women.  

item: Thousands of CETA jobs are eliminated by federal budget  
cuts. The President suggests that Congress make cuts in social  
security, food stamp, school lunch, and student loan programs.  
A tax rebate is approved which gives proportionally more buy-  
ing power to rich citizens.  

item: Guidelines for bilingual education are eliminated by the  
federal government. Funds for special education are curtailed,  
forcing the elimination of many programs. Tax credits for pri-  
vate schools are proposed in Congress.  

item: Congress members have introduced legislation to repeal  
the Voting Rights Act, to pass a “Family Protection” Act, a  
“Human Life” Amendment, and a bill to prohibit high court  
jurisdiction over abortion and school busing cases. Legal scho-  
lars suspect that the Supreme Court may uphold the Constitu-  
tionality of these proposed laws.  

item: The FCC votes to recommend that Congress scrap the  
broadcasting Fairness Doctrine and equal time rules. R AW con t AGAINST  
item: Native American peoples are forced off their land so  
America can have coal. The Mount Diablo nuclear power plant  
is being built on an earthquake fault. The federal government  
sends military advisors to the right-wing government in El  
Salvador. The President proposes to send AWACS to Saudi  
Arabia.  

All information is from the SF Chronicle, Plexus, and the  
Gay Community News. Watch your local newspaper for  
further details.  

The Aurora collective for this issue is:  

Beatrice Blatteis  
and Butch  

“To Sir; With Love”  

Dear Dad,  

Hello. When we talked, I felt like you  
were saying a lot of random negative things  
about the Women’s Writing Center and  
feminism without having checked them out,  
and that you weren’t willing to discuss  
your statements. That was totally unex-  
pected, and it made me both bummed and  
angry.  

If you understood feminism, you  
wouldn’t say it is narrow. If you under-  
stood my relationship to feminism, you  
wouldn’t say I was limiting my perspec-  
tive.  

You said it’s “shit” to write for and about  
women. Every writer limits her/his audi-  
ence as soon as s/he writes on a page by  
using a language, a world of experiences, a  
set of images that cannot be accessible to  
everyone. I don’t believe that feminist writ-  
ing is only for women, though I would  
agree that it is just for people who acknow-  
ledge that women are people whose exis-  
tence is valid and that everyone has a right  
to live in a nurturing world.  

Shakespeare wrote to and about men.  
You say it’s important to respect him and  
other “classic” institutions because if  
something lasts, there’s a good reason for it.  

Shakespeare lasted because it has been  
the opinion of white upper-class males  
(who have labelled their views “objective”  
for too long) saw fit to perpetuate his work.  
His work came into existence only because  
his gender and class provided him with the  
privilege of an education, and the freedom  
to be creative. It survived because it sup-  
ported the world-view of people in power.  

There’s a poster that says “Judith  
Shakespeare lived ... and they burnt all her  
writings.” This isn’t radical rhetoric. It’s  
history. Women who managed to overcome  
the multitudinous barriers to the written  
expression of their creativity have sys-  

“Rape,” an overview of the week’s activities  
and interviews with the people involved in  
them. Tuesday from 7:00 to 8:00 “Issues of  
Self-Defense,” a program about the value of  
self-defense and the different kinds of  
self-defense. Wednesday from 7:00 until  
8:00 “Men, Sexism, and Sources of Male  
Violence” will be the topic of discussion  
and Thursday from 7:00-8:00, we will be  
“Celebrating Our Strength” with an hour  
of music and poetry.  

Suggested Travel Route Maps have been  
designed by the Department of Public  
Safety (Special Services Unit) and will be  
available very shortly. Campus lighting is  
also being improved as another step toward  
a safer community environment.  

Escort service is available through Stu-  
dents United for Rape Elimination  
(S.U.R.E.) by dialing 497-3217 and loud  
whistles are available at the bookstore.  
Women can also join the Women’s Self De-  
fense collective Tuesday night at Roble  
Gym.  

This “Working Against Rape” week in  
October represents just one aspect in the  
struggle for women's rights. “We want this  
whole week to reflect the life force and joy  
that we feel,” Brandt stated. “Although we  
get discouraged and angry at times, the  
overall feeling is of joy and progress.”  

As strong as the economic, educational,  
and societal barriers to women writers have  
been the psychological obstacle of a  
socialization which has taught us to depre-  
cate ourselves, and specifically, to believe  
we have nothing worth saying ... that  
female experience is not valid to write from  
or about.  

The Women’s Writer’s Center is popu-  
lated by writers who take women and  
feminist ideals seriously. Since it’s the only  
institution of its kind in the country, I sus-  
pect that it is the supportive and challeng-  
ing environment that I need as a writer and  
want as a person.  

On the pamphlet I sent you, the Center is  
thoughtfully and widely endorsed by Ad-  
rienne Rich. Enclosed is a copy of an essay  
by Rich that really inspired and scared me  
when I first read it because she pushes so  
hard to excellence that even one’s “best” can  
be better. This article should give you a  
good idea of what a feminist education is  
about, and the kinds of expectations an in-  
stitution would have to fulfill in order to  
earn Rich’s endorsement.  

I’ve written all this because I love you  
very much. I’m looking forward to seeing  
you soon.  

Carinosamente,  
Trini  

“This name refers to Shakespeare's sister,  
real or imagined. In A Room of One’s Own,  
Virginia Woolf speculated about her life  
and the destiny of her talent and coined the  
name “Judith.”  

SPECIAL OFFER  

A Radical Feminist Analysis  

Edited by Robin Ruth Linden,  
Darlene R. Pagano,  
Diana E. H. Russell  
and Susan Leigh Star  
Publication Date: Dec. 15  
SPECIAL DISCOUNT $6  
plus 6% sales tax  
(offer expires Nov. 1)  
Send payment to:  
FROG IN THE WELL,  

430 Oakdale Rd.,  
Palo Alto, CA 94303  

A lesbian sexuality reader $3.00 plus  
25 postage can be obtained through  
SAMIOS, a lesbian-feminist  
organization, PO Box 2364 Berkeley,  
94702. Next orientation meeting is Oct.  

soon to be published: COMING TO  
POWER  

Editor’s note: The Janus Society, an SM  
organization for straights, bi’s, and gay  
men can be contacted through PO Box 6794.  
SF 94101.