An Abortion: The Road Taken

Name Withheld

I am leaving my name off this article not because I am in any way ashamed of my actions, but because although abortion is a personal action, it is at the same time a political one, applying to so many women that my name is unimportant. I am writing this to tell not only about my experience but also to illustrate how women’s health care is still a male-dominated and in many ways impersonalized arena.

My period was two weeks late when I went to a Planned Parenthood clinic and dropped off a urine sample. The next day I went back, and a counselor called me into a room to tell me that my test was positive.

“How do you feel about this?”

“How will this affect your relationship with your boyfriend?”

“How does abortion make you feel about yourself as a person?” she asked. When I cut in with my own questions she explained that she had to finish her list of questions first. At the end of our half hour she gave me a list of abortion clinics because their clinic did not perform abortions.

“It will be okay,” she said.

I walked out onto the street and cried for a while on my way back to work. I couldn’t believe that it was me this was happening to.

There were several abortion clinics in the city I lived in, but all were too expensive. I ended up driving three hours to a clinic that charged $225, cash payment.

The clinic was in a medical building with several dentists’ offices. The waiting room was full, packed with a mixture of beaming husbands accompanying their pregnant wives, and nervous boyfriends, alone. The receptionist asked, “Are you here for a procedure?”

“Yes.”

I was ushered into a separate waiting room with about ten other women. An older woman called out my name, and I went into an office where she asked for my money. She counted it out on the desk.

“Okay.”

I was then given a blood test by a smiling nurse and was sent back into the waiting room. Doctors came in and out of different offices, and through an open door we heard several inside with the clinic’s accountant counting the payments received that day. A doctor came out of the office and called my name. He gave me a pep talk for a few minutes and explained the procedure.

“Don’t worry, it’s over in a few minutes. Smile, we love all our girls.”

The receptionist then accompanied several of us back through the two waiting rooms and across the hall. One of the women asked if a female doctor would perform her abortion.

“Oh no, all of our doctors are men.”

We went into a locker room where we changed into brightly-colored robes and were instructed to deposit our urine samples into little cups. We then waited in the hall in a row of chairs. With our bright robes and with each of us clutching our cups of urine, some of us smoking, we looked as though we were at some ludicrous cocktail party.

Farther down the hall a woman was asking the doctor what they did with her aborted fetus. She was saying calmly, “It’s mine, I want to take it with me.” One of the nurses took her outside.

It was my turn, and one of the nurses took me into a room and introduced me to my doctor. She helped me up onto the table and into the stirrups. The doctor came over and put a shot of tranquilizer in my arm. While waiting for it to take effect, the nurse peered out of the Venetian blinds and hummed. Another nurse opened the door and said to the doctor,

“You might not want to do the next one. She’s only thirteen.”

The doctor came back and gave me another shot. I felt safe and relaxed as I went under. The next thing I remember is being wheeled into a recovery room with about ten other women. Someone had attached a big sanitary pad to my panties, and I could feel myself bleeding. The drug left me feeling nauseous and dizzy. I was placed in a reclining chair facing two women who were talking.

“This is my third time here. The first two times I made them put me under, but this time I just used a tranquilizer.”

“I had to tell my mom I was going to the amusement park today.”

The woman next to me was crying. Another woman was wheeled in. She retched over the arm of her chair. A nurse passed out cups of water and pills to stop the cramping. She handed out cookies to those who had recovered sufficiently. We had been told to eat nothing after midnight the day before.

The doctor poked his head in.

“You girls can leave whenever you feel ready.”

I lay in my chair for about half an hour. Then I went and dressed. More women were waiting in the hallway. No one said anything to me. On my way out through the main waiting room, boyfriends and female friends looked up at me expectantly and then down again at their magazines.

I bled on and off for a couple of weeks. I went back to Planned Parenthood for a post-abortion check-up. The doctor asked me questions about the clinic. After the examination he told me everything was okay.

I more beady and estab labs

Nancy Cott, continued from page 3

deprecated for it. I suppose that the danger I face is of somehow moderating my work in such a way that it justifies the status quo instead of remaining an adversary stance to it. I think that I will retain my integrity—I certainly intend to!—but I don’t have to struggle that much. This institution has said, “What you do is all right with us.” That's the kind of fuel that helps me, that allows me to continue in Women’s Studies and to turn more people to it, and it may have more subversive potential than Yale has been aware of.

My most optimistic thought about this is that universities are good places to work, because there is at least lip service—and I hope more than that—to the idea that we are seeking the truth, that we are seeking the most-enlightening view of ourselves and our culture. If that is the case, then Women’s Studies scholarship is an advantage to the university. We're opening the picture, we're discovering, we're reviewing, we're perfecting paradigms; we're enhancing intellectual inquiry. So long as that ideal of the university is asserted, it will be very difficult for Yale to say that they don’t want this going on here. I intend to press in that direction, to speak to the kinds of concerns that the university supposedly upholds. I think it’s more politic to move this way—and it is a way that I believe in, it’s not simply strategic—rather than saying that we're angry and we're therefore going to seek for answers to vent our anger. That creates a great deal of anxiety. There's enough anxiety created when you tell them that their version of truth wasn’t correct and you're going to try to correct it. That's a position of intellectual integrity, and it’s probably more effective in a community like this.

I've often puzzled about why it is that insofar as you can distinguish the progress of Women’s Studies scholars in the different traditional disciplines, people in history seem to have made

Julie, 21 Schizophrenic Beecher State Hospital

“My manic mother is like an aging doll. Her face is powdered cheesecloth, baby-round. Her eyes glaze bright and do not see at all. She jerks in time to the staccato sound of someone's voice recorded in her head, The lisp compulsive and mechanical. The cloying syllables, vivacious, dead, Tap at the cool white china of her skull,

Tap shatteringly on each empty wall.

Sometimes she thinks she'll break. Her room is hot Behind our echoing house: stifling and small

And always dark and tapping. She will not

Confront the young derisive sun. She owns Four white horizons: claustrophobia; Some hundred Harlequin romances; bones Gnawed clean, and other memorabilia

“Segmented Life” — Marlene Sansone Of sweet young motherhood. These lie beneath

Her smooth, smooth bed. Above them, in her sleep, She chatters through her porcelain milk-teeth,

Once in a while the memory will creep

Whole, heavy, out from under. The palms and knees Clatter like breakfast did that Sunday morning

That taught her how one vision atrophies

A whole world to a bedroom without warning.

WOMEN’S HEALTH SERVICES

by women for women • non-profit

And I, who found him there, was nine years old.

To wake him, I poured water on his face.

They dragged him dripping from the ears and cold. She moves through dust and books to draw the lace.

birth control

gynecology abortion

pregnancy testing

Naomi Wolf

314 Prospect St. • New Haven 777-4781