A History of Women at Yale

6  
By Sarah O’Brian  

I have been told that this article does  
not meet journalism’s requirement of  
objectivity. It may not meet this  
mythical standard - what does? What  
I think must be said is that often,  
especially during this “Tenth Year of  
Coeducation at Yale,” we hear a  
glowing interpretive version of selected  
facts, a narrative designed to convince  
us that Yale is an enlightened institu-  
tion which was in the forefront of a  
historic movement within academia  
towards coeducation, and which has  
successfully adapted to the needs of  
women within the student body. I do  
not deny the many great  
women at Yale, or the success of  
coeducation within the university. It is  
important, though, to realize that Yale  
has a long tradition of misperception  
and conservatism/patriarchalism towards  
women, a tradition which is  
extant, although often muted and cam-  
ouflaged, up to the present day. In  
order to begin to comprehend that  
tradition, it is essential to explore its  
history.  

At the Yale commencement exercises  
of 1773, the year of his graduation,  
Nathan Hale won a resounding triumph  
in the affirmative side of a forensic  
debate. The subject: “Whether the  
Education of Daughters be not without  
any just reason more neglected than  
that of Sons.” Hale’s reasoning, ap-  
parently, did not extend to the proposal  
that women and men be educated  
together. Nor did that of the educators  
of the day.  

In 1783, President Ezra Stiles of Yale  
examined a candidate for admission to  
the college, and pronounced the student  
extremely able in Latin and Greek.  
Indeed, he stated that the college  
would have admitted the applicant on  
the basis of scholastic merit had it not  
been for the unfortunate circumstance  
of her sex. The candidate was Lucinda  
Foote, aged twelve.  

In 1835 a female student, Elizabeth  
Stillman of New Haven, attended Yale  
for a year, departing when her family  
went west. We have only her descen-  
dants’ word to testify to her time here,  
so her admission remains a mystery.  
Perhaps she used the ruse which,  
according to legend, women used to  
gain admission to the Law School in its  
early years: They applied using only  
first initials for identification so that  
their sex was not revealed until after  
their acceptance, when they arrived at  
the school’s doorstep.  

Though the existence of these mythic  
law students is unproven, one woman,  
Alice Rufie Jordan, is known to have  
attended Yale Law School in the class of  
1886. After her graduation, the rules  
were carefully rewritten to specify, as  
they had previously failed to do, that  
only male graduates of undergraduate  
schools were eligible for admission to  
the Law School. This rule remained in  
effect until 1919, when women were  
once again permitted to enter the  
school, some twenty-five years after  
most of the graduate schools at Yale  
had begun to admit women.  

Some of the graduate faculties, not-  
ably the School of Fine Arts, accepted  
occasional female students from the  
mid-1800s on. These students were  
usually only taking courses, rather than  
pursuing degree programs. The School  
of Fine Arts admitted women earlier  
than the other schools, but from its  
founding in 1865 until 1891 it did not  
offer a degree program. Interestingly  
enough, when the school granted its  
first Bachelor of Fine Arts degree, the  
first recipient, and that year’s only  
degree candidate, was a woman.  

Despite these occasional forays by  
individual women into Yale’s all-male  
domain, University policy did not of-  
ficially provide for female students until  
1892. In that year, the Corporation  
voted to admit women Ph.D. candidates  
to the graduate schools. Twenty-three  
women were accepted and in 1894,  
Ph.D.s were granted to the first seven  
successful female candidates. Their  
commencement passed with no un-  
toward incidents, though some (male)  
students had threatened to hiss while  
the women received their diplomas.  
Instead, the audience burst into spon-  
taneous applause as the degrees of the  
women were conferred.  

To the surprise of many Yale men,  
the arrival of female graduate students  
caused no radical change in the univer-  
sity environment. The continuity of the  
“virile” atmosphere of the school might  
be attributed to the strength of tradi-  
tion; but there is little doubt that the  
restrictions imposed on women students  
curtailed their contributions to the  
institution. Like most male graduate  
students, the women lived off campus.  
Unlike male graduate students, they  
were prohibited from attending under-  
graduate level lectures, without special  
permission from the instructor. In only a  
few instances was this permission  
granted. Unlike male students, women  
had to be “careful not to venture on the  
campus unescorted, for fear the dread  
cry of ‘FIRE!’ would be raised, and very  
window pour out the embarrassing  
salutation.” (1)  

Despite the difficulties they en-  
countered, women persisted in their  
studies in the Yale graduate schools. By  
1969, on the eve of Yale College’s  
transition to coeducation, 977 women  
were enrolled in the various graduate  
and professional schools. Throughout  
the years, however, many men at Yale  
chose to virtually ignore the presence of  
women on the campus. When the Dean  
of the Graduate School suggested in  
1942 that Yale commemorate the fiftieth  
anniversary of the admission of women  
to the University, his proposal was  
“rejected with scorn” by the Secretary  
of the University. “His attitude,”  
relates the Dean, “was typical of the  
older Yale College graduates in the  
faculty and administration. They ap-  
peared to be embarrassed by the  
presence of women in the student body  
and would have no part in calling to  
attention Yale’s lapse in this matter.” (2)  

Whatever the status of women gradu-  
ate students, the policy at the under-  
graduate level was clear: Yale was  
absolutely, exclusively, male. For years  
women, even visitors, were routinely  
prohibited from attending undergrad-  
uate lectures, presumably for fear that  
they would disrupt them completely by  
their mere presence in the lecture hall.  
As recently as 1969, during the experi-  
mental “Coeducation Week” at Yale,  
the visiting women were admonished in  
an orientation booklet to “make their  
presence give appeal to the lectures, not  
to anarchy.”  

William Phelps taught at Yale for  
forty years before his wife was permit-  
ted to visit one of his classes in 1931.  
Even then, her visit was sanctioned only  
because she served as an escort for  
visiting royalty. In the same year, Yale  
officials demonstrated the University’s  
concern for the rights of women by  
refusing to accept a bequest which  
would have funded an anti-feminist  
lectureship.  

In the fall of 1956, the suggestion of  
Dean of Admissions Arthur Howe that  
Yale College consider admitting women  
caused a furor on campus and in the  
national news media. William DeVane,  
Dean of Yale College, supported Howe’s  
proposal, but President of the Univer-  
sity Whitney Griswold was moved to  
write doggerel verse to express his  
apparent disapproval of the idea. In an  
address to perturbed alumni, he intoned  
a limerick of his own composing:  

“By keeping in step with the male  
We proceed at the pace of a snail—  
Said the Dean of Admissions,  
‘Let’s shift our positions  
And get some fast women at Yale!’”  

Students, too, rejected the notions of  
coeducation, perceiving it primarily as a  
mixing of social life and academics. One  
summed up prevailing attitudes in  
remarks quoted in the Yale Daily News  
of September 29th 1956: “If it occurs  
during my stay at Yale,” he em-  
phatically declared, “I plan to transfer.  
Social life is secondary to studies, and  
any biological urge can be dissolved by  
a quick trip north.” Except for a few  
proclamations, undergraduates seemed to have  
the administration made it clear through  
numerous press releases that coedu-  
cation had never been regarded as more  
than a distant possibility.  

In 1961-62 the subject of coeducation  
was once again raised in a few  
sentences of the Faculty Committee on  
Freshman Year’s report. The committee  
felt it was an idea worthy of further  
exploration. Their findings, known as  
the Doob Report, released in April of  
62, proposed that women should be  
admitted to the College on two condi-  
tions: first, that the number of women  
admitted be substantial, not merely a  
token representation, and second, that  
the number of men admitted each year  
remain constant. This second clause was  
probably a response to the famous  
concern, especially widespread among  
some of the alumni, that unless the  
College continued to admit a constant  
number of men, the number of “lead-  
ers” produced each year would drop.  

In the 1965-66 academic year, the  
first moves towards coeducation at the  
College level took place. Women faculty  
members were appointed for the first  
time as Fellows of the residential  
colleges. A plan was proposed to allow  
the wives of faculty and graduate  
students to complete their undergrad-  
uate education at the College. And the  
Corporation began to explore with the  
Regents of Vassar College the possibil-  
ity of establishing a coordinate relation-  
ship between the two institutions.  

When Vassar rejected the idea of  
moving to New Haven in order to  
coordinate with Yale, the Corporation  
and administration quickly moved to  
propose an independent Yale plan for  
coeducation. Their decision was doubt-  
less evidence of their genuine commit-  
ment to the integration of women into  
Yale’s undergraduate population, as  
well as an exercise in saving face after  
the much ballyhooed merger with Vas-  
sar fell through. The unanimous view of  
the Corporation in 1968 was not only  
that women be admitted to the College,  
but “that any long-range plan must  
assure that women students be treated  
at least as well as men students in  
terms of facilities, arrangements,  
programs suited to their needs.” (4)  
Almost immediately following the  

release of this report, the student-  
organized Coeducation Week gave the  
proposal added impetus. Seven hundred  
women from twenty-two eastern col-  
leges arrived on campus for a week-long  
experiment in co-education at Yale.  
Students turned over their rooms to the  
visitors, and the women attended class-  
es and worked with Yalies on various  
extracurricular activities. The visitors  
were not, however, encouraged to  
criticize Yale. Lest they misunderstand,  
the information sheet which served as  
their guide for the week’s activities  
began with a quotation from Kingman  
Brewster, President of the University:  
“The arrogance of self-pity is the worst  
form of impatience,” it starkly declared.  
Yale’s plan to admit women to the  
freshman class of 1969 aroused com-  
ment nationwide, as well as consider-  
able uproar on the campus itself. The  
move to coeducation was supported by  
most students; however, many felt  
Yale’s plans were too conservative.  
Students protested the proposed isola-  
tion of women in a single residential  
college, and fought for a more complete  
integration of female students with the  
male student population. The news  
media, on the other hand, found the  
plan revolutionary and worthy of exten-  
sive comment. Many found the pro-  
posed change lamentable, but a sizeable  
group just considered it funny.  
Caricatures of “future Yalies” - “girls”  
in scuba diving equipment, beatnik-type  
“girls” strumming huge guitars, heavy,  
bookish “girls” with lank, stringy hair,  
etc. graced the pages of magazines and  
newspapers. A New York Times Sunday  
Magazine article on the subject praised  
the plan in backhanded fashion: “Yale  
realizes that in this technological age  
when men’s education is increasingly  
specialized and vocational, the women  
are becoming the repository of Western  
cultural and intellectual values. - and  
Kingman Brewster, for one, is quite  
concerned about her responsibility for  
passing these values on to her family.”  
continued on page 17