Editorial  
This issue of Aurora arrives at an uncertain time in the history of  
women. The administration now installed in Washington is bent on reviv-  
ing two archaic philosophies—social Darwinism and government's right  
to dictate private life—to justify its domestic policies. A social policy  
drift in this direction threatens all groups that are not part of the power  
elite—including, and particularly, women—and all individuals who  
choose unconventional lifestyles—particularly homosexuals. In its  
assumption that all individuals in our society “naturally” have equal op-  
portunity, the New Right manages to ignore the reality of sexual and  
racial politics. In the state of nature, unequal privilege has never made  
for equal opportunity.  

As part of its general effort to set back the clock to an era when the  
patriarchy was unchallenged, the so-called Moral Majority wishes to im-  
pose on women the cruel choice between unwanted pregnancy and un-  
safe abortion by outlawing or restricting abortion. Punitive measures like  
the Human Life and Hatch Amendments make women pay the penalty  
for the sexual “freedom” of both sexes. These reactionaries reveal their  
intention to protect the elite most openly in their resistance to even the  
theoretical sexual equality of the Equal Rights Amendment.  

A less recent but equally alarming trend is the growth of intolerance  
toward individuals who choose not to follow patriarchal sex roles and  
marriage patterns. Senators Laxalt and Jepson (backed by New Right  
money) seek to enforce conservative values through the Family Protec-  
tion Act. The effect of this act would be to deny federal funding in areas  
ranging from teenage contraception through busing to achieve racial  
balance, to legal advocacy for alimony, child support, abortion rights,  
and homosexual rights.  

In this historical context, December 1981, the painful question facing  
the editors of Aurora is whether the publication of one feminist magazine  
is a hopeless gesture, considering the powerful forces arrayed against  
feminism, gay rights, and reproductive freedom. Every individual who  
considers taking that crucial leap from passive critic to organized activist  
must confront this dilemma in one form or another.  

Our response is to publish. We have come to believe that when a voice  
is raised to protest the injustice of inequality—whether that inequality is  
sexism, racism, religious bigotry or anything else—that voice will even-  
tually be heard. The history of American grassroots activists for social  
change—the abolitionists, labor organizers, suffragettes, and civil rights  
marchers—seem to bear out this idealistic statement in the long run. We  
believe the feminist movement will be similarly vindicated. Nor is the  
political arena limited to state and federal capitals. Feminists learn early  
that the personal is political, and that change will occur only if human in-  
teractions affirm legislative intent. As Argentinian human rights activist  
Jacobo Timerman recently said at Yale, there will be no change unless in-  
dividuals act to make it happen.  

Toward the Subversion of Gender Roles.............. Maia Ettinger  

Where Does Yale Stand on Sexual Harassment?............ Jill Katz  
senate. sohed asks MACS.  
Take-Back the Night. :—-fajehe) scp a ke ee Marcia Eiteman  
Judaism and Feminism. ............-.-... 0.000. Marion Shulevitz  

Yale Women’s Caucus. . . eae eC Catherine Lindell  

ST he Fale or vasmine See Christina Buchmann  
Learning From Feminism. ...........0..........0... Dennis Earle  
Black Undergraduate Women’s Group.............. Sheila Thomas  
New Haven’s Theatre of Light and Shadow........ Nancy Lee Kathan  
An Abortion: The Road Taken..................., Name Withheld  
OAL OGIOS os yh es ep ean oe eR Amy Klobuchar  
Announcing...the Feminist Film Society!.......... Nancy Lee Kathan  
Nancy Cott on History and the Historian............ interviewed by  

Kathrin Day Lassila and  
Beth Ingersoll  

MULANEH: Latina Women Working Together....... . interviewed by  
Kathrin Day Lassila  

SOARED nts Seeger rena Veeuehs Dons eos ioiasn go. trapsiaten BY  

: Anne Herrman  
Women Who Kill... 2 ..............:. reviewed by Robin McHugh  
Third World Women’s Archives... ......00.00 0000 cee eevee eee  
Fear Behind The Curtain (poem): ster eee es Judy Wurtzel  
Call to Rape (poem) ee Pes his rN ee ae Alix Chasin  
Marisa in Mexico(poem).............0...... ~.. . Joanna Wissinger  
The Right Way (poem) ..........5.5. 06.0200. 0 cee Polly Shulman  
Peoria Eee ete tate 5 eee eS Ernestine Abel  
WHIT TERDMERRT ero ena op oe Sherry Agar  
Charlotte Perkins Gilman (poem) .................... Naomi Wolf  

Ernestine Abel  

10  
16  

13  

19  

V7  

Aurora is committed to providing a forum for the many voices that are  
being raised in feminism today. While there is no single ideology of  
feminism, certain common concerns do recur in this fall’s articles:  
outrage at the pervasive violence against women in our society, and  
debate over the degree to which feminists must separate themselves from  
our presently male-dominated culture. Aurora welcomes articles, poetry,  
fiction, art, and photography from all women and non-sexist men.  

Since Aurora receives no money from Yale, and advertising revenues  
cover only a small part of our costs, we rely on contributions from  
readers who would like to see this magazine continue to publish. Current-  
ly we are heavily in debt, and would appreciate any donation concerned  
readers are able to make. Checks may be made out to Aurora and should  
be mailed to 2575 Yale Station, New Haven, Connecticut 06520. Submis-  
sions to the magazine may also be sent to this address,  

9  

Mimi Unger Coppersmith  
Helen Day  

Helen Doehne  

Janelle Ford  

Deborah Meredity  

Julie A. Sutton  

very special thanks to Elisha Atkins  

9  
Aurora Staff  

Editors: ttaiet sparen pte Sas SS vies Ernestine Abel  
ASSOCIATE EDITOR: Kathrin Day Lassila  
ASSISTANT EDITORS: Benedicte Misner  
Business Managers: Claudia Mesch  
Editorial Staff... ... Christina Buchmann, Nancy Cheng, Marie Deer  

Betta Fisher, Lisa Greenman, Barbara Heffernan,  
Lisa Posner, Jill Katz, Robin McHugh  

General Staff........... Barbara Gamble, Beth Ingersoll, Cathy Liu,  
Thornton Matheson, Jennifer Sawin, Judy Shulevitz,  

Polly Shulman.  

Artists... 0... Christina Buchmann, Alexandra Castelli, Leif Garrison,  

Nancy Cheng, Nancy Lee Kathan, Kerry Pelzman,  
Marlene Sansone, Lenore Skenazy, Deborah Taylor  

Business Staff ........ Laura Biénen, Marie Deer, Barbara Heffernan,  

Robin McHugh  
Thank you to........... Sonia Alvarez, Lydia Andre, David Chapell,  

Gilbin Ezer, Marcie Friedman, Pam Hays,  
Anne Herrmann, Calyn Hodge and the Yale  
Graduate-Professional, Dmitri Iglitzin,  

Robert Neediman, Stephan Schwanauer, The  
Blues Astronauts, Robin Winks, Yale Daily  
News Typesetting Service, Yale Women’s Center  

Cover: Self-portrait by Christina Buchmann  

:  

“4  

Leg dhe eb all gl anansbcAee sow sdeerpet-soliantremidsrpea a sud ainsi cast leathery ics lemmas atenmiensintabiied diltin ‘edh geil tates cencsistahinihelasilis temas