Perceptions

A p panes,

He vay Lae

’
Sis ~ < - 4

Of Women

Scientists ~

some women may produce stereotypes;  
they are then extended to all women.  
She concluded that the very fact that  
one is a married woman with small  
children makes one look like less than a  
serious scientist in some men’s eyes,  
however adding that “I would not have  
wanted to give up the kids. Children are  
a fantastic source of enrichment.”

Is there a difference between the  
approaches of men and women to  
science? According to Bartoshuk “it is  
premature to assume that men and  
women think identically.” She feels that  
one should not make assumptions about  
such empirically measurable things. But  
even if such differences are assumed,  
they do not justify the prejudice against  
women. On the other hand, Haseltine  
believes that such differences favor  
women being in the sciences: “Men and  
women speak different languages. Wo-  
men can speak men’s language, but you  
will rarely find a man speaking women’s  
language. The only language in which  
people can really communicate is the  
scientific language, because it elimi-  
nates a lot of subtle things. That is why  
I think women do have an advantage in  
the sciences over other fields, because a  
lot of the language in the sciences can  
be taught. You can teach it by reading a  
book. You do not need to teach it by  
interacting.” Her advice to women now  
entering the sciences: “Learn how the  
system works. Just learn the system.  
We are not taught this in school. Men  
know the system instinctively. Learn the  
unwritten rules.”

In conclusion, I would like to add a

By A. Baha Balantekin

I love reading the history of science.  
When I was a kid I used to spend a lot  
of time going through books about the  
contributions of various people to the  
progress of science. But I never paid  
particular attention to the fact that  
almost all of those science people were  
men. Because I was a boy. Now, as a  
student in the sciences, namely in  
physics, I still see very few women in  
these fields. For this reason, I thought  
it would be interesting to interview  
some women scientists on their percep-  
tion of women in science. The following  
is the result of two talks, one with Linda  
Bartoshuk, associate professor of Epi-  
demiology and Psychology, and Flor-  
ence Haseltine, assistant professor of  
Obstetrics, Gynecology and Pediatrics.

“In order to get equal treatment you  
really have to earn it by being better  
than the male colleagues in the field,”  
topic of the interview. She remarked  
that the women’s colleagues often make  
jokes about how aggressive she is,  
despite the fact that she is no more so  
than they are. From time to time,  
women are perceived as complainers  
about their position in science, and thus  
when they do voice objections they are  
only fitting into a stereotype: “You  
(men) make them (women) a stinker,  
then you punish them for being a  
stinker.”

Florence Haseltine points out that  
the women who pursue careers in—  
sciences will surely meet some men who  
are very defensive about women’s  
issues. Moreover, among these men  
there might exist people with whom  
women have to work. Although this  
might not be an easy situation to  
handle, it should not be a source of  
discouragement. She has noticed that  
the more defensive a person gets on  
women’s issues, the more probable that  
they are going into a thinking process.

On the subject of a woman scientist  
choosing a lifestyle, Bartoshuk com-  
mented that “you are likely to get  
punished no matter what path you  
follow. You should be congratulated for  
surviving no matter what path you  
follow. Instead it seems to be that  
there is always someone ready to get  
angry with you because of the way you  
pursue your career if you are married  
and with children. If you are not  
married you do not face this. That is  
interesting too. I look back and see it  
is interesting too.

“In the sciences you will find that  
there are certain areas where the women  
in the sciences tend to be unmarried. It is only recently at Yale that you find very many women in  
sciences who have small children.” She  
continued, “many women do take years  
off, raise the families and come back. In  
certain fields this is probably devas-  
tating and probably ensures that the  
women will never be at the top of the  
field. These sort of patterns among  
few of my opinions without attempting  
to fully address the whole issue of  
women in the sciences. It is interesting  
to note that in countries with a solid  
scientific establishment, science appears  
to be a male discipline like the other  
social institutions; whereas in nations  
where the scientific establishment is  
relatively new, such as in Turkey,  
science does not have such a gender  
specification. One also observes that  
the oppressed people are denied, among  
the other rights, also the right to develop  
themselves intellectually because of the  
elitist system of education. Among the  
oppressed people women in particular  
have added constraints due to their  
assumed roles in child-raising. The fact  
that there are not that many women in  
the sciences is not only due to the  
attitudes of the male colleagues, but  
also reflects the structure of the whole  
system.

said Linda Bartoshuk when told the  

NEW HAVEN FEMINISM continued from page 24

anti-nuclear movement. Because women have not  
been conditioned to accept the values of the male  
role, such as aggression, women can contribute a  
unique perspective to a broader movement. This  
perspective operates and is developed best within a  
women’s group.

Within the women’s community there are or-  
ganizations and individuals focusing on outreach  
and issues specific to minority women. MULANEH  
is organizing Hispanic women, the Women’s Center  
has a minority outreach worker, and the Rainbow  
Committee of the Feminist Union is helping all  
groups improve outreach to minority women. These  
groups are working to make women’s issues more  
accessible to minority women.  
The issue of Lesbian rights is also of crucial  
importance to the women’s community. Because  
Lesbians live without the privileges offered women  
through their affiliations with men, sexist oppres-  
sion hits them with its strongest virulence. Almost  
all women’s groups have been ‘dismissed’ as  
Lesbian. While it is not true that all feminist groups  
are ‘run by Lesbians,’ even if this were true, it is  
not adequate grounds for dismissal of the claims of  
those groups.

STRATEGIES

The cooperative structures of most feminist  
groups is the beginning of the creation and  
development of alliances. This is essential  
because accomplishments are directly related  
to the means that are used to accomplish change. If  
we cannot rid oppression from our own organiza-  
tions, how can we expect to eliminate our  
oppression by others? An alternative must be  
through a slow process of evolution and  
cannot effectively be imposed overnight.

Each alternative organization must interact with  
the existing system and many decisions must be  
made about the type and degree of compromise that  
is tolerable if the organization is to function and be  
effective. With and between groups there are many  
different strategies and philosophies about how to  
bring about change and what degree of change is  
necessary. However, each group’s success in raising  
feminist issues and developing solutions takes  
individuals one step further, although from different  
points and in slightly different directions, along  
paths to a feminist consciousness and a non-sexist  
society.

Approaches to the development of changes have  
expanded in many dimensions over the past ten  
years in New Haven. Education was initially the  
vehicle by which women were drawn into active  
participation in the women’s movement. This was  
begun through the distribution of literature,  
consciousness-raising groups and political rallies  
which still continue today. Political actions, march-  
es, demonstrations, etc., helped introduce and gain  
recognition of issues through media coverage as  
well as pressuring for specific changes. The analysis  
of problems and their solutions is complex and  
requires in-depth analysis that has been expanded  
and developed through workshops, discussions,  
conventions, courses and reading. The process  
continues.

Contrary to media presentations, the women’s  
movement has continued to expand and grow  
despite the “apathy” of the “me decade.” It has  
not been as sensational as the anti-war movement  
therefore not “worthy” of as much media coverage.  
However, the women’s movement may ultimately  
have further reaching results; it has been laying a  
solid foundation for expanded activities that are  
becoming more and more stable.

The concept of education has been broadened to  
include providing and developing services for  
women. In New Haven many feminist groups exist  
that directly provide service to women, such as,  
Rape Crisis, the Battered Women’s Shelter,  
Self-Defense Alliance, Women’s Health Services,  
The Counseling Collective of the Woman’s Center,  
Conn. Women’s Education and Legal Fund and  
many others.

Ideas of the women’s movement have been  
viewed with skepticism by many low-income and  
minority women. Providing access to these much-  
needed services increases the credibility of and  
contact with feminist ideas. Also helping women  
alleviate their immediate problems enables them to  
begin to look beyond their immediate situation.  
Feminist services are developing comprehensive  
solutions that would eliminate the root causes of  
problems rather than simply patching up the  
manifestation of specific problems. In counseling,  
this identifies problems in society rather than  
blaming the individual woman. This approach will  
not only lead to the prevention of future problems,  
but in the process strongly affirms a woman’s  
self-worth. A woman can realize she is not  
responsible for having been attacked but that her  
attack is a logical result of conditioning that  
encourages the exploitation of women by men, and  
she has the right to freedom from the threat of  
attack and the rights to choose her own lifestyle.

Service organizations also provide for the more  
solid establishment of feminist ideas because they  
can more easily become self-sustaining and provide  
employment for women where they can refine and  
develop new structures and organizations consistent  
with feminist ideas. For example, in New Haven, the  
Woman Power Coalition, a group of eight organiza-  
tions, was able to obtain funding for twenty CETA  
positions. This has been a tremendous help to many  
groups, although the needs for women’s services is  
overwhelming and is only just beginning to be met.

continued on page 36