March 1984

AURORA

Barbara Ehrenreich on:

The Feminization of Poverty

by Anne Semans

A noted socialist feminist emphasized
the need to “deReaganize” political dis-
course across the country as one way to
overcome the feminization of poverty.

Armed with witty sarcasm, factual sta-
tistics, and unfaltering conviction, Bar-
bara Ehrenreich addressed the issue of wo-
men’s poor economic status before an at-
tentive audience of 150 people on
Thursday, Feb. 23.

Ehrenreich is co-chairperson of the
Democratic Socialists of America, and au-
thor of For Her Own Good, and The
Hearts of Men.

According to Ehrenreich, the poverty
population is disproportionately female, a
phenomenon referred to as the
“feminization of poverty.”

“Two-thirds of the adults under the
poverty line are female, and out of 9.4 mil-
lion female-headed households, one-third
are in poverty,” she said.

Ehrenreich placed partial blame on the
Reagan Administration for women’s pres-
ent economic condition. Government cut-
backs in funding for key programs like
Medicare, Medicaid, and Aid for Families
with Dependent Children (AFDC) have
fueled the economic demise of the elderly,
women, minorities, and children, she
said.

“What's unbelievable is that these pro-
grams make up only 8.5 percent of govern-
ment spending. It’s obvious some real tar-
geting went on,” said Ehrenreich.

Ehrenreich also cited wage discrimina-
tion, the fact that women still earn 60
cents to every male-earned dollar, as an-
other factor contributing to women’s
declining economic status.

The reason this exists is that people still
believe in the traditional family wage,

April 11:
World’s Fair

Center For Research on Women
Stanford University

The Jing Lyman Lectures
Spring 1984

“When the Artist is a
Woman...

Wednesday at Noon, Terman Auditorium

which assumes first that men will earn
enough to support a family, and second,
that they will share their wealth, accord-
ing to Ehrenreich’s theory.

The problem, she explained, is that not
only is it practically impossible for a fam-
ily to live on a single income, but today
there is a breakdown in the willingness of
men to marry and share their earnings.
“Whereas before the 50s and 60s it was
too hard for men to do simple things like
laundry, the introduction of drip-dry
clothes and frozen foods has made it pos-
sible for them to live on their own without
the help of a wife or a servant.

“What’s more,” she continued, “if you
give one group of people more money and
then bombard them with media messages
of monetary self-indulgence — tropical
vacations, Chivas Regal, finer clothes —
how can we expect them to share it if they
don’t have to?”

What remains as an accepted part of the
economy, then, is the notion that women
must still be earning a secondary income,
Ehrenreich explained.

“The economy is not willing to accept
women as independent breadwinners,”
she said, “which explains why today the
average yearly income for a full-time
working female is only $11,500, and why
the average woman with a college degree
earns less than the average male high
school drop-out.”

Ehrenreich suggested several programs
which would spread awareness about the
feminization of poverty while also
working to overcome it.

She said more government-sponsored
jobs are needed to provide better quality
work for women.

An increase in public income supports
is vital, but possible only when the gov-
ernment recognizes that many people in
society, whether for age or health reasons,
cannot find jobs which allow them to
survive,” she explained.

With regard to family services, Ehren-
reich demanded quality child care, which
the private sector does not currently pro-
vide because it is not profitable.

“Corporations and companies seem to
work under the biological assumption that
children are born at age six and after that
go to sleep at 3:00 p.m.,” she quipped.

“It can't be just a woman’s demand,”
she said. “It should be taken up by every-
one since it is ultimately a child’s need.”

Ehrenreich suggested a cutback in mili-
tary spending as a method of funding
these programs.

“If we reduce military spending to a
level needed for defense of our own
country’s national boundaries, we'd have
about 2 trillion dollars to play around
with,” she said. “That's more than
enough.”

Ehrenreich went on to urge a foreign
policy of non-intervention and unilateral
disarmament, which drew tremendous ap-
plause from the audience.

The crowd’s energy level peaked as she
insisted that we first “disarm the nuclear
terrorists in Washington” and “get rid of
the lunatic fringe now in power as soon as
possible.”

Ehrenreich also said the gender gap is
one obvious example of how women have
reacted to Reagan's policies, but explained
that it will take a politically unified,
democratic effort to bring about the
desired changes.

“The larger change to feminist and
socialist values is not something someone
else will do,” she noted. “They will not be
obtained if we participate in the fight as
spectators. Success depends on us,” she
said as she gestured hopefully to the audi-
ence, “all of us, working together, for
change.”

Terri Esther

Stories of

Women
cont'd from pg. 5

the U.N. special sessions for disarmament.
Leah Halper, the second intern, a Stanford
graduate, will be speaking during Women’s
Week (Thursday March 8 at 7:30, History
Corner, Rm. 2) on a panel with Santa Cruz
activist Marge Franz and Linda Shott, Stan-
ford grad student in History. Linda’s dis-
sertation research is on WILPF. They will be
exploring the history of women in peace
movements. The panel will provide an his-
torical context for the more personal status
of the WILPF presentation.

“What I learned from the interviews is
that there is a long history of struggle
before me, and probably will be for many
years after me, but I have gained hope and
a recognition of the strength of these wo-
men who have been working for peace,
equality and justice long before I was
born. Their stories are important. They are
modest in assessing their own efforts and
yet their cumulative effect helped bring an
end to the Vietnam War and affirmed wo-
men’s abilities to build and sustain major
political movements. During this election

Moon’s corona

Branches still reaching

—Margaret Jacobs

resting on the catwalk

through winter’s dangling leaves

of this tired tree.

The leaves dead,

hanging themselves
by their own stems.

All so lifeless

seeking a peaceful rotting
into the devouring ground
after a rude transplant of tree.

Lifelessness only feigned though

Just the passing of a season
Leaves must fall for others
to arrive
And trees must stand to
weather the winter.

to distant air
Catching coronas
on nights
clear and cold.

This year these same women will be polling wo-
men in Palo Alto supermarkets on their
opinions on abortion, nuclear freeze, dis-
armament and a host of subjects. They are
always out there working for social change.
One woman in her 80's once said to me,
when I asked her how she kept going over
the years (I was ‘burned-out’ from work on
feminist issues), “Dear, when I get tired and
discouraged I just get up early and leaflet the
commuter trains going into San Francisco.”
She was an inspiration to me, to keep
working for the issues that are important to
me.”

Students and community members in-
terested in participating in the SCIRE
WILPF or YWCA oral history projects, the
Stanford Oral History Project, or who
would like to develop their own oral his-
tory project, should contact Judy at the
SCIRE office, 590A Old Union (497-4504).
SCIRE has an extensive bibliography on
women’s oral history, peace research, and
other related resources, and can accredit
special oral history research projects.