22

White Feminist Theory and Practice:  
The Race/Sex Analogy  

Renee P. Raymond  

In an attempt to articulate and further legitimize women’s struggle, many feminists — predominantly white — have committed a ‘grave error.’ The term racism has been analogized to describe the socio-political-philosophical-psychological oppression/repression of all women. Such a homogenization of terms is dangerous for at least three reasons: 1) It disregards white women’s participation in the racist oppression of people of color, 2) It is reductionist in that it assumes a specific social dynamic as the cause for all oppression, 3) The woman of color’s particular oppression as black, brown, red, or yellow and female is ignored.  

This error is not new. Since the beginning of the women’s movement in this country, sexism has been compared to racism. Not only were racism and sexism paralleled, in a few instances, the movement itself practiced questionable policies towards women of color. Angela Davis gives some examples of this ironic stance in Women, Race and Class.  

There are many myths praising the far-sightedness of the founders of the women’s movement in this country. Recently, women such as Susan B. Anthony, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, and Margaret Sanger, to name a few, have been lauded and regarded as America’s first feminists. Documented addresses, statements, and discussions indicate that a reinvestigation of these sources is in order.  

Elizabeth Cady Stanton, considered one of the primary advocates of women’s rights, specifically women’s suffrage, was unabashedly classist and racist. A letter written to the New York Standard in December of 1865 reveals her extremely narrow political agenda.  

The representative women of the nation have done their uttermost for the last thirty years to secure freedom for the negro; and as long as he was of the lowest in the scale of being, we were willing to press his claims; but now, as the celestial gate to civil rights is slowly moving on its hinges, it becomes a serious question whether we had better stand aside and see ‘Sambo’ walk into the kingdom first.  

Stanton apparently equated the social condition of the white woman with that of the recently emancipated black man. I emphasize man because the black woman is virtually a shadow in her analysis. The myopia which allowed her to use the derisive term “Sambo” to describe the black man also prevents her from acknowledging the basic injustice of disenfranchisement for anyone able to vote. The opportunism which Stanton falls victim to was embraced by many of her liberal sisters. Note that the excerpt quoted, like most of the other passages, revolved around what suffrage would mean for white women and black men.  

In a conversation between Susan B. Anthony and Ida B. Wells (Ida B. Wells was a lecturer and organizer of civic clubs for black women. She was one of the first people who thoroughly researched and publicly criticized lynching), Anthony explained why she did not want Frederick Douglass to attend a Suffrage Association Convention. “I did not want to subject him to humiliation, and I did not want anything to get in the way of bringing the southern white women into our suffrage association,” she reasoned. For similar reasons, Anthony refused to support several black women who wanted to form a branch of the suffrage association. Anthony could not see through the patriarchal superstructure of American society which requires that groups with similar needs be pitted against each other in order to neutralize agitation and maintain the status quo. Black people were systematically denied voting rights long after women got the vote. The examples of Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony are drawn to establish a distinction in the histories of white women and people of color.  

There is one more historic figure whose philosophies and methods I want to take to task. Margaret Sanger was a primary advocate for birth control in this country. During her early crusade, she was affiliated with the Socialist party. Simultaneous with the birth control movement, the eugenics movement was popularized. In order to demonstrate the influence of the eugenics movement on Margaret Sanger and the American Birth Control League, Davis quotes Sanger’s definition of “the chief issue of birth control” as “more children from the fit, less from the unfit.” This social Darwinistic simplism was followed to its logical conclusion when, in 1932, Sanger gave her public approval to the fact that twenty-six states had passed compulsory sterilization laws for ‘unfit’ persons and that thousands of people had already been experimented on.  

We can evaluate the true regard the American Birth Control League and Margaret Sanger had toward blacks if we look at the “Negro Project” which the Birth Control Federation of America, the ABCL’s successor, planned in 1939. The Federation concluded that Negroes “breed carelessly and disastrously,” so that the overall population was increasing “from that portion of the population least fit, and least able to rear children properly.” The Federation attempted to recruit black ministers to be the mouthpieces for their programs. As Sanger wrote to a colleague:  

We do not want word to get out that we want to exterminate the Negro population and the minister is the man who can straighten out that idea if it ever occurs to any of the more rebellious members.  

Such blatant racist exploitation is a historic phenomenon particular to women of color. The rampant abuse Sanger advocated did not stop after the eugenics movement died down. Thousands of black, Puerto Rican, Chicana, and Native American women have been sterilized over the past forty years. By the 1970s, over 35 percent of all Puerto Rican women of childbearing age had been surgically sterilized.  

With this history in mind, it is especially distressing to the woman of color when she reads a modern critic’s “correct” feminist interpretation of any of the aforementioned women. Linda Gordon has articles in Capitalist Patriarchy and the Case for Socialist Feminism by Zillah Eisenstein and in A Heritage of Her Own by Nancy Cott and Elizabeth Pleck which discuss birth control and Margaret Sanger’s contributions. Neither article questions Sanger’s treatment of women of color. The race-sex analogy is a fiction which thorough research will dispel. White women do women of color a disservice when they clump our histories together or when they misrepresent founding feminist mothers.  

It is especially important that race-sex analogizing cease so that new areas of study, such as Women’s Studies, are as representative as their titles suggest. Academicians and students seem to find speaking in universals more manageable than acknowledging exceptions. The fact is that white women do not now and never have experienced the same oppression as women of color. Two years ago, when I was crossing a street in Harvard Square, four white men did not scream from their car window, “Get out of the way nigger bitch!” nor did the car with the Confederate flag license plate (a primary icon of the KKK) speed up and almost run down Maria and me because we are women.  

American feminists, especially academics, should avoid making the mistake of race-class parallels that some French writers are making. I mention this because American feminists are currently looking to France to see if French feminist method and theory might benefit American feminist thought. In the introduction to The Second Sex, Simone de Beauvoir repeatedly compares the plight of the woman, the Negro, and the Jew. Granted, the book was written in 1952 but there might have been a new introduction for the most recent edition. Helene Cixous, one of the proponents of écriture féminine, writes about woman as “Africa” and as “the dark continent.” Metaphors such as these, highlighting mystery  

cont. on p. 28  

life during wartime  

finally I’ve found you  

to receive my nightmare history in your large and gentle hands,  
and in between of making love  

you recite to me  

the history of your nightmares.  

I make love to you with gratitude  
I travel your body calling for trust  

calling into you  

my lips pressed at your skin  

I travel your body singing with lust  
glowing against your brown stomach  
and you hardly know what to make of me.  

when there is war  

two women will meet and say  

remember that night  

how we couldn’t conquer fear  
how this is our new history  

I am certain your hands will still be  

twice the size of mine  
and you will still want me  

then we can say  
how even in war  

there is something for which  

we are grateful.  

Anonymous