21

Separatism Revisited:  
Toward a Political Economy of Lust  

Nora Janeway  

The ruckus generated by the  
publication, in last Fall’s Aurora, of a  
dozen or so different women’s ideas  
about men, women, power, politics,  
and patriarchy (“Separatism”) came  
as a surprise to some of us. Angry, bit-  
ter, hate-filled, chauvinistic, “idiotic,  
raving, warped, irrational” and  
violent lesbians? My goodness! What  
was not such a surprise was the con-  
tent of that ruckus. There was (1) the  
“sexual preference isn’t political” line:  
“the authors have no right to pass  
judgment on heterosexual  
relations...” (Catherine B. Sevcenko,  
Yale Daily News); “in many ways  
CHAPS has confused a political issue  
with sexuality... True feminism has lit-  
tle to do with sexual preference”  
(Carmen Dixon, Yale Political Mon-  

thly, Spring ’82). And there was (2) the  

“we’re-all-just-individuals,  
where’s-your-intellectual-objectivity”  
line, intertwined with accusations of  
“reverse discrimination.” Because I  
do not see the difference between  
queer and straight as simply a matter  
of “sexual preference” and because I  
trust the subjectivity of women,  
queers, Third World people and  
working-class people far more than I  
trust the intellectual objectivity of  
men, straights, white people and rich  
people, I do not like to see those two  
particular ideologies go unchallenged.  

First, you cannot question the  
subordination of women to men, or  
question gender stereotyping,  
without questioning heterosexuality.  
Some activists of the early Women’s  
Liberation Movement put it as “men  
are the oppressors; sleeping with men  
is consorting with the enemy.” I do  
not think it is quite that simple.  
Whatever makes men oppressive peo-  
ple is not so easily divorced from  
what makes them attractive to  
women. The system at work here is  
the institution of heterosexuality: the  
system at work is that in accordance  
with which male and female as we  
know them are created, regulated and  
maintained, and we do not step out-  
side it by replacing males with  
females as our bed partners.  
Heterosexuality has been enforced by  
the individuals with power on both  
the family and State levels, and they  
have been passing judgment on  
homosexuality since before the word  
was invented; it is about time for us to  
be asking, what is this thing called  
heterosexuality? Where does it come  
from? Can it be cured?  

It is becoming increasingly difficult  
to put human heterosexual attraction  
down to some untainted biological in-  
stinct mechanism. It might be a little  
bit embarrassing at this point to be  
caught declaring that it is the  
presence or absence of masculine  
secondary sex characteristics which  
triggers or does not trigger an  
automatic response in the body of a  
woman. At least declaring openly.  
And yet if we minimize the role of  
biological determination in the  
eroticisms of us non-oestrous  
animals, what are we left with? That  
we only do it with the opposite sex  
because the pleasure is in the poten-  
tial for procreation? That the divine  
forces of a Yin/Yang universe lead  

every microcosmic embodiment of  
the positive (male) pole to seek its op-  
posite? (Granted, there have been  
times and places in which it would  
have been counterproductive for a  
society to risk any kind of limitation  
upon the amount of procreational  
coupling; most of us are not,  
however, any longer in the position of  
needing to produce children the way  
fish produce eggs, in the hope that a  
few may survive to carry on the  
species.)  

So what does it mean, this custom,  
this dictate that boys like girls and  
girls like boys and that’s just the way  
it is? Certainly it requires the exag-  
geration of existing biological distinc-  
tions, the development of something  
as potentially trivial as deep  
voice/high voice, clitoris/no clitoris,  
into an unmistakable and highly  
significant dichotomy; if the dogma is  
that each is attracted naturally, ex-  
clusively, to the opposite sex, the  
possibility of confusion must be  
rendered near-to-nil. There must be  
something powerfully distinct about  
men such that a woman finds men,  
and only men, sexually appealing.  
There must be something powerfully  
distinct about women such that a  
man finds women, and only women,  
sexually appealing. Did I say power?  

The point is that it is not just a mat-  
ter of reds and blues, insies and out-  
sies, separate-but-equal. Ours is not a  
bilaterally symmetrical gender  
system. Men are men and women are  
women but people are men too. Each  
must bear the marks of her/his assign-  
ed gender, but as any woman who  
divests herself of the peculiar trapp-  
ings of femininity and gets called  
“sir” for it finds out, those in power  
tend to establish themselves as the  
norm and to establish the less power-  
ful as the marked. (Men are human  
but women are female, whites are  
people but Asians are Third World,  
etc.)  

And so in the realm of sexuality,  
where for us the play of masculinity  
and femininity is at its most elemen-  
tal, there is, I think, something more  
at stake than sign systems, than codes  
for male and female. What are these  
derived from? Whatever makes men  
attractive to women and women at-  
tractive to men has something — has  
everything? — to do with  
power— power that we know as a cer-  
tain way of occupying space, of  
speaking, of moving, of dealing with  
other people and with the world. For I  
am certain that no superficial distinc-  
tion, no secondary sex characteristic,  
could determine the direction of  
something so essential as sexual at-  
traction. What is it about one sex that  
the other finds so attractive? Is it the  
shape of their bodies, or is it  
something more basic? To  
acknowledge that sexuality as we  
know it is utterly butch/femme is to  
begin to sort issues of domination,  
control and systematicity out of the  
morass of psychobiological obfusca-  
tion which has characterized most ap-  
proaches to the question of sexuality  
and gender.  

In response to the complaint that  
critiques of heterosexuality are no  
more than reverse homophobia, then,  
I would want to ask: how free and  
natural is most women’s orientation  

toward men when in their minds and  
in their lives no alternatives exist? Is it  
respect for each person’s integrity  
regardless of gender if for most men  
the human world is divisable into  
fuckable and non-fuckable? What are  
the implications of the experience of  
having been around a few drag  
queens and finding that the  
“feminine” women never look quite  
the same again (does the grand-  
motherly matron next door know that  
she’s in danger of being confused  
with a caricature of herself)? How  
benign is the institution of heterosex-  
uality if it has its roots in the  
historical, forced, one-by-one ap-  
propriation of women by men? How  
natural is heterosexual orientation if  
it is the result of a complex system of  
childhood conditioning? Finally, just  
how personal is it? Feminist theory  
has debunked the myth of the home  
as a haven from the power structures  
and political violence of the  
“outside” world. What yet needs to  
be acknowledged even by most  
feminists is that you no more park the  
tangle of systems of heterosexuality,  
power, gender construction, violence  
and domination outside the door of  
the bedroom than you park racism,  
sexism or imperialism outside the  
door of the house.  

What all this means on the per-  
sonal level is that the words “I’m  
straight” may some day have as much  
cringe-inducing potential as the  
words “some of my best friends are  
Black.” A woman who says that she’s  
straight is saying, to me, that her fun-  
damental affiliation is to men and  
that chances are she has never  
thought twice about it. Does she just  
happen to find herself attracted to  
five-o’clock shadow or does it have  
more to do with attraction to a cer-  
tain kind of power? And if that attrac-  
tion feels so immanently a part of  
herself, or feels so close to the bone  
that it eludes examination, that is not  
reason enough to stop asking, where  
does it come from, this need for men,  
this attraction to the social construct  
known as masculinity? If she feels  
herself to have any stake at all in the  
abandonment of gender-role  
stereotyping, in the doing away with  
of dogma of the “men are...” “women  
are...” “men don’t...” “women  
don’t...” variety, then she has a stake  
in the abandonment of the most un-  
questioned of all confining,  
categorizing generalizations: the  
generalization of heterosexual  
dogma.  

Here is where things get tricky: hav-  
ing argued against the stereotyping of  
people on the basis of gender, I want  
to defend my stereotyping of people  
on the basis of gender. Because I do  
not live my life along the lines of  
“let’s-all-be-bisexual, Black/white-  
male/female—we’re-all-just-human,”  
and I don’t intend to. Racists are  
those who say, “Why do all those  
Latinos want to sit at their own table?  
Why don’t they sit with me? I  
wouldn’t even notice what color their  
skin was!” — as if we lived in a world  
in which ethnicity did not already  
make a great deal of difference.  
Racists, and sexists, are those who  
write that “reverse discrimination is  
becoming as entrenched and  
disgusting as the oppression of  
women and minorities has been  
throughout the centuries” (Sevcenko,  
YDN), as if whites were being lynched,  
prevented from voting, bought and  
sold, as if men could not be on the  
streets alone at night for fear of being  
attacked by women. Reactionaries  
are those who say, “What do you  
mean, class? America is the land of  
opportunity!” And then there are the  
men who argue that it is not pro-  
gressive for women to have some  
space to themselves, as if men’s at-  
tempts to ensure the impossibility of  
no-man’s-land were not utterly  
familiar...  

It may be true that ultimately it  
wouldn’t matter what gender a per-  
son was, but right now it does matter,  
very much. I cannot ignore dif-  
ferences of sex, race or class in hopes  
that they will go away. It is only  
through acknowledging the specifici-  
ty and significance of those dif-  
ferences that we can try to come to  
terms with, and combat, the legacy of  
a long history of inequality, oppres-  
sion and discrimination. Separatism?  
No one can withdraw from the  
patriarchy, from racism, from our im-  
plication in imperialism. But most les-  
bians would rather be with queer peo-  
ple than with straight people, and  
many would rather be with women  
than with men. The reason is hardly  
rage and hatred, or feeling threatened  
by men, or inability to get a man: the  
reason is, quite simply, that for many  
lesbians men, and especially straight  
men, do not have as much to offer.  

If the politics presented here seem  
a little confusing (if I reject the  
ideology which accepts and man-  
dates the unqualified existence of  
such a thing as masculine and  
feminine, why don’t I react to people  
as people rather than as this or that  
gender? If I am so biased toward  
women and queers how do I expect  
ever to overcome those distinctions?),  
it may be because many of us are not  
used to thinking of the political as a  
matter of bias and vested interest.  
The political is certainly not a matter  
of disinterested theorizing, nor has it  
ever been. It is a matter of our lives.  
How do we live the simultaneous in-  
tertwining of history, present cir-  
cumstance, and possibilities for the  
future? The fact is that we already  
are. To recognize that this is so and to  
recognize the way in which this is so  
is to make the first step toward  
change.  

Correction: AURORA AND CHAPS apologize  
for not crediting the line “Give me a woman  
with bravado and you can keep your few good  
men,” which appeared in the article Separatism  
in AURORA Fall of 1981. The line is from a  
song, “Woman with Bravado,” by the  
Massachusetts feminist songwriter and musi-  
cian Kathryn Wetzel.