Griswald’s support for Orcutt il-
lustrates the need for women’s net-
works and female solidarity to counter
the effects of the old boy network.
Fahey feels that “Women are beginn-
ing to band together in different
groups for political reasons and are
beginning to see that they could have
power in numbers, that they can work
together to build each other up or to
push each other up the ladder.”

However, women’s political
organizations in the electoral arena
are not yet effective in this regard, and
financial and social inequities. In light
of the growing strength of right wing
conservatism, it is especially urgent
for women to have a voice in electoral
politics. Many of the women we inter-
viewed expressed concern about the
current political climate and its ef-
fects on women. Kennelly speaks of
the recent trends in the U.S. Congress.
“The women’s movement is in flux
right now, and we'd better watch
ourselves ...don’t take for granted the
strides which have been made...
without the ERA every piece of legisla-
tion that has been passed in our favor
can be changed. You would never, five
years ago, hear about the legislation
which is being discussed in the Senate
today.”

Reaganomics, Kennelly states, “is an
attack on women, an absolute attack
on women.” “When the economy
changes, who gets laid off first and who
suffers the most?” Kennelly’s concerns
with the budget were repeated by most
of the other women.

Roz Berman says, “My big concern is
jobs; when the economic climate is not
good, women and minorities suffer.”
Marcella Fahey feels that the effects of
the budget cuts will be to force states
to make the choice “between one
human service and another, often af-
fecting the same people...We’re putting
the neediest people in categories and
having them fight for the least amount
of funds....Women are the most af-
fected when social services are cut.
Most of the specific programs being
cut by the federal government have to
do with women and children.”

Eunice Groak was the only woman
to wholeheartedly support
Reaganomics. She feels the cuts “will
make government a little more respon-

sive.” Groak does not assess the im-
pact these cuts will have specifically on
women and children. Groak has “never
been involved with women’s causes.” 
“I did a lot of my law school work and
entered into the marketplace prior to
the outset of the women’s movement...I
just never had the time to really get in-
volved in it.” Though denying that the
women’s movement has helped her
career, she later conceded, “Maybe
there are debts I haven't paid.”

Kennelly declares, “The women’s
movement has had an effect on all our
lives, whether people want to admit it
or not.” Roz Berman speaks of the
changes the women’s movement has
brought. “One of the great contribu-
tions of N.O.W. is that they have suc-
ceeded in raising the consciousness of
women. Women of my generation were
not necessarily feminists. I have seen a
great turnaround in people of my
generation and older: women who
perhaps ten to fifteen years ago might
have viewed the feminist movement
with suspicion. I spoke to a group of
senior women who are active in
volunteer work and they were extreme-
ly supportive of the women’s move-
ment and very understanding of the
problems that women have...(this sup-
port) was not there five to ten years
ago...”

Pauline Kezer, who doesn’t consider
herself an “ardent feminist,” and yet 
“I don’t consider myself a non-feminist,”
feels that bursts of activism in the
women’s movement are very threaten-
ing. “There’s the mainstream of us who
like to carry the movement on without
the threatening attitude...You really
don’t get anywhere in the politics of
confrontation.”

Fahey disagrees. She believes this
fear of appearing threatening has held
the women’s movement and women
back. She offers an example: “In ten
years past women in legislatures did
not want to form a block because they
did not want to be seen as too ag-
gressive.” Fahey feels that women will
increase their numbers and influence in
politics as they form networks of their
own. The experience of the women we
interviewed suggests that Fahey is cor-
rect: it will take hard work and the will-
ingness to join forces to build the
foundations for an effective political
strategy for women.

“Tuesday to Sunday
I(- 560

982 State Street
New Haven, Connecticut 06511
203-624-5372

Go filled with f
Fea Seer ate oe

14

I Will Name My Baby

every what must out somehow

and here: this is my silence

I’ve held my breath so long from you
to keep myself intact

because I knew I loved you. You, the enemy.

The ice storm after my abortion

sealed us in your house

you with all your liberal friends

and me, who shared my secret just with you.

That ice storm was the day I wasn’t sober anymore

and wanted just to cry

and scream

and hold you

You were sanely cold, and playing games with them,

You, you wouldn't listen,

and I couldn’t talk to them.

They thought I was hysterical

And didn’t know I really truly was

Now I’ve come to hold my tongue and save up every breath I have

To hold my thoughts secure from thievery.

That child was also yours.

You wanted me so badly to abort it.

You played along with all those quiet, sterile medics,

You told me you were proud of how I kept so very brave

You never wanted me to think.

It was the only decent thing to do

we have our lives to live

what could we give a child?

But every coming out of something held inside is searing.

Now I’m going mad;

Your horrid friends would like to know

In academic fashion, what my stand is on the issue.

Shall I tell them,

darling,

how I hate the way you tried to make my hard abortion easy?

Or simply nod and mention: I write letters to my congressman?

Just the way you wanted that abortion

You beg me now to pour you out my thoughts

You know a soothing word from you

will make me doubt my powerful rage

The rage that is my truest ally now.

ear - you're very right
will out somet alan

But you will not defuse me

Here is my silence, on this page.

I’ve been entombed so long in ice
to keep this heat intact inside

You'd abort this child of yours

Let it dribble out of me in garbage-bound stillbirth -

Sweetheart, not this time.

Our healthy screaming baby just might kill you
for the love of me someday

Unless you pledge to help it grow.

Don’t you name what you have never known

But help me to embrace

All we give birth to.

sds, Netgear ena pete ender he tetra sappy,

luk

4 worthwhile contribution to the literature of

ethnic pioneer feminism,

Pioneer feminist Miss O'Hara urges Frieda to serve mankind, not one man. Her volatile, Old World father orders her to
marry and produce sons. Her ailing mother and demanding
aunt can't get along without her at Levies’ Kosher Boarding-
house. Rudy, Harry, Mr. Gimel each has plans for her too. As
does Arizonan Bennie Goldson who is determined to make her
the first lady of Dos Cacahuates, a raw, new town on the
Mexican border. Once Frieda has chosen, there’s no going
back. Even when undreamed-of pleasures and endless hard-
ships transform her into a woman for whom few of the old
rules apply.

Journalist-author Harriet Rochlin, lifelong resident of
Los Angeles, calls herself Ameri-Jew-Mex. She has written
extensively about Western Jewish pioneers and notable women
of the West. This is her first novel.

Now available at bookstores

Jove Publications, Inc.

200 Madison Avenue

New York, N.Y. 10016
1 (800) 223-0510