Whim. ’n Rhythm

__ by Sherry Agar  
(Pitchpipe, Whim ‘n Rhythm of 1982)

The first women’s singing group at  
Yale was started in 1969, by some of  
the first women admitted; their reper-  
toire consisted of a few cute songs in  
simple harmonies, and they sang once  
a week at Naples Pizzeria. Things have  
changed a great deal since then, but  
the singing group world is still  
necessarily male-oriented: the men’s  
groups have a longer history, with more  
(and older) alumni; their repertoires are  
more extensive; and arrangements tend  
to be written in a style favorable to  
men’s voices. One bias, however, is no  
longer present. There now exists a  
senior women’s singing group, oriented  
specifically toward women, and aimed  
at high musical standards and a dif-  
ference in performing style.

In the spring of 1981, some senior  
women no longer in groups but still  
wanting to sing got together and decid-  
ed to form a new group. All the  
members considered themselves  
feminists, and several of them were ac-  
tively involved in the feminist move-  
ment. Fed up with singing about  
waiting for Mr. Right, and tired of  
toom-toom 2nd Alto parts (“walking  
viola lines”) they decided to use only  
arrangements that use women’s voices  
effectively, and lyrics that are not in-  
sulting to women. The group found a  
name— Whim ‘n Rhythm— and set out  
to create a new tradition.

Whim ‘n Rhythm’s first performance  
was at the Zeta Psi Jamboree in April,  
where they sang the three songs that  
comprised their repertoire. The au-  
dience was a little hesitant, but was im-  
pressed at the quality of singing of the  
group. Auditions for interested Juniors  
were held that week, and Tap Night  
was scheduled for the following Tues-  
day.

I had been one of the hesitant ones.  
Senior year, I had told myself repeated-  
ly, was the time for me to break away  
from singing groups and do something  
different. But I strongly believed that  
such a group should exist, and I knew  
that everyone who felt that way had to  
be prepared to lend active support if  
Whim ‘n Rhythm were to survive. By  
the time Tap Night came around, I was  
unbelievably nervous. Suddenly my  
roommate came pounding up the  
stairs yelling, “Whim ‘n Rhythm Pitch!  
Get down there!” To my astonishment  
and delight I discovered that, despite  

the pouring rain, many members of the  
“singing group community” had turned  
out to follow the tap, and as we went  
around campus I began to realize that  
I was now part of a senior singing tradi-  
tion that had not been open to women  
before. Old group rivalries became ir-  
relevant—this was my new group, and  
from now on we would be working  
together.

Starting a new group of any kind is  
never easy. We inherited a name, three  
songs and a lot of enthusiasm; our mis-  
sion was to build from that the best  
women’s group on campus. We chose  
to accept the challenge.

DAVID GILL  
A Florist in the European Tradition

The community was behind us from  
the start. The singing group council  
allotted us, without a murmur, the  
coveted slot to appear before the Whif-  
fenpoofs at the major jamborees. Peo-  
ple emerged from all corners to offer to  
write us much-needed arrangements.  
The Whiffenpoofs of 1982 have been  
more supportive than we could ever  
have hoped, giving us encouragement,  
backing us up, and inviting us to sing  
concerts with them. The Dwight Hall  
Jamboree was our first performance:  
quaking but hopeful we went onstage,  
and found one of the warmest and  
most receptive audiences I have ever  
seen. They applauded everything wild-  
ly, and I finally had to apologize that  
we couldn’t give them an encore  
because we didn’t know any more  
songs!

Since then we have added two new  
songs at each performance and our  
repertoire is up to nine pieces with  
several more coming soon. We still will  
not sing any song that we feel is inap-  
propriate, musically or ideologically,  
and we are still set on high musical  
standards and diversity of repertoire  
(from French madrigal to the Roche  
sisters). Most of all, we love what we  
are doing and want the tradition to con-  
tinue, and we are prepared to work for  
that. As our song says: “They used to  
say that a lady should be shy, should be  
coy...should just wait for her dreams to  
show. I’m not that kind of a woman.”

9

Why did men drink wine and  
women water? Why was one sex so  
prosperous and the other so poor?  
What effect has poverty on fiction?  
What conditions are necessary for the  

creation of works of art?

—Virginia Woolf, A Room of One's  
Own

a few bios  
Naomi Wolf will have her work includ-  

ed in an anthology of women poets  
published by MacMillan.

Amy Klobuchar is a Senior at Yale.

Marlene Sansone, the director of Con-  
necticut Advocates for the Arts, lives in  
East Haven. Her work will be exhibited  
at the Eli Whitney Barn this spring.

CHAPS is a group of radical lesbian  
feminists.

Jill Katz graduated from Yale in 1981.

Marcia Eiteman is a member of the New  
Haven Take Back the Night Alliance.

250 Church Street  
New Haven, Ct, 06510  
Phone: 624-4243

Judaism and Feminism  
continued from page 10

positions; and their exclusion from  
adult responsibility: these are but some  
of the patriarchal, sexist elements that  
are crying out to be eliminated. These  
imposed male-female definitions have  
no place today, when women in other  
areas are moving towards reciprocity  
rather than subordination. But they are  
being challenged by thoughtful Jews.

Philosophically, the perception of  
God as an authoritarian male figure is  
as unacceptable as the assumption that  
we, “His” children, are automatically  
sons. Jewish feminists are working with  
the liturgy to re-describe God in more  
encompassing terms as parent rather  
than as father, and to include in  
Him/Her some of the maternal  
characteristics so necessary to this  
new perception. To recognize these  
shortcomings of my heritage is not to  
reject it but to seek to improve it. Who  
could do this better than a woman who  
is a Rabbi?

As I could not give up my feminism,  
so could I not give up my Judaism. Just  
as we must fight to achieve our poten-  
tial as Jewish women, no less must we  
strive to assure it as Jewish women. I  
stand with Paula Hyman, one of the  
pioneer Jewish feminists, who said:

“Jewish feminists have not rejected  
Judaism; we are struggling with it in our  
desire to find a way to fulfill ourselves  
as Jews and as women.”

and with Elaine Starkman who  
wrote:

WE ARE  
we are not tintypes of our great-  
grandmothers  
who served their men and bore sons  
to sit at their feet in heaven.

we are not portraits of our grand-  
mothers

who fled pogroms to make myths

in American sweatshops.

we are not snapshots of our mothers  
doting in despair to force us  
into pink formals and MRS degrees.

we are a generation

seeking tradition

transforming symbols

Jewish women not yet ourselves.

Take Back the Night  
continued from page 17  
had to leap off to avoid electrocution.  
Women could have been killed. The ci-  
ty official who investigated the  

“tampered grating above the sprinkler  

system told us sabotage was the most  
likely explanation.

Nevertheless, women rallied  
resources, and with flashlights  
substituting for stage lights and a  
bullhorn for a sound system, Shange  
continued to deliver a much-abridged  
speech. Her words followed those of  
Speakers Kathy McCarthy, Dai Thomp-  

"Love"

18

son, Joan Cavanagh, Buffy Dunker and  
Gloria Anzaldua. The Theatre of Light  
and Shadow performed a dramatic  
work, and Wendi Dragonfire from the  
Valley Women’s Martial Arts Dojo  
gave a demonstration with Jean Hess.  
As the women turned from the Green  
and began the spirited one and a half  
mile march through downtown New  
Haven, Alison Farrell sent them off with  
her powerful singing of “Fight Back.”  
Her performance, sung through a  
bullhorn as she stood in soggy grass in  
the darkness, facing the distant  
receding backs of the women mar-  
chers, was incredibly impressive and  
very moving. She gave yet another ex-  
ample of how, as strong women, we  
can resist the sabotage and violence  
directed against us.

Other incidents included obscenities  
shouted at the women marchers, most  
noticeably from Calhoun College and  
other of the residential dorms at Yale.  
The chant “Rapists also go to Yale” ob-  
viously struck a raw nerve in the au-  
dience of rapists and batterers leaning  
from the Hallowed Halls. Several  
women were mugged and attacked on  
their way home that night, cruel  
evidence of the ongoing violence  
against women and the major threat  
posed to males by hundreds or  
thousands of women walking together.

The march thus had its primary pur-  
pose in breaking silences, in gathering  
women together, in rousing commit-  
ment on each of our parts to fight back  
in whatever context we can. Despite  
the disruptive incidents, the energy of  
the marching women that night was  
high. Some cheering, such as that from  
the kitchen staff of Blessings’  
restaurant, added to our power. But  
clearly more is needed to stop rape  
than a one-night demonstration. Castra-  
tion—simple and easy—would be  
a good first step. Already in West Ger-  
many castration of convicted rapists  
occurs by law. At least thirty men have  
been castrated so far, and the numbers  
grow. In the meantime, while we  
prepare to castrate the men who have  
been raping us, we can initiate other  
projects such as the Green Light Pro-  
gram, a community block network of  
first aid, referral, and support from  
individual resident women for any  
woman attacked or even afraid at any  
time of the night, while on the street.  
The Women’s Transit Authority, if  
reinstated, can also offer an alternative  
to dangerous nighttime walking. Many  
possibilities exist for future organizing,  
so those women who remember the  
energetic lift of 1500 women marching  
on a common issue that night, or those  
women who were unable to come but  
who connect with any of the related  
issues, should break across barriers of  
inertia and isolation and join with  
women in an international movement  
towards empowerment.

g

—Marlene Sansone