just about the sweetest and wisest  
face in the world, I’d say. As I was  
thinking about this, a thought sudden-  
ly occurred to me: I wonder if  
Kristie’s boyfriend gave her that black  
eye. I hadn’t even thought about it  
before. So I took the bandages out,  
and the hydrogen peroxide, and I  
hoped that the poor girl didn’t have  
pieces of glass in her hand, because  
that could get nasty. And I wondered:  
what made her smash that glass down  
on the table? What had happened to  
that girl that she had so much fight in  
her? Well, she and Amy were talking  
when I went back to the living room,  
and Kristie was still crying, sort of  
spluttering out her story, I guess. I  
would’ve kept leaving them alone,  
but I couldn’t anymore, I was worried  
about the girl’s hand, you know. So  
I went over with the bandages, and she  
just ignored me, Kristie did. They  
both did. Amy just kept rocking  
Kristie, saying, “Yes, yes,” and “There,  
there,” and “I understand,” and  
Kristie kept right on with her sobs,  
and her hiccoughs, and her story. But  
Kristie sort of let me pull her hand  
away, without even looking over at  
me as I did it, so that I could clean the  
hand up and get it in shape. It was  
bloody, all right, and cut, but not too  
deep, not deep enough for stitches. I  
wasn’t too worried.  

I would have kept thinking about  
that other stuff—about my face in  
the mirror, and the fight and why I’d  
done it. But being right there, and  
Kristie telling her story, of course I  
started to listen to it. This is what I  
heard, some of it, anyway.  

“And God knows I don’t want to be  
selfish, you know, and I can’t bear it,  
I can’t bear to hurt her, and selfish,  
selfish, this accusation, people say,  
how can you do this to her? She says,  
how can you do this to me? And, God,  
I am responsible, I see that pain on  
her face, and I am responsible, and  
God I just want to scream, you know,  
and say, I just want to be happy! I’m  
just doing something that feels good  
to me! But it can’t just be that, it can’t  
be, I’m leaving behind someone else,  
and her pain, and dear God.” She kept  
saying that, “Jesus,” and “dear God.”  

I wondered whether she was asking  
him to help, or whether the words just  
soothed her in their repetition. I was  
wondering a few things, in fact. It was  
beginning to dawn on me to wonder  
something else—who was this ‘she’?  

Kristie started sobbing again. “And  
Amy, if you’d seen it. I can see the  
whole thing. I can see every second of  
it ....” Her tears stopped for a  
minute. She grew quiet, and looked in  
the distance, looked out our living  
room window into the black night  
outside.  

“I can just see it,” she said again,  
almost whispered. “She asks me:  
Well, do you love her? Do you love  
this ‘Pat’ woman? —And I say to her,  
I just say those words, — ‘Yes, I do. I do  
love her.’ And Eve’s hand is out from  
nowhere, and it’s across my face, and  
I’m on the floor, in shock,—and my  
eye is full of pain, and she’s crying  
out loud, and”—She stopped. A  
woman? A woman did this to her? I  
was just putting the bandages around  
her hand now, and I was the only one  
making any sound. Amy was just  
rocking Kristie, who was staring  
blankly out the window. It was as  
though she had frozen still with the  

end of her words.  

And there it was.  

I'd heard the story now, most of it,  
the main part of the story. I was wrap-  
ping these bandages around Kristie’s  
hand, and I was going so slowly, very  
slowly and delicately. I suddenly felt  
that her entire frame might collapse  
under my touch if I wasn’t very, very  
careful.  

I just couldn’t help thinking, over  
and over—like some litany: It was a  
woman who did this to her? Then,  
after that: That shouldn’t happen to a  
young girl.  

Suddenly, I wanted to be like Amy,  
and I wanted to have all the warmth  
and wisdom to rock this girl, in her  
pain. I wanted to have the wisdom to  
stay silent and the gentleness to be  
able to hold her without breaking her.  
But I couldn’t do it, and I knew that.  
By now I had finished up the ban-  
dage, so I left the two alone again, to  
go up to my room and go to sleep.  

Sylvia Brownrigg  

Lesbian  
Reading  

You wouldn’t believe how much les-  
bian literature is actually out there, en-  
tirely too much to cover in a short  
piece. I know, I know: I’ve left out lots  
of your favorites. I’ve left out lots of  
my favorites. This article is meant to  
provide only a somewhat rambling and  
idiosyncratic introduction to the scores  
of authors and hundreds of works  
which fall within the broad parameters  
of lesbian literary tradition.  

Several books are of interest to  
anyone seeking a more extensive look  
at lesbian literature. Sex Variant  
Women in Literature by Jeannette  
Foster, originally published in 1956 and  
reissued this year by Naiad Press, is a  
goldmine of information. Foster con-  
siders not only overtly lesbian authors  
from ancient Greece through the 20th  
century, but also those, such as Virginia  
Woolf, George Sand, Emily Dickinson,  
Margaret Fuller and others whose work  
has unmistakable homoerotic content.  
Jane Rule’s Lesbian Images is a study of  
over a dozen writers of lesbian fiction,  
while Judy Grahn’s The Highest Apple  
is a collection of essays on lesbian  
poets (among them Rich, Lorde,  
Broumas, Sappho) and the lesbian  

poetic tradition. Lillian Faderman’s Sur-  
passing the Love of Men, a history of  
the concept of “romantic friendship”  
between women, contains a good deal  
of information about lesbian literature.  
And one of my most favorite books,  
Another Mother Tongue is Judy Grahn’s  
intriguing and moving exploration of  
gay mythology and history. Although  
not focused, as are most of the  
preceding titles, primarily on literary  
tradition, Another Mother Tongue pro-  
vides a homoerotic context from which  
to look at our works and lives. This is a  
book that can change you.  

Two anthologies, entitled appropriately  
enough Lesbian Fiction, edited by Elly  
Bulkin, and Lesbian Poetry, edited by Elly  
Bulkin and Joan Larkin, provide introductions to the  
work of several dozen contemporary  
lesbian writers, many of whom have in  
turn published volumes of their own.  
Other anthologies (some of them are  

not entirely lesbian) present the work of  

Third World and Jewish American les-  
bian authors. These anthologies include  
This Bridge Called My Back, edited by  
Cherríe Moraga and Gloria Anzaldúa, a  
collection of prose and poetry by  
radical women of color; Home Girls: A  
Black Feminist Anthology, edited by  
Barbara Smith; A Gathering of Spirit,  
edited by Beth Brant, an anthology of  
writings by Native American women,  
and Nice Jewish Girls: A Lesbian An-  
thology, edited by Evelyn Torton Beck.  

For thought-provoking examinations  
of issues in lesbian lives and relation-  
ships, issues which are reflected in our  
fiction and poetry, essential volumes  
are Adrienne Rich’s On Lies, Secrets and  
Silences, Audre Lorde’s Sister Outsider,  
and Cherríe Moraga’s Loving in the War  
Years. All three of these authors are  
also poets.  

Below you will find an extremely ran-  
dom but, I hope, nonetheless useful  
listing of writers who have produced  
prose and poetry with significant les-  
bian content. All have works currently  
in print, in paperback. In some cases I  
have noted titles of particular interest;  
in others, the author’s name and a word  
or two about her work in general.  
Works already listed in this article do  
not appear again here. Here goes:  

Sarah Aldridge, now in her 70's, has  
been writing lesbian novels for years  
that can be put in the “good trash”  
category: often absorbing reading with  
lots of romance, some sex, and some  
historical background.  

Paula Gunn Allen is a Native  
American novelist and poet, known  
particularly for her novel The Woman  
Who Owned the Shadows.  

Alice Bloch writes fiction and non-  
fiction from a Jewish lesbian perspec-  
tive.  

Ann Bannon is a pseudonym. This is  
good trash from the 50’s and early 60’s,  
long out of print, recently reissued by  
Naiad Press.  

Rita Mae Brown. Rubyfruit Jungle, of  
course. But don’t bother with Sudden  
Death; it’s embarrassing.  

Olga Broumas. Extraordinary poetry  
of lesbian lives and eroticism. Start  
with Beginning with O and with Caritas,  
which is lesbian erotic poetry at its  
most intense (really).  

Cheryl Clarke is a black lesbian poet  
who has published one volume, Nar-  
ratives, and whose work appears in  
many anthologies.  

Colette: significant lesbian content  
in many of her works.  

Katherine Forrest writes perfect  
vacation reading. Her three published  
novels include a sexual romp, a lesbian  
utopian fantasy, and a mystery with a  
lesbian detective.  

Elsa Gidlow, now close to 90 years  
old, has been writing lesbian essays and  
poetry for decades. See especially Sap-  
phic Songs.  

Judy Grahn has been giving us the  
most amazing poetry and essays since  
the 60's. Her two volumes of published  
poetry are Work of a Common Woman  
and Queen of Wands.  

continued on page 8