Pee hws

Page 6

AURORA

March 1984

by Caroline Streeter

The following is a series of journal
entries made during the course of a couple
of hours of watching MTV (music televi-
sion, a 24-hour cable television channel
that shows nothing but rock music
videos).

Such hoopla has been made about MTV
and changes in music lately — the English
invasion, renewed appreciation of black
music (although this occurs via mostly
white, mostly European musicians),
“new” music, “rap”, techno-pop, syn-
thesizers, “pop” and “break” dancing,
metamorphoses of aging stars (Bowie,
Simon and Garfunkel, Tina Turner (who
has gone blond), Yes, Robert Plant, the
Animals) — much of this is chronicled in
the videos — or the video is becoming the
vehicle of chronicle; the time capsule as
well as the purveyor. On TV these people
and groups get incredible exposure with-
out touring or even putting out an album
in some cases. So we need to examine this
phenomenon as newspapers, magazines,
etc. have been doing. Although I have
seen the blatant sexism/racism/gratuitous
violence mentioned, I have yet to read an
article that expresses true concern about
how seriously degrading these videos are.

MTV is the land of pseudo. Nothing but
pseudo sex, pseudo nudity — but also
pseudo kidnapping (the Rolling Stones
“Under Cover of the Night”), suggested

rapes — single and gang (a particularly ef-

fective metaphorical example of the latter
is in Motley Crue’s “She’s Got the Looks
that Kill”. Here a woman who has dis-

played some power (she freed other wo-

men from a cage) is stalked by all of the
(male) members of the band and caught
and surrounded in the end).

Since the average song lasts only 3-5
minutes, we are virtually barraged.

relationships.

and fairy tales.

F.S. 198.
MEN WRITERS

Staff, 1-5 units, Th 1:15-3:05

House (across from Campus Bike Shop).

FEMINIST STUDIES SPRING 1984
COURSE OFFERINGS

F.S. 125, SEX AND ROMANCE IN AMERICAN FILM AND TELEVISION
J. Trice, 4-5 units, MW 3:15-5:05 and T evenings
An examination and analysis of American motion pictures and prime-
time television programming from 1920 to the present which attempts to
define the constant and changing elements in the depiction of romantic

F.S. 140. WOMEN AND THE PRODUCTION OF CULTURE
G. Tuchman, 5 units, MWF 10:00
This course examines the role of women in cultural processes, especially
as writers, artists and workers in contemporary mass media.

F.S. 190. IMAGES OF WOMEN IN MYTHOLOGY
R. Marks, 5 units, MW 1:15-3:05
This course will focus on the patterns and symbols used to characterize
the power of the feminine in ancient and classical mythology, folktales

“THOSE WILD SPACES”: THIRD WORLD AMERICAN WO-
MEN WRITERS

W. Lubiano and M. Klages, 5 units, MW 4:15-6:05
An exploration of the literature of women of color in the United States
which emphasizes contemporary writers.

F.S. 301. GRADUATE SEMINAR: FEMINIST THEORY
A seminar on current feminist theory for graduate students in all disci-
plines who are familiar with advanced feminist theory. Topics will cover

the most recent developments in feminist social science research; credit
may be arranged through feminist studies or other departments.

Also courses in English, History, Anthropology, Political Science, Medicine,
Modern Thought and Literature and Religious Studies.

For more information, call the Feminist Studies office at 497-2412 or stop by Serra

e Misogynistic Televised Violence?

All of the videos basically look alike.
Same scenarios reoccur with mind-
numbing regularity. No freshness, or dif-
ferent point of view. The same videos
played over and over, reinforcing the
banality, sexism, racism, just insisting
upon the stagnant and offensive imagery.

There is a lot of narcissism, complete
male-centeredness, and just plain silli-
ness. Most of the videos are male ad-
venture stories — despite a variety of
styles — futuristic, wild west, mythologi-
cal, all feature men in various action
postures, and women have little function
beyond being life-size props. __

Even without these videos, TV has
already got a formidable store of por-
nographic and racist imagery in the
aerobics/exercise shows. Crotch shots,
breast shots, overwhelmingly, white wo-
men. In both the exercise shows and the
rock videos, the overriding image of wo-
man is that she is being objectified. It’s in the
way the camera pans her body. All of her
power lies in her appearance; sexy, sultry,
sensuous, removed sometimes but always
implicitly available. The norm is woman
as object (sometimes, though not necessar-
ily, object of desire). She is mute, always
mute. In the Romantics’ “Talking in Your
Sleep”, members of the band sing in a
room full of immobile, comatose looking
women dressed in skimpy lingerie. In the
Tubes’ “She’s a Beauty”, the scenario is a
circus fun house in which a boy rides in a
car that is made of a live woman. All of the
attractions feature women in cages, wo-
men doing stunts, women as creatures. At
one point the boy bursts through a large

cartoon drawing of a female breast. At the
end the boy is very much aged. See
the implication — that he is the one who
has been used up.

The most important thing about the
image of woman in video is that she be ac-
cessible, and that this accessibility be ex-
plicitly sexual. In three videos — Huey
Lewis and the News’ “I Want a New
Drug”, the Stray Cats’ “Sexy and Seven-
teen” and ZZ Top’s “Sharp Dressed Man”,
women are admired only for how they ap-
pear (beautiful, thin, young, etc. ad
nauseum) and their potential for making
the man or men “feel good”.

Even if the imagery is not directly
woman-hating/misogynist and pornograp-
hic, the lyrics are, the idea is. We often see
the male rocker hurt, rejected, angry, com-
mitting an act of violence (smashing a
record player, for example) that we can
sense is meant to be a replacement for
destroying or hurting or maiming a wo-
man.

A lot of elaborate costumes, makeup,
staging and setting often mask the real
sexual violence of a video. Michael Jack-
son’s “Thriller”, beyond the appealing
campiness of the werewolf and the ghouls,
is really about a boy getting off by terrify-
ing his girlfriend.

Come to think of it, there are few videos
of female performers and/or bands, and
when there are, it’s sometimes even more
depressing. The women either degrade
themselves, singing about being some-
one’s “toy” (Girlschool, a British band),
being put down, down and out, unlucky
in love (Berlin, “The Metro”), or, they are
uninspiring ornamentation (like the

Go-Go's, cavorting in a fountain singing
“Our Lips are Sealed”).

Let’s face it. Women’s sexuality sells.
The main objective of these videos is to
make people notice them, and female
sexuality, aside from being a major com-
modity in and of itself, has been used to
sell virtually everything else for years. A
video which had real potential to make
this more clear is Pat Benatar’s “Love is a
Battlefield”. In it, a group of prostitutes
console a hooker who has been abused by
a man. They get angry, and for a few
seconds things are looking pretty right-
eous. But when they are in the presence of
the men, the prostitutes become pouty,
personified sex once more, instead of just,
ifiably pissed-off women. The video
backed off from making a strong statement
about the dangerous and unglamorous life
of prostitutes. Its use of women’s sexuality
to sell the song is particularly ironic.

Misdirection
Karie Youngdahl

“I’m very perceptive — I've always been
attuned to peoples’ thoughts and moods. I
can sense the changes in attitudes, the
subtleties in nuances.” He looked at me
from across the car, his eyes piercing the
interminable distance between driver and
passenger, between controller and rider.

I looked out the window, expecting fur-
ther introspections from the unfathomable
depths of this man’s soul. They came. _

“Since I was a small child I’ve been told
that I’m special. My mother read
Kierkegaard and Nietzsche to me when I
was still in her womb. I attribute part of
my superior intelligence to that pre-natal
experience.” He paused for a response —
an affirmation of his specialty, an ack-
nowledgement of his difference.

I unrolled the window, trying to relieve
the atmosphere in the car. As the fresh air
rushed in, the pomposity that had accum-
ulated escaped to the countryside. I
thought of a smoke-cloud billow of boast-
fulness rising to the mountains, joining
the fog, becoming indistinguishable from
the natural. I wondered, though, if pom-
posity could float. Wouldn’t it waft out the

Despite the lip service paid to a new
British invasion into American music,
American videos overwhelmingly domi-
nate MTV. The American videos are very
white. (European bands are more likely to
be integrated, and in instances like a
crowd scene, they will use people of
color.) Consequently, I can count the all
black or interracial videos I see on one
hand. Other people of color are quite in-
visible.

Racism and sexism intersect in the
images of women on MTV. White stand-
ards of beauty dominate.

And what about this really insensitive
parody of poverty — in dress, in hairstyle,
in jewelry, in imagery, in lyrics. There’s a
horrible form of satire and appropriation
going on in the implementation of the new
poverty chic. Genesis, in the video “That's
All” mimes being poor and cold in rag-
gedy clothes while playing their valuable
electronic instruments. The movie,
soundtrack and video of “Flashdance” has
encouraged people to pay for clothing that
looks old and torn up. The whole trend is
a highly hypocritical romanticization that
only the privileged can afford.

On the one hand I want to dismiss this
MTV, these videos as the drivel they truly
are. But I cannot. Let’s face it — even if
they are starving — American families
own a television set. Of course the very
existence of cable TV, of which MTV is a
part, illustrates a class discriminatory phe-
nomenon (which in this country is
synonymous with race discrimination).
There are many who have less access to
these videos — however, they are carried
on network TV as well. They are affecting
us, and I think that we need to deal with
that.

To say (as the standard excuse goes) that
these videos parody and make fun of
sexism rather than glorify and represent it
is amazingly hollow and untrue. Accoun-
tability doesn’t live in commercialized
rock and roll: If a piece (any media type) is
indeed making fun of that which it does
not approve of, that should be obvious to
some of us, at least. True satire would
clearly convey a critical viewpoint and
question the ideology that it portrays.
Such intelligent probing is far beyond the
range of the videos.

window, only to sink to the highway with
a dead thud, the thud of a rabbit under an-
other set of tires? And if it did float, to
cling to a tree or caress a rock, wouldn’t it
alienate itself from the other clouds with
its overbearingness? Would they scorn it,

mock it, scuttle from it? Or would it
become a tolerated pariah in their midst,
grudgingly accepted but never belonging?

“The children at school realized I was
their superior; I led them and they fol-
lowed.” He had waited for a response long
enough, I assumed, and had decided to
continue. I watched sprinklers in the
groves, vast living irrigation systems in
rows of regimented vines.

“We began an insidious attack on the
social hierarchy of my school. We perse-
cuted the squirming, white-faced students
with ruthless fury. I infested other parts of
the city with my doctrines. I revealed the
truth. All who had doubted shook before
me in horror. I am sent from God; I am his
messenger. I have been endowed with
gifts no other mortal possesses — gifts
from Him, from His hand, from His seed.
He has laid the path for me. I will quell the
multitudes and calm the seas.”

The sun was going down. I told him he
had missed the turn to Fresno.