March 1984

AURORA

Tenure Decision

Paul Appeals

by Vanessa Poster

The Center for Research on Women and
the Drama Department are co-sponsoring a
conference this spring (April 27-29) on
Women Playwrights. Four nationally
known women playwrights will be at
Stanford for the conference: Marsha Nor-
man, Megan Terry, Martha Boesing, and
Emily Mann. Scholars from a number of
universities will speak on many aspects of
women in theatre.

Marsha Norman won a Pulitzer Prize for
her play “'night, Mother.” The prize
focused broad interest on the contribution
of women to dramatic literature. The play
is about a mother and daughter, two wo-
men defined by their isolated relationship
to each other. The mother finds meaning
in her attachment to material life: her
chocolate, her manicure, her T.V., while
the daughter takes control of her life by
deciding on suicide. The two women real-
ly communicate with each other for the
first time through the fear of the imminent
suicide. The daughter tells her mother of
her plans because she wants her to know.
In an interview with the New York Times
last May, Ms. Norman said, “Knowing is
the most profound kind of love, giving
someone the gift of knowledge about your-
self.”

Megan Terry’s plays are of a completely
different style. She comes from the Open
Theatre, a tradition of questioning the
boundaries of stage and character. Martha
Boesing has been known for her interest in
social and political issues. Emily Mann’s
play “Still Life” will be performed on
Friday and Saturday evening. Another
play, “Female Parts” by Dario Fo and
Franca Rame, will be presented at noon on
those days.

Helen Krich Chinoy and Linda Walsh
Jenkins, who recently co-edited a book
called Women in American Theatre, will
open the scholarly portion of the confer-
ence on Saturday morning. They will be
followed by other talks on American and
British women playwrights by Stanford
professors Wendell Cole and Martin Es-
slin.

The afternoon session is devoted to
black women playwrights and the Sunday
morning session to “Feminist Experimen-
tal and New Age Drama.” On Sunday af-
ternoon, a group of Bay Area women
playwrights will present scenes from their
work, followed by a panel discussion.

In conjunction with the conference,
there will be a display in Meyer Library on
the four featured playwrights. Also, the
Center for Research on Women has begun
a reference library on women in drama
throughout history.

If you would like to volunteer to help (as
a host/ess or in some other capacity) in this
exciting exploration into women’s theatre,
please contact Vanessa Poster at CROW-
Serra House, 497-1994.

1©OS00000800SS880008

|W

THE BRIDGE

Students Counseling Students
Complete Confidentiality. No Cost.

640 Campus Drive
497-3392

Why must we always fight to keep our
valuable women professors employed at
this university?

Diana Paul, an assistant professor of re-
ligious studies, is currently appealing her
department's decision to deny her tenure.

It appears Paul was the victim of a chain
of costly administrative errors concerning
her tenure process, according to her ad-
viser, English professor Ron Rebholz.

Rebholz questioned the validity of the
academic reviews solicited by the five-
man religious studies “personnel commit-
tee.”

“The department inaccurately defined
her field as Chinese philosophy and reli-
gion,” Rebholz said. “Since her real field
is Chinese Buddhism, we can’t help but
feel the 11 reviewers weren’t competent
enough in that area to evaluate her work.”

Paul is asking that her entire record of
teaching and research be evaluated again,
and that members outside of the religious
studies department choose the next
reviewers of her published work.

The original committee consisted of five
male tenured faculty members in the reli-
gious studies department, a department
Rebholz referred to as “generally non-
tenuring within itself.” No one has been
tenured in this department for 10 years.

Paul’s grievance also included a critique
of the department’s evaluation of her
teaching, which overemphasized her in-
frequent graduate teaching and ap-
parently ignored her undergraduate work.

Paul has taught over 1000 undergrads,
including more than 200 so far this year
(compared to 18 grad students). Her
classes have become so popular, she has
had to turn away students for lack of
space. They overwhelmingly evaluate her
teaching as “very good.”

“She makes complex philosophical and
religious issues easily understandable,
and provides a framework within which to
think about typically ignored issues like
death,” said Purea Knight, a student this
quarter in Paul’s “Buddhist Thoughts on
Death and the Afterlife.”

Despite her popularity among under-
graduates, it appears that the department
placed more emphasis on the evaluations
of the few graduate students in Paul’s
classes.

“She was teaching undergraduate
courses,” Rebholz explained. “She would
not have been teaching at the advanced
level those upper division students would
have expected.”

In addition, those graduate students in
East Asian languages who worked with
Paul on an advanced level, and who were
qualified to evaluate her graduate teach-
ing, were never consulted.

“It was an administrative error,” Reb-
holz said, “an extremely costly one.”

Rebholz also claimed that the depart-
ment committee members never per-
sonally observed Paul’s teaching, as is
done in other departments during tenure
considerations.

There have been no accusations of sex
discrimination as yet, but Rebholz
stressed that because Paul is both a wo-
man and a member of a minority group,
her case should have been treated with the
special attention called for in the faculty
affirmative action report.

“With all these administrative errors
and departmental oversights, it is obvious
that procedures were not followed as
scrupulously as they could have been,” he
said.

Finally, both Rebholz and Paul’s hus-
band, Doug Paul, believe that Stanford’s
tenure process is seriously deficient.

The Pauls are currently Resident Fel-
lows in Soto dormitory. According to
Doug Paul, “When we moved into Soto,
Diana was pretty much told that it was
impossible to work as an RF and do
quality research at the same time. We're
trying to disprove that.”

Rebholz explained that in tenure con-
siderations, too much emphasis is placed
on research and publication, and “only lip
service is paid to teaching ability and uni-
versity service.”

And according to Rebholz, this will
have a negative effect on the university's
future. “In a university that’s at least half
undergraduates, we cannot ignore the im-
portance of teaching — if it is not taken
seriously, the students suffer.”

Rebholz is right.

We as students lose not only a qualified
and enthusiastic teacher, but with her
goes another opportunity to explore a
much neglected perspective in academia.
Who will teach “Women, Religion and
Politics” each Spring? I seriously doubt
any of the five tenured men will volunteer,
nor do I think I would want them to.

As students enrolled in this costly uni-
versity, we should demand to be heard.
Our opinions should not be neglected —
we are fighting for our own education.

It is not too late to show your support in
Diana Paul’s tenure case. Students inter-
ested in helping should write letters to
Dean Norman Wessells, sign petitions at
Soto or at the Center for Research on Wo-
men, or make appointments to vocalize
your concerns to Professor Gordon Craig,
the appointed arbitrator in the appeals
process.

It is the least we can do, for her, and for
ourselves.

May Sarton

will read from her works

8 pm, Monday, April 9

Kresge Auditorium, Stanford

$5 ($3 Student)

Tickets available at Tresidder Ticket Office (415) 497-4317
Presented by University Events and Services