The Girl With the Black Eye

It seemed like she had it for weeks,  
but it couldn’t have been more than six  
or seven days, I guess. But she’s such a  
pretty thing, you know, and you no-  
ticed right away that she didn’t even try  
to hide it with make-up or anything.  
Oh, she was embarrassed about it, all  
right, you could see her start blushing  
when people would stare at it—but she  
didn’t cover it up. She was a funny girl,  
that way. She had this kind of pride  
that I’ve never seen in a young girl like  
that before—it’s more something you  
see in veterans or boxers or something  
like that—battlers, you know—people  
who fight. I don’t suppose she fought  
much, but that was the kind of pride  
she had.

She came over to dinner at our  
house one night that week, that’s why  
the whole thing stands out so in my  
memory. It wasn’t just something I saw  
from a distance. My wife’s known her  
for years, since she babysat the grand-  
kids, and the two of them got to be  
tight, somehow. You know, my  
wife—she likes young people, she likes  
talking to young girls about their lives,  
about her life. I don’t know. She’s had a  
lot of young friends, somehow, kids  
coming over for coffee and cake in the  
afternoon, and me wandering around  
the house feeling a bit like a sore  
thumb. —A bit out of place. Not that I  
mind—I think it’s great, really, great  
for Amy and probably good for these  
young people, too. With all the crazy  
things people do now and get away  

with, you’d probably need someone  
with good old ideas and a strong sense  
of things sometimes. It would help.  
Anyway, that’s how it was, she and  
Amy were tight, and I liked the girl  
myself, she was always respectful and  
kind to me, which I can’t say is true of  
everyone Amy brings home. She can  
come up with some crazy ones  
sometimes!

But this time, I knew something was  
wrong, the minute I stepped into the  
kitchen. I had been out back, doing  
some carpentry—I was building a little  
toolshed at this late stage, we’d always  
needed one and I finally had the time  
to do something about it—and I came  
into the kitchen, and the two of them,  
Amy and Kristie, suddenly became  
very quiet. You know how it is with  
women, you can tell when they’re talk-  
ing about something really serious,  
because they stop the instant you go  
into the room. I’m kind of used to it,  
though—I just figured I’d better leave  
until dinner was ready, wash my hands  
and “make myself useful,” as they say!  
They probably had something to talk  
about, something important—and I  
walked through to go out to the  
bathroom, I thought I saw some fresh  
tears shining on Kristie’s face, and of  
course I noticed that big black eye  
again. Oh, it looked painful.

When we all finally sat down  
together, the two of them were pretty  
quiet again, but we started talking  
about family news, which kept things  
going for a while. I had to ask about  
Kristie’s parents, of course, you know,  
John Beck was a student of mine years  
ago (John—that’s her Dad), a feisty  
one, and now he’s a pretty successful  
young doctor—I always feel a touch  
of pride in that one, somehow, and I  
like to hear how he’s doing. Her  
mother, now that’s another story, a  
sort of crazy one—she was a  
frustrated actress, I guess, that’s how  
the story goes, and she had vanished  
a few years before to go back to  

Hollywood. Got a job on a soap  
opera, it turned out. Sometimes in the  
afternoon Amy and I would turn on  
the TV, just for a laugh, and watch  
Kristie’s Mom strutting around, run-  
ning from this crisis to that. We liked  
to do that from time to time, you  
know how you get a kick out of see-  
ing someone you know on TV.  
Anyway, it was a sad story, really, I  
never did hear much about how  
Kristie felt about her Mom doing that,  
but I imagine it was hard on  
her—why, she was only sixteen or so  
at the time, and that’s still pretty  
young for a girl to lose her mother to  
some crazy business like the TV  
business. But I’m straying from the  
point, here. We weren't talking about  
Kristie’s Mom, at all, then—she was  
telling us about her Dad, and about  
some new woman he was seeing now.  
I couldn’t help mentioning that  
modern times seemed quicker than  
you could keep track of. I couldn’t  
quite understand it, or approve of it.

But I always get in trouble when I say  
something like that around Amy or  
any of her friends, especially the  
young ones, of course. For them,  
nothing’s more natural than breaking  
up and changing partners every two  
or three years, and not always with  
marriage or anything in between! Not  
that I’m trying to say that’s awful, or  
wrong, really, I’m not one of these  
stuffy old moralists like you see, I just  
try to stand up sometimes for the  
values of faith, and loyalty, you  
know. I think it’s fine when people  
who love each other stick together,  
like Amy and I have done, and I think  
it’s a pretty inspiring thing. But it’s  
hard to get away with saying that,  
people think you’re trying to outlaw  
“cohabitation” or what do they call it.  
So when I made this little comment  
about modern life, Kristie turned  
around on me like I’d just said  
something in favor of the neutron  
bomb or something.

“I think it’s great that my Dad’s  
found someone that he loves again!”  
she said. Her face all red and indignant.

“Well I’m not saying anything  
against love, Kristie,” I said, trying to  
pacify her a little (she looked so  
mad!), and explain what I meant. “I’m  
just saying—you know, it’s a bit sud-  
den, it’s a bit quick, all these different  
loves ... isn’t this your Dad's third  
girlfriend now, since Jeannie left?” I  
knew it was, I don’t know why I asked  
her, really. I saw right away that it  
made her uncomfortable, and I  
wasn’t trying to do that. Not really.

“Well—yeah, it is,” she got a little  
quieter. “But he’s been dating—I mean,  
he’s been trying to find the right  
woman for him, since Mom left, and  
it’s not easy for him at his age. It’s not  
easy for anyone, at any age—so he’s  
just meeting different women, to try  
to find the right person.” Didn’t she  
sound like an ancient sage, at nine-  
teen years old! As if she’d been  
through it all, she knew what it was all  
about! “And Debbie—she seems really  
right for Dad.”

Well, it’s hard to argue with so-  
meone who’s so self-assured, but I  
guess the devil was in me that night.  
I didn’t know why Amy was staying out  
of it—usually she’s right there in the  
middle with the rest of us, no con-  
troversy’s too big for her! But I notic-  
ed that she had a very distant, sad ex-  
pression on her face, and wouldn’t  
say anything. That should have tipped  
me off to leave it alone, but it didn’t.  
I kept going.

“But what about the last one, what  
was her name? Sara? She seemed like  
the right one, too, now, didn’t she?  
And how will he know when he’s real-  
ly hit the right one?” Now even I  
realized that my tone was starting to  
sound a little snide—a little too  
smug. And I really can’t say why I did  
it, except that I have a bit of a fighter  
in me, too, and sometimes something  

just brings it out. I wanted to fight this  
one.

“Sara was different,” Kristie  
mumbled sulkily. “She was—she was  
possessive of Dad.”

“You see? There you are! That’s  
another thing that’s gained a lot of  
currency these days—the notion of  
‘possessiveness’. Now I don’t want to  
start sounding grandfatherly, but  
when Amy and I were first seeing  
each other, people didn’t talk about  
‘possessive’. They talked about ‘stay-  
ing true’, and if you loved someone  
and didn’t want to let go of them, it  
made perfect sense. They wouldn’t go  
and call you ‘possessive.’”

“That’s just because people are on-  
ly beginning to understand now what  
it means to love people freely! You  
weren't that free back then!” “What’s  
more free than loving someone and  
wanting to be with them the rest of  
your life?” “That’s not freedom!  
That’s shackles—that’s marriage and  
ownership and people having to cling  
to each other for fear of their lives!”  
Her face was all red and indignant  
again, but mine was, too, by this time.

“Marriage is not like shackles,” I  
said, and I was angry now, too, “But  
to me, this ‘freedom’ and ‘choice’ are  
becoming a different kind of  
prison—where people are locked in  
indifference, and selfishness, and lack  
of responsibility!” There I said it all,  
sounding like the true old man  
moralist! And no sooner were the  
words out of my mouth than I regret-  
ted them. But I hardly had time to  
regret them, before Kristie stood up,  
and did something that completely  
shocked me—she lifted up her wine  
glass, and then smashed it down on  
the table, holding onto it, so that her  
hand came crashing down with it and  
crushed with the rest of the glass on  
the table.

There was a minute of silence, and  
then Kristie was crying again, and she  
said softly partly to me, partly to  
herself, “Goddamn it, I don’t need to  
be attacked from all sides.” And Amy  
was rushing around to her side of the  
table, to hold her and comfort her,  
with all that warmth and wonder-  
fulness that Amy has. I was just left  
staring at the broken shards of glass,  
the sound of breaking glass. I was a  
little stunned. Then I realized that  
Kristie’s hand must need some atten-  
tion, so I disappeared for a moment  
to the bathroom to get the bandages  
and all. But I stayed for a little while  
in the bathroom, on the john, and  
then looking into the mirror.

It’s a curious thing—I don’t usually  
look at myself much in the mirror.  
What’s to look at? I’ve seen my face  
for at least sixty years now, I sure as  
hell know what it looks like, so there  
aren’t many surprises. Maybe a new  
wrinkle, or a lost couple of hairs, or  
the skin looks a bit chapped, but so  
what. That night, though, something  
made me look in the mirror before I  
went out again to be with the women.  
I saw something I didn’t like much. I  
saw a pugnacious man’s face, that  
was still a little hot and red from get-  
ting into a fight, and from wanting to  
win that fight. Why should it have  
mattered to me? I looked at my face  
again, and it seemed rougher and  
meaner than I’d ever pictured it look-  
ing. Not like the two faces I’d just  
been looking at in the other room.  
Now, Kristie, of course, she’s just  

a young girl and then Amy, well she has