By Cathy Bergmann

Rape is one of the most devastating
things that can happen to a woman; it is
an assault upon her person and upon
her self. Last year over eighty rapes
were reported in New Haven; probably
many more women than that were raped
and did not report it. Where can a rape
victim go for help? In New Haven she
can get help from Yale/New Haven

Hospital and from the New Haven Rape

Crisis Center.

Probably the first thing a rape victim
should do is get medical care. Yale/New
Haven Hospital’s emergency room has
the necessary facilities and a special
Rape Counseling Team to assure that
the rape victim receives appropriate
crisis care. The Team consists of around
twelve to fifteen hospital staff members.
Besides medical treatment for injuries,
VD, or possible pregnancy (they give
the Morning After Pill if desired and
appropriate), a rape victim is treated
with special consideration in the emer-
gency room. In everything they do the
Rape Counseling Team tries to show
respect and care for a woman.

If a woman is there, then she will be led to a

private area. The counselor remains
with her as long as she is in the
emergency room.

Lunch. 11:30 - 23:30

85 Ferris Street
Black Rock, Bridgeport, Ct. 06605
203-570-XXXX

of medico-legal evidence. If a woman

washes or douches before going to the

hospital, the counselors offer support and
follow-up care. They also give informa-
tion, tell the woman what is going to
happen. Counselors assist in the gyne-
cological exam, giving injections, etc.,
so a rape victim has some sense of
continuity and does not have to deal
with a lot of different people. In the
past it has been said that rape victims
are “re-raped” in the emergency room;
that feeling is what the Rape Counsel-
ing Team at Yale/New Haven is trying
to overcome.

Follow-up counseling is maintained
for a minimum of six weeks. Depending
on the counselor and the woman’s
needs, follow-up, by telephone, may
begin as early as the next day. The rape
victim is given the counselor’s name
and the emergency room phone number
in writing and is encouraged to call as
often as she wants. She is also given
written information on any medications
she received and encouraged to return
in four weeks for another gynecological
exam.

Yale/New Haven Hospital works
closely with the police in the collection

of medico-legal evidence. Women should know that they
can anonymously report the rape by
giving the police a description of the

rapist. Even anonymous reports can
help bring down the incidence of rape
by giving the police more information
on assailants. Reporting the rape does
not bind the victim to prosecute if she
does not want to.

The New Haven Rape Crisis Center is
based on a different philosophy than that
of Yale/New Haven. A group of women
operate a 24-hour crisis phone line and
do educational outreach. They believe it
is very important to try to break the
myths which surround rape in our
society, discussing with the victim how

they will urge her to go to her private doctor
or to Yale/New Haven’s emergency
room. The counselor will then call the
emergency room to alert them, so they
can make any necessary preparations,
and will accompany the victim to the
hospital and stay with her as long as
she is there. They usually limit the
counseling to three sessions. As a new
feature, they also offer a support group
where women who have been sexually
assaulted can share their feelings and
talk about their experiences. Depending
upon the victim’s needs and desires,

all women are susceptible to rape, how
rape relates to women’s position in
society, and how all women are raped
sometime, even if only symbolically.
They feel that a victim cannot forget a
rape; afterwards, she will see things in
a new perspective. The rape becomes a

point of reference; the victim will have a

different way of looking at men.

When a woman who has been raped
calls the crisis answering service and
leaves her name (she does not have to
use her real name) and phone number,
usually within minutes one of the
counselors will call her back. Rape
counselors focus on crisis counseling,
feeling the most important thing that
can be done for the victim is to give her
a safe, comfortable place to release her
emotions, be supportive, educate her,
and break down the myths about rape,
women and sex roles.

The first question the counselor asks
the victim is if she has had medical
treatment. If she has not, the counselor

may be referred to a number of
places, such as Connecticut Mental
Health Center, for further counseling.
Often women call the Rape Crisis

Center just to have someone to talk to.

Some women wait months or years
before they feel they can tell anyone
about the rape.

Besides consciousness raising, the
Rape Crisis Center works on teaching
precaution and ways of preventing rape
in our society. Towards this aim they
provide many speaking engagements.
For further information call:

New Haven Rape Crisis Cntr. - 397-2273
Yale/New Haven Hospital Rape Coun-
seling Team - 436-1960

A source book on rape: Medea, Andra
and Thompson, Kathleen Against Rape:
A Survival manual for women: How to
avoid entrapment and how to cope with
rape physically and emotionally (New
York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 1974)

activities because you can’t get there safely.

Donations accepted for gas.
Volunteers Are Always Needed.

Task Force Against Violence Against Women - New Haven Feminist Union

WOMEN'S TRANSIT AUTHORITY

CALL FOR RIDES: 436-0645
Thurs, Fri, Sat 8pm - 1:30am
(please call at least 30 minutes ahead of time)