13

Old Boys/New Girls:

Connecticut Women in Politics

Barbara Heffernan and  
Ernestine Abel

Connecticut has one of the most im-  
pressive records in the country for elec-  
ting women to office in state govern-  
ment. The percentage of women serv-  
ing in the Connecticut legislature is the  
highest in the nation: 22% of the State  
Senate* and 24% of the House of  
Representatives. Although Connecticut  
women are far from achieving propor-  
tional representation, the progress that  
has been made in Connecticut is still  
impressive when compared to the  
percentage of women in the U.S. Con-  
gress. Only 19 women currently serve in  
the House of Representatives of 435  
(4%), and of the 100 U.S. Senators, only  
2 are female.

How then, do women fare in Connec-  
ticut when they run for and serve in  
elected office? Do the established  
political networks here welcome and  
support female candidates? What im-  
pact has the women’s movement had  
on women in politics? We interviewed  
seven Connecticut women politicians  
to hear their views.

Marcella Fahey, Democratic State  
Senator from East Hartford, sees a  
full network in party politics that  
excludes women from deci-  
sion-making positions. “The old boy  
network is part of the political process  
and it hinders women. I think it’s very  
hard for women to break in. Most of  
the time women are allowed to run for  
a seat in the legislature if the party  
assumes they can’t win it, or if women  
challenge the party's nominee and run  
by themselves without the party's help,  
or if the seat is designated by the party  
as a women’s seat.” Although each of the women interviewed fell into one of these three  
categories at one point in their careers,  
only three of the seven women  
acknowledged that this old boy net-  
work hinders women.

Rosalind Berman, Republican State  
Representative from New Haven, for in-  
stance, is “not aware” of a strong net-  
work within the party, yet she herself  
was asked by her party to run for state  
representative in a district whose ratio  
of Democrats to Republicans is twelve  
to one. “I surprised them,” she says and  
agrees that the party will “ask women  
to run when it is unlikely that their can-  
didate will win in that district.”

Barbara Kennelly, Democratic U.S.  
Representative from Connecticut's First  
District, feels that women’s traditional  
absence from the political sphere is  
what hinders women politicians, and  
not the party system; but Kennelly has  
had a rare advantage in party politics in  
that her father, John Bailey, was Chair-  
man of the Connecticut Central  
Democratic Party from 1946 through  
the mid-seventies and chairman of the  
Democratic National Committee from  
1961 to 1968. When asked about the  
old boy network, Kennelly replied, “I  
haven’t had any personal problems  
with (it)...obviously, here I sit.” Until her  
election to the U.S. Congress, Kennelly  
was the Connecticut Secretary of State,  
a post unofficially designated a  
“woman's position” since 1939. With  
the exception of Governor Ella Grasso,  
no woman has filled any other ex-  
ecutive position in Connecticut. This  
“doesn't bother me at all,” Kennelly  
states. “It's a good job, an interesting  
job.”

Pauline Kezer, Republican Represen-  
tative from New Britain, was not sup-  
ported by her party when she first ran  
for office. She challenged the  
Republican town chairman’s nominee  
and won. Still, she does not feel she has  
been hindered by an old boy network  
within the party or the legislature. As  
the House Assistant Minority Leader  
and the president of the Organization  
of Women Legislators (OWLs), she says,  
“I function within the system.”

Eunice Groak, a Republican in her  
first term on the Hartford City Council,  
challenged her party's nominee in the  
election and won. Like Kezer, she  
claims, “I’ve never had the feeling of  
discrimination, certainly not within the  
party.” She does admit that “there is an  
old boy network, and I’m sure I’m not  
included in it, but I’ve never spent a lot  
of time worrying about it.”

Kezer and Groak attribute their elec-  
toral successes to alternate political  
networks they formed on their own  
before running. Kezer did “tons of  
volunteer work,” mainly within the  
YWCA and the Girl Scouts, that enabl-  
ed her to know her community  
thoroughly; Groak developed her net-  
work through many years in law prac-  
tice and community work.

Gail Orcutt, Democratic State  
Representative from New Haven, cites  
one ramification of the old boy net-  
work not mentioned by the Republican  
women. The old boy network, she  
claims, “has strong relationships with  
businesses, the major sources of  
political money.” Financing a cam-  
paign is the “major problem a woman  
faces in launching a political career.”  
Fahey agrees, “Because of the old boy  
network, men have other men who not  
only have more money to give, but who  
realize the necessity of giving large  
amounts of money ...men deduct it  
from their taxes and see it as a business  
expense, whereas a woman helps  
another woman by taking five dollars  
out of the family’s food money... Men  
will take more of a risk on somebody  
making it.”

Financing campaigns may be more  
of a problem for Democratic women  
than for Republican women. Fahey  
states one of the reasons that  
Republican women do better politically  
than Democratic women: “Republican  
women have more money... They're a  
little bit wealthier. They've gotten  
involved earlier... Maybe they’ve had  
someone to help them at home.” Statistically, the Democratic Party has not done as well as the  
Republican Party in the percentage of  
women in politics on the state or na-  
tional level. In the U.S. Senate, both  
women are Republican; in the U.S.  
House, 4% of the Republicans and 3%  
of the Democrats are women. Of the  
Connecticut state representatives, 32%  
of the Republicans, and 16% of the  
Democrats are women.

Kezer comments, “The Republicans  
have traditionally had more women in  
public office. They tend to put up more  
women than the Democratic Party in  
Connecticut... maybe because we're  
the underdogs in a race and women fill  
spots on ballots.” Fahey echoes this ex-  
planation: “A party that is not in power  
would be more willing to let its women  
try to get in, whereas the people in  
power, which have traditionally been  
men, they're not going to let the  
women in if they can possibly avoid it.  
So maybe it comes down to who's got  
the power.”

The old boy network seems to be  
particularly strong within the  
Democratic Party, which has long  
been the dominant political party in  
New Haven. Women of both parties  
mentioned the Democrats’ abuse of  
patronage as a detriment to qualified  
aspirants of both sexes. After twenty  
years of Democratic control of New  
Haven, Orcutt claims, patronage has  
gotten so out of hand that “It would  
be difficult to get a job sweeping a  
floor in a New Haven school without  
having a recommendation from a par-  
ty person.”

The attitude of the town chairman  
toward women, especially within the  
majority party, is crucial. The town  
chairman has almost absolute power  
in the decision of which candidate the  
party should support. Women who  
challenge the party's nominee in a  
primary are, in effect, challenging the  
town chairman’s choice.

According to Louise DeLauro, a New  
Haven Alderwoman since 1966, New  
Haven had a Democratic town chair-  
man for 20 years, who did not sup-  
port women. After serving for nine  
years on the town council, DeLauro  
decided to support Frank Logue in the  
mayoral election against the town  
chairman’s candidate. The town chair-  
man decided she was becoming “too  
independent” and he threw her off the  
party ticket. DeLauro ran anyway, and  
won. “I beat the machine,” she says  
with a large smile.

Gail Orcutt, who was approached to  
run for State Representative by the  
retiring incumbent, Mary Griswold,  
was not supported by the town chair-  
man in the election. Griswold felt that  
there were too few females in the  
legislature and was determined to see  
a woman succeed her. Orcutt at-  
tributes her success in the election to  
the backing of the more liberal  
members of the party, who were in-  
terested in “having a candidate who  
was not party-machine backed.”  

Bring this ad in  
for $5 off on all  
hair services