by Michele Shockey

It used to be easy, being a girl.

I remember feeling a secret pride, riding  
my bike past hooting construction work-  
ers, proud that they'd be whistling at me,  
that I'd been able to predict their reaction  
as I got closer. I wouldn't turn around to  
look back or acknowledge their approval,  
but there’d be a little smile in the corners of  
my thirteen-year-old mouth. They thought  
I was cute, and that was great.

One time a motorcyclist pinched my  
friend as she and I were biking around a  
curve in the road, wearing just our gym  
shorts, having come straight from P.E. We  
were both kind of shocked, but it made for  
a great story all week at school. I wondered  
if he’d ever ride by us biking around that  
corner another time, and if maybe  
I wouldn’t be the one to get pinched, and  
then I could report my adventure to the  
friends at school.

When my family would drive into San  
Francisco for a special dinner in the city,  
my brother and sister and I would press  
against the windows, trying to figure out if  
Dad was going to turn onto that street with  
all the flashing lights and huge neon naked  
ladies above the sidewalks. If we hit the red  
lights, sometimes we could just make out  
the photographs on the walls, more naked  
people standing together. If we kept our  
eyes peeled, we might even be able to pick  
out in the middle of all the night walkers on  
the pavement, standing with her hand on  
her hip, in platforms and red fur, a p-r-o-  
stitute. I could guess what she was probably saying  
to the suited man who'd just walked up to  
her. When we passed people like that,  
I was glad to be safe inside the car.

There was a day though, when I was  
outside the car, and someone was staring at  
me from inside, and it started to not be so  
easy, being a girl.

Riding home from school and there's  
this car behind me that won't pass and he’s  
just following along my tail and finally he’s  
driving right alongside me and with one  
glance I see his one hand on the steering  
wheel and the other’s moving up and down  
in his lap... and I just glare at him, stare  
into his horrible eyes and through his eyes  
and I want to blow him up and he knows  
that it’s just him and me because not one of  
the other cars passing us can see what I just  
saw, or know why I feel like someone just  
punched me in the stomach, stabbed me,  
split me wide open, and I make myself  
strong, roaring with determined rage...  
422 NMU, 422 NMU, 422 NMU...

And a week after I’d gone to the station  
with my dad to file the report — he was  
proud of me for remembering the license  
plate — and after the “adventure” of telling  
the friends at school had worn off, I got a  
phone call from the officer, and he needs  
to know for the record if the man I'd done  
my best to describe in every detail, from  
the scars on the back of his neck to the  
color of his horrible eyes, he needs to  
know whether I could tell if that man was  
having an orgasm as he drove alongside me  
... and I’m embarrassed as hell because  
I’m fifteen and am I supposed to say some-  
thing like? So I tell him I don’t know and hang up,  
feeling like I’ve just somehow flunked a  
really important test, and that they'll never  
catch him now because I couldn’t answer  
the question.

Then I started working evenings, and the  
night supervisor would tell me stories  
about the job she’d had before this one,  
working as a ‘cocktail waitress’ on Broad-  
way. She shared dressing rooms with Carol  
Doda, the one whose name I remembered  
seeing up in lights next to the red neon  
naked lady. She told me Carol had breasts  
that were big alright, but black and blue  
too, from the silicone injections she used to  
give herself. The rage would seep back in,  
but I couldn’t say anything. I was so blown  
away by the idea that breasts could be  
black and blue from shots you gave to  
yourself... something was so wrong with  
that that I couldn't even begin to express  
myself.

And now it’s damn hard to be a woman,  
because that silence I’ve been keeping  
hasn’t done anyone any good, and it just  
gives me heartburn, churning around in-  
side until I manage to dissolve it with the  
excuses and rationalizations I’ve learned  
so well, that explain why women are  
treated as sub-human forms of life. It’s the  
unlearning that is so hard, the newfound  
knowledge that I as a woman have been  
bound and gagged, that we are supposed  
to swallow the garbage that’s shoved down  
our throats.

Bound and gagged, when I’m working as  
a receptionist and the burly a-little-drunk  
delivery man comes in with an order and...  
he’s standing right over me and his belt  
buckle is at my eye’s level with a kind of  
spacy design on it and I'm trying to figure  
out what it represents while he's explain-  
ing the order to another secretary, and all  
of a sudden the random forms on the  
buckle take shape and they're not random  
at all, but depict a woman giving a man  
a blow-job, part of the huge purposeful plot  
that women are the victims of. I want to  
scream, to tell the office to stop talking to  
him, because they don’t realize what he  
and his belt buckle stand for, and I want to  
yell, “Get out of this office with your damn  
belt, because we don’t ask for it and we  
don’t want to give it to you!” I’m sick of  
putting up with all of it in silence, sick of a  
sick society of “sick men,” jerking off while  
I'm riding my bike on Foothill Expressway,  
while I’m licking my ice cream cone in a  
park in Amsterdam, while I’m walking with  
a five-year-old angel of a little girl under a  
bridge in Paris, a child I’m supposed to be  
caring for, protecting, and I can’t even take  
her for a walk along the river to look at the  
boats. I wondered as I shielded her from  
that spectacle, how she would eventually  
learn the awful truth, learn that she can’t  
offer her child-smile to “just anyone,” that  
there are places she can’t go to walk, that  
her womanness will be pushed down into  
the ground so that someone else’s male-  
ness can stand that much higher on top of  
it.  
I kept my silence with that belt buckle  
raping me in front of my face, but I have a  
secret smile on my twenty-year-old mouth,  
because I know that with every article or  
book I read, every poem or debate I hear,  
each conversation with angry friends that I  
speak out in, that slowly I am becoming  
unbound, stretching, feeling their strength,  
and more than anything else, finding my voice. And  
when that last tethering bond breaks,  
there’s going to be a big noise.

Coordinator  
Anne Mellor

more aleeaand