Baby-Sitting Wages

20

by Libby Berkeley, Outreach Coordinator,  
Latin American Studies

Most women working for Yale are employed as  
clerical workers—almost quadruple the number of  
women workers in any other category. [1] 1,783  
female clerical workers are employed by Yale; they  
comprise 91% of Yale’s total clerical staff. This  
percentage has not changed greatly in the last two  
hundred years.

“Yale as an Employer to Women” was the topic  
of a panel discussion at the October 1979 Alumni  
Conference on “The Women of Yale.” The panel of  
women, of which I was a member, included no  
clerical workers, although three of us had done  
clerical work in the past. We panel members  
represented the small minority of women  
somehow, and often only in title, succeed in moving  
up the ranks.

Why were women clerical workers not included in  
a panel intended to discuss “Yale as an Employer  
to Women”? Maybe a quick glance at the situation  
of these women will help answer the question.

The low salaries are by far the most common  
complaint made by members of Yale’s clerical staff.  
[2] Almost half of Yale’s clerical workers receive  
less than $140 per week, or $7,280 per year. [3] Last  
year alone, the cost of living rose about 14%. Yale’s  
pay scale is so low that when the minimum wage  
goes up, clerical salaries must be readjusted.

Many of these “clerical” jobs demand highly  
qualified people. In Sterling Library, where the  
salaries are among the lowest on campus, many  
multi-lingual people and advanced degree holders  
are employed mostly at what some of them call  
“baby-sitting wages,” to file cards. Since the New  
Haven market is glutted with “qualified” (edu-  
cated) people, such as student spouses (mostly  
wives), or people attracted to Yale for cultural  
reasons, Yale can maintain its low wages.

This low wage policy affects other area office  
workers as well. Since Yale employs such a large  
percentage of them, low salary levels at Yale have a  
significant effect on average wage figures in this  
area. [4]

The second most common concern seems to be  
the few opportunities for promotion offered Yale's  
clerical workers. After having worked at Yale for  
long enough to prove her loyalty and demonstrate  
her efficiency, a worker may be awarded a 7% pay  
raise, or a change in title. Unless she has a  
professor with “clout” pushing for her, she is not  
likely to get more than a small yearly raise, totaling  
less than annual inflation. A change in title, from  
“secretary” to “administrative assistant” may  
reward her, but as one woman told me, “You can  
call me anything you like, as long as my rent  
doesn’t go up faster than my salary.” [5]

To address the promotion problem, Yale has  
sponsored “managerial and supervisory instruction  
seminars,” but many times they are only open to  
people already in managerial and supervisory  
positions. [6] There was such a seminar at the  
British Art Center, and at least one woman was  
denied admittance to such a seminar last year, on  
the basis of her title.

According to the Yale University Personnel Policy  
Manual, even if a promotion is likely, when moving  
to a higher position, no more than a 10% salary  
raise is permitted. This means that if an employee  
moves into a supervisor’s or colleague’s job, she  
could earn less money than her predecessor.

The problem of promotion is complicated as well  
by the practice of filling jobs before they are posted,  
putting even Yale personnel at a disadvantage  
within Yale. The listing of openings has become a  
necessary formality only to comply with personnel  
department rules.

Many other small problems exist in Yale’s policy  
towards the staff. The grievance procedure (confus-  
ing and messy at best) requires that the employee  
talk to her supervisor first. Lack of job description is  
cited as a source of frustration by many clerical  
workers, since it makes the duties of a particular job  
unclear and thus makes it difficult either to cite  
specific responsibilities as grounds for a raise or  
promotion, or to protest a denial of one.

The Affirmative Action plan instituted by the  
government to encourage employers to hire, train  
and promote women, racial minorities and the  
handicapped, can be viewed at only three places on  
Yale's campus. In the Recent Office Workers of  
New Haven survey, 40% of Yale respondents either  
did not know that such a plan exists or denied that  
Yale has one. Of those who replied that they were  
well aware of the plan, 67% had never seen a copy  
of it.

What about Yale’s great benefits? Yale does have  
a good health plan, although it does not cover  
dentistry or ophthalmology. We have access to the  
libraries, museums, art galleries, theater, and  
sports facilities (although gym membership costs us  
$60 from September to May). There is a month  
vacation after one year of employment, and a  
modest pension plan, which few employees ever  
reap the benefits of.

What about university policy to “encourage  
personal development”? (Yale University Personnel  
Policy Manual). There is a tuition reimbursement  
plan, which totals $200 per term maximum. Even if  
you could take a course at Yale for $200, there are  
very few courses offered at night when we would  
necessarily take them. If a staff person wants to get  
credit for a course at Yale, her status as an  

employee (unlike at Columbia, NYU, Rutgers, and —  
many others), means nothing. She must go through  
regular admissions procedures or enroll as a special  
student, which on a Yale salary is hardly feasible.  
For $50, we can audit a course, but we receive no  
transcript or any written verification if we do so  
(unlike, for example, graduate student auditors).

Last year a library system worker who I know  
attended a talk by a Yale dean entitled “Possibili-  
ties of an Education at Yale” for staff people. He  
discouraged people from pursuing this further,  
warning that “Yale has very high standards and is  
extremely demanding, a very difficult task for  
someone who works.”

Do all of the benefits justify the low wages and  
poor working conditions? Once during a discussion  
of “benefits” with a group of women that work at  
Yale, I was interrupted by one woman who said,  
“Education at Yale? Who has time to think about  
classes when it takes such an effort to work and  
feed my children?”

Many of the problems I have been outlining are  
criticisms of the material conditions of working at  
this institution. But we must ask what underlies all  
this: Is it simply chance that the category of lowest  
paid and most exploited people in the University  
happens to be comprised of 91% women? One could  
say that it might be traced back to the time when  
women’s wages were “supplementary” to the  
man’s main family income. But isn’t this just  
another symptom of the same problem? Could it be  
that all these issues; low pay, lack of promotional  
possibilities and in addition boredom, are all  
related? Perhaps the main problem is sexism, the  
existence of which is supported by the fact that only  
4% of tenured faculty positions at Yale are held by  
women.

I would like to explore the question further, and  
suggest that it is due to a class bias that clerical  
(and technical) workers were not chosen to speak on  
the alumni panel. I think that the examples outlined  
above have to do with our femaleness secondly, but  
firstly are manifestations of the attitude of an elite  
towards people from largely working-class and  
middle-class backgrounds.

Being both a worker and a woman is a  
double-barreled gun. It is difficult to listen to  
people like the Yale dean, a privileged white male,  
look you in the eye and tell you that you are inferior  
to Yale students and to him. An attitude of  
disrespect and superiority is behind the low pay,  
low status, and mindless uncreative jobs that  
characterize clerical work everywhere. I think that  
once we understand this, we will move to demand  
what we genuinely deserve — respect. After that is  
follow.

Notes:

1. Women at Yale, A Statistical Profile, 1969-1979.  
Office of Institutional Research, Yale University,  
October 1979.

2. Employment Policies and Practices: A Survey of  
New Haven Area Office Workers. Office Workers of  
New Haven (OWNH), October, 1979.

3. OWNH Survey.

4. OWNH Survey.

5. All the women that I spoke with requested that  
they remain anonymous.

6. OWNH Survey.

The

New Haven  
Law Collective

Law Offices of Pillsbury & Simon  
938 Chapel Street  
New Haven, Connecticut 06510  
777-3401