by Pat Berge

A Black feminist once told me she didn’t
think white middle-class women were op-
pressed. I’ve heard the same idea from
poor women, lesbian women, and di-
vorced women with children. To a certain
extent this is true, since society is ordered
for the convenience of a white middle-
class, heterosexual elite. But this elite is
male.

I used to run into what I thought were
individual sexist men, who might unfortu-
nately have some socially legitimized
dominance over me in their roles as older
relatives, teachers, or employers. Or I
might read in the newspaper about iso-
lated instances of sexism in certain institu-
tions, such as the “traditionally all-male
printing trade,” confronted by UP Press, or
the “traditionally all-male sport of
mountain climbing.” Generally, this sup-
posedly anomalous sexism was legitimized
as a declining prerogative of eccentric old
men, or as a quirk adding to the charm of
the last bastions of male camaraderie,
holdouts from modernity. ‘Traditional’
implied “respectable” implied “not sub-
ject to question or change,” so that these
vanishing cases were to be ignored and the
men were to be humored. I didn’t ever
quite subscribe to the opinion of the self-
styled “co-ed” who told me she had never
encountered any discrimination, had
never been unable to do what she wanted
to do, because she was a “girl” and, “girls

Yet, I believed that the patriarchy could
not prevent me from living my own life in
my own way, since I was wary and intelli-
gent. Perhaps I subconsciously bought the
American myth that everyone gets what
s/he deserves, that upward mobility
through education solves all problems and
is easily accessible to deserving Blacks,
white women, and the poor. My parents
were supporting me, and I was going to
enter liberal Stanford University to study
Physics.

I now realize that the oppression of
some women could not be continued
without the oppression of all women, even
the over-privileged. Subjugation of
women extends to all women because it is
based on sex, not on race or class. It is
systematic, all-pervasive, and intentional.

The narrow view that oppression of

AURORA

A Middle-Class White Woman’s Oppression

Goddess Mother, April 28, 1982

middle-class women means the “nameless
problem” of The Feminine Mystique fails
to connect a woman’s experience with all
women’s experience of oppression. Such a
view reflects the white heterosexual liberal
view of the “traditionally all-male” media
and should be suspicious on those
grounds alone.

Perhaps women with money can file
sexual harassment lawsuits. Perhaps a
post-50’s microbiologist would not be de-
nied a Nobel prize for her work with DNA.
Perhaps an astronaut will not be tokenized.
Perhaps Stanford University will even te-
nure one more woman. But a white
upper-middle-class woman with access to
money and prestige can be instantly de-
humanized by an anonymous rapist, a rude
construction worker, or a patronizing
father.

Men exercise power over women, with-
out distinguishing between a woman and

THE STUDENT CENTER FOR INNOVATION IN RESEARCH AND EDUCATION

is here to help you:

design your own individual or small group project involving fieldwork, or studying an
issue outside of the regular curriculum (apply by NOV. 24 for winter credit);

arrange credit for doing an internship with a community group or agency;

fund innovative projects with a long-term impact on the Stanford Community;

coordinate or sponsor task forces investigating issues in undergraduate education.

The Clearinghouse Catalog of Internship and Research Opportunities, published by SCIRE and
available at 590-A Old Union, lists several internships related to Feminist Studies, as well as
opportunities in 25 other subject areas. (Apply by JAN. 12 for Winter credit.)

SCIRE

590-A Old Union

497-4504

Photo by Laura Kay

women in general. Total strangers, male,
have the audacity to make critical personal
comments to women encountered on the
street. The heterosexist white American
middle-class generic society is organized
so that any man can claim the right to judge
any woman's personal appearance,
weight, age, and value to a male as prop-
erty.

This culture perpetuates itself. A partial
list of the cultural roles I have seen labeled
“traditionally male” includes presidents,
diplomats, senators, judges, lawyers, nu-
clear physicists, engineers, generals,
bankers, professors, doctors, priests, tele-
vision producers, and news editors.
Women are denied access to power and to
the decisions about the use/abuse of
power.

So why do white
heterosexual women buy into the male
world, when men define and control all
knowledge and all power? Politics is de-
signed to control people, business to
exploit people, and science to destroy
people. “People” means all those unlucky
women and men excluded from the
heterosexual white male upper-class elite
that makes all the decisions.

In the male world, every action and situa-
tion is defined from the elite perspective.
The incredibly narcissistic egotism of the
elite white male is illustrated in the concept
of frontiers. Modern “frontiers of know-
ledge” imply that abstract breakthroughs
made by tiny groups of elite white male
scientists somehow advance the metaphys-
ical estate of the other three billion hu-
mans because the elite group has obtained
more knowledge and often more power, to
be used against other humans.

The frontiers of “the explorers” meant
that my 4th grade geography teacher

middle-class -

October 14, 1982

thought it more appropriate for me to
memorize exactly where individual 14th
century European males exploited non-
Europeans, instead of who these non-
European groups were, and how they felt
about the invasions.

The frontiers of the “Old West”
legitimized genocide by a few white males.
Instead of questioning such abuses of
power, men with less power imitate the
elite in the hopes that oppressing “their”
women will help the men to gain more
power.

White middle-class women buy into that
world in the mistaken belief that they, too,
can gain power. But even those who can
realize their powerlessness know that the
oppressed don’t have choices. The
middle-class battered wife has no more op-
tions than the welfare mother has. Women
don’t have a say in their destinies, in cul-
tural values, in appropriate uses of power.
We don’t even have a voice in forming cul-
tural images of women.

Images of women reflect the fact that
oppression of any woman extends to op-
pression of all women, because all women
are denied individuality. We women can
be made to hate ourselves if we internalize
the male invectives such as “fat” or “bitch”
or any of a thousand other labels men use
from childhood on. All women are bur-
dened with feminine stereotypes, too. Fear
is supposed to be characteristic of women,
whether it is fear of mice or of mysterious
flutes. Weakness is another stereotype,

perpetuated.

developing, physical strength. Even women
body-builders become weak because be-
fore a contest they must fast for as much as
a week so that they will fit the male notion
of flat-stomached women. The entire pat-
tern of subjugation is consistent with
men’s devaluation of women’s work, ex-
perienced by middle-class housewives as
well as by working women of every class.
Men impose a value, women have no al-
ternative to conforming, and the
stereotype is perpetuated. Typical partici-
pation in our own exploitation!

Even the women’s movement has been
exploited and trivialized by men in the
media who focus on the negative aspects
of affirmative action and the exclusionist
tendencies of narrow feminist liberals. But
reverse discrimination is an oxymoron,
since women’s experience of reality is not
the same as men’s.

The subjugation of all women is real, on
purpose, and rooted in misogyny. Vio-
lence is committed against women of all
classes, in traditional institutions such as
wife-beating, raping “the enemy’s wo-
men” during war, bringing camp followers
along, and denying most women the op-
portunity to support themselves indepen-
dently from an exploiting male. The pro-

cess of subjugation has continued through

centuries of different cultures, and is pre-
sent in modern American middle-class cul-
ture. Why should we be any different than
any other culture, even in degree of op-
pression? Power in the armies and in mod-
ern science and technology is still an exclu-
sively male domain, even for the upwardly
mobile, educated white heterosexual wo-
men, because the male world sees them as
women without individuality. It is unlikely
that a woman who would challenge the use
and basis of military and scientific power
would ever be allowed the chance to make
that decision.