-MULANEH: Latina  
Women Working Together  

AN INTERVIEW  
BY KATHRIN DAY LASSILA  

“Donde la mujer sea respetada, allí  
estará la paz.” —proverbio indio  
“Where the woman is respected there  
will be peace.” — Indian proverb  

Mujeres Latinoamericanas  
de New Haven (MULANEH) is an  
organization of and for local Latina  
women. MULANEH began in 1975 as a  
discussion group of about ten Latina  
feminists, and eventually expanded into  
a full-time community organization that  
provided information and referral, ran  
several health education workshops,  
and published a monthly newsletter.  
This year, however, MULANEH’s fun-  
ding has run out and the group is dor-  
mant. I spoke with Dr. Tirsa Quinones, a  
steering committee member and one of  
the original core group of feminists,  
about the past, present, and future of  
MULANEH.  

Q) Tell me about MULANEH’s educa-  
tional workshops.  
A) Education was  

We designed a series of health  
workshops, which we offered in Wilbur  
Cross High School and in Fair Haven  
Community Junior High, and we also  
had a series of workshops at the Con-  
necticut Mental Health Center in the  
Spanish Clinic. We decided to go to  
these places because we had tried  
several approaches to gathering  
women together that did not work. We  
showed films, we had festivals, and  
they would come one time and not the  
next. It’s very hard to get people out;  
that’s true for a lot of community agen-  
cies. We realized that we had to find  
different ways of organizing. Many of  
our people have very basic needs and  
problems. If you have five kids at home,  
how can you go to a meeting at night?  
Even if child care is provided, it’s just  
not part of their cultural understanding  
that one does these things. So we  
studied the community to find the  
places where women were already get-  
ting together.  

There was a group of six or seven  
women, some who had family  
members who were alcoholics and some  
who were alcoholics themselves, that  
would meet at the Spanish Clinic of the  
Connecticut Mental Health Center a  
few times a week. One of those  
meetings, MULANEH would take over.  
Rosie Romero and Lydia Perez worked  
with these women, talking basically  
about issues of female sexuality and  
mental health, and also going into sex-  
ual roles. The workshop lasted for four  

months, and it was quite successful.  

Something that was very good, that  
we were all excited about, was the  
series of workshops in the high schools.  
Lourdes Sullivan and Maria Mojica put  
these workshops together themselves,  
with the little material they could  
gather from different sources. Besides  
the basic issues of health and female  
sexuality, they dealt with sex roles and  
what they mean, and they went into  
topics like the prevention of domestic  
violence—what alternatives are  
available to you if you have a  
boyfriend who shows signs of being a  
possible wife beater. They talked about  

the core of our work.  

alternatives in many different areas, in-  

cluding the alternative of post-high  

school education. That seems very  
basic, but for many of our kids, post-  
high school education is something  
that happens to other people.  

Q) What was it like to work with  
women in their teens? How did the high  
school women feel about talking to  
older women about these issues?  
A) Well, Lourdes and Maria are in their  
mid-twenties, so the difference was not  
very great. But more important than  
age was the fact that Lourdes and  
Maria shared many of the experiences  
of these women, since they are both  
Puerto Rican women who were brought  
up in this country. For us, that has a lot  
to do with communication. And they did  
a terrific job; we got a positive response  
from the schools and the teachers.  

Q) Why did you decide to work with  
younger women?  

A) One reason was that we felt the  
younger Latina women were more apt  
to think of this country as a place  
where they would stay for a long time,  
while in their mothers and grand-  
mothers you always see the older  
generation’s anxiety about going back  
to their country. This is a transition  
stage. We had many plans for the older  
women, too, and of course we touched  
a lot of people through our other ac-  
tivities, but we had very limited  
resources—we didn’t have much  
money or much womanpower—so we  
decided that if we had to choose, we  
should choose the generation that is  
becoming more solidly imbedded in  
this community. Also, for the mothers  
and grandmothers, the cultural values  
are so tight. The younger women are  
able to open themselves up, to make  
their own value system. The workshop  
dealt with things that we don’t talk  
about too much—they talked about  
homosexuality, for instance, and abor-  
tion. Abortion is a taboo, you know.  
Q) How did MULANEH deal with sen-  
sitive issues like abortion or possible  
battering?  

A) Lourdes and Maria approached  
abortion from a medical point of view,  
explaining what happens when you  
have an abortion, and they presented it  
as something that could be a positive  
alternative: What are the alternatives  
to having a child at fifteen and quitting  
school and going on welfare? Of  
course, in many of these cases, the kids  

have gotten pregnant just to get out of  
the house, because the situation at  
home is not very good and that’s the  
only alternative they have. We have to  
talk about these things, too.  

The group lasted for close to a year,  
so the students were able to open up  
more and more; and eventually they  
were able to say, “My boyfriend is ex-  
tremely jealous.” But what does  
jealousy mean? What can it take a per-  

son to? How can you avoid getting to  

that point; how can you put a stop to  
these things before they happen? But  
Lourdes and Maria were very careful:  
they did not go in with a strong feminist  
stance. This would have turned off a lot  
of kids, because they need to unders-  
tand other things first. We can’t just  
say, “You can’t be pregnant at fifteen.  
You should have an abortion.” What  
Lourdes and Maria did was to talk  
about reality: our reality as Latina  
women, and the specific reality for  

During the months of September, October, and November of 1979,  
MULANEH did a door-to-door survey of 101 Latina women in the Hill  
area of New Haven. The following information resulted:  
— Average age: 31.24 years  
— 98% were born in Puerto Rico  
— Time in the U.S.A.: 9.18 years  
— Time in New Haven: 7.95 years  
— Average years of school: 7.26  
— Average number of children: 3.02  
— 72% of the women never worked outside the home  
— 44% of the women have been sterilized for an average of 7.4 years*  
— 45% knew more than four women who have been sterilized  
— 48% felt battering was a serious problem  
— 15% acknowledge having been victims of battering  
— Estimated 43% are single heads of household  
— 81.8% are on welfare  
— Average income: $454.39 per month  
— Among working women (few), the following negative work  
conditions were identified:  
— dangerous or unhealthy conditions  
— few opportunities for advancement  
— unequal pay  
— discrimination against women  
— 68% go to the Hill Health Center for medical assistance  
— 65% go to Yale-New Haven Hospital  
— 27% never go to the GYN  
— 85-89% did not know what services were available for victims  
of rape and battering  
— 57% of women with children have their children in the  
bilingual program  
— 53% experienced problems with  
— 37% knew on the average of  
— Order of services needed:  
— counselling  
— help with school and employment  
— social services  
— cultural programs  
— recreation  
— tutoring  
— residential programs  

*Many of these women were inadequately informed about the opera-  
tion, or were offered no birth control alternatives. One woman is cur-  
rently suing Yale-New Haven Hospital for an alleged forced hysterec-  
tomy, performed without her knowledge during a bladder operation.  

Tirsa Quinones  

--Judy Shulevitz