‘Nancy Cott on History  
and the Historian  

AN INTERVIEW BY KATHRIN DAY  
LASSILA, WITH ASSISTANCE FROM  
BETH INCERSOLL  

Nancy Cott is an Associate Professor  
in the History Department and  
American Studies Program at Yale, and  
the Chair of the Women’s Studies Pro-  
gram. She has published three books of  
American women’s history: Root of Bit-  
terness: Documents of the Social  
History of American Women; The  
Bonds of Womanhood; and A Heritage  
of Her Own.  

Q) In her recent collection of essays on  
the methodology of history, Barbara  
Tuchman indicates that she considers  
the historian to be primarily a fact-  
finder and reporter. How do you  
understand the task of the historian in  
modern society?  

A) I agree with Tuchman that historians  
are reporters, but I think they are more  
than that. The task the historian is  
engaged in, whether she recognizes it  
or not, is creating a story—setting a  
stage, creating historical actors—in a  
way not all that dissimilar to what a fic-  
tion writer does. It’s creating a  
believable story about our past that we  
can work with.  

Q) But can a historian write with an end  
in mind?  

A) When I say that writing history in-  
volves creating a story and setting a-  
stage, I don’t mean one that is obvious-  
ly leaning one way or the other, or one  
that serves a particular or recognized  
purpose, because I don’t think that  
historians should do that. They may, of  
course, but they should do it in the ser-  
vice of their politics rather than as  
history. The story that a historian re-  
counts does not have an ending—ex-  
cept that the ending, which is usually  
unstated, is the reading of the present  
as she sees it. The point from which  
historians work is the present; their  
understanding of the way we are today  
has to condition, has to color very em-  
phatically, the way they portray the  
past, whether or not they admit it.  

Q) But didn’t you say that politics and  
history should be kept separate?  

A) I didn’t mean to put quite that  
schematically. What I meant is that if  
you want to exhort a certain future, you  
may; but say that that’s what you’re do-  
ing and don’t disguise it as history. No,  
I don’t think that people can separate  
their politics from their version of the  
truth. If you truly believe in a certain  
politics, then that is your reality and it  
has to affect the way you see the reali-  
ty of the past. History writing is subjec-  
tive; all scholarship is subjective, and  
not to recognize that, not to  
acknowledge that, is to be serving a  
certain ideology yourself. The mistake  
of objectivity is extremely strong at  
Yale, stronger in some departments  
than others, and stronger among some  
people. I don’t find it especially strong  
in the history department, but I may  
just not be aware of it. Genuine  
scholars recognize subjectivity in their  
work; if they didn’t, they'd be like  
ostriches, heads in the sand.  

But historians can very fruitfully use  
their politics without fatally condition-  
ing or contaminating their work,  
without removing from their work that  
aura of accepted scholarship that  
writing in the academy has to have.  
They can do this by using their politics  
to ask the questions rather than to pro-  
vide the answers. Very good and very  
political historians often start off work-  
ing with a certain body of material  
because they have questions about the  
present day. They may find that their  
answers are not at all what they ex-  
pected, and that’s legitimate too; then  
there’s a kind of shaping process going  
on between what you find in the past  
and what you think in the present. I  
wouldn’t want to slight Tuchman’s idea  
that we're fact-finders; I think we are.  
But the problem is in the word “facts.”  
What are facts? Often what you find in  
history are not facts, but evidence.  
Evidence isn’t quite as decisive as fact.  
Evidence can be interpreted and most  
of the time it’s partial, so you have to  
decide how to use it.  

Q) Does the particular political situa-  
tion of a woman historian affect the  
way she uses evidence?  

A) In this time and place, just being a  
woman historian should change your  
point of view in history. But it isn’t  
necessarily so in every case; because  
there are certainly women historians  
who have so acclimated themselves to  
the predominantly male academy that  
they manage to think just as men  
would. They forget that they are  
women, in that they don’t identify  
themselves with their gender. If you’re  
surrounded by powerful men and your  
models of success are mainly men, it’s  
not surprising that you don’t think of  
yourself as a woman—especially if you  
haven’t met any real barriers. In either  
case, it’s a matter of conditioning. We  
don’t know how the essential woman  
historian would operate, because we  
don’t have any essential woman  
anythings. We have only conditioned  
women.  

I do tend to think that women who  
have become practicing historians  
often have the perspective of the out-  
side group. I know a white historian  
who advocates Women’s Studies but  
she has not done women’s history, she’s  
always done Black history—I think  
because it’s the history of an out group,  
an oppressed group. When she started  
to do her Ph.D., women’s history was  
not really born yet, so she did Black  
history. There are probably a lot of  
women historians who have done the  
history of other oppressed or subor-  
dinated groups in lieu of looking for  
their own past: That is: what we do in  
history. We look for some form of how  
we got to be what we are, and the “we”  
will be more or less authentic, depen-  
ding on our own state of consciousness.  

Q) Can a man be a women’s historian?  

A) There has been a lot of discussion  
about whether men can write women’s  
history. It’s really the same question as  
whether whites can write Black  
history, or anything of that sort. I think  
that it would be wrong in all sorts of  
ways, intellectually, politically, etc., to  
say that one has to be a member of the  
group about which one is writing. It  
would be extremely limiting. Where  
would you draw the line? Age, place of  
birth? So I welcome men’s attempts to  
write women’s history. On the other  
hand, I do assume that women have a  
certain advantage in writing good  
women’s history; they have an insider's  
view. I don’t mean that they have the  
insider's view or that they can im-  
mediately empathize with other  
women. The same limitations apply to  
women of different races or classes or  
regions; a poor Black male sharecrop-  
per would probably write better history  
about poor Black female sharecroppers  
than an urban white upper-class woman  
would.  

One of the main reasons that women  
have written the best women’s history  
in the past fifteen years or so is not  
simply their gender, but their ex-  
perience in the women’s movement.  
There were some who saw it,  
academically or enterprisingly, simply  
as a going field; but the bulk of them,  
especially the women, saw it as  
politically necessary, politically impor-  
tant. Here again, it was the questions  
that were dictated by politics, not the  
answers. Rather than saying, ‘We're go-  
ing to find that women were  
important,” or “We're going to find that  
women were oppressed,” they asked,  
“where were the women? What were  
the women doing? Why don’t we know  
about the women?” The best history  
has always been linked to politics, to  
some pressing need to know. That is  
one of the reasons why academic  
women’s history is capable of inspiring  
real excitement, particularly among  
women, while the same people might  
find that a lot of other history seems  
dead.  

Q) Does Women’s Studies employ a  
new critical language?  

A) I don’t think that I personally  
employ a new critical language. Some  
practitioners of women’s studies are  
certainly claiming to, people who deal  
substantively with language or  
arts—the French critics, for example.  
But Women’s Studies as I see it, and as  
I use it, does have a different critical  
perspective. The difference—in very  
brief—is that women are the subject,  
not the object, of the inquiry; they are  
not a thing out there to be investigated.  
It's not that women have been entirely  
neglected. In Virginia Woolf's A Room  
of One’s Own, you know, she goes to  
the library to do research on women  
and fiction, and she finds Napoleon on  
whether women can be educated, Lord  
So-and-so on whether they have souls,  
and so on. Women’s subjectivity, their  
view of the matter, has not been taken  
into account, has not been expressed;  
and that is the essential difference in  
perspective that Women’s Studies ap-  
plies and implies. That is very brief, but  
it has wide-ranging ramifications in all  
of the standard disciplines. It means  
not only that there are subject matters  
that are not touched with women’s  
perspective, but also that abstract  
models of human experience have to  
be altered because women’s ex-  
perience has not been considered in  
those models.  

Q) How can one bring this critique into  
existing academic institutions—and  
preserve it? How do you cope with be-  
ing a women’s historian and a feminist  
at a place like Yale?  

A) I don’t know that I’m the right per-  
son to ask about this, because at Yale  
I am in the very fortunate position of  
having been affirmed for what I do,  
rather than being castigated or  

continued on page 4  

Black  
Undergraduate  
Women’s Group  
at Yale  

by Sheila Thomas  

The Black Undergraduate Women’s  
Group (BUWG) came into existence  
because the Black women at Yale felt a  
need for a support group consisting of  
women with similar experiences. The  
group serves to educate women with  
rap sessions, workshops and other ac-  
tivities which focus on issues important  
to Black women and women in general.  
Recently, BUWG had a rap session on  
the “Well-rounded Black Woman.”  
Several women shared their  
experiences and views about what being  
a Black woman at Yale means. BUWG  
hopes to sponsor such events con-  
tinuously in an effort to bring Black  
women closer together in a supportive  
network. BUWG encourages those in-  
terested in these activities to contact  
the group coordinators Debbie Spikes  
(432-1573) or Sheila Thomas (432-1157)  
and/or attend any of the meetings.  

Valerie Russell