i a

4

Objects In

No Notes On

25

Sey Lowe

We Attempted to Examine the Feminism

By Hester Eisenstein  
Barnard College, Columbia University

(This article originally appeared in The Guardian,  
and is also being reprinted in the Barnard alumni  
magazine).

The notorious cover story of the September 1979  
“college” issue of Playboy was a much-publicized  
color spread (sic) on the women of the Ivy League.  
When, in preparing the issue, the photographers  
visited the campuses of Harvard, Yale, Princeton et  
al., much controversy ensued. Some student  
newspapers, including the Harvard Crimson, re-  
fused to run the ads recruiting women students.  
And at Yale, Brown, and Cornell, there were sizable  
student demonstrations reminiscent of the 1960s.  
At the campus where I teach, a serious speakout  
was held to debate the issues raised by this event.  
In the discussion at Barnard, it was clear that the  
anger and political outrage of the feminists were not  
universally shared, or even understood, by many  
segments of the community, female and male. Some  
students said they thought it was a mistake for  
feminists to get angry at Playboy, and quoted with  
approval the views of Christie Hefner, daughter of  
Hugh and heiress-apparent to his empire, who  
argues that feminism means options for women. If  
an Ivy League student really wants to have her  
picture taken nude for $400, and thereby gets a  
“break” in the worlds of film and fashion, they  
asked, what’s wrong with that?

In their honest confusion about what feminism  
represents, these students were, I think, responding  
to a message beamed at us from all sides by the  

media, saying: It’s OK, girls, you can go home; the —  
fight for women’s rights has been won. The women’s magazines—Wo-  
man’s Day, Family Circle, The Ladies Home  
Journal—have all added features on the working  
woman and how to share child-care with your  
husband. These appear alongside the usual recipes  
and directions for 17 outfits to sew from a single  
pattern for all occasions, including board meetings.  
The media cover events like the Rideout case in  
Oregon with dignified restraint implying their  
approval of the new law that prohibits a man from  
raping his wife, and coverage of wife-battering now  
appears, along with fashion reports, on the “style”  
page. Similarly, “feminism” appears to have been  
assimilated in the pages of Playboy. The national  
male center for the definition of female attractive-  
ness comes to the campuses where some of the  
brightest and most privileged young women in the  
country are, and says: “Girls (or: young ladies) of  
the Ivy League, we want you.” What a reversal of  
traditional stereotypes: now intellectual women can  
be sex objects, too!

I do not believe that this is a victory for women,  
or for the women’s movement. But to demonstrate  
why, I need to make two interrelated points, one  
about economics, and the other about conscious-  
ness-raising. To take the economics point first: Why  

does a woman who will graduate from an Ivy  
League college need a “break” from Playboy? What  
does this tell us about the current options for  
women in today’s job market? If feminism is so  
acceptable, if the struggle for equal rights has been  
won, where are the other options for women? Why  
is the route to success still through a display of our  
sexual attractiveness for cash? This is not a new  
road to economic security for women; I believe it is  
called the world’s oldest profession. Indeed, it may  
be that the message being beamed at us is not that  
the fight for women’s rights has been won, but  
rather, that we’d better not carry the fight too far.  
Jimmy Carter has endorsed the Equal Rights  
Amendment, but he fired Bella Abzug when, as  
Chair of His Advisory Committee on Women, she  
conveyed to him the concerns of that body about the  
national priorities reflected in his budget. In an  
interview on WBAI radio, Abzug pointed out that  
her firing was reminiscent of the flak received by  
Martin Luther King, when he began to turn his  
attention from the struggle for civil rights to  
broader issues like the economic situation of Black  
Americans and the war in Vietnam. Similarly,  
Abzug and the commission she chaired were being  
told: Stick to the struggle for the ERA; don’t  
concern yourself with excessive military spending  
and the reduction of social services. In other words,  
revision of sex-role stereotypes, yes! But redistribu-  
tion of income, no.

To me, feminism means taking a hard look at the  
economic system we live in, and the limits that it  
sets on options for all people, but especially for  
women. I think also this brings me to my  

enormous separation of political and cultural structures that collaborate to  
make us acquiesce in certain kinds of behavior and  
certain kinds of attitudes; that keep us, in effect,  
from really pursuing our interests, that is, the  
interests of the majority of people in this country.  
Consciousness-raising means becoming aware of  
this, and analyzing, and thereby gradually freeing  
oneself of its effects. Playboy is part of the  
apparatus. The marketplace in this country depends  
on women being eager to look like dolls. It depends,  
too, on our staying in the market—competing with  
each other for male approval, for certification as  
truly “sexy,” and thus, as “real” women. Not even  
women with “brains” can be allowed to escape this  
net of social control. On the contrary, women who  
are learning to think for ourselves—and this includes  
all feminists, by definition—must be most particu-  
larly brought back into the fold of docile, non-uppity  

women.

In this light, the Playboy issue on Ivy League  
women can be seen for what I believe it is, namely,  
part and parcel of a general counterattack on the  
women’s movement, and, more generally, on the  
movements for personal and political liberation that  
took place in the 1960s and early 1970s.

1006 CHAPEL ST NEW HAVEN ALLUVIA CLOTHING & GIFTS

I’d include in this category the campaign  
against the right to abortion; the attempt to defeat  
the ERA; the assault on civil rights for lesbian  
women and gay men; and the attack upon Black  
people via the revival of the Ku Klux Klan, aided  
and abetted by extensive media coverage. Even  
some erstwhile members of the left have lent  
themselves to this backlash (or should I say  
backlash?), deploring the effects of feminism on  
the integrity of the American family—as though the  
struggle for women’s rights, and not the state of the  
economy, were undermining intimate ties in family  
and community (see Christopher Lasch, Haven in a  
Heartless World, and The Culture of Narcissism, for  
this version of events).

Anyone who lived through that decade of  
ferment, or who has read some history, or both,  
knows that there is no such thing as instant  
revolution, in either the private or the public  
sphere. Personal transformation is a long, hard  
process, and so is effecting social change. It is clear  
from the puzzled questions of some of the students  
at the Barnard speakout that the lessons of  
consciousness-raising do not get transferred auto-  
matically from one generation to the next, and that  
you don’t acquire a feminist consciousness over-  
night or by learning a few slogans. It is something  
that is slowly and painfully won, an uneven process  
of educating and re-educating the self, a recon-  
ditioning of one’s most profound “reflexes” and  
“instincts”—about sexuality; about relationships;  
and about work. Similarly, the social changes that  
will bring about the true liberation of women—psy-  
chological, economic and political—will not happen  
as the result of the easy assimilation of a few  
concepts into the current language of the media. (In  
saying this I don’t mean to minimize in any way the  
important work of public education that feminists  
have already accomplished; but I am emphasizing  
here the attempt to cover up or disguise the work  
that still lies ahead of us.) They will be the product  

of defeats and setbacks along the way.

Given this historical perspective, we may be  
confident that the current issue of Playboy will not  
stop the women’s movement, or even slow it down.  

The tactic of “divide and conquer” is no less  
effective now than when it was used for so many  
hundreds of years to perpetuate the power of the  
Roman Empire. Women cannot be an effective force  
for social change when we are divided. We should  
be struggling, not with each other, but with those  
who oppose the interests and the advancement of all  
women.