Reflections on Left Discourse:  
The Case of Feminism  

by Lisa Sullivan  

The latest labor dispute at Yale pro-  
vided a perfect opportunity to observe  
left politics in action. In particular,  
feminist discourse was highly visible  
since the dispute was necessarily one  
of gender exploitation. For all those  
previously skeptical of the existence of  
leftist activity within the university, the  
benevolent hustle and bustle of student  
activism last semester removed all  
doubts. However, with the situation at  
hand, many participants in established  
campus organizations as well as ad hoc  
strike-related committees demonstrated  
very serious deficiencies in left ac-  
tivism inside the Ivory Tower.  

The most immediate concern stems  
from the class composition of the in-  
dividuals who collectively constitute  
the Yale community. There is no ques-  
tion that the predominantly upper- and  
middle-class composition of this in-  
stitution complicates student ac-  
tivism. During the strike, so many  
meetings were devoted to personal  
testimony and reaffirmation of per-  
sonal support for the “masses” that few  
people actually turned their attention  
toward strategizing or effectively  
discussing the strike particulars. Per-  
sonal self-validation eclipsed strike  
politics. For many ardent devotees to  
“the cause,” their participation in terms  
of time, energy, and political zeal  
bordered on obsession. Of course the  
strike galvanized concerns which war-  
rant huge and ongoing efforts, but I  
suspect that some Yale students were  
motivated more by the opportunity to  
assume a progressive posture. Clearly,  
the affluence of Yale contributed to  
this phenomenon.  

Specifically, as historian Christopher  
Lasch has observed, learning to be  
rich—to live the kind of life dictated by  
great wealth—can be difficult, painful  
business. In order to reconcile their  
own lifestyles with those of the less  
wealthy, children of privilege must re-  
nounce their compassion for those less  
fortunate than they, their curiosity  
about injustice and its origin, their in-  
tense interest in the lives of their social  
inferiors, and their capacity for im-  
aginative identification. Naturally,  
then, many Yalies given their inherent  
class privilege are unable or unwilling  
to reconcile their compassion for the  
“oppressed” with their own socio-  
economic position. This leads them to  
participate in left politics with a fervor  
that boggles the mind. The worst part,  
however, is that as a result political ac-  
tivism at Yale becomes more  
therapeutic than issue-raising and  
problem-solving. And to the extent that  
politics is purely a curative, it relieves  
no one except those in need of therapy.  

During the strike, it became clear  
that feminism at Yale has a difficult  
time addressing the impact of race and  
economic class on the lives of  
American women. Very few activities  
dealt with the issues of particular con-  
cern to poor and working-class women.  
Instead of concentrating on issues  
which raise questions about the post-  
industrial state, Yale feminists seemed  
preoccupied with providing Yale  
minority women with forums to voice  
their feminist concerns. Minority  
women must voice their concerns, but  
white feminists must learn, for exam-  
ple, that poor and black, especially  
within the Yale student body, are not  
synonymous. Haunting this misconcep-  
tion is the hidden opportunism and  
racism that surfaces when white  
feminists grant one Black, one Asian,  
and one Hispanic feminist a legitimate  
voice under the pretense that they  

represent the real “radical” interpreta-  
tion of feminism. If white feminists in-  
tend to infuse their discourse with op-  
posing voices of dissent by giving  
women of color a voice, a standard of  
rigorous scrutiny must also apply to  
these would-be spokespersons. It  
seems that Yale feminists are so happy  
to see and hear a woman of color speak  
that no one critically scrutinizes what  
she says. Almost anything is accep-  
table. And most times, these “token”  
women of color utter words that don’t  
even come close to laying bare the  
issues that confront poor women.  

As John Lee, a junior in Branford Col-  
lege, expressed in his timely editorial,  
minorities at Yale are “tolerated”  
because many of them came to Yale  
from comfortable, predominantly  
white neighborhoods and schools. Lee  
noted further that minority students are  
legitimized only when they acquire the  
habits, speech, tastes, and same preppy  
self-confident manner of Yalies. Those  
minority students who come from dif-  
ferent cultural as well as social class  
backgrounds are not “recognized” until  
they disregard the cultural identity that  
they brought to Yale.  

There is not necessarily a correlation  
between cultural identity and the inten-  
sity of political expression. However, it  
does seem that one’s interests and con-  
cerns are shaped by one’s cultural ex-  
periences. This is definitely not to sug-  
gest that people with different cultural  
backgrounds cannot share similar in-  
terests and concerns. But a question of  
integrity must be raised when a black  
feminist, or any other woman of color,  

has social or political connection with  
few, if any, members of her ethnic  
group. Inherently, there is something  
wrong with a privileged person speak-  
ing on behalf of women most likely to  
be poor, unemployed, and permanently  
on welfare when that person has no  
clue about what these women think or  
feel, outside of what she has read in  
books.  

To be sure, the tendency to intellec-  
tualize socio-economic disparity is  
common at Yale. Race and class op-  
pression are two over-used concepts  
that have become empty and rhetor-  
ical. This, however, is the case with  
class more than race since blacks ex-  
perienced legal racial discrimination  
until twenty-five years ago. To this ex-  
tent, a context exists in which race can  
be intellectualized. Class oppression,  
on the other hand, remains unexamined  
mainly because American social and  
political thought has never really  
acknowledged societal tensions moti-  
vated by economic class. Therefore, it  
is difficult to intellectualize something  
that has not been adequately defined  
in a specifically American context. And  
it is to the detriment of feminist  
discourse at Yale that “class” is tossed  
about.  

This suggests that feminism, inside  
and outside the academy, suffers from a  
lack of theoretical development. It  
seems that feminism has been unable  
to develop a viable model capable of  
explaining the subjugation of poor  
women. Many academic feminists have  
yet to critique the governing in-  
stitutions (primarily the economic  
order) that contribute extensively to  
race/class/gender dislocation. More im-  
portantly, feminists must begin to in-  
fuse theory with practice. There is no  
room for the separation of reality from  
politics if feminism is to be more than a  
caricature of historically floundering  
left politics.  

Bell Hooks’ recent book, Feminist  
Theory: From Margin to Center, at-  
tempts to define black feminist theory  

Once you’ve had EST...  

We deliver  
to Yale Campus  

you’ll forget all the rest!  

Sunday-Thursday,  
11-12  

Friday-Saturday, 11-12:30  

1176 Chapel Street  

aimed at “shaping a revolutionary mass  
based political movement which has a  
transformative impact on society.”  
Hooks summarily addresses those  
issues characteristic of black under-  
class society today. However, she fails  
to consider them as practical issues  
which necessarily give rise to mass-  
based political expression. She treats as  
theoretical constructs rather than  
potential public policy issues such mat-  
ters as: joblessness, systemic causes of  
poverty in female-headed households,  
increased female dependence upon the  
social welfare apparatus, the rising  
underclass (lower-class workers whose  
incomes fall below the poverty level,  
long-term unemployed, discouraged  
workers who have dropped out of the  
labor market, and permanent welfare  
recipients), the increasing concentra-  
tion in central cities of jobs that have  
educational prerequisites beyond the  
educational attainment of poor central  
city residents, and comparable worth.  
This disparity between reality and  
theory is endemic to academic  
feminists.  

In general, feminism at Yale lacks a  
political agenda grounded upon the  
social reality of most women outside  
the academy. Even though feminist  
discourse purports to be concerned  
with these issues, there is little in the  
way of political activism that reflects  
or acknowledges large-scale social and  
economic issues. Although these reflec-  
tions have been critical of the feminist  

community at Yale, maybe they will in-  
spire a discussion on the purpose of  
feminist politics. Until such date,  
feminism will continue to suffer from  
the inability to look inward and to  
critically assess the attitudes, premises,  
and theories which motivate its out-  
ward expression.  

1. See, Christopher Lasch, “To be Young, Rich,  
and Entitled,” Psychology Today, March 1978.  
2. In general, the left tends to accept otherwise  
intolerable positions (or lack thereof) from  
minority affiliates. For example, the Coalition  
Against Apartheid (CAA) and the Black Student  
Alliance at Yale tend to be strange bedfellows. I  
can’t imagine that the CAA would seek a work-  
ing relationship with any other campus  
organization that failed to decide whether the  
Grenada invasion was wrong.  

3. See, John Lee, “Student Tolerance of  
Minorities is Superficial,” The Yale Daily News,  
February 11, 1985, p. 2.  

4. For further discussion of these issues see,  
David A. Caputo, “American Cities and the  
Future,” Society, (Jan/Feb 1985): 59-64; Barbara  
Ehrenreich and Frances Fox Piven, “The  
Feminization of Poverty,” Dissent (Spring 1984),  
162-70; Barbara A. P. Jones, “The Economic  
Status of Black Women,” in The State of Black  
America, National Urban League, 1983; William  
J. Wilson, “The Black Underclass,” The Wilson  
Quarterly, (Spring 1984): 88-99 and “The Black  
Community in the 1980's: Questions of Race,  
Class, and Public Policy,” American Academy  
of Political and Social Science Annals, 439  
(September 1978): 90-117; Michael Gold, A  
Dialogue on Comparable Worth; Frances  
Hutner, Equal Pay for Comparable Worth: The  
Working Woman's Issue of the 80’s, (Forthcom-  
ing); and Helen Remick, ed., Comparable Worth  
and Wage Discrimination, (Temple University  
Press: 1983).