House

they could be sent out to the field at
any time according to the Master's in-
clination, and the female “house niggers” were even more vulnerable to
rape than the women in the field
because they were more physically ac-
cessible to the Master.

The minorities at Yale are “house niggers” because, while the rest of our
fellow people of color are still slaving
out in the fields, we have been allowed
into the Master's house. We have been
allowed to assimilate somewhat into
elite White society. Thus, we can place
out of the harsher daily realities that
our brothers and sisters of color en-
dure.

A position within the Master’s house,
however, does not guarantee equality
or respect. As an Indonesian-American
woman, I have very few illusions about
the kind of authority I hold in this
culture. Asian women are the most ac-
cepted minority group in American
culture because we are stereotyped as
being submissive and powerless and,
therefore, attractive to White men.
Such false images are predicated upon
a subordinate gender, racial, and im-
perialist relationship to White men. To
carry the “house nigger” image further,
if the minorities in this institution are
“house niggers,” then the Asian women
are “mulatto mistresses.” These power
relationships and stereotypes inform
our perceptions of ourselves and other
people, however unconsciously.

Being allowed into the Master's
house is a transformatory experience. It
is difficult, if not impossible, for a
“house nigger” to remain in the
Master's house without being fun- Returning at:
damentally changed in his/her
behavior, goals, expectations, choice of
lifestyle—everything. Becoming a In Luchia vendors squat
“house nigger” effectively distances a plastic canopies shading the
minority from his/her original ethnic morning sun. Mud splatters as
community. They can never return to they hose off
being a “field nigger” and would not turnips freshly scrubbed
want to anyway. “House niggers” are to glisten like
the ones who have access to the dinosaur eggs
Master’s ear as the tokens in organiza- and fish scales jump,
tions and the writers of the books that silver dust. I lift my skirt gingerly
directly influence the Master's policy like some European
towards people of color. aristocrat.

“House niggers” are often despised ie eee ae aren
by other people of color for accepting Low wooden houses have sprouted
favored treatment from the Master, multi-storied buildings
and for betraying them by acting as the built in
Master's agents. Even if we minority parallelograms
students are too polite to use the term to accommodate
“nigger,” the New Haven people of col- the angle of the streets.
or know full well what we are. They A carved stone doorway
realize, even more than we ourselves leads into a
might, that our acceptance by the courtyard with walls
White culture is on a limited in heaps of brick
basis—“niggers are niggers no matter and sad fruit trees where
how high they might think themselves.” children used to steal
Being a “house nigger” at Yale is an the rich man’s guavas.

embittering and confusing experience.
But, unless you have been allowed into
the Master’s house, you waste a lot of
time wondering what it is like inside. I
do not advocate downward mobility
for minorities because, as far as I am
concerned, downward mobility is a lux-
ury for privileged White people. But I
am critical of privileged people of col-
or who do not return something to the
Colored community in terms of
political or economic commitment.

Yale has given me a certain amount of
cultural authority that I would never
have had otherwise, and I intend to use
that authority as fully as possible to
goer ee des ee; and to see where her stories
my twenty-first birthday, I will graduate had ted se it childhood
from Yale. I have been to the Master's
house, learned his business, and taken
all that I needed. Now I am ready to
leave—and I am leaving by the front
door, not the service entrance.

She did not recognize her town,
she told us, when the taxi
stopped in the alley
where she had lived all her life
before leaving
for America. Her father’s
death compelled her return.
Laughing, crying with
sisters and brothers,
unearthed memories,
put them all to rest
among people my mother had
sleepwalkings.

— Peggy Kuo