29

Graduate School And Women

.. by Robin Schott...

“The problem of women and grad-
uate school.” This rather undefined
topic brings forth a surge of emotion
and recognition from those of us who
stand at the juncture, who are both
women and graduate students. But what
does it mean, what is the problem of
women and graduate school? Do we
really mean the problems women have
in graduate school? Partially. This topic
calls to mind the anxieties and insecur-
ities with which many of us are familiar.
But our male colleagues similarly suffer
psychic despair in the course of their
graduate education. Indeed, unhappi-
ness may be the sine qua non of
graduate education in its present form.
It is a period in our lives during which
we are adults in age and readiness for
responsibility; but we remain dependent
on our professors for their judgments
and on the graduate school for our
financial sustenance (if we are lucky).

The problems women have in grad-
uate school have a lot to do with the
problems women face outside graduate
school too. A hesitancy to assert
ourselves, to take our work seriously, to
be ambitious, or follow up our ambitions
without the guilt of feeling arrogant, is
the problem many middle-class women
confront who are trying to establish
themselves in traditionally male occu-
pations.

However, the difficulties we face are
not merely one-sided. We have diffi-
culty in dealing with certain professors
and colleagues because they have
difficulty in dealing with us.

Most, probably many people, includ-
ing women graduates, are at
this moment already protesting: women
have no problems now! Look how much
has changed for women in higher
education in the last 30 years. 30 years ago women
at Yale (who were only allowed in the
graduate school, and only in small
numbers) were denied the pleasure of
reading in L & B, of eating in Mory’s.
They were asked in job interviews
whether they planned to marry, whether
they were serious about their pro-
fession. No, we don’t face quite that
kind of discrimination any more (although in some quarters it still per-
sists).

Yet we should not be seduced into
thinking that our problems are over. We
need to be aware of the possible
resurgence of discrimination. But our
problems in graduate school also take a
subtler form. Most of our professors,
especially on the senior faculty, are
men. Sometimes we feel the suspicion
of sexual tension in the air; but more
often we feel the paternalism of profes-
sors towards us. A paternalistic rela-
tionship is often not like that of a
mentor and a pupil where the student is
treated as a potential colleague, as an
apprentice in the field. Where the
overtones of paternalism are present,
the experience of learning cannot itself
hold one’s attention; the experience of
authority - of submission and/or rebel-
lion - dominates.

When the paternal authority ema-
nates from a professor, male students
may feel the bonds of being a son as
much as women feel the pull to
daughterly behavior. But men’s experi-
ence in graduate school seems less
made up of such relationships. There is
a “newness” about women in the
university, which we are a long way
from growing out of. While women tend
to feel like spokeswomen, like repre-
sentatives of our sex when we speak in
class, men may try to protect us in a
situation in which we lack confidence.

They start with good intentions, but it
undermines women’s confidence in their
intellectual identity.

My first point is that the problems of
women in graduate school are not only
our problem, that we respond to what
other people expect of us, that we feel
out of place when people don’t make a
place for us (or when people try
unnaturally hard to make a “place”,
making us self-conscious of the fact that
we don’t belong).

However, we also carry around an
enemy inside ourselves. The strength of
this enemy force derives from the
history of women, and is compounded
by the specific nature of academic work.
Each of us carries around somewhere
within us the persona of a nice girl, an
obedient daughter and student, a rather
modest and self-effacing being who can
more readily shoulder other people’s
problems than her own. We know this
self and hate it; it is anathema to
becoming an independent thinker; it
erodes our trust in our ideas, our
intuitions, our feelings.

Virginia Woolf asks what conditions
are necessary for a creative mind. She
answers, the mind must be free,
unimpeded by injuries and grudges,
without hate. Although more of us now
have rooms of our own and the prospect
of money of our own, our minds are
crowded by cast-off roles which we can
never finally discard, by our “oversensi-
tivity” to anything that hints of deni-
gration of our sex, by the rage at the
centuries and centuries in which women
were literally shut in their family
homes. We don’t even have to think on
a grand scale of the history of women.
We know, without thinking that the
experiences of our grandmothers, of our
mothers themselves, have often been
confined to their homes or to distinc-
tively female professions like nursing
and teaching. These are not the condi-
tions for confident and free thinking:
they are the conditions for anger.
Though we have privileges denied to
our grandmothers and mothers, we
cannot just feel privileges. We are
deprived of the “years of thinking in
common,” of developing the confidence
in our creative possibilities.

There is something positive in anger.
It reminds us that we are not disem-
bodied minds; it makes us critical of the
“ideal” of pure, disinterested know-
ledge; it is what motivates change. But
we do not want to be free of the
structures which have made us angry,
and open ourselves to possible interests
and ideas which this anger overrides.

Academic work at its best involves
creative thinking; because it is person-
ally meaningful, our persons are very
much on the line. As graduate students,
this intensely personal dimension is
naked in front of the judgment of our
professors. Because intellectual work is
not satisfying an immediately necessary
or useful need, because it does not
provide the economic or social recog-
nition possible in other professions, the
opinions of our teachers carry undue
weight in our self-evaluation; it is the
only source of recognition we as
students have. The newness of women
in this arena, the tenuousness of our
sense of identity, makes us especially
sensitive and vulnerable to the traumas
of a graduate student’s experience.

Treating women like daughters may