FEMMES DAMNÉES

--“Qui donc devant l'amour ose parler d’enfer?”  
Charles Baudelaire  
Les Fleurs du Mal  

I, Scene from a mythology: Alchemy  

“What are you doing? Lucienne? What are you  
doing?”  

“Shh, you will be silent. I will place you.  
I have found the heavenly prints; there is still  

“I'm writing in my journal. Can’t you be quiet for  
awhile?”  

Eva has spent the early part of the afternoon  
pouting, lying on the sofa reading a novel half-  
heartedly, angry at me for ignoring her. It is a  
Sunday, late in November, and the sky is heavy, grey  
as lead. If I were  
to capture a bit of the congealed, fibrous sky and amuse  
Eva with it, spin it into dirty thread and play at Cat’s  
Cradle, lead her to the Apache’s Door and ask her for  
the key. But I am too busy with pen and paper to  
offer her toys, another bit of magic from my past. I  
look out the window and one line of an old song  
becomes suddenly clear. I would murmur to Eva:  

“You thought the leaden winter  
Would bring you down forever...”  

but that would only make her angrier, me quoting  
again, flaunting another esoteric source. Now, in the  
afternoon silence, it is difficult to even whisper.  

“Would you like some coffee? What are you writing  
about?”  

“Eva, I am trying to capture you. Even today, lying  
there lazily in your pale yellow kimono, like a  
butterfly afraid to fly in the fog, hanging sleepily on a  
moist stalk of colorless wheat, you are in motion.  
Were I to reach out for you, kneel on the carpet and  
cushion my arms on your thighs, I would still be  
unable to pin you to my specimen case.  

“Maybe later. I’ll tell you later.”  
I have always believed in the alchemy of the word,  
I have always wanted to be a juggler, a prestidigitator.  

Like alchemy, writing is an archaic art, almost as  
disreputable. Like alchemy, something from nothing.  
Eva has fallen asleep on the sofa. Her hand still  
holds the volume that fell to the floor a moment ago.  

Eva, in my head I have constructed a mythology. If  
there is space enough in the sky for another constellation.  
Not this sky of ash, of dust. I shall create for you a  
Mediterranean sky, a sky so blue, so dark and cool.  
Outside, the drain-pipe rattles in a meager wind. I  
am certain that drain-pipes are no longer made of  
lead, if they ever were. I cannot give any name to the  
darkened gutter: another detail lost. If I could only  
exorcise all of the details, the atomic weights and  
numbers, the abbreviations. Perhaps it is enough now  
to note that the drain-pipe has rattled unpleasantly.  

“Would you like to go to the museum later?”  
“Sure, that sounds fine.”  
It is not going well today. Yes! Let’s wander in the  
smooth marble hallways and reflect on the frozen  
chaos encased in each gilded frame. I would watch  
Sophonisba forever on the verge of swallowing the  
contents of a wine-glass eaten with poison, the strap  
of her lace gown fallen from her white shoulder.  
Silent, wordless,  

“Eva, do you know my true name?”  
She laughs and says, “But your name is Lucienne; I  
gave it to you. What name could be truer?”  

Chemist. Today you have beaten me at my own  
game. Your hair swirls as you walk to the closet,  
getting dressed for the streets. You are once again a  
maelstrom. I look frantically for a life-preserver, a raft,  
a handle. “Eva?” I say and turn from my desk.  

“Je suis Notre Dame de Paris”  

I was in Paris then and the world was beautiful and  
vague. I walked along the Rue de Rivoli, through a  
grey film, not even mist, that stretched the distances,  
softened, silenced, but made everything nearby, the  
world five paces in any direction, so clear around  
you, so immediate: cold fingers, bricks of anonymous  
buildings. Walking with my hands jammed into the  
dusty pockets of a pea-coat. Where did that coat  
come from? How I loved the wool smell of it, after I'd  
been out in the snow or rain. Perhaps one of Eva's  
cast-offs. She could not bear to see me go cold; she  
cared for me as she did the pigeons that huddled on  
her window sill. The day I went with her to la Piaf’s  
grave, holding her hand while she cried into a hand-  
kerchief, she had named me her little sparrow, “sa  
petite alouette.”  

“Femmes Damnées; Delphine et Hippolyte”  

But in the winter we no longer visited the graves. I  
walked along the Rue de Rivoli and stopped to talk to  
Jeanne d’Arc. Her so tall above me, cast in bronze, a  
metal amazon. I watched the old women across the  
street, in the Tuileries, feeding the pigeons butt-ends  
of one week’s worth of 1.5 F baguettes, and Jeanne  
talked to me. She spoke always of the English, the  
English, asking if they still held French soil. I listened  
for awhile to her outdated tirades and then finally I  
would ask, “Is it true Jeanne, did you die a virgin?  
Were you never tempted by the broad backs of the  
archers, the slow flex of the warriors’ muscles?” And  
she laughed, a copper laugh, like a broken bell, and  
said, “I saved myself, I saved myself for the  
executioner. But I cried at night, under the stars on  
the wet ground, hearing the soldiers sing around the  
fires. All day riding, the warm, heaving sides of a  
stallion between my legs; at night nothing to hold me  
but straw and sackcloth. Ah, but little one, fire is a  
tactful lover.”  

I bought a tiny, gilt Eiffel Tower in the tourist shop  
nearby and pinned it to my coat. I watched the cars  
passing, I watched a page from a newspaper blowing  
on the sidewalk. I muttered, leaving the monument  
behind. “And into ashes all my lust.”  

I had just seen Richard off at the train station. I had  
finished with my architect and I sat in a café with vinyl  
booths and a juke-box. I listened to the Rolling  
Stones, I drank coffee and played “Angie” over and  
over again. I declared myself finished with order,  
exhausted with blue-prints. I coveted the coffee stains  
on the tablecloth, so perfectly meaningless.  

“With no loving in our souls  
And no money in our coats,”  
You can’t say we’re satisfied...  

In the acrid smoke that enveloped our world we lost  
our perspective. Drugs. Lines of cocaine cut with  
strychnine that gave me white headaches, blinding,  
snowy. Hash, easier to procure than Mexican grass  
then, cheaper. We were all visionaries, creators with  
the realization of our creative force. We waltzed in  
cafés, we jitterbugged in the Latin Quarter, we drank  
cocoa and toasted Proust in the Ritz, we languished  
in the melt-flow of jazz. Ooh Bessie. Ooh those  
saxophones moaning in the night, floating around  
moist street lamps, the metro stops, just like in the  
movies. We got hot listening to the brittle 78’s. In the  
late summer, we listened to the Jamaican steel drums  
played by islanders with curry-flavored accents,  
reggae-dancing on corners. They always answered  
with the beat, wisely monosyllabic: “Oui, mon.”  
Colored scarves and oh, the creamy skin, shiny with  
sweat; warmed us, made us forget the approaching  
Winter. We smoked ganja with them, drank rum.  
When Eva was drunk enough she’d dance for us on  
the street.  

We were aliens then, wherever we ended up,  
whatever connections we made. Senegal, Kougane,  
Toulon, Berlin. I got letters from Semire, postcards  
from Carmella, Patti. I'd put so many countries, so  
many half-learned languages between myself and  
my homeland that I felt certain that I owed allegiance  
to nothing more than motion, border-lines, visas.  
But now I ate cous-cous in the Arab restaurants  
and stayed rooted in Paris, unable to pull myself  
away from that city. My name had always changed  
with each train ride, but now I was never more than a  
metro stop away from the Rue de Montmorency and  
I remained Lucienne.  

It was Eva that gave me my name; she who saw in  
each landscape a woman. One day, as we were  
walking aimlessly through one of the sad, quiet  
streets of the Faubourg Ste. Antoine, she stopped in  
front of a shadowy alleyway, framed by a boarded-up  
parfumerie. “This street is so much like you,” she  
said. At the end of the street we found a marker with  
a name painted on it: Rue Lucien.  

If I were to have given Eva a name it would not have  
done her justice. In every woman I saw a city and, for  
me, Eva will always be Our Lady of Paris. The  
arrondissements seemed to swirl in her hair, she  
carried gardens, cemeteries and apartment buildings  
on the landscape of her body, she controlled the  
rhythm of the streets with her walk. She knew the  
chimes of every bell-tower in the city.  

Eva insisted upon being an anachronism, she fought  
against years as against some tangible enemy. She  
refused to use the past tense, she refused to accept  
the inevitable movement of time. Dates to her were  
adjectives, landscapes; in her vocabulary, “1848”  
might just as well have been “blue” or “Baden-  
Baden.” Yet she loved pre-penieres, she loved the  
ring of numbers, the names of months, so long as the  
Anno faded off into three periods, like the attestation  
to reality of eighteenth-century novels. She collected  
birth-dates, she read the daily astrological forecasts in  
cheap newspapers. We would be gathered in a café,  
in the afternoon, drinking watery Alsatian beer, and  
she would announce, “Today is Tsar Alexander’s  
birthday. He is 23 and it promises to be a fine  
Prussian day, as he looks out from his chambers.”  

At times, Eva’s vagueness annoyed me. She wanted  
to be at the ocean and be hit by each wave, never  
seeing the vastness of the tide. She wanted to be  
submerged and not see the current flowing away  
from her. I could never remember exactly where I  
stood, but I knew that the days were passing, leaving  
only the vacuum of memory in their wake. Today,  
tomorrow, the only words I needed.  

But to live with Eva was to lose track, to lose the  
sense of time. The clothes she wore altered eras from  
one day to the next. She was obsessed with cos-  
tumes, with fabric, with style. Most of us, Angel,  
Sebastien, Antonella, wore the standard bohemian  
uniform: tight American jeans, black sweaters, faded  
scarves, cheap sandals in the summer. I suppose that  
our group, made up of students, artists, drifters like  
myself, “le petit noyau,” we laughingly said, was just  
as anachronistic as Eva, but ever so consciously so.  
We saw ourselves as hold-outs, rebels against this  
“sacre modernisme.” Eva had no sense of revolt,  
none of the pretensions of a 1978 intellectual playing  
at 1951. She could just as easily show up in chic  
punk, enormous safety pins in her ears, a torn,  
stained t-shirt pulled on carelessly, as in a 1922 dress  
tuxedo.  

I followed her to the flea market, the junk shops, and  
watched her gather her eclectic piles of silk, leather,  
plastic. She was overwhelmed by lingerie, adored  
exotic brassieres, sateen garter belts, brocade corsets,  
and yet she often went without panties or wore  
unmended tattered socks. She would spend the last  
of her money to get a suit cleaned at a dry-cleaners,  
but she refused to waste her money washing shirts or  
matter what sort of chaotic rags she had  
attired herself in, a pink angora sweater or a cadet’s  
uniform, she always wore beautiful, expensive shoes.  
She could go without eating for days, borrow from  
friends, just to buy a pair of slippers she’d seen in a  
window. She loved the movie-star stiletto heels with  
straps that wrapped around the ankles, but most of all  
she loved boots, heavy, shining boots with solid  
wooden heels, made with Italian leather, the kind that  
gave a determined, lethal quality to her walk.  

She was tall, but not thin; the boots made her statu-  
esque. She was sturdy, muscular, and would have  
been an amazon, but for the brief moments of hesi-  
tancy that cut through her voice, her gestures.  
Though she could laugh loudly, brassily, uncon-  
strained in our perennial haunts, the cafés, musées,  
student cafeterias, or crash loudly through the silence  
of a bibliothèque, thighs sheathed in red wool, black  
boots already run down at the heels, often I would  
catch her, after having swallowed the last of a gin and  
tonic, an impossible drink (She picked up the habit  
during her one trip to England, had since had gin  
mailed to her from the US by an obscure, ex-patriot  
uncle who also seemed to supply her college and  
living expenses), or after having thrown one of her  
dancing slippers at the white plaster wall of Paolo’s  
apartment, perched uncertainly on the edge of her  
chair, running her hands through the blue-black of  
her hair, ruining its perfectly combed symmetry. She  
seemed then to embody an indecision strangely  
incongruous with the strength of her body. And it was  
at those moments precisely that I most desired her,  
most cared for her.  

I thought little of my own clothing, I lived on the run,  
on the edge, and had little time or room for anything  
more than the functional. I was a spectator and I  
allowed myself to be dazzled by Eva, as by the  
brilliant smoothness of a Brancusi bird. I remained “la  
petite clocharde,” wore hand-me-downs, played at  
being one of Beckett’s tramps. Inevitable jeans; two  
pairs that alternated from week to week, coupled  
with a pile of button-down shirts that never quite fit,  
hanging on my bony frame like slack sails. Yet Eva  
could not bear to see me go without embellishment.  
One e. e. cummings birthday, I discovered seven pairs  
of identical size 6 sneakers, the kind that tie up past  
the ankle, all lined up in the center of her room, dyed  
every possible color, the “formals” black with silver  
toes. She gave me an odd assortment of underwear  
that I wore with one of her old bras, black silk cut.