(Bi  
Lal  

Child A  

By Victoria Roth  
With Thanks to Elizabeth Tate  

You hear about child abuse, in the papers, on the  
television, in the magazines. Another form of  

domestic violence: somebody else’s personal tragedy.  
But every year, adults in the U.S. batter or  
neglect hundreds of thousands of children. Most of  
these adults are not psychologically disturbed. The  
maltreatment of children in the U.S. results from a  
variety of personal and social causes; only concerted  
social efforts can begin to solve the problem.  
Generally, a distinction can be drawn between  
abuse and neglect. A neglectful parent (or  
caretaker) fails to provide for the basic care of the  
child, who may suffer from an inadequate diet, or  
be improperly cleaned. An abusive parent, on the  
other hand, usually meets the child’s physical  
needs, but fails to provide the child with a healthy  
psychological environment. The child may be denied  
a variety of emotional support, as in  
excessive screaming, teasing, or expressions of  
scorn; or sexual - as in incest. The two types of  
breakdown in parental responsibilities can occur  
simultaneously.  

The effects of abuse or neglect are similar and  
can be severe. Abused children suffer from  
emotional and physical handicaps, handicaps which  
can dog them for the rest of their lives. From their  
early experiences abused or neglected children may  
lose the ability to love and trust others; poor  
self-image may frustrate their endeavors in adulthood.  
Early injuries can cripple, or deform them  
permanently. Abused children frequently become  
antisocial, criminal individuals in adolescence.  
Every year in the U.S. abuse and neglect results in  
the deaths of hundreds of children.  

The symptoms of child abuse vary. Recurring  
injuries, especially bruises, welts, and burns can be  
a sign, particularly if the parents appear to be  
unconcerned, deny such incidents, or relate unlikely  
histories of such ‘accidents.’ Neglected appearance  
is another sign; but so is excessive neatness, which  
a parent may use to assure the world that  
everything is all right, or which may be a symptom  
of excessive discipline. Along the same lines,  
passive, withdrawn, and shy children sometimes are  
suffering from abuse; but so may be very  
aggressive and disruptive children who constantly  
seek attention.  

Why do parents abuse their children? Child abuse  
is a social problem, but it does have other  
dimensions. The factors which contribute to child  
abuse are latent in almost any neighborhood or  
home; but abusive parents vary widely in their  
backgrounds and situations. Although many reports  
have indicated a high incidence of child abuse  
among the poor, the lesser educated, and minority  
groups, this high incidence may be due to the  
localization of reporting services, centered in the  
emergency rooms of urban hospitals. When Dade  
County, Florida, implemented a 24-hour statewide  
reporting service for abuse and neglect, a study  
revealed that the typical child abuser was a white,  
middle-class, college-educated woman.  

Generally, however, abusive parents cannot be  
typed. Nevertheless, certain behaviors sometimes  
indicate abusive parents. Parents who tend to  
criticize their children unduly or to punish them  
frequently may become abusers when their children  
do not meet their unrealistic standards. Slapping a  
six-month-old infant for spilling his milk, or  
chastising a one-year-old infant for crying exemplify  
such unrealistic demands. Extremely isolated fami-  
lies, ones who return friendly approaches with  
hostility, distrust others, or fear outsiders’ efforts to  
help them in any way, frequently turn out to be  
abusers. Good parents make errors in judgment  
occasionally, but when isolated incidents seem to be  
part of a pattern, action should be taken and help  
sought before tragedy results.  

According to a 1975 study, only 10% of abusive  
parents suffer from serious psychological difficulties.  
(1) But abusive parents frequently share  
characteristics of helplessness, dependency, low  
self-esteem, and isolation. Seventy percent of all  
child abusers themselves had parents who were  
abusers. When adults become parents, they harken  
back to the way they themselves were brought up.  
Battering a child may not seem to be strange  
behavior, especially if one’s siblings or oneself were  
knocked around in childhood.  

Child abusers often have lived lives of emotional  
deprivation, with needs long gone unsatisfied.  
Consequently, their interpersonal relationships suf-  
fer, and this suffering itself puts strains upon  
parents. As one New Haven pediatrician told me,  

“Child abusers are often young parents, who are  
overwhelmed by the demands of child abuse and rejection.” A sociological study done by Gelles in 1973 cited unemployment, unwanted pregnancy, and general economic conditions as possible social causes of child abuse. (2) Children become the sources of parental aggression because they, as unwanted children, are sources of stress for the family. An unwanted child may be considered the root of a family’s troubles, and therefore a burden.  

Gill (1975) has seen child abuse in terms of the  
prevailing social philosophy. Societal attitudes  
towards the use of force as a means of attaining  
goals and dealing with conflicts ultimately serve as  
a cause of abuse on the family level. A society that  
legitimizes the use of force restrengthens the abuse  
of young children. (3) Other psychologists have  
noted that the mistreatment that a young child  
receives in varied circumstances may be interpreted  
by the child as a positive sign—perhaps, “Mommy  
and Daddy care enough to hurt me to stop me from  
being bad,”—and as justified. Through this process  
children may internalize their parents’ standards  
and ideas not only about correct behavior but of a  
child’s duties towards his parents. These notions  
may later be enlarged and applied when they have  
children of their own.  

Can child abusers and their victims be helped? In  
addition to immediate treatment for urgent prob-  
lems, such as physical injury or malnutrition, or  
immediate psychiatric therapy for the child, longer-  
term support services and counseling can help  
families to learn how to live together and to cope  
with crises. Sometimes a temporary separation of  
parent and child is necessary in order to protect the  
child and give the parents a chance to cool off.  
Permanent separation is only a last resort. Foster  
care does not seem to be an adequate solution for  
the child. Foster homes cannot provide the crucial  
emotional support that abused children need. Moss  
(1966) described the feelings of abused children in  
child care institutions after separation from their  
parents. (4) The children become extremely depen-  
dent upon the institution; they feel anxious and  
rejected and lose the ability to trust others. Foster  
care presents many problems, including the possi-  
bility for continued abuse and neglect; 15% of all  
child abuse takes place in foster homes.  

A program for abusive parents, modeled after the  
Alcoholics Anonymous program, helps abusive parents  
through self-understanding and self-control. An abusive  
mother from California, who calls herself Jolly K.,  
began Parents Anonymous, or PA, as it is called.  
PA can and does help those emotionally strong  
enough to join such a group. But some parents do  
not wish to change. Some recidivism does occur  
among child abusers who have been reported and  
brought to the attention of social agencies.  
Generally, however, after intervention, improve-  
ments in parenting result. Certainly, helping  
parents to help themselves is better than foster care  
for changing child-rearing patterns and protecting  
children. The risk to children is lessened once the  
parents decide to help themselves, and there is a  
good chance that the vicious intergenerational cycle  
of child abuse can be broken.  

The number of reported incidents of child abuse  
has climbed steeply in the past few years. It is  
likely that this rise has been due to increased public  
awareness of the problem; but how much of the  
increase might be due to the increasing frequency  
of violence in American life can only be conjectured.  
Most parents do want to be good parents. “Parents  
shouldn’t have to go to school to be parents,” a  
Yale-New Haven Hospital pediatrician told me,  
“But the increasing interest in birth preparation  
and now even in post-partum support groups shows  
that responsibilities have at times been relegated to  
television, babysitters, and paraprofessionals. For  
certain families, these arrangements have worked;  
for others they have hurt more than they have  
helped.  

For some parents, the extended family has proven  
to be a supportive structure for raising children.  
More frequent contact with other children seems to  
help children without younger siblings to learn more  
about parenting; extended families also enable  
young adults to learn parenting skills from each  
other. But child abuse predates the nuclear family,  
and still exists in some families, where abuse may  
be perpetuated from generation to generation.  
Attempting to raise children within the structure of  
the extended family may then become nightmarish.  
Parents are not the only people who abuse children.  
Aunts, uncles, cousins, grandparents, and even  
close friends may be abusers.  

In January 1974, the Federal government outlined  
Public Law 93-247, which makes the reporting of  
alleged child abuse a mandatory procedure. All fifty  
states have complied with federal legislation by  
enacting mandatory laws of their own. In Connecti-  
cut, everyone has a legal duty to report incidents of  
child abuse to the local or state agency - either the  
local or state police, or the state welfare commis-  
sioner. The law lists twenty-six different profes-  
sionals who might notice incidents of child abuse  
and must be alert to such incidents. In addition to  
hospitals, physicians, interns, licensed and un-  
licensed nurses and psychologists, the law lists  
policemen, school teachers, guidance counselors,  
school principals, social workers, mental health  
professionals, clergy, and day-care center workers.  
But any citizen has a duty to report immediately, or  
within seventy-eight hours, whenever reasonable  
cause exists to believe that a child is or has been  
subjected to abuse or neglect. Full civil and criminal  
immunity is granted for reports made in good faith;  
failure to report may result in a $500 fine.  
Connecticut has a statewide number (the twenty-  
four hour Careline: dial 1-800-842-2288) that may be  
used to report abuse or neglect; the telephone  
service also provides some counseling services to  
parents. Last year, this phone line received 1166  
reports of physical abuse; 966 cases of physical  
neglect; 200 cases of sexual abuse; 134 cases of  
emotional maltreatment; and 675 cases of what are  
termed ‘at risk children’ - children living with adults  
who are in some way unstable, such as parents who  
are drug addicts. Cases reported to this number are  
funneled through Protective Services, a state agency  
which is part of the Department of Child and Youth  

Services.  

continued on page 33