Yale Women’s Studies

There is now a Women’s Studies program at Yale, largely thanks to the efforts of many students and faculty members, present and past. The field is expanding, as is demonstrated by thriving departments in many universities and colleges, by the recent and continuing publication of many significant books in the category of Women’s Studies, and more specifically, by the fact that the largest workshop in the latest Modern Language Association convention was on Women’s Studies. However, many Yale students and faculty do not know what Women’s Studies is, why the people who take it seriously do, or how a pilot Women’s Studies program came to be at Yale.

Ruth Borenstein, class of ‘78, had a crucial role in making Women’s Studies possible. She worked on the very initial stages of the proposal for a women’s studies core course and program, but graduated before the finalized program proposal was approved by the faculty for a five-year trial period in the spring of 1979.

“Ruth, how would you define women’s studies?”

“Fundamentally, it is a commitment to examining the experiences of all people, including all the oppressed people that traditional scholarship refuses to treat seriously... Did you see the Holocaust series?”

“No.”

“In an analysis after the show, they said that the average high school history textbook devoted only one paragraph to the Holocaust. I was so offended by that. It made me see very clearly how much further everything has to go. If you don’t fall into certain categories, you just don’t count in the official record. It’s real sad. That’s why Women’s Studies is important to me. It’s a way of rectifying that. It’s the ultimate indignity to leave somebody out, to just not mention them.” Borenstein felt that one important part of the early planning for Women’s Studies was that students were allowed to play an important role in the decision-making process. As Women’s Studies had become more institutionalized, she said, the active role of students has been discouraged.

“The whole thing started with the Women’s Studies Task Force of the Yale Women’s Forum, an umbrella organization of all women at Yale. That was great, it was a faculty and student committee but it was run by a student, Carol Mostow. That same year I was on the Committee on the Education of Women which was headed by Kai Erikson. He was very supportive of the whole issue, and so we used the committee to apply for money from an internal fund at Yale to develop a core course for a Women’s Studies Program.” Eventually, some funds were obtained, and the course began.

Borenstein was one of the teaching assistants for the Women’s Studies core course in its first year. She talked about the difficulties of running a discussion section and “What an effort it is trying to make people take a course seriously, when instead of pressuring them to write paper after paper, you want them to read a book that should be important to their life. Yale students are not accustomed to taking their lives as seriously as they take their schoolwork. The dream of it all is that you find someone who hasn’t really thought much about these things and you charge them up - if you have enough enthusiasm, it’s infectious.

I asked Ruth how the program as it is now compared to the original plans of the people who initiated Women’s Studies at Yale.

“Well, it’s definitely a disappointment. It seems as though the spark, the enthusiasm that shaped our plans at the beginning has gone. The idea behind Women’s Studies was a pure one, but it changed as Yale began to take control of it. You should never underestimate Yale’s power - it’s been the way it is for years and years: Yale can easily co-opt — and fundamentally change any movement within it. What’s happened to Women’s Studies is a perfect example.”

RUTH HUBBARD

Professor of Biology,

Harvard University

Impact Of Social Factors On The Biology Of Women

Davies Auditorium, Becton Center 15 Prospect St.

Monday February 4, 1980, 8 PM

Dinner With Dr. Hubbard 6 PM Law School Faculty Dining Room Call 436-8744

Sponsored by:

Dean Judith Berman Brandenburg,

Yale College Dean’s Office, and The Department of Biology

Although Borenstein is doubtless correct that there have been setbacks on the participation of students in planning Women’s Studies, active students still play a more important role in planning than in most other departments. Several members of the Student Committee on Women’s Studies have voting power with the Women’s Studies core faculty, for example.

But as Borenstein stressed, the difficulties involved in the development of Women’s Studies at Yale, both are and were immense: Both lack of funding, and the insensitivity of the bureaucracy in a new study which few people understand were two major problems that she mentioned. “I see people struggling now just the way we struggled and all I see are more brick walls ahead. It’s a no-win situation.”

“Would you work on Women’s Studies again if you were starting over as a freshman now?”

“I guess I would. If you go to Yale and don’t fight it every step of the way then you’re saying that it’s right the way it is. But whether I’d go to Yale again is another question.”

“What would you tell women who are active in Women’s Studies at Yale?”

“That what they’re doing is important. They should keep doing it.”

For my second interview it seemed appropriate to talk with Catherine A. MacKinnon. MacKinnon is a graduate student in Political Science at Yale and also has a Law Degree from this University. Recently she published a book, Sexual Harassment and the Workplace Woman which “establishes sexual harassment as a legal form of sex discrimination.”

In 1977, MacKinnon was hired by the Women’s Studies Task Force to teach the core course in Women’s Studies, “Feminism and Humanism.” Although the objective fact is that I have never had job security, MacKinnon has been teaching the core course and working with the Committee on the Education of Women on developing a Women’s Studies program until the academic year 1979-80. This year, which is the first year of the new Women’s Studies Program, MacKinnon has taught only the first semester of the Women’s Studies core course, and will be teaching a college seminar on Feminism and Socialism. The spring semester section of “Feminism and Humanism” will be taught by Women’s Studies DUS (Director of Undergraduate Studies) Gillian C. Gill.

I asked MacKinnon how she defined Women’s Studies.

“Done properly, Women’s Studies addresses the situation of all women from the perspective of changing it. Anything that doesn’t do that is a less complete acting out of the principles.”

Q. “How did you first get interested in Women’s Studies?”

A. “The National Association of Women’s Studies says in their charter that Women’s Studies is the educational arm of a break-through in consciousness and knowledge. Asking that question is really like asking when did you first come to conceive of the world as a feminist. You realize that you have one head, that you cannot keep your scholarship in isolation from the questions and issues posed by feminism.”

Q. “Now very concretely, what do you think must be done to start to implement Women’s Studies at Yale?”

A. “The people in Women’s Studies must be given control over their own money. With that control they will be able to bring in scholars who specialize in Women’s Studies. That would help create an atmosphere wherein people could grow towards valuing Women’s Studies for what it is. In ignorance they can’t value it properly. You understand that what I’m trying to do here is break down a circular process. If Yale came to value Women’s Studies, they’d give it money. But I think they'll have to give it money anyway because we’re going to ask for it.”

by Meg Starr and Jenny Wriggins

Q. “Recently, Professor Martin, Chairperson of the Princeton Women’s Studies Committee resigned because, although originally she had thought that she could work for Women’s Studies that way, she came to feel that she would be supporting Princeton’s policy of neglect if she stayed in her position. For me this raises all sorts of questions about what are the most effective forms of action. What would you say about this?”

A. “You never know what the consequences of an action will be. Staying on as the Chairperson legitimizes the Committee, yet if you leave, you’ve conceded that they have won... And I was just thinking that trying to get a University to understand Women’s Studies is part of the whole difficult thing. They are the ball-game - they have the resources and if you can’t or won’t play with them, you may find out that you are unable to play alone. They set standards that you are in fact going to get judged by. Of course, there is always the possibility of moving outside a specific structure to organize some of the alternate ways of bringing pressure... Another one of the most effective things I’ve seen is when students from Women’s Studies courses start asking professors in other courses about subjects in the professors' own fields of expertise that they haven’t been exposed to because they haven’t had a Women’s Studies perspective. That sends the professors straight into the libraries to do new research.”

Q. “What’s your sense of time and effectiveness? Does that make sense to you as a question? Sometimes I go through time warps when I feel as if everything might get done very fast, and that is very exhilarating - Then I hear some bad news about the ERA or something, and I realize that everything may just go on like this forever, which is sad.”

A. “I don’t require a connection between my own efforts and what others think of as effectiveness. The satisfaction is being part of a process, which has gone on for a thousand years. I have a certain serenity about the process - of course there is always my own explosive impatience when I am not satisfied about the immediate results.”

Q. “It seems as if your definition of Women’s Studies implies that if the discipline becomes fully accredited within the University, the connection between scholarship and action will have to be redefined.”

A. “I think it’s equally possible that we will be crushed. If we’re not, then it will be changed.”

One of the quips one sometimes hears when Women’s Studies is mentioned is, “Well, what will it be next - Men’s Studies?”

In a fundamental sense, Men’s Studies is what scholarship has been so far. The very pervasiveness of the male bias in scholarship makes it at times difficult to perceive. Just as it often takes a change of place to make us realize where we've been, it may take reading that first serious book on Women in the Industrial Revolution to make one realize that all the books one read previously on this topic were on Men in the Industrial Revolution. One begins to ask why a book about women in a particular era or culture is considered to be about only the female fifty percent of the people, while a book about men in society is generally expected to ‘cover’ women also.

All of the women quoted in this article talked about Women’s Studies as a form of activism. Conventional disciplines are no more objective or divorced from practice than is Women’s Studies; however, they stand in a different relationship with society. Conventional disciplines come out of a male-dominated society and reinforce its values. Women's Studies is based on different premises which direct it toward supporting change.