40

THE RESISTANCE

by MLH.

Excerpted from Resistances to Consciousness by Irene Peslikis

Thinking that because we have an education privilege and can talk in abstracts we are somehow exempt
from feeling oppression directly and talking about it honestly and, therefore, think of personal
experience as something low on the ladder of values (class values).

Thinking that women consent to their own oppression (or anyone does for that matter). This is a
statement which puts the blame on the oppressed group rather than on the oppressor class which
ultimately uses brute force to keep the oppressed where they are. It is an anti-women and anti-people

statement.

Thinking that only institutions oppress women as opposed to other people. This implies that you have not
identified your enemy, for institutions are only a tool of the oppressor. When the oppressor is stopped he
can no longer maintain his tools and they are rendered useless. Present institutions and our feelings
about them should be analyzed in order to understand what it is we want or don’t want to use in the new

society.

Chris called up her best friend to share her day’s
events. The phone rang twice, and Cathy answered.
“Hello?”

“Hi, Cathy, how are you? I’m doing okay. Yeah,
today was my first day at the agency. No, I’m
assigned to the Miller, Inc. account, and I’m
working on the Grandma Stiles’ maple syrup
division. We’re trying to appeal to the consumers
who are so paranoid about cancer these days by
using larger labels that say, ‘REAL MAPLE
SYRUP.’ The work is all right, and I know I’m
going to learn lots. Oh yeah, the people are great!
Some other Ivy League schools have interns at the
same place, and I met all the interns today. There
are five of us, and we’re all working on different
accounts except for this one guy named Bob Warner
from Princeton who’s working on Miller’s too. We
have to work very closely together since we’re the
only two interns on the same account, so I hope we
get along. I don’t see any problem, though...he
seems very nice, and he has a good sense of humor.
Today he asked me my last name twice because he
thought I said ‘Christian’ instead of ‘Chris Chan.’ I
want to get to know all the interns better, but Bob
is the only one I'll be seeing regularly. (...) Yeah,
yeah, but he seems okay. At least, he didn’t make
any sexist remarks to my face. Yeah, the agency as
a whole seems okay, even though, you’re right, they
haven’t seen very many women there. (...) Good

Lord, Cathy, I doubt if they’re going to be that

sexist. (...) All right, all right, you’re
right. But I doubt if they’re going to be pinching my
seat. All right, you made your point. Tell me what’s
been going on with you.’’ Although irritated with

her point on Miller’s (yet to be seen), Chris enjoyed her year together.

At work the next day, Chris, Bob, and the three
other interns met with their supervisor. Mr. Resnick
passed out elaborate time-table sheets to the
interns, complete with due dates for each phase of
each intern’s project. Chris and Bob, the only
paired-up interns, were assigned a more extensive

project than the other interns, and they found that

their duties included helping Miller account ad-
persons compile a report on the impact of the new
“REAL MAPLE SYRUP” labels on national sales.
The report concluded the project, and as for the
project itself, it looked, well, difficult. But don’t
worry, said the supervisor, you two are working
with very efficient people.

Chris thought that her project looked more
challenging than anyone else’s, Bob notwithstanding.
Unfair. Still, she felt prepared to deal with the
work--after all, she couldn’t quit now--and wondered
how Bob felt about the work ahead. Maybe I should
ask him to dinner, she thought. Since we’re starting
work tomorrow, I should talk to him tonight about
what he thinks and how he might want to split up
the work.

At five o’clock, Chris walked over to Bob’s
cubicle. Hunched over his desk, he looked like
Chris’ image of Scrooge’s good ole Bob Cratchit.

“Bob, would you like to have dinner together
tonight? I’d like to discuss our project with you, and
maybe we can decide how to divide the load,”

“Sure. Where would you like to go? I'd invite you
to my place if I had something to offer you, but I
don’t.”

“I'd invite you to my place, but it’d take too long
to prepare dinner while we're talking. Why don’t
we go to The Deli? It’s just a five-minute walk from
here, and they have good food.”

“Fine, let me get my coat, and then we’ll go.”

Over dinner, Chris and Bob brought out their
project sheets and discussed the upcoming work.
Both agreed that the work would be strenuous, to
say the least, but they even were willing to put in
extra time, if necessary. Judging from the
supervisor’s comments, “extra time” would not be
extra time but expected time. But they both wanted
to do the best job possible.

After they cleared business, Chris and Bob talked
about themselves. Chris found Bob very open, and
she felt comfortable answering personal questions.
He answered her questions with ease and
assurance. They discussed their own short and
long-range plans for the future. Both were
considering law school, although Bob said he
wanted to combine law and business school. Chris
laughed, then quickly explained:

“Oh, I’m sorry for laughing. It’s just that you
reminded me of Bob Cratchit today, and wasn’t he
a businessman too? And you have the same first
name.” Chris stopped abruptly, realizing how
foolish she sounded. “I guess that was a pretty
off-the-wall comment; I hope you don’t think I was
making fun of you.” Chris didn’t know why she had
blurted out her thoughts, much less laughed, maybe
because she already felt so comfortable with Bob.

“That’s all right. I guess we both remind each
other of famous people. I was going to tell you that
you remind me of Suzy Wong.”

Suzy Wong! Chris didn’t know how to respond to
such a comparison. She wanted to say that her
comparison to Bob Cratchit at least afforded him
some respectability, whereas this comparison to
Suzy Wong, the legendary Hong Kong prostitute,
was hardly flattering. Instead of voicing her
thoughts, Chris asked Bob another question, again
related to the subject of careers.

They continued to talk, animatedly. Not until their
waiter came by with the announcement, “Kitchen
closes in 15 minutes,” did they become conscious of
the late hour. Chris glanced at her watch, and,
amazed at the time, said, “Bob, we should go. This
place wants to close soon, and besides, it’s about 10
p.m.” Bob agreed, and after they had paid their
separate checks, they walked out onto the street.

“Thanks a lot for dinner, Bob. I’m glad we got to
talk--I really enjoyed it.”

“I enjoyed it, too. We’ll have to do it again
sometime soon. The tensions from work have to be
relieved sometime, right?” Bob winked at Chris,
then stared straight into her eyes. 

“Good night,”

The next few days at work flew by; so much work
had to be done. Chris found Bob easy to work with,
for he was very upfront with his criticisms and
praise, and they both were pleased to find how well
they worked together. Chris thought, I’m glad we
got to know each other before we started working.
Since we broke the original barrier of unfamiliarity
before we started work, we didn’t have to test each
other the first few days.

But even though Chris and Bob worked efficiently
at the office, they found that they still had to work
after hours in order to keep up with the schedule.
Soon, at least two evenings of the week were spent
together, usually at Bob’s apartment since he lived
closer to the office.

Although they always attacked their office work
first, Chris and Bob also had personal discussions
on just about everything: work, city politics, people
at the office, roommates. Chris thoroughly enjoyed
Bob’s company but despite her roommate’s teasing
and accusations to the contrary, Chris liked Bob
only as a friend. Maybe even as a brother. She
wasn’t quite sure how Bob felt about her, but it
seemed like a strictly Platonic relationship. Still,
every now and then Bob would make a remark that
threw her off-balance, a remark which didn’t quite
fit in with the good ole friendly Bob she knew.
What he had said the night before, for example.

They’d been discussing a conversation they had
had with their supervisor. Bob had asked Mr.
Resnick if their schedule could be eased up by a few
weeks, and he had said that he’d find out if it would
be possible. But it had already been a week, and he
still hadn’t said a word. And here the project report

was due in less than a month, Chris had said, “I
think we should ask him again. If we don’t, I think
we’re compromising our position that we’re over-
loaded.”

Bob had replied, “That’s okay with me, since I'd
rather be in a compromising position with you than
with anyone else.”

Again, Chris hadn’t known how to respond. Bob
joked around so much, she sometimes didn’t know
if he was kidding or serious. Instead of asking him,
she always changed the subject, and immediately
dismissed the disruptive thoughts from her mind.

Their supervisor finally got to them, and said no,
the schedule is absolutely set and no alterations can
be made. Chris and Bob, realizing that the report
required even more time than the overtime they
had put in, started to take work home every night.
It was a situation that could have been much worse,
Chris thought, if she and Bob didn’t get along so
well.

But despite the working nature of their relationship,
everyone seemed to think that she and Bob
were more than “just friends.” She thought her
roommate was being silly when she teased about
“How well you and Bob work together--don’t you
wonder what goes on in Bob’s mind when he’s
alone with you?” and Chris just turned red when
Bob’s roommate always closed the living room door
behind him with a smile and a quiet, “I know you
two want to be alone.” Whatever went on in his
roommate’s mind, Chris didn’t know and didn’t care
to pursue.

The last two days before their report due
date--Good Friday, as Bob had dubbed it--were
spent in a feverish rush. Chris, who was operating
on adrenaline and caffeine, thought of nothing but
the report. Bob even stopped joking around, totally
immersed in the work. The night before the report
was due, they worked on revisions until 2 a.m.

The next day, with sighs of relief and pride, Chris
and Bob gave the thick, freshly-copied report to
their supervisor. The report (“looks good,” Mr.
Resnick had said) marked the end of their work at
Miller’s, and Chris felt a bit sad that she and Bob
wouldn't be working together anymore. During the
office party held in honor of the interns, Chris
expressed her sadness to one of the other interns
who had asked about the report.

“I don’t think such a project is possible without
total cooperation between the two interns. In our
case, Bob and I worked well together, fortunately,
and we think we did a good job. In fact, I'll miss
working with him,”

Gayle, the only other female intern, gave Chris a
long look and said, “I bet you will.”

While talking to the other interns, Chris sensed
that they knew something about her, something she
herself did not know. She didn’t understand why
she felt so conspicuous and foreign. Since she
hadn’t seen the interns--even briefly--since her first
week at Miller's, she wanted to know what they had
been doing and if they had enjoyed their work. But
they wouldn’t talk about themselves; the conversa-
tion completely centered around Chris. She was
confused with all the attention from the male
interns, who stood so close in front of her. Bob was
hanging around in the back of the room with what
looked like a blush on his cheeks. Although

everyone talked about her work, no one asked about
Bob. They hoped so, since Bob had so enjoyed working with Chris. Why,
Bob had told them all about how he had enjoyed
working with her...but you really shouldn’t have
been so cruel, Chris...taking so long. When Chris
asked them what they were talking about, they
smiled and said, winking to each other, “Old Bob is
right, she is a cool one.”

Flushed, disconcerted and embarrassed from the
veiled remarks that had been made to her, Chris
could hardly wait until the party was over. She
knew who could clarify the mystery. Bob. But where
was he?

She found him upstairs, in their Miller office.

“Bob, you heard them downstairs. What were
they talking about?” she asked him, her voice tight
in her throat. She wasn’t mad, but she felt as if she
were talking to a stranger, and not to her buddy
Bob.

“What were they talking about?” Her chest was
heaving now, not from anger, but from the hurt
confusion that came from a feeling of betrayal.

Bob looked up at her. “It all started off as a joke.
When I first found out that I’d be working with you,
my friends started teasing me about working with
an ‘exotic Chinese girl.’ At first I just ignored
them. Then, when we had to start working all those
late nights, they wanted to know if I had
experienced any of your Chinese sex. But c’mon
Chris, don’t be upset. They were making fun of me,
and getting pretty nasty about it. So I said sure, but
you were kinda cold at first, but since you liked to
be called Suzy Wong...”

“I never said I liked to be called Suzy Wong!” she hissed.

“But you didn’t seem to mind whenever I called
you Suzy. You never told me to stop.”

“Yeah, so everyone’s supposed to talk when they
feel something's wrong, huh,” thought Chris. “So it's
all my fault. Just because of his feelings, his stupid
masculine pride.”

Chris walked out the door. Cathy had warned her
of sexism, all right. But not of racism.