* »: Taking Back The Night:

Feminism & Violence Against Women

by Alisa Klaus

On July 28, 1979, 2,000 women marched
throughout the streets of New Haven after dark to
“take back the night.” We joined women all over
this country, and in many other countries, in
proclaiming our determination to fight against
violence against women in all forms. For too long,
women have accepted what has become common-
place: “A woman doesn’t go out alone at night”—or
into a cemetery or public park at noon. We are not

even safe in our own homes, and many of us fear

violence from our fathers, brothers, husbands, and
lovers. Violence against women—incest, rape on the
street and in the home, and battering by husbands
and boyfriends—pervades our society. Our culture
condones such violence; we learn from our parents,
and from books, movies, and advertisements, that
women like to be raped, that wives deserve to be
“slapped around a little” by their husbands. Ending
violence against women involves not only changing
laws and prosecuting criminals, but altering
profoundly the consciousness of both men and
women.

According to admittedly conservative FBI esti-
mates that only one out of ten rapes is reported,

this means that, on the average, more than two
women are raped each day in this city alone. One
out of three women is sexually assaulted at some
point in her life. New Haven police receive about 80
reports of rape that they consider “non-bullshit” in
a year. A woman cannot escape rape by avoiding
“dangerous” places or strange men. Most rapes
occur in the woman’s home, and most are
committed by men personally known to their
victims.

The police, judges, and many others still
frequently blame women for inviting rape, or
suspect them of using accusations of rape as a
weapon against the accused. Our culture teaches us
that women like to be raped—or at least pushed
around a little. Movies and books abound with

virgins who are coerced into sex with heroes (i.e.
raped) and love it. (A woman who steadfastly
refuses a man’s advances is unsympathetically por-
trayed as a “frigid bitch.”) Thus, in rape trials, it
often appears that the victim rather than the rapist
is on trial. She must prove that she has been
raped—that she did not “ask for it,” by going to
dinner with a man, by letting him in her
dressing provocatively, or by living a “promiscu-
ous” life. Police are unlikely to believe a woman
who says she has been raped by a man she knows.
New Haven police classify as “bullshit” those cases
in which a woman has a fight with her boyfriend
and then decides to say he raped her. A taxi driver
in San Francisco was recently fired after she was
raped by a passenger. Her employer later agreed to
“give her a second chance,” adding that he was
just lucky the car wasn’t hurt.

Estimates are that as many as 55% of all married
women, and a large percentage of unmarried
women, are battered by their husbands or boy-
friends. Battered women live in constant fear, in
their own homes, of the very man who they depend
upon for economic support and physical protection.
They come from all ethnic and economic groups.
They are isolated and afraid to report their problem
to friends or to the police.

Society is just beginning to accept woman-batter-
ing as the serious problem that it is. Movies, books,
and advertisements depict a little violence as a
normal aspect of marital relationships, and some-
times as romantic. Men joke that women need
slapping around. Movie heroes joke that all their
heroine needs is a husband who will “belt her one
every day whether she deserves it or not.” An ad
for unisex jumpsuits shows a conventionally attrac-
tive couple on their honeymoon—the woman is
reeling from a blow her identically dressed husband
just dealt her.

The “authorities” still commonly accept “domes-
tic violence” or “family fights” (euphemisms for
woman-battering) as routine and minor. When
called into a home, police are likely to tell the
batterer to take a walk around the block to calm
down. Last year, an Ohio judge ruled that a woman
could sue her ex-husband for damages incurred
from his beating her—but only because they were
already divorced at the time of the suit. The primary
purpose of the court in such cases is to “preserve
marital harmony,” and in this case, it was clear that
the marriage was beyond salvation. It is not
surprising, then, that some men have confidence
enough in their ownership of their wives to hit them
on city streets. One such man, when told by two
women observers to stop beating a woman up, said,
“Shut up! She’s my wife.”

“Pornography is the theory,” writes Robin
Morgan, “and rape is the practice.” Pornography is
not just the portrayal of explicit sex; it is a culture
that closely associates sex with violence; it teaches

us that women enjoy pain, that rape is romantic,—

that beating women is sexy. A picture in a porno
magazine shows a male blue-collar worker with a
jackhammer in a woman’s vagina. “At last!” reads
the caption, “A sure cure for frigidity!” One article
gives explicit instructions on how to tie up a girl.
Girls—they can’t tell (no one will believe them). The
cover of “the last all-meat issue” of Hustler, a
magazine as widely circulated as Time and News-
week combined, depicts a woman being fed head
first into a meat grinder. Inside the magazine are
women’s bodies served up as chicken cacciatore and
on hamburger buns, tomato sauce and ketchup
covering them like blood. In the making of “Snuff”
films, women are actually tortured to death and
disemboweled.

All pornography is not violent, but more treats
the bodies of women solely as objects upon which
men may satisfy their sexual desire and let out their
aggression. We receive the same message from the
socially acceptable media as we do from porno-
graphy, on a different level. Women in vulnerable
positions, or women who have been assaulted, are
shown as sexy or romantic to attract buyers to the
products associated with the women’s images. A
record cover depicts what appears to be the victim
of a rape, lying in dead leaves with her head thrown
back; another shows a woman's buttocks stamped
USDA Grade A. The ad for the film “Bloodline”
shows a woman with her head tilted back, her
throat bared, a red ribbon around her neck. The
caption reads, “The line between love and death is
the Bloodline.” In a TV commercial for a lipstick
which has been whipped (why?) a husky (“sexy”)
woman’s voice purrs, “It’s whipped, it’s whipped, ..
I like it so much, I call it my whipstick.”

At a feminist conference on pornography in New
York this fall, women spoke about the relationship
between pornography and the violence done to them
personally. Incest victims spoke about how their
fathers or brothers had used pornography in their
sexual abuse, as material to convince the girls that
this is what grown-up or other girls do; or as
instruction manuals. Letters were read from women
who were disturbed by their husbands’ use of
pornography, and what this indicated about how
these men thought of all women, including their
wives and daughters.

Some studies claim to show that pornography
does not incite men to commit violence against
women, but rather provides an outlet for their
sexual aggression. Even if this were so, just the fact
that many men find a jackhammer in a woman’s
vagina sexy, or even mildly amusing, is evidence of
a deep and profoundly disturbing hatred of women.
Pornographic images have profoundly influenced the
attitudes of all of us, female and male, toward our
own sexuality. For those of us who thought women
had come a long way towards equality, the growth
of the multi-billion dollar pornography industry,
partly in reaction to feminism (“Liberation = Castra-
tion”), gives us a clearer idea of what lies behind
the oppression of women.

Feminists are fighting against violence against
women and changing attitudes. Rape crisis centers and shelters
for battered women all over the country deal with
women recipients of male violence. In New Haven,
the Rape Crisis Center (397-2273) provides support,
counseling, and practical advice for women who
have been raped. Rape crisis also gives educational
talks and leads discussions of rape for high school
women’s clubs and other groups. The New Haven

continued on page 11