~ for the:

By Harry Scott

In the four years or so since I came out as a gay
person, being gay has become so constitutive a part
of my life and perspective on the world, that I often
forget entirely that my perspective is radically
different from that of most people in this society
and, of course, at Yale. I no longer assume, for
example, that all men are heterosexual, and when
I’m eying a man who turns out to be with a woman,
I’m often even surprised. In talking to fellow
classmates about plans after Yale, I’m reminded
that most see in the not-too-distant future settling
down somewhere in a good job, with wife or
husband, and children; while marriage is no longer
even a part of my reality. And in spite of the fact
that I expect one day to settle down in one place or
another, I’m aware that my settling down will be far
less permanent than theirs: I can imagine “settling
down” in several cities, even countries before I
settle down for good.

Fortunately, I suppose, the reality of how other
nongays view gay people intrudes upon my illusions
of normalcy and (yes, even) integration vis-a-vis the
majority culture: An appreciative glance will meet
with hostility; an acquaintance that once greeted me
warmly suddenly becomes uncomfortable and be-
gins to distance her/himself (having learned of my
sexual proclivity); the night air will ring out with the
epithet faggot, reminding me of the hatred with
which gay people are often regarded, and the threat
of violence, encouraged by society, which is held
over gay people to remind us of our place.

Another such occasion for disillusionment was a
recent Yale Daily News article boldly entitled “Gay
at Yale: truths and consequences.” Just when I was
beginning to feel “normal,” fortunately, I got once
again a glimpse of how gay people are perceived in
general, and on Yale’s campus in particular. The
article was instructive less for what it said - it was
hopelessly garbled and without any apparent focus -
as for the way it said it, which was quite
enlightening.

Now, I’ve never been especially convinced by the
veneer of liberality that barely conceals Yale’s
; but again I was unprepared
to slip to the way I see myself, and
how the author of the article - and most Yalies I
suppose - view lesbians and gay men on campus.
Like most articles about gay people written by
people who don’t identify themselves as
the source or possible foundation for the trauma.
The implication is that it is part and parcel of being
gay, and has nothing at all to do with the sexist,
heterosexist environment we must live in. The
picture that emerges is of the maladjusted,
conflict-ridden gay person, and since we are not led
to see why these people are so traumatized, the
portrait is of a group of paranoics.

Nongays are notoriously incapable of seeing how
gay people, among other minorities, are in any way
oppressed. (We are often even seen as privileged:
rich, talented fashion designers. Lesbians are, of
course, ignored by this stereotype.) Since no one
need know that I’m gay, unless I tell them, my
oppression is my own fault, the not undeserved
reward for flaunting my deviation, of a perverse
ostentatiousness coupled with delusions of persecu-
tion.

My first reaction to the YDN article was that I
should write a response, revealing and discussing
the author’s implicit assumptions, and the many
distortions. I then decided that what was needed
was not an excoriation of the author, who could
hardly have been expected to report objectively on
being gay at Yale, but rather more from lesbians
and gay men themselves. “Truths and consequen-
ces” led me to think about my own years at Yale as
a gay man, about what it means to be gay at Yale.
It means first of all different things to different
people, so that one article about the experiences of
several hundred people seems impossible. I was
especially skeptical about my own ability to
undertake the task since in many ways I have spent
my years here divorced from much of what goes on
at Yale. I have never lived in my residential college,
and outside classes and certain cultural and
intellectual events, I have had little to do with Yale
since my freshman year. I can, however, talk about
my own experiences, and perhaps thereby discern
some generalities about “the gay experience” at
this university.

My own coming out, which coincided with my
going away to school, was in the first instance
intellectual and political. Long before I even
touched another man, I’d read over everything I
could find in the libraries and bookstores about
homosexuality. I could only fantasize about sex with
men, but the politics of gay liberation was
beginning to color my entire world view, to
re-orientate my life, goals, and expectations. My
decision was to come out irrevocably, so as to avoid
the possibility of ever crawling back into hiding, of
concealing my gayness for whatever reasons.

Gay At Yale

In the spring of my senior year in high school,
having seen it listed in the undergraduate bulletin, I
wrote to the Gay Alliance at Yale - in care of the
admissions office - and began to correspond with a
member. It was my first real introduction to the
Yale I was most interested in, and it was my main
reason for deciding to come here. On my freshman
housing form I stated a preference for living with
other gay men, not with the illusion that any beside
myself would have so declared themselves, but as a
political statement: if I was to be at Yale, it was to
be as an open gay. I’d no intention of concealing my
gayness, and the university would just have to get
used to having self-identified gay people among its
“diverse” student body. I was determined that my
college years not be a repetition of those in high
school, where belonging meant hiding my gayness
and was in fact no belonging at all. My fear of
rejection meant that, though not rejected, I was
never accepted for what I was. This time I
determined that I was going to be myself; those
who could deal with it, fine; those who couldn’t, to
hell with them.

My first year on the Old Campus was surprisingly
good, considering the difficulties that I might have
had living with straight men. My request for gay
roommates unfortunately could not be met, so Dean
Hortas decided (through a process of reasoning I
can only speculate on) to place me in a quad with
three Puerto Ricans (one of whom, with political
fervor similar to my own had refused to room with
anyone white). My first act upon arriving was to
display my books, including a large number on
homosexuality, feminism and gay politics, promi-
nently on the bookshelf in the living room - thus
disallowing myself the path of least resistance, of
presumed heterosexuality. Though in the first weeks
the topic was never raised, I later learned that my
possible homosexuality was the subject of an
emergency consultation among my roommates on
the very day of our arrival. Apparently no particular
line of action was decided upon, and the subject
was dropped until another six weeks or so. (I
suspect that they became too involved in their own
adaptation to Yale to devote much attention to my
sexual habits.) By that time we’d grown to know
and like one another, and though my gayness and
feminist leanings were perhaps only superficially
understood or thought about - I became the
- the aerate © ing
here.

My memory of those first weeks is now unclear,
probably because they were uneventful. But by
November I was sharing a tiny bedroom and a
growing friendship with a man who almost didn’t
come to Yale because there was a gay organization
on campus. I have always believed that people react
to you in much the same way you see you react to
yourself. The fact that I made no attempt to hide
my homosexuality, but insisted on acting on my
feelings and beliefs with the freedom and matter-of-
factness that nongay people take for granted, my
gayness did not, could not, become an issue. (In
fact, I became increasingly aware and annoyed by
the way it was ignored altogether, in true liberal
style, so that while I was not dumped on for being
gay, neither was my gayness treated as an integral
part of my being which I needed to be recognized
and appreciated. But more on this later.)

If my rooming situation was surprisingly good, it
was more than compensated for by the estrange-
ment I felt in the rest of my social life in that first
year. I’ve never been comfortable, or felt I belonged
at Yale. I remember vividly how, the first night on
campus, at a party in one of the entryways, I felt
utterly external to the entire scene. (White,
heterosexual and straight as it was.) By the second
night I had the good sense to locate Partner’s. And
I can proudly say that I have been to only one
college happy hour - the “Circus,” featuring women
shipped in from women’s colleges all over this coast
- thus satisfying any curiosity or interest I might
have had in such events. Meals, especially dinner,
became a daily ordeal; since I was so divorced from
the social life at the base of the ritual. I often chose
to just sleep through it, and go out for food later.
On an interpersonal level, my gayness and political
stance meant that relations with heterosexual men
were strained by their fear I might make a pass at
them; and both men and women often visibly didn’t
know quite how to handle my gayness. Their
discomfort was mutually oppressive, and I soon
preferred to invest myself in relationships with
nongays only with great caution, rather than endure
their kid-gloves, condescending approach to my
gayness. I’m not sure how much my own facade of
self-containment prevented my meeting people on
campus, but for my own sake I needed to protect
myself from the hurt that I knew could result from
such relationships. I remember a guy on my floor
whom I talked with a bit, initially because of some
similar tastes in music. One evening when we were
in my suite listening to music, he remarked on my
dancing and asked why I never came to any of the
entryway parties or happy hours. “Because I’m
gay,” I answered matter-of-factly, “and they’re
overwhelmingly heterosexual affairs.” He grew
about two shades paler than he already was,
managed to get out a few more lines, and finally
inched - unmolested this time! - out the door. The
visits became fewer and fewer, until I soon noticed
that he found it difficult to even speak to me. We
soon stopped speaking.

Yale’s social life is unabashedly and unreservedly
conservative. This fact was brought home to me by
the hostility several gay male friends met when they
began to dance together at a Stiles mixer two years
ago. The message is that being gay is okay, as long
as it remains hidden, doesn’t intrude upon
heterosexual assumptions and institutions or,
heaven forbid, present itself as a healthy expression
of sexuality, and an alternative way of relating to
people that is not based on rigid role divisions,
sexual or other. When I came to this place I realized
that a total integration into the life here was
impossible - whatever my decision about my
gayness - essentially because of my race and class
background. Only later did I come to an understand-
ing of the radical impossibility of that integration -
into a white, male-dominated institution run for the
sons of those white men - and this largely a result
of my thinking about being gay and about feminism.
My own lower middle-class background of integrat-
ed schools, of being the token par excellence, had
made a believer out of me: in the power of hard
work, equality of opportunity, the progressive
liberalization of this society, etc., etc. Only the
harsh reality of being gay, now and then, could
awake me from my own “dogmatic slumber,”
because if nigger jokes are unacceptable around
Yale’s dinner tables, faggot jokes have amply filled
the void. And when there are no niggers around,
who knows? If the admission of 300 Blacks - out of
5,000 students - is enough to perpetrate the lie of
equal access and diversity - at least among those of
us lucky enough to number among the 300 - it is
still difficult to imagine a Yale overrun by dykes and
faggots. However would they house us? Would
bladderball be replaced by an annual costume ball
on the old campus? THE GAME by noncompetitive
volleyball?

Whether we like it or not, the existence of racial
and sexual minorities at Yale can only be
oppositional. We can never be Yalies, cannot afford
to be about trying to become Yalies, but
the recognition of the outsider status of all four of us at
this university, me because I’m Black and gay, they
because they’re Puerto Rican. We needed to support one
another. And as the true nature of my relation to
Yale became clear to me, so did the limits of my
relation to my roommates and, as a Black, to other
minorities on campus. Our mutual exclusion from
Yale doesn’t necessarily mean an understanding of
the various forms of that exclusion. Most often
minority communities at Yale do not understand and
can’t offer support to sexual minorities within those
communities; My experience here, and probably
that of most lesbians and gay men, has been that I
had to create my own community, in rejection of the
artificial divisions made by people in this
society and reinforced at places like Yale. My
presence at Yale is a quirk, a mere flirtation with
the power structure that this university represents;
and it can annul my membership as easily as it was
proffered. I am Black, and a Black gay for life. The
realization of that fact has meant that my college
experiences have not been nearly as circumscribed
as is meant to be the case. The need to understand
my own oppression, in relation to other forms of
oppression, and the need to fight that oppression
has given me an organizing perspective for my
coursework, and a constant interaction with left-
thinking people that has challenged me to grow
constantly. It’s this that has made my Yale
experience, and the main reason I’m glad to have
come here.