Anti-Abortion Terrorism

by Liz Marshall

This past February, the first warm
breezes over Columbus, Ohio revealed
a shocking surprise for the employees
and patients of the Founder's Clinic.
Discovered beneath the melting snow-
drifts about the clinic was an unexplod-

ed pipe bomb. 
The Founder's Clinic, which provides
abortion services, was inestimably

lucky. The pipe bomb had been planted
at some undetermined time during the
winter months, and had failed to
detonate. The clinic staff was un-
doubtedly traumatized to confront the
imminent danger under which they had
carried on their daily lives.

Such is the kind of uneasiness that
abortion providers across the country
have had to contend with. Although
not every clinic has come as close to
total destruction as the Founder's
Clinic did, the soaring numbers of
bombings, arsons, and other types of
clinic violence and harassment in the
past year have forced abortion pro-
viders everywhere to defend
themselves against the constant threat.
Many abortion facilities have hired
security guards, built limited-access en-
tryways, updated procedures for
evacuation, or even relocated. One
counseling director of a Stamford, Ct.
clinic that received bomb threats told
the Bridgeport Telegram, “It’s frighten-
ing. We have social workers and nurses
who have devoted their careers to help-
ing people. Now they have to start fear-
ing for their lives.”

This fear is certainly justified. In
1984, no less than 24 abortion facilities
were partially or totally destroyed by
arson or bombs—an appalling jump
from two such incidents in 1983, three
in 1982, and zero in 1981. In 1985 there
have been three more anti-abortion
bombings, including a gasoline fire that
raged throughout the Women’s Clinic
of Mesquite, Texas, destroying the
clinic and parts of the shopping mall in
which it was housed, injuring two
firefighters, and causing $1.5 million in
damages.

Violence has escalated in other
forms as well. The National Abortion
Federation reports that by November,

HAPPY HOUR

Monday - Friday
Before 9:00 a.m. After 7:00 p.m.
All Day Saturday & Sunday

1984, 131 anti-abortion acts, such as
bomb threats, assault and battery, inva-
sions, and vandalism, had already been
reported that year. This figure is nearly
triple the figure for all of 1983 and fif-
teen times greater than the statistics for
1981. Patients’ rights have also been
violated by such forms of harassment
as physical and verbal intimidation,
blocking of entryways, banging on
clinic windows, and videotaping of
their entrances and exits from the
facilities. Nor is the harassment con-
fined to the workplace. Employees at
some abortion facilities have received
threatening off-hour phone calls; others
have had their houses picketed. One
director went home to find that an anti-
abortionist had decapitated her cat.

New Haven has not been immune
from this disturbing rise in clinic harass-
ment. Both Planned Parenthood and
Women’s Health Services have re-
ceived bomb threats and threatening
phone calls, and been repeatedly
plagued by acts of vandalism. Verbal
abuse from picketers at WHS has
necessitated that each patient arriving
for an abortion be escorted by a staff
member into the building.

There seems to be no simple ex-
planation for this recent escalation of
anti-abortion attacks. Inevitably it is
linked to the rise of the new right, in-
cluding the “Moral Majority” and
“Right-to-Life” movements. Although
these organizations have adamantly
denied any involvement with the
bombings and arson, and there is no
proof indicating otherwise, the anti-
abortion arguments espoused both by
these groups and by the criminal ar-

sonists are similar. By blurring the

distinction between fetus and baby,
and between a woman’s right to have
children and her obligation to do so,
anti-abortionists feel justified in under-
mining a woman's control over her
body. There can be no denying the dif-
ferences between the violent tactics
employed by the extremists and the
more subtle approach of political and
public indoctrination used by the of-
ficial right-to-life movement. Still, both
groups seek the same goal and utilize
similar arguments to rationalize it.

It is insufficient, however, to blame
the trend in clinic violence on these

Kinko's
THE CAMPUS COPY SHOP.

17 Broadway (upstairs) New Haven

777-1777

anti-abortion groups without also ex-
amining the reaction of the rest of the
American public, a public that has con-
sistently supported the right to legal
abortion since it was first legalized
twelve years ago. With such solid pro-
choice support reflected in our na-
tional polls, it would appear that a ra-
tional public would have little tol-
erance for the fanatical activities of the
anti-abortion movement.

Yet one of the most disturbing
aspects of this increase in clinic
violence has been the lack of response
from the public and the government
that purports to represent it. President
Reagan’s reaction against clinic
violence has been predictably—and
depressingly—feeble. It was not until
January 8, 1985, following four clinic
bombings within the preceding two
weeks, that he publicly denounced
such attacks as “violent, anarchist ac-
tivities.” What Reagan did not explain
was why it took 30 bombings—all oc-
curring during his administration—for
him to reach this momentous conclu-
sion.

Federal investigations into the bomb-
ings have been equally frustrating. FBI
Director William Webster dismissed his
agency’s responsibility to investigate
the bombings because they did not of-
ficially qualify as acts of terrorism; that
is, they were neither attacks on the
government nor set off by a definable
group. It was later revealed that these
qualifications for terrorism sprang sole-
ly from Webster’s head, and that ter-
rorism was, according to FBI Assistant
Director William Baker, something that
the FBI relied on its “experience” to
define. Because the FBI has refused to
define these violent acts as terrorism,
the bombings are considered lower
priority crimes and are not officially
under FBI jurisdiction. Investigations
are consequently being handled by the
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and
Firearms, where money and resources
available for crime research are con-
siderably less.

The federal government's role in in-
vestigating acts of clinic violence other
than bombing has also been limited. In
a further attempt to justify his agency’s
non-involvement, Webster recently
issued a statement maintaining that

civil rights laws are not broken when a
woman is illegally harassed, even if
such harassment interferes with her
constitutional right to abortion. Ap-
parently, Webster was not fazed that
this statement contradicts a federal
statute forbidding any interference
with the exercise of a constitutional
right. This disheartening series of events
makes it obvious that the director of
the FBI, along with other top federal of-
ficials, are trying to downplay the
seriousness of clinic violence and
harassment.

While many Americans are disturbed
by the recent escalation in anti-
abortion acts, there has also been an
unsettling lack of public reaction.
Coupled with this apathy has been a
growing ambivalence toward abortion
itself. Even within enlightened circles,
abortion has become the pariah of
liberal causes. Unfortunately, anti-
abortion propaganda has contributed
to this uneasiness. We have become
bombarded with revolting images of
bloody fetuses, we have been told that
abortion is tantamount to killing
babies, we have been misled concern-
ing the emotional and physical
responses of fetuses. On a more sub-
conscious level, many still find it unac-
ceptable that a woman might actually
choose to reject or postpone
motherhood.

As a result of these biases, discussion
on abortion focuses increasingly upon
the intangible needs of fetuses instead
of the tangible rights of women.
Although this has not yet caused most
people to alter their sanctioning of
legal abortion, they have grown less
adamant in their support. The rise in
clinic violence has perhaps only rein-
forced the opinion that abortion is a
murky, unsavory issue.

It is incredible that we often fail to

see these attacks against abortion
facilities for what they are: attacks on
the freedom of women. Over a decade
after women won the right to better
control their bodies and their lives, it is
shocking that, once again, women’s
rights are being so violently threatened.
The fight against anti-abortion ter-
rorism, and against society's indif-
ference toward it, is one battle that we
can no longer afford to neglect.