~ The Lesbian Body:

Lisa Clark

When I finished The Lesbian Body, I felt at once distressed, disoriented, speechless, thoughtful, dreamy, elated. I tried to register this blend of responses to the text in mental categories of judgment; good-bad, distinct-muddled, rational-irrational, but I could not make them fit. Like coming home from a trip with suntan stripes, dirty laundry, pebbles from the beach, napkins covered with names and addresses, a diary, photographs, assorted clippings, memories of overheard conversations and of remarkable vistas—I felt compelled to organize my impressions, but I lacked an appropriate method.

The Lesbian Body, like much contemporary French feminist writing, is a text that aims to engage the reader in a woman-centered experience. It offers new modes of reading, writing and thinking that reflect the ‘female’ disposition; relational, open and fluid (as opposed to the male orientation; logical and objective). This disposition informs the book’s stylistic characteristics, the choices of loose punctuation and syntax, of large spaces between the paragraphs, of varying metrical rhythms which skillfully connect the paragraphs as if they represented different voices in a dialogue or song. Accordingly, the content of the book focuses on women. It depicts the intellectual, emotional and physical relationship between two women, named I and you, who live on an imaginary island of women. The reader, presumably female, is forced into the text by the appellations I or you, and through them, journeys to the island.

By the end of The Lesbian Body, I was lost among the crowd of women characters, of goddesses they worshipped, of I and you, all of whom were never completely separated or defined. By far the most problematic character was the omnipresent I, who by her illustration by Fido assumed to represent my singular perspective. Though I is written differently from the conventional I, I felt confused. How was I to define or separate myself? Falling back on my instincts, I considered what felt right, to choose the theme which fascinated me most and follow its path through the text. I chose the theme of mythology and organized my impressions of that theme onto paper. But as I wrote, I decided to make an additional exploration of the text, the attempt to imitate its fragmented, dialogical style, in order to test the possibilities for a unique yet comprehensible women’s writing.

Women possess their own, natural language which describes female truth. This idiom is more than just words; it is song, it is dance, it is physical touch. Conventional language, a male creation, is sustained by male domination in the world and by the authority of ancient mythologies, particularly the Judeo-Christian, that confirm ‘the Word as Truth.’ To replace this man-made construction, women must give birth to a new, female mythology which synthesizes the old sources with our own inventions that conform to our reality.

The Lesbian Body illustrates the birth of a new women’s language with two distinct movements—one like a whirling eddy and the other like an arrow which ascends and then falls—that recur simultaneously throughout the tale. The dynamic eddy reproduces the form of women’s communication. The trajectory of the flying arrow imitates women’s transcendence of the old language.

The Judeo-Christian myth recounts how God passed down to Adam the power to use words to describe reality. Adam proceeded to name all the other living beings, including the animals and the woman. Through language he gave their existence meaning, and, in a sense, brought them to life. Soon after, Adam fell from grace and lost his immortality because, as the myth says, the woman Eve sinned. Centuries later, Jesus died and was risen to be the first man to be restored to the state of grace. Jesus’ self-sacrifice reestablished men’s connection with God, and reaffirmed men’s authority to bestow life with language. This myth of the foundation of male-defined language describes male, not female, reality. All women were condemned to be subordinate to men, and to use their language. For you and I to fashion a new female-defined language, we must redo the myth of Jesus in our terms, for as Jesus gave life back to men, we need a ‘Jesus’ to give us life through our own language. We do not want to change the Eve myth because Eve’s error, rendering humankind able to see itself as it truly is in its nakedness, is not a sin for us who worship the body.

‘I’ and ‘you’ are the main actresses in this revolutionary drama. Often in our sexual frolicking, we convey the impression that we are separate—two swans, two horses, or two personalities at war with each other. Yes, you and I are two distinct bodies, you my lover, but through touch we transcend separation; “I am you and you are me irreversibly,” I tell you. I call me me to signify that I am not contained alone: I am split: I am with our goddesses, and with all women who know us by reading us. Together, we descend to the dark, hidden place that is like the inside of your vagina or my vagina. That place is the origination of female truth.

Often I invoke a goddess, “my incomparable Sappho,” or some other to aid me in my amorous pursuit of you, for goddesses are omnipotent. I am not the first to call upon a goddess, for the poetess Sappho herself, in her longest poem, beseeched Aphrodite, the goddess of love and of the sea, to help her capture the love of a young girl she fancied. Sappho’s entreaty asked the goddess to come into her and empower her with the ability to win the girl. At the same time, Sappho’s prayer to Aphrodite, “Even so! End this tossing and turning! All that I’m mad to have you know so well!” is also a plea to the young nymph to recognize Sappho. Goddesses are only useful to us when they reify in us. Hence, in our story, they are part of us, as Aphrodite was with Sappho, and we are part of them. You and I and our goddess(es) constitute a trinity, in which we speak to each other as if in a circle. In this passage, ‘her’, the personification of the flow of communication between us, indicates our fundamental unity.

I watch her struggling in your arms, I hear her calling for my help, I roll against her to try to grasp her arms, her shoulder or her legs. Finally she bursts out laughing, her muscles relax, she asks for her bandage to be removed so she may see where she is. You my incomparable one, you kiss her cheeks and mouth.

Her is thrown between us rapidly. First she struggles in your arms, then I grasp her arms, but it is as if you and I were actually embracing. Her calls your help in the same way I invoke Sappho. “You my incomparable one,” you who are “my incomparable Sappho” elsewhere, respond to her with kisses. This is how we relate to our goddess. Between the three of us, our spiraling energy is limitless, like an eddy.

Our little family includes all the women on the islands of women which we inhabit, the “green Cytheras,” where Aphrodite arose from the sea, and “the dark gilded Lesbos,” where Sappho lived in the sixth century before Christ.

cont. on p.27