Why

Yale Wanted Women:  
The Way It Was In 1968

Copyright Bob Lamm 1979. All rights reserved.

Bob Lamm is a free-lance writer and teacher who  
lives in New York City. He is presently on the  
English faculty of Elisabeth Irwin High School and  
is offering a seminar in Ezra Stiles College on  
“Men, Masculinity, and Sexism.”

By Bob Lamm

Any article about the history of women at Yale  
must begin with the glaring fact that Yale  
University would not admit undergraduate women  
students for 268 years. This bitter truth seems  
perpetually obscured in the glib statements issued  
by University officials about Yale’s treatment of  
women. Yet this world-famous, supposedly en-  
lightened university had at its core a deep prejudice  
against more than half of humankind. The vision  
which sustained Yale for almost three centuries was  
an unjust, arrogant vision which did not consider  
women as worthy of a quality education. The “light  
and truth” that Yale claimed to value was for men  
only.

Given that Yale chose to exclude women for 268  
years, the question then arises: why did Yale  
reverse its discriminatory policies? Why did Yale  
elect to admit women as undergraduate students  
beginning in September, 1969? Was there some  
basic transformation in the Yale community’s sense  
of justice that prompted Yale men to see that they  
were violating the rights of women? Or did the men  
of Yale open these “hallowed halls” to women  
because they believed that men had something to  
gain from the presence of women undergraduates?

I lived under a rock until late 1969, and  
experience about the climate at Yale during the  
battles for coeducation. I offer this testimony  
because I believe that the history of Yale’s decision  
to admit women is quite relevant to the continuing  
problems that women face at Yale ten years later.

First, it must be underscored that it was  
essentially men who determined that Yale would  
admit women. Women had no appreciable presence  
or power at Yale College in 1968. There were  
women on the scene - including faculty members,  
graduate students, and non-teaching staff; wives of  
male faculty and male students; undergraduate  
women from other colleges; and local New Haven  
feminists - who participated in the successful  
pressure campaign to force the admission of women  
at Yale. The efforts of these women have, to my  
knowledge, never been properly acknowledged. It is  
my hope that some individual concerned with the  
history of Yale will identify, interview, and chronicle  
these women who helped make it possible for  
generations of other women to attend Yale.

Still, it must be stated that the University’s policy  
was changed primarily because men changed the  
policy. Yale University did not admit women due to  
a massive feminist initiative to transform Yale into a  
non-patriarchal institution. Yale admitted women  
because many men at Yale determined that it was  
in their interests to admit women.

Of course, a significant number of men associated  
with Yale in 1968 - including administrators, faculty,  
students, and alumni - were quite comfortable with  
Yale as an all-male bastion. There was powerful  
opposition to the admission of women, stemming  
rather directly from a generalized contempt for  
women that defined the Yale of the late 1960s.  
Yale’s mission, according to then-President King-  
man Brewster, was to produce 1000 male leaders  
per year for society. Woman’s role was to be the  
date, the ornament, the sexual partner, and  
eventually the loyal, obedient wife of the rising  
male leader. At the time that I was a Yale  
undergraduate, Yale men commonly referred to  
women as “cheese.” A woman was “a piece of  
cheese.”

Thus, some men were quite content with Yale’s  
268-year tradition of excluding undergraduate  
women. A key concern of opponents of coeducation  
was that if a male student were to have a sexual  
encounter with a female student, he might have to  
face her the next morning in the dining hall. Many  
Yale men found that thought intolerable. For them,  
it was preferable to ship the women off on buses to  
Poughkeepsie or Northampton or wherever and not  
face the emotional consequences of one’s sexual  
acts.

Faculty attitudes toward women students were  
also far from enlightened. During Yale’s “Coed  
Week” in 1968 - a week in which hundreds of  
women students, primarily from Seven Sisters  
schools, lived at Yale and attended classes as  
guests and public commentators of various faculty,  
Yale in the late 1960s was not a welcoming place. I can recall personal comments about coeducation. Quite striking in retrospect was  
a comment from an English professor, A. Bartlett  
Giamatti. In discussing an English class he ran  
during Coed Week, Giamatti noted: “Girls were  
reluctant at first, but towards the end of the  
discussion, one girl ventured a comment. She was  
shrewd and very bright. I could see that after  
getting into a routine of Yale classes, she might be  
like that all the time.” (1)

Despite these disturbing attitudes toward women,  
Yale chose to admit 576 women as undergraduate  
students in the fall of 1969. For the men who ran  
Yale - Kingman Brewster and the Yale Corporation -  
the incentives were economic. The handwriting  
was already on the wall for private education; it was  
clear that institutions like Yale would face dra-  
matically rising costs and more strenuous competi-  
tion for potential students. Yale was already losing  
desirable male candidates to other institutions  
because it was not coeducational. If, on the other  
hand, the University were to admit women, it could  
immediately draw on a vast and untapped popula-  
tion of potential students who could afford to go to  
Yale (including alumni daughters). Thus, when the  
Corporation approved the admission of women to  
Yale College, it was simply making a business  
decision.

Male students had a somewhat different agenda  
in crusading actively (as many did) for coeducation.  
But, again, the key issue was hardly the rights of  
women. Mark Zanger, the “radical” columnist of  
the Yale Daily News in the late 1960s, wrote in  
October, 1968: “Down here in the colleges,  
psycho-sexual repression (horniness) is not a  
possible issue for reform. The all-male university  
should never have happened, and it should be  
integrated immediately.” (2) This was perhaps the  
most revealing statement written by a male student  
during the debates on coeducation. For Zanger, for  
many Yale men, the issue was “horniness.” The  
remedy, presumably, was to import available  
women of suitable class background who would  
service the sexual needs of male undergraduates.  
As Charlotte Kirk, a Vassar student, observed in  
the Yale Daily News at that time: “So far all  
discussion has centered on bringing women to New  
Haven (quickly!) as a lifeline to malcontent Yalies.” (3)

There were occasional attempts by male students  
and faculty to question in some moral sense the  
right of the University to favor or discriminate  
against applicants based on their sex. However, the  
underlying motives of male students in fighting for  
coeducation were sexual. This became clear on a  
historic evening in the Trumbull College Dining Hall  
late in 1968.

On November 14, 1968, Kingman Brewster held  
an open meeting with hundreds of Yale students  
and faculty in Trumbull to discuss the admission of  
women to Yale. The meeting took place in an  
atmosphere of increasing activism on the issue of  
coeducation. Brewster had been given a petition  
signed by 1700 students which called for:

1. the admission of men and women in approximate-  
ly equal numbers to each incoming Yale class,  
beginning with the class of 1973

2. the admission of 500 women to the classes of  
1970, 1971, and 1972 as a transitional measure

3. active recruitment of female faculty, with equal  
opportunity for advancement

4. the integration of all University facilities,  
including housing, beginning in fall, 1969

There had also been rallies in support of  
coeducation at Kingman Brewster’s house and on  
the Cross-campus lawn.

At the meeting in Trumbull, Brewster announced  
for the first time that Yale would admit female  
students, beginning in the fall of 1969. He intended  
to admit 250 women as transfer students to the  
classes of 1971 and 1972, and 250 women as  
first-year students in the class of 1973. The transfer  
women would be housed off-campus according to  
Brewster’s plan, while the first-year women would  
all be housed in Trumbull. For the academic year  
1969-1970, Trumbull College would become a  
“women’s residence.” All male students in the college  
would be moved elsewhere.

The reaction of male students to Brewster’s  
proposals was hostile and explosive, particularly  
as reported by the Yale Daily News: “the meeting was filled with  
frequent catcalls, Bronx cheers, jeering, and  
profanity mixed with loud and disrespectful laugh-  
ter.” (4)

Male students were bitter about Brewster's  
housing proposals. The leader of the Yale Coeduca-  
tion Committee stated that this plan was unfair to  
both freshman and transfer women who wanted  
integrated housing. Most speakers supported the  
inclusion of women students in all of the residential  
colleges. A key student leader later stated in the  
Yale Daily News that “spreading the transfers  
among all twelve colleges is the only logical way to  
do it.” (5)

Behind the “logic” and anger of the male  
students was the understanding that each college -  
each group of men - should get “its own” group of  
women. It was a classic “division of the spoils”  
mentality. When the possibility was raised that  
women could be housed in two or three of the  
colleges, rather than simply at Trumbull, many  
male students became quite agitated. It wasn’t fair,  
in their view, to allow some men to live in colleges  
with women students while others could not. The  
central ethical and political issue, as defined by the  
male students, was the right of each man to easy  
and equal access to women students.

I have virtually no memory of any speakers at the  
meeting focusing on how women might feel about  
various housing arrangements (other than to invoke  
women’s unstated preferences when it suited their  
own proposals). The Yale Daily News reported that  
an unnamed Vassar student spoke at the meeting  
and stated that the incoming women students would  
want to live together for at least one year. She  
accused everyone at the meeting of being selfish.

Later, even the Yale Daily News was forced to  
acknowledge the disturbing pattern that was  
emerging. In an editorial on November 20, 1968, the  
News declared: “Throughout the current debate  
among students on living arrangements, the  
attitudes and needs of women students have been  
overlooked. Many undergraduates have been shout-  
ing in the dark while desperately hoping that their  
own college will receive its fair ‘share’ of women.” (6)

Eventually, after enormous student pressure,  
Brewster agreed to a compromise. The incoming  
first-year women would all be housed together on  
the Old Campus. The incoming transfer women  
would be distributed among all twelve residential  
colleges. Trumbull would not be converted into a  
women’s residence hall. Significantly, Yale’s first  
women students were never given any voice in  
these decisions, which were to gravely affect the  
first years of women at Yale.