“Women’s Athletics At Yale:  
The Situation  

by E. Marsh  

Women’s athletics at Yale is a complex issue  
made increasingly controversial because of several  
factors: an athletic administration with no clearly  
defined policy to ensure the progress of women’s  
athletics; a majority of older male alumni who  
support men’s athletic teams but because of  
adherence to tradition and/or sexism refuse to do  
likewise for women’s teams; a coaching staff that in  
most cases justifiably does not want to risk  
challenging the policies of the athletics administra-  
tion during this time of budget cutbacks; and  
factions of women student/athletes who are largely  
unaware of the issues threatening the progress of  
women’s athletics at Yale.  

After ten years of coeducation on the under-  
graduate level at Yale, women’s intercollegiate  
athletics has increased from two club-status teams  
(tennis and field hockey) in 1970, to sixteen varsity  

level sports. This increase in women’s athletic opportunities has been primarily due to the efforts of  
women undergraduates and the impact of legislation  
such as Title IX, rather than through efforts on the  
part of the Yale athletics administration or the  
majority of older male alumni.  

Yale and Princeton both began to admit women  

as undergraduates in 1969. Princeton offered their  

incoming women students several established var-  
sity teams. However, according to then Director of  

Women’s Activities Mrs. Joni Barnett, the Yale  

athletic department’s policy was “to create inter-  

collegiate sports teams when students showed  
sufficient interest and participants for competitive  
athletics.” Thus every women’s varsity team at Yale  
has had to prove its student support before being  
accorded varsity status and its added benefits.  

A winning record is an asset for an athletic team  
that wishes to request additional benefits such as a  
full-time rather than part-time coach, and/or  
improved facilities and equipment. Therefore, it is  
useful to compare the effects of the separate  
policies of Princeton and Yale on the competitive  
records of their respective women’s teams.  

During the first few years of competition,  
Princeton’s women’s teams, with their better  
organization and funding, beat Yale’s women’s  
teams consistently. Then, as Yale’s women’s teams  
became better established by attaining similar  

varsity status, Yale began a period of beating  

Princeton as well as other opponents. However, the  
1979 Annual Report on Athletics at Yale, published  
by the Sports Information Office, states that now  
the overall winning percentages of Yale’s women’s  
teams have dropped for the third year in a row.  

Athletics Frank Ryan acknowledged in a December  
1979 meeting with women athletes, that Princeton is  
able to attract a greater number of highly talented  
women athletes than Yale. Better athletic facilities  
may be one reason; the Princeton athletic adminis-  
tration’s past record of self-initiated dedication to  
the progress of women’s athletics may be another.  

Yale’s athletics administration underwent a  
$210,000 reduction in the 1979-80 athletics budget.  
Director of Athletics Ryan has had to adapt his  
administrative decisions accordingly. Mr. Ryan has  
been very willing to meet with women student/  
athletes in order to discuss his administrative  
decisions and to listen to the student/athletes’  
opinions. However, he has not volunteered informa-  
tion concerning the allocation of the athletics  
budget, or the athletics administration’s plans for  
the future of various women’s athletic teams.  

On October 27, 1979, Mr. Ryan met with  
representatives of various women’s varsity athletics  
teams. Mr. Ryan defined progress in women’s  
athletics as the number of wins and losses compiled  
by a team: The team with a winning season merits  
added benefits including a full-time coach, or  
improved facilities and equipment.  

However, the captain of one women’s team then  
questioned Mr. Ryan as to why her coach would not  
be rehired after this season, although the team has  
an excellent past record and the coach is well-liked  
by the team. Instead, the coach of the men’s  
counterpart to this particular women’s team would  
take over coaching duties for both the men’s and  
women’s teams, although the men’s coach had  
declared to the captain of the women’s team that he  
wanted “nothing to do with coaching the women’s  
team.” Mr. Ryan responded that the consolidation  
of the men’s and women’s teams under one coach  
was necessary during this “transition stage” of  
budget cutbacks. Mr. Ryan added that he was  
“ticked off” that the women’s coach “took her  
problems to a public audience,” i.e. that she had  
informed her team that this was to be her final  
season as their coach.  

On December 11, 1979, Mr. Ryan met again with  
representatives from women’s varsity athletic  

teams. When questioned as to why men’s basket-  

ball, ice hockey and wrestling teams alone of all  
other winter-season varsity teams have the bene-  
ficial publicity of game schedule posters, Mr. Ryan  
replied that these three men’s teams generate  
enough revenue to pay for their posters; “we’ll  
spend money to make money.” Mr. Ryan acknowl-  
edged that the wrestling team is an exception, for it  
has not drawn large crowds in the past. However,  
Mr. Ryan felt “intuitively” that the wrestling team  
would draw larger crowds if given the necessary  
publicity. When asked why the same would not  
work for a sport such as women’s basketball or  
women’s gymnastics, Mr. Ryan replied that he had  
“little faith in the promotional poster creating an  
audience for a women’s sport.” However, the  
publicity around campus or prominently displayed  
season schedules with attention-getting photographs  
would advertise women’s athletics to a larger  
segment of the Yale community, as well as enhance  
the image of women’s athletics.  

Concerning charging admission to some women’s  
games, Mr. Ryan said, “There isn’t enough interest  
in women’s sports that ticket sales will even pay the  
cost of running the game.” However, the same type  
of audience attends men’s as women’s games:  
friends, roommates and relatives of the student/  
athlete, and this audience would probably be willing  
to pay a small admission fee. Charging admission  
would also help raise the status of the women’s  
sport: Paying for something implies that it is  
valuable.  

Mr. Ryan agreed to consider printing game  
schedule posters for the women’s basketball team.  
For this action, Mr. Ryan will probably draw fire  
from those men’s teams that do not have posters.  
This could happen also with women’s teams in a  
similar position, but women athletes as an  
organized group should not begrudge the benefits  
given to one women’s team. In the long run, this  
step forward for one women’s team will benefit all  
the others.  

Alumni support for athletics is the third largest  
source of sports funding at Yale, after general  
university appropriations, and revenues earned by  
the athletics department.  

According to Mr. Anthony M. Lavely, ‘64,  
Chicago AYA President, the majority of older Yale  
male alumni are not concerned whether or not  
Yale’s women’s teams beat Princeton or any other  
team. Choosing between rationality and  
emotions, most older male alumni disregard merit,  
and simply resent any progress of women’s athletics  
at Yale. They feel Title IX, implemented in 1972 to  
ensure equal opportunity education, including  
athletics, is unfair to men’s sports.  

These alumni who are interested in the progress  
of women’s athletics at Yale may have been  
misinformed by the statement of the AYA Chairman in  
the 1979 Report to Yale Alumni. The AYA  
Chairman implied that Yale’s current athletic record  
is improving. This statement is true regarding  
Yale’s men’s athletics teams, which during the past  
few years have had an increasing overall winning  
percentage. However, as aforementioned, the over-  
all winning percentage for Yale’s women’s teams  
has dropped for the third straight year.  

Mr. Lavely feels that a change in attitude of older  
male alumni who resent women’s athletics at Yale  
will happen only through a lapse of time—about ten  
years. However, this period can be shortened by a  
greater effort of Yale women student/athletes to  
communicate with Yale alumni, through publicity  
and promotion of women’s sports. This could be  
achieved through individual women athletes speak-  
ing at their hometown alumni clubs, and through  
the establishment of a newsletter or magazine  
profiling Yale women athletes and their teams.  

Another valuable means of direct communication  
with Yale alumni are the biannual “Assemblies”  
held in New Haven about which information can be  
obtained at the AYA House on York Street.  
Unfortunately, these Assemblies get little publicity  
on the Yale campus. Each residential college may  
send two undergraduates as “delegates,” but this  
measure also gets little publicity.  

From October 24-27, 1979, Assembly XV on  
“Women at Yale” convened in New Haven.  
Although alumni representatives from various  
regions of the country attended the subconference  
on “Women in Athletics,” there were no under-  
graduates to meet with them, aside from three Yale  
women athletes invited by the Assembly coordina-  
tors.  

Assembly XV on “Athletics at Yale,” will be held  
in New Haven, April 10-12, 1980, and a large  
turnout of 200-300 alumni is expected. Mr. Lavely is  
chairman of Assembly XVI. He stated in a  
November 12, 1979 phone call that women athletes  
and their coaches were being invited to participate  
on various panels during the Assembly. However,  
as of December 11, 1979, no woman athlete had  
received a notice of Assembly XVI. Brochures for  
Assembly XVI are to be printed in January 1980,  
but Mr. Lavely has stated that the Assembly  
program would be shaped before the end of 1979. It  
is probable that the Assembly coordinators will  
again fail to notify interested undergraduates about  
this opportunity to interact with alumni.  

Most coaches of women’s sports want respect-  
ability for their teams—which means emulation of  

revenue-drawing sports. It will be necessary for  
leaders of women’s athletics to maintain this policy  
of emulation. However, the different regulations for  
men’s and women’s athletics make emulation, on  
the part of women, to achieve equality and  
respectability with men a difficult matter. For  
example, the men’s NCAA code of “controlled  
professionalism” allows a greater extent of recruit-  
ing than does the women’s AIAW code of “informal  
amateurism.” With no top athletes there can be no  
winning season and thus no crowd attraction. As  
long as men’s and women’s athletics are under  
separate regulations there will be no equality of  
opportunity between them. It is unlikely that men’s  
teams will accept AIAW regulations; therefore both  
men and women should be regulated under  
modifications of the NCAA code.  

On the other hand, women’s athletics emulating  
men’s athletics may involve settling for women’s  
rights rather than women’s liberation, as Ms. Janice  
Kaplan points out in her book Women and Sports:  
women should try to avoid “slipping into roles that  
have already been defined by men in sports—roles  
that aren’t necessarily desirable (e.g., over-commer-  
cialization—which includes charging admission to  
games—and under-the-table dealings) but that give  
new status.” If women athletes choose to become  
more professionalized, as it seems they must to gain  
equality and respect, then it is more unlikely that  
there will be a return to the spirit of amateurism for  
any athletes.  

In conclusion, if my approach to the question of  
women’s athletics seems confused it is only because  
this issue at Yale is such. The athletic administra-  
tion’s policy concerning women’s teams seems  

erratic and without any sense of long-range purpose—  
we seem to be judged continually as in an interim  
stage of development. The crux of the matter seems  
to be the limited drawing power of these women’s  
sports, both in the form of alumni donations and  
admission to events. Yet little attempt has been  
made to change either of these. Alumni know little  
about the progress of the women’s teams of their  
alma mater, and even current Yale students have a  
difficult time finding out when and where women’s  
athletic events occur. A possible answer might be a  
newsletter, distributed both on campus and to  
alumni, that would give such information. In any  

case, it looks like much of the change in the  

progress of women’s athletics at Yale must come  
from the student/athletes themselves. More com-  

munication between women’s teams must occur,  
and possibly an association of women athletes could  
be formed. It is only if we work that our  
voice on women’s athletics will be heard.