Another Women’s Novel

by Alix Kates Shulman

(This piece is adapted from a speech to the
American Library Association on the topic of “The
Problems of the Woman Writer.”

After more than a decade of feminism, can there
be anything more to say on the problems of the
woman writer? This is a question I pondered as I
began to compose my speech.

Even before the movement began, much had
been said about it. Virginia Woolf analyzed it
brilliantly in 1929 in A Room of One’s Own, and
Simone de Beauvoir discussed it in The Second Sex
in 1949. Tillie Olsen wrote passionately about it in
her 1964 essay, “Silences,” now expanded into a
remarkable book. Adrienne Rich spoke painfully
about it in essays of the early 70s. And since then,
many fine books and essays have been written on
the subject in the last several years, inspired by
new feminist insights and criticism.

But no sooner did I think this thought—that it
must all have been said before—than I realized how
I myself had just unwittingly fallen into the very
trap that constitutes that latest problem, in a long
unbroken line of problems, facing women artists in
a world ruled by males.

The problem is this: the idea that there is nothing
more to say on the subject; that women’s
consciousness has been explored enough; the bored,
“Oh, that again, we've heard it all before...We’re
sick of it...Please go away...Not another woman’s
novel.” —As if woman’s poignant awareness of her
otherness were a trend in publishing, instead of a
condition of her history and experience. And there
was I, who in my new novel about feminism,
Burning Questions, had had my own heroine say,
“Those who'd denied us our rights in the old days
by saying we didn’t need them could now deny us
our rights by pretending we already had them”—I
was falling into the trap. The most dangerous
version is the one that says, “Yes, we agree with
you. Now go away.”

But the problem of the woman artist, like the
more general problem facing women in a male-
dominated, frequently misogynist, society, won’t go
away. No matter how many people would prefer to
see the subject closed, until this world is no longer
dominated by one of the two sexes, much more will

have to be said on the subject. And there will be

more “women’s novels.”

When I first began writing, there was a certain
sneer awaiting women writers—the nemesis of
every woman who has wanted to write: the sneer
was contained in the phrase, “Lady Writer”—a
phrase which, if applied to her, meant that her work
would not be taken seriously. This sneer has
prevented many women from writing at all and
caused many other women to write first-person
novels with male protagonists, or to try to be that
impossible thing, the exception.

It would probably have deterred me from writing
too, had it not been for the rise of feminism about
the time I started writing. Instead of fearing the
sneer, as I had in the fifties and early sixties, I tried
to understand it. And what I learned it meant was
this: that our deepest experiences, what we knew
well enough to write about, ordinary daily female
experience, was not considered worthy of serious
fiction, was deemed trivial, and was fit only for
what were contemptuously called “ladies’ maga-
zines.” It took years of painful analysis, it took a
whole Women’s Liberation Movement, and endless
pondering to overcome that sneer by understanding
it for what it was: misogyny; the denigration of the
experience of one sex by the other, dominant one. 
It took years of painful analysis, it took a
whole Women’s Liberation Movement, and endless
pondering to overcome that sneer by understanding
it for what it was: misogyny; the denigration of the
experience of one sex by the other, dominant one. It
prevented women from writing; or if they wrote,
from publishing; or if they published, from being
well received or taken seriously. The fact of
difference between men and women and their
experience in society was used, as it has been ever
since women began writing, to justify the discour-
agement, discounting, and even exclusion of women
writers.

But now, in 1979, having gone one full circle and
understood the basis of the difference, having
embraced the difference and analyzed it and created
a movement around that understanding, and used
our consciousness of it to attempt new art—now,
once again to be dismissed as a woman writer,
author of “women’s novels,” is a clear demonstra-
tion of the depth of that denigration. Now, some of
the experience women write about is different from
the experience women wrote about in the past; but
the slur is the same. “Woman artist,” a “woman’s
novel” is often said with the same contempt as
before there was a general acknowledgment of
society’s injustice to women. For though the
difference between men’s and women’s experience
is now widely acknowledged, the relative power of
men and women remains essentially unchanged.
The world has once again adjusted to this new
knowledge and gone on as usual. The slur in the
phrase “woman’s novel” or “women’s lib” is very

like the old slur “lady writer.” It contains the
same dismissal of women’s deeply felt experience.
Whereas before it meant trivial, now it means
boring, old hat.

What can that phrase “woman’s novel” even
mean? So far as I can tell, it means nothing more
than a novel written by a contemporary woman,
perhaps reflecting some consciousness of one or
another injustice done to women, perhaps in a
contemporary setting. Does anyone speak similarly
of the men’s novel? Do we hear the complaint that
men’s books are an industry? Or a trend? I doubt it.
I’m reminded of the old joke: “Oh no, I can’t give
her a book for her birthday. She already has a
book.”

The last word on the problems of the woman
writer has not been said. Or if it has, it needs to be
said again.

Here, I want first to make some remarks about
the function of art in general; then some
observations on some of the problems still or newly
facing women artists despite the rise of feminism;
and finally I want to speak a little about my own
work and its relation to feminism. I’m not going to
discuss the practical problems the woman artist
faces and always has faced—isolation, making a
living, raising a family essentially alone and trying
to write too—though they are still critical. Instead
I'm going to talk about the inner problems of
consciousness.

There is a peculiar assumption, a prejudice, in
our country that art is supposed to be somehow
“above” politics—pure in some sense. I think of
T.S. Eliot’s famous remark about Henry James:
“He had a mind so fine no idea could violate it.”
But like almost all fiction writers, James wrote
about the relations between people—social
relations, power relations, relations between the
sexes, which are, of course, political. Most if not all
fiction is certainly social; there is nothing pure
about it. James did not simply record events or
facts in his fiction; each work was an interpretation
of facts and events and experience. That is what art
of fiction mainly is—an interpretation of experience.
It is always committed, never neutral. Art is
subjective. There is always a mind at work, an
imagination ordering experience in order to show
something—even if only, “that’s the way life is.”
Frequently the writer tries to expose “what is” in
the interest of what “could be.” In another way, it is subversive of the established order. Art undermines the status quo; in the words
of Herbert Marcuse, art “indicts what is” by
creating an alternate way of experiencing reality.

Art is liberating in part because it liberates you
from the restrictions of your own experience and
vision, and puts you inside the consciousness of
another. At the same time, art recreates or
preserves consciousness even as it is disappearing
or threatening to disappear. Susan Sontag said,
“Artists are memory specialists, professional cura-
tors of consciousness.”

Toni Morrison, talking recently about her novel
Song of Solomon, said that what she tries to do in
her art is point to things she loves that are in
danger of being lost or are under attack. With
women’s art, as with art generally, the artist says:
This is my vision of the world. This is the feel of my
experience. Understand how it feels. See what it
means. At the same time, the artist says: What
has been accepted as the natural way, the
established way of feeling experience is not the only
way. In giving voice to an interpretation of
experience other than the received or officially
established one, in making intelligible what may
have been only vaguely sensed before, in making
visible what has been unseen before, in projecting a
new vision into the world, art is subversive of the
established order. No wonder the establishment is
suspicious of art, since it looks back or ahead to the
possibility of a different reality, a different way of
being and seeing.

Novelists start with a particular viewpoint toward
life: a vision, a passion, an obsession or interpreta-
tion that they feel compelled to put down on paper.
Fiction is an expression of vision, an organization of
insight and feeling that has its source in the artist’s
deeply felt experience. Now, since women’s experi-
ence in society is in many ways different from
men’s experience—and from this experience
springs women’s consciousness and art—it is to be
expected that women may project different visions
of the world than men. In relation to men, women’s
experience is that of the underdog. But unfortu-
nately, this fact of difference, which makes the work
so valuable, has been used to denigrate women’s
experience and the art that springs from it in a
society ruled by men and in a literary establishment
that is male-dominated.

The short story writer Grace Paley said, “I think
art, fiction, poetry, whatever it is, makes justice in
the world. That's why it almost always has to be on
the side of the underdog...You see it all in the
Russian writers. They bring this guy, this person,
this woman, this man, out of some shadows some
place and they shine a light on him—this is a
person, too.” continued on page 39