Baling Sat atebadine esa

On _ Ladies

by Amy Klobuchar

Mrs. Jean Harris is a lady. She grew
up in the fashionable Cleveland suburb
of Shaker Heights and was educated at
the Laurel School. In 1945 she
graduated magna cum laude from
Smith College. She married and had
two children: David, who became a
banker in Yonkers, New York, and
James, a Marine Lieutenant. She divorced
her husband in 1964. In 1977 Mrs.
Harris became headmistress of the
Madeira School in Virginia, which for
seventy-four years has educated
daughters of America’s prominent
families. She was known as a strict
disciplinarian at the school and lectured
so often on the need for high
moral standards that she acquired the
nickname “Integrity Jean.”

On March 10, 1980, Mrs. Jean Harris
shot and killed Dr. Herman Tarnower,
inventor of the famous Scarsdale diet,
and her friend and lover of fourteen
years. Mrs. Harris asserts that she accidentally
shot Dr. Tarnower in a struggle
over the revolver, which she had
brought to his home with the intention
of killing herself. The prosecution contended
that she shot the doctor in a
jealous rage over his affair with his
clinical assistant. After a three-month-long
trial, the jury found Mrs. Harris
guilty of second-degree murder.

The trial of Mrs. Harris fascinated the
nation. It unfolded a glamorous and
enticing tale: The setting was a wealthy
suburban New York estate; a crime of
passion was committed in a violent
bedroom scene; the victim, a famous
doctor, was known to have had many
lady friends. And the murderess was a
lady.

A lady. A lady is a woman of refinement
and good manners. She is usually
of good family and social position. It is
possible, however, for any ordinary
woman to rise to the state of ladyhood.
One can marry into a proper family, of
course, but a mere ceremony is not
enough to become one overnight. It is an ongoing
process: a combination of good
breeding, a strong moral upbringing,
and proper schooling.

Quick ascent to ladyhood, on the
other hand, is likely to be accompanied
by some type of qualifying adjective or
to appear in an occupational context.
We speak of ‘cleaning ladies, shopping
bag ladies, lady doctors, lady lawyers,
and ladies of the evening. It is not the
purpose of this essay to explore these
deviant instances of ladyhood, except
to note that when the word appears in
the occupational context it loses much
of its original dignity. “Lady” is not a
word to be used loosely.

How does one know when one is in
the company of a lady? It is sometimes
difficult to distinguish a refined woman
from one who is merely posing as a
lady. A proper lady is likely to be impeccably
attired. Her clothes are often
characterized as “smart” or “classic.”
She looks most lovely in “soft hues.” Be
suspicious of a “lady” in clothing which
might be described as “very snug” or “low
cut” or “loud and gaudy.” The tone of a
lady’s voice is pleasant, something like
the sound of tinkling bells. Her walk is
graceful, her body willowy, her neck
long and slender. She is perpetually
pleasant and sometimes giggles—but
never laughs loudly, of course. If one is
in doubt and possesses a keen sense of
smell, a subtle sniff will usually suffice
to ascertain ladyhood. A delicate scent
is desirable; if the aroma is overly
pungent, it is likely that one is in the
company of an impostor. One of a
lady’s finest virtues is patience. Many
women spend years of schooling in
hopes of acquiring the aforementioned
traits. Ladies-in-waiting?

Comparison is yet another way to
determine whether one is in the
presence of a lady. It is helpful to have
a standard on which to base observations.
In every field, the standards of excellence
are characterized by a variety
of adjectives such as “greatest” and
“best” in

portrait of Rhonda Lipkin

abilities of an aspiring quarterback by
comparing him to the quarterback on
the first string. In an orchestra, a promising
violinist’s talents are measured
against those of the musician seated in
the first chair. When in the company of
a woman, one can determine her quality
by comparing her to the First Lady.

The institution of First Lady upholds
the principle of ladyhood in America.
She is a gracious hostess, a loving wife.
She is strong enough to stand by her
husband in times of crisis, but never so
strong as to interfere with matters of
state. The First Lady is charged with
choosing the official White House
china and advises on the arrangement
of White House furniture.

Many First Ladies have devoted time
to a specific area of public policy. Our
present one, Mrs. Reagan, has given
special attention to home decoration.
She also has a keen interest in fashion.
Although Mrs. Reagan’s wardrobe by
no means will revolutionize the fashion
industry, it does set a standard of excellence
for other American ladies.

“She represents what I would call a
thoroughbred American look: elegant,
affluent, a well-bred, chic American
look,” said Adolfo, one of Mrs.
Reagan's favorite designers. “She has
very feminine taste, but not cute, not
frumpy. If she has a blouse with a little
ruffle, it’s elegant; it’s not overbearing.”
Adolfo adds, “I think there are many
who would like to look like her.”

For the inaugural ball, Mrs. Reagan
wore a hand-beaded gown designed by
James Galanos. The cost of her inaugural
wardrobe was estimated to have been
approximately $25,000. Says Miss Mollie
Parnis, who has designed clothes for
every First Lady in the past thirty years,
“I don’t think people care what Mrs.
Reagan pays for something as long as
she looks pretty. Americans like to think
of the President and the First Lady as
something different, something to look
up to.”

The gown is now housed in the
Smithsonian, where it has become part of the
much-acclaimed First Ladies’ Gowns
exhibit. A visit to this exhibit is highly
recommended to anyone interested in
American history. Historical preservation
is essential if we are to maintain
our country’s cultural heritage. The
museum curators have taken great care
to preserve the gowns. The lights in the
exhibition hall are kept very low to prevent
the dresses from decaying.

Mrs. Reagan’s gown is displayed next
to the blue chiffon Mrs. Carter wore to
the previous inaugural ball. In the
opinion of many fashion experts, Mrs.
Carter's dress, worn six years before at
the Governor's inaugural ball in
Georgia, was an embarrassment to the
nation. Some critics would dismiss her
eligibility for the ranks of ladyhood as
an instance of overnight ascent, in the
occupational context, with the qualifying
adjective being “first.” But we must
be kind to Mrs. Carter. She lacks the
proper upbringing of her successor. In
fact, while Mrs. Reagan became a
debutante and entered Smith College,
Mrs. Carter, whose widowed mother
took in sewing and worked as
postmistress, was attending secretarial
courses at a two-year community