Yale Women’s Caucus

by Catherine Lindell

Since 1974 the Yale Women’s  
Caucus has offered undergraduate  
women the opportunity to express their  
views and hear other women’s opinions  
on a wide range of topics, from les-  
bianism to the role of men in feminism.  
Through the past seven years the  
Caucus has evolved to meet the needs  
of its members. This year, because of  
pressing local and national needs, the  
women of the Caucus are trying to  
become more involved in the New  
Haven community and focus their at-  
tentions and energies on political  
issues. In addition, the Caucus main-  
tains its traditional consciousness-  
raising role.

The New Haven Women’s Center  
was closed this past year due to a lack  
of CETA funds, as was the New Haven  
Rape Crisis Center. The Women’s  
Center may reopen in January with  
private funding but until that time the  
Yale Women’s Center, staffed by  
members of the Caucus and others, will  
answer calls from the New Haven Com-  
munity and make referrals to other  
New Haven organizations such as the  
Battered Women’s Shelter. This is one  
situation in which Yale can use its vast  
resources for the good of the communi-  

ty. At the same time the Women’s  
Center staffers gain experience in com-  
munity and personal interactions.

On the national level, the ratification  
deadline for the Equal Rights Amend-  
ment is June 1982 and three states are  
still needed to make this amendment a  

part of the Constitution. Also, hearings  
are currently being held in Congress  
concerning anti-abortion amendments.  
In response to these issues the Caucus  
has formed ERA and Abortion Rights  
task forces to organize Yale women  
and men to help ensure the rights of  
privacy and equality to American  
women.

The Abortion Rights group has had  
information tables in all the residential  
colleges and in Commons this semester  
and has sponsored a postcard drive urg-  
ing Connecticut representative Larry  
DeNardis to support Pro-Choice legisla-  
tion in Congress. DeNardis has since  
become a Pro-Choice advocate. The  
Abortion Rights group plans to staff in-  
formation tables several more times  
this year to keep the Yale community  
informed on abortion legislation.

The ERA task force shared informa-  
tion tables with the Abortion Rights  
group and has set three major goals  
which the members are pursuing. The  
group would like to educate the Yale  
Community, the New Haven communi-  
ty, and other colleges in this area as to  
what the ERA actually says (“Equality  
of rights under the law shall not be  
denied or abridged by the United States  
or any state on account of sex”), im-  
plications, and its progress in state  
legislatures. The Task Force would also  
like to have Yale women graduates  
speak to undergraduates on the ERA  
and is planning fund-raising for the na-  
tional and local ERA efforts. Some  
Yale women intend to work over spring  

break in states which have not yet  

ratified the ERA to push for its ratifica-  
tion. Interested people are needed to  
put up posters, make phone calls, come  
up with fund-raising ideas and visit  
other campuses in the area.

The Caucus is also alert to any  
development concerning Title IX and  
the Family Protection Act.

The focus of the Caucus meetings  
alternates between political issues and  
informal discussions occasionally ac-  
companied by speakers. The political  
meetings are held twice a month, as are  
the discussions, to keep members in-  
formed as to the status of women’s  
issues on campus, in New Haven and in  
Congress, and to deal with Caucus  
business. The discussions this semester  
have included one on what feminism is  
and another on the male view of  
feminism. Joy Napier spoke at the  
Center this fall on women in third world  
countries and Laurie Rutenberg, a rabbi  
and associate chaplain of Dwight Hall,  
led a discussion on women and  
Judaism. Upcoming events include a  
gay/straight rap and a discussion on  
pornography.

The Caucus is interested in  
educating and organizing Yale women  
and men on feminist issues and  
interacting with the New Haven com-  
munity, as well as providing a place for  
open discussion of feminist issues.  
Meetings are held at 9:30 P.M. Thurs-  
day nights at the Yale Women’s Center,  

198 Elm St.

ii Sites fe ty. es

Sarah Bro

Where the emphasis is on personalized  

hair design

wee

Your patronage is welcomed

--Leif Garrison

Sexual Harassment  
continued from page 15

Cruz “invites a written reply” from the  
accused, it does not require one, and  
none of the other schools asked for  
anything other than a verbal response.  
As Attorney Donna Morris points out,  
this deficiency leaves “the person com-  
plained against free to change or to  
shade his or her version of events over  
a period of time without being subject  
to verification.” All the policies which  
read required the complainants to sub-  
mit written statements.

The University of Minnesota  
grievance procedure also proposes  
several possible sanctions against those  
who violate the University code on sex-  
ual harassment. These include: “a repri-  
mand and suspension without compen-  
sation for a period of one quarter or  
longer. Acts of sexual harassment of an  
extremely serious nature may warrant  
criminal action and may warrant a  
recommendation of removal for  
cause.” Duke is the only other universi-  
ty to list such specific sanctions against  
sexual harassment in its policy. Specific  
sanctions are desirable both as a deter-  
rent, and as an indication that the  
university takes sexual harassment  
seriously. However, Minnesota’s Board  
is empowered only to recommend  
sanctions, not to enforce them—and  
Duke does not even have a Board.  
Yale’s policy neither specifies sanc-  
tions, nor requires the Board to recom-  
mend them; such decisions are left  
solely to the discretion of the Dean of  
Yale College.

The University of Minnesota’s pro-  
cedure is not without faults. According  
to its policy, complaints are screened  
by an entry level office which has no  
student members. If this office rejects a  
complaint, a student can always appeal  
to the Board. In a procedure which is  
already emotionally charged, however,  
this extra step may deter the student  
from pursuing a legitimate grievance.  
Another drawback is that the policy  
does not ensure that statistics about  
complaints and their resolutions will be  
collected and published; publication of  
these data is an important source of in-  

formation for the college community  

about the extent of the sexual harass-  
ment problem. Moreover, the  
knowledge that others have had similar  
experiences—that sexual harassment is  
not something that the student brings  
upon her/himself—may encourage a  
victim to report an otherwise undisclos-  
ed incident.

Although Yale’s Sexual Harassment  
Grievance procedure is comparable to  
Minnesota’s in its complexity and sen-  
sitivity, it also is far from flawless. In Ju-  
ly of 1981 Attorney Donna Morris  
wrote a five page letter to the OCR,  
enumerating the deficiencies in Yale’s  
grievance procedure. For the sake of  
brevity I will not discuss all these pro-  
blems, but will limit myself to a few:  
I have already noted one procedural bias  
against the complainant, namely, Yale’s  
failure to require a written response  
from the offender. Morris feels that the  
composition of the Board is also slanted  

continued on page 21

Bring this ad in  
for $5 off on all  
hair services  

#3 F-SS1l  

PR RV SEIS? Fe