1. They become a part of the system and adopt as their own its values and goals.

2. They cannot deal with institutional sexism and so leave. Alvarez suggests that the latter might explain the high number of women graduate students who leave before completing their studies, rather than the administration’s explanation that they leave to get married or to follow their husbands.

3. This choice involves the recognition of Women’s Studies as a legitimate and highly important intellectual field. It is necessary to turn to other women for intellectual support as well as social support. Unlike Laura Bornholdt, Alvarez believes there is as much intellectual discrimination as there is social (simply demonstrated by a quick glance inside most history, political science, social science, etc. texts). For this reason, Women’s Studies must be legitimized. As one person from the floor remarked, “Women’s Studies will change both culture and mentality.”

After many more comments from the floor and meetings of Special Interest groups, we all moved to Commons for lunch and Rosabeth Moss Kanter’s keynote address. (She is professor of both sociology and organization and management currently on leave from Yale.) First, she outlined the three stages that, according to her, any movement goes through:

1. Pioneers who are ‘forced’ to identify with the institution or organization whose very structure would normally exclude them but within which they must succeed in order to gain power.

2. Collective Solidarity begins when there are enough women (the pioneers in this case) present in the above institution so that they can identify with each other. The awareness of being women in a hostile environment overwhelms other barriers and a sisterhood is established.

3. Individuals begin to conceive themselves with their own personal goals as women approach equality with men.

The next panel, ‘Lifestyle Choices and Contradictions,’ instead of presenting various choices, seemed to demonstrate the different ways a family unit, or more specifically a mother/child(ren) unit, can function when the mother has a demanding career. There was general agreement that high-quality daycare centers are a necessity, and Eustace Theodore (master of Calhoun College and the only male panelist) urged the women undergraduates not to underestimate their male colleagues. Why, if male undergraduates are as concerned about the problems of career and home as he claims, were not more of them present at this discussion? As Theodore said, he was the male representative. The panel discussion concentrated on child-rearing and neglected to present fully other alternatives such as no children, single parenthood, communal or cooperative living arrangements. However, the workshops afterward skirted the problem of family life entirely. One attorney who had just recently had a child told us of the rejection she has suffered from her women co-workers, pointing out that apart from the social pressure on a woman to bear children, there is now another pressure from other women, not to have them. These women are allowing highly demanding careers to preclude any family life in the same way that many men have done.

The doors to success are opening; women are “there to walk through them.” The second myth concerns a woman’s capability, or rather lack thereof, to handle power; the typical manifestation being that men will not work for a woman because she is not as authoritative as a man. Kanter destroys this myth by pointing out that in most cases a woman has no real power and therefore no authority over her workers. “No one wants to work for someone without clout.” The third myth, probably the strongest although it has no historical validity, is that women are prejudiced against other women. There is, to the contrary, a strong history of female solidarity in the United States which is again on the rise.

Kanter feels that women today are expressing a new sense of strength, independence, and options that will allow them to be individuals while identifying with other women. This joint support from others will enable women to obtain power. Our power is in our collectivity. However, we still face major problems:

1. Many women are simply not willing to work in or for institutions whose power base they disagree with. This political stance, however, robs women of ever obtaining control over that power.

2. Women must deal not only with antifeminism from men but also from other women since they do not necessarily see how feminism can benefit them personally. Simply because they are women does not mean that they will, or even ought to, have the same political, social, etc. ideas. However, everyone can be reached on an issue base. In closing, Kanter stressed the necessity of reaching out and advocated the bending rather than the breaking of institutions.

The conference failed to successfully address the question of coordination of motherhood and career, perhaps because the women in the workshops were not thinking seriously of bearing children and the panelists seemed to have had theirs before their careers became so important. One significant achievement was the mailing list started in the hopes of keeping Yale women, past and present, informed of each other's activities as well as perhaps providing some informal job counseling. I sincerely hope that through this ongoing contact we may establish a network of support and counseling that women at Yale will benefit from.

After lunch, we broke into smaller career workshops. I was very disappointed with the Law workshop as it became increasingly evident that the facilitators were entrenched in the existing system and did not aim to change it but rather to maintain it. Granted the situation has changed greatly—there are many more than fifteen female students per residential college—however, problems do exist. The attitude of the alumnae that I talked with in the Law discussion was, in general, “We made it ten years ago under much more adverse conditions than those which you face now; what are you complaining about?” It was very discouraging to hear other women voice the same sentiment that the male alumni had voiced the day before. The alumnae seemed to assume, like the alumni, that simply because there are more women at Yale, there is no more or negligible discrimination based on sex. If this were so, then the Grievance Committee set up in the wake of the Pamela Price sexual harassment suit, although purporting to be independent of it, would be unnecessary. This is not so, as any residential college dean or master can tell you. As Traci West said: “Just because there is a woman editor-in-chief, does not mean there is no sexism at the Daily.”

CONCLUSION

The AYA Conference and the Transitions Conference were very different with respect to publicity, funding, attendees, and tone. Yet both were products of the Yale administration and the overall message was the same: that women should fit in and adjust to the institution rather than that the institution should adjust to women. Yale is the means to “success” in the world for women, and women should not try to make changes within the College.

The AYA Conference affirmed the success of coeducation. If coeducation is an unmitigated success, I wonder at the reluctance of the AYA organizers to include actual women undergraduates. Why, for example, was no member of the Undergraduate Women’s Caucus on the ‘Quality of Undergraduate Life’ afternoon discussion?

The Transitions Conference was more open to divergent opinions and was in general tremendously encouraging for women undergraduates. There was a feeling of sisterhood solidarity that tends to benefit from the progress made by those who have “made it” or are “making it”—either in alternative careers or in a profession—gives a tremendous boost to the hopes of the present undergraduates. As at the AYA Conference, coeducation was deemed a success.

Kanter advised the generations to listen to and hear each other. One attorney answered that she was not discriminated against on the basis of her sex, but on the basis of her lack of experience. Other concerns were competition in law school and maintenance of personal ethics in corporate law. The answer to the latter being that there are two sides to every question and many times corporations are in the right.

Something the alumnae who made up the majority of the conference did not seem to realize was that we undergraduates still face many of the same problems that they confronted ten years ago. To be honest, the need for gradual further change seems necessary. With an annual women’s alumni conference, these changes may be realized!

1. Do your parents know about your heterosexuality?
2. If they do, did you tell them, or did they ‘find out’ some other way? How did they react when they learned of it?
3. What influenced you to be heterosexual? Did an older person and/or particular experience ‘start you off,’ or did you always have a feeling that you were straight?
4. Are you glad to be heterosexual?
5. Are most of your friends heterosexual?
6. How would you react if your child was heterosexual?
7. Do people often make remarks or stare at you if you display heterosexual behavior in public, or for simply ‘looking straight’?
8. How do you feel when you hear someone say, “I’m not prejudiced - some of my best friends are straight”?