Joanna Wissinger

Fashion is considered a vital concern
for women; we are conditioned to pre
sent ourselves in terms of our physical
bodies to a much greater extent than
are men. Women spend their lives be-
ing looked at by men; for many, male
observation is the confirmation of their
identities. Thus women must watch
themselves - they must be aware of
how they look, and at the same time,
aware of this awareness. Fashion and
style, considered as the manner in
which you choose to present yourself,
can be useful tools of analysis, and thus
liberating as well as confining. This
potential for liberating fashion makes
the impact of the punk movement on
women and women’s fashion an impor-
tant topic.

Punk arose in the company of the
many youth subcultures which sprung
up in Britain after the Second World
War - the latest in a series which began
with what are known as “Teds” and in-
cludes “Mods,” “Rockers,”
“Skinheads,” and “Rude Boys.” One of
the more interesting features of the
punk movement is that it doesn’t ex-
clude women.

I remember the first time I ever went
to Ron’s Place—about two years ago,
in the early spring of 1980. It was the
first time I’d ever been to a real punk
club (and we will not get into an argu-
ment about the authenticity of Ron’s
here). I knew a little bit about the
music, and I was curious. The first thing
I noticed when I walked inside was a
woman with the front of her head shav-
ed and the back part of it left long. She
was wearing ripped-up running shorts
and a t-shirt held together with safety
pins. As soon as I got a chance to look
around, I realized that the place was
full of women, and none of them (or at
least very few) were dressed in a man-
ner that could be described as conven-
tionally “feminine” or “attractive.”
They wore black leather jackets and
had short hair and black lipstick. They
looked much tougher than any women I
had ever seen before. As I looked
around, I suddenly came to the half-
excited, half-dismayed realization that I
had entered into a world where women

seemed to be dressing to please
themselves, or rather some idea of
themselves, instead of dressing to
please men.

This was not entirely true, of course,
as I later came to realize. Nonetheless,
it was my first and overwhelming im-
pression that punk fashion meant
liberation from fashion. Punk is more
than just fashion, or is it? Again, this is a
difficult question, because punk
started off as anti-fashion, and then
became a kind of chic nihilism. At first
it meant that you didn’t have to be a
nice girl, and wear skirts and nylons.
You didn’t have to wear pumps or high
heels, unless you wanted to gouge so-
meone with them. For women, punk

fashion meant liberation from the code
of femininity without a required sexual
reassignment. Punk evolved with an
ideology - anarchism, nihilism, rage
against the state. In its original form, it
was quite puritanical, and eschewed
fashion and ornament in most ways;
the hallmarks of the style were tight dir-
ty jeans, short black boots, t-shirts
(most often ripped). Safety pins and
razor blades, mass-produced bits of
shiny metal, were used as jewelry.
These basic elements were soon joined
by fancier ones, things like bum flaps,

bondage trousers, and the notorious
hair, often worn in a skull ridge
(Mohawk) and tinted the proverbial
green. The whole point of styles like
this is to be simultaneously ridiculous
and offensive. Punk expressed rage and
alienation. It broke down a lot of bar-
riers in terms of people’s acceptance of
outrage. As a philosophy, it professed
to be anti-everything and therefore
anything could happen.
Probably the most
cultural manifestation of punk, along

with the fashion, and what probably
springs first to everyone’s mind as the
key to it all, is the music. Here, I
suppose, is the best point at which to
make the distinction between punk and
“new wave.” New wave is probably
best described as the commercial side
of punk. It is also, however, a very art-

important

F-F-F-FASHION™

ful music; it should not be dismissed as
mere pop. It is representative of a dif-

ferent sensibility; one that is concerned
with fashion, and with attractiveness.
Where punk was alienated, new wave is
part of the marketplace. It should not
be condemned out of hand, but at the
same time it doesn’t have the same
revolutionary and idealistic fervor
that distinguished the original punk
sound.

Punk was equal opportunity nega-
tion. To be a punk star, you didn’t have
to be chic or beautiful. In some cases,
you didn’t even have to know anything
about music. The girl groups of the six-
ties were polished products, slick and
consumable. The female
singer/songwriters of the seventies were
shy and vulnerable and fragile. The
punk women of the late seventies and
the eighties are not sex objects or pup-
pets; they’re strong enough to hold up
their own instruments. They write their
own songs and design their own
costumes. They dress like men in some
cases, but it’s clear that they are not
trying to emulate them. Siouxsie Sioux
of the Banshees used to dress in a

way that did not conform to sexual ster-
eotypes. She was not butch, but she wasn’t really
dolled up either. Instead, she estab-
lished her own look which did not rely on
gender, but comprised a valid way to
present herself to the world without
depending on standard expectations.
This, I believe, is the most significant
aspect of the punk aesthetic: its adap-
tability. Punk is not a pure form. It has
gone too far past its original boundaries

to ever return to the narrowness of its

beginning. Punk purists may argue that
punk is dead, or only exists in a small
part of London, or whatever; others
may scorn it for having been co-opted.
But I think that the most interesting
thing about “punkiness” is its elasticity,
and ability to contain opposites. The
very fact that it did enter the cultural
mainstream proves its importance,
rather than diminishes it. “In England,”
says my friend Vivien, “even quite nice
girls have several holes pierced in their
ears and dye their hair. It’s just fashion.
It doesn’t have anything to do with
anarchism.” But it does serve as a cons-
tant subversive reminder of what has
been. The fact that “even quite nice
girls” are willing to present themselves
in such a manner is proof of the effect
that punk has had.

Even in the United States, where the
style had much less impact, it is still im-
portant. Here at Yale, most of us look
like nice middle-class people, and yet
punk has affected our lives. Although
it’s not really accurate to describe it as
punk —we’ll have to enter into the area
of new wave. I don’t know how many
people ever really thought of
themselves as being “punks” but at
least three semi-punk bands were
started by Yalies, one of which, the
Aquanettes, consisted entirely of
women, and even played Ron’s a few
times. One member of the Aquanettes,
Katherine Cormack, went on to
become a member of the Saucers, New
Haven’s most popular punk group.

Punk has become a kind of
piecemeal agent of liberation from
convention. A safety pin in the lapel of
a tweed jacket may not seem like
much, but it is a subtle acknowledge-
ment of the subversive power of the
punk aesthetic.

Wearing bits of punkness (safety
pins, funny glasses or shoes) does not
necessarily signal your allegiance
to the entire aesthetic, but it does show
a willingness to present yourself as
standing apart from the norm. Of
course, there are those who will argue
that to a certain extent, punk has
become the norm, but a quick look
around shows that this is not true ex-
cept in a few small areas (Soho, e.g.).
The telling indicator of punk’s real
status is that it has become the general
term used to describe anything that is
unconventional or out of the ordinary,
having replaced the venerable “freaky”
little term with the original British
form. It has become a style which
signals rebellion. For women, it is one
among many useful tools for escape
from stifling convention.