18

showed me the portrait after I'd been away for a
weekend, having run off with a wealthy architect I'd
met at the Jardin de Luxembourg.

“That’s very beautiful, Paolo.”

“It's not finished yet; she hasn’t come to sit for days.
She’s been very unhappy, you know. And when she
gets like that she won’t do anything, just sits in her
room and drinks tea.”

“I know, I know. I suppose it’s my fault, as always.
She looks at me with those big eyes and I feel like I
should get up on the witness stand and plead guilty.”

Paolo was a wonderful teddy-bear, with his beard
and shaggy hair. He was older than most of us and
had a bit of money; he and Antonella were almost

like parents sometimes. Yet Paolo and I shared a

special friendship. I understood his desire to settle
with the jolly Anto, to raise bambini and paint day
and night. He understood my need to run, to keep
ahead of the past at my heels.

“No, it’s not entirely your fault, wanderer. Eva can’t
stand the world the way it is; she wants you to change
it for her. Nobody’s equal to that task, not even you.”

“I hate myself sometimes for making her suffer,
especially when I know how easy it is to make her
happy. But it takes too much of me; I start to feel like
I'm in a cage.”

Paolo pulled another canvas out from behind the
easel. It was a portrait of me. I looked wild, farouche,
like a leopard.

“You see, even on canvas you do not look the
same. For Eva I use rose, grey, blue, fine brush
strokes; for you I must use yellow, orange, black,
working madly, throwing the paint. It’s unfortunate
that you two love each other so much; you'll never
be able to love well.”

When I walked back out into the living room, I
looked again at Eva. She felt my eyes on her face,
but continued to listen to the conversation. She was
so beautiful then; I was almost angry at myself for
feeling it so strongly. I could not reach for her then,
could not even talk.

When everyone had gotten to Paolo’s, usually about
11:00, after Sebastien got off from work at the library,
before Vivi had to leave for her early morning shift
at the Café Rue Laplace, Sebastien would get out his
clarinet ceremoniously and call across the room to
me, “Eh, la clocharde, chantez-vous ce soir?” -

I would leave my coffee cup by my seat, peel off my
sneakers and then saunter over to him, pull up a stool
and straddle it defiantly. He would give me one sly
look, then close his eyes and start blowing that
clarinet. Not cool jazz for that time and place; nothing
frenetic or abstract, but the warm notes, the cedar-
chest melodies, the old warm, warm smoky notes. He
would start me off with Billie: Sophisticated

® pregnancy testing & counseling

@ women’s health information

e first trimester abortion

e@ women’s health education

"Eva, or of her hold over me, he

Lady or April in Paris, but I would lure him towards
Bessie: Rainy Day Blues or Empty Bed Blues, every-
body’s special favorite. He would ease out the notes,
insinuating, leering, and I'd striptease the words,
pulling off each one like a high-buttoned glove or a
feather boa:

When my bed gets empty,

Makes me feel awful mean and blue,

My springs are gettin’ rusty,

Sleeping single like I do...

When Sebo started getting tired, when everyone —
had leaned back into their chairs to listen, when it was
almost too late for anything but silence, he’d start on
Driving Wheel, a song I'd taught him a long time ago,
towards the beginning, thinking that he would find it
too American, too sad. But he had uncovered its
shape immediately, filling in all the empty spaces
with forlorn prairie notes: Sebastien, who'd never
once travelled outside of Paris. By that time at night
we were all too dreamy to be self-conscious about
the words, to be cynical or existential. Alain would
pick up the cat and stroke its fur, Paolo would run his
hand through Antonella’s hair, absently, tenderly,
and I would unthinkingly look for Eva’s eyes.

And I just called to tell you that I need you,

And I just called to tell you how I feel,

I feel like some old engine

That’s lost its driving wheel...

And when the last notes had faded away, when we
were left strangely embarrassed, naked, by the
silence, hearing the cabs and wind suddenly outside
the window, I called across the room, “Eh bien Paolo,
du chocolat pour ces enfants?” and I slid out of my
seat, went to help him boil milk for hot cocoa.

I carried out a cup for myself, one for Eva, and I
sat on the floor by her seat, watching out the window
silently. I sensed her tension, her fear infused desire,
and I was angry, delighted; I could feel my heart
pumping silently, my breath echoing in my lungs.
When I had finished my cup, I leaned up against her
chair and, after a few moments, asked, “Can I stay
at your place tonight?” She started when she heard
my voice, then answered carefully, “You know you
can always stay with me. You needn't even ask.” Oh,
but we knew how to make epics out of so very few
words.

A few minutes later we left together. While Eva was
standing by the door, wrapping herself up in the black
Russian cape she was wearing that winter, I ran into
the kitchen and hugged Paolo goodbye. He wrapped
up two leftover pastries in a piece of paper: “Your
breakfast,” he said, smiling. Sebo caught me in the
hall before I rejoined Eva, unable to resist hissing in my
ear, “Bonsoir, Delphine.”

& referral

Lunch. 1:30-2:30

Tuesday, Thursday,
Friday, Saturday.

Women’s Health Services
19 Edwards Street
New Haven

Walking home in the empty streets, I stayed several
paces away from Eva, hands stuffed into the stretched
pockets of my raincoat, kicking the dirty
mounds of snow with my silver-tipped shoes. I was
unable to break the silence, could not think of what
to fill it with, Eva like a ghost beside me. Angry at
myself, angry at Sebastien and his nasty reference to
Baudelaire, angry at the stupidity of these nights, I
finally leaned back into the shadow of a narrow
alleyway, looking up at the sky, a thin blue line
between the two ancient buildings; alley so narrow
and buildings so old that the sagging walls had been
propped up by thick planks of wood wedged hori-
zontally between them.

When she followed me in with her sad, sad eyes,
I was overcome with the frustration of not being able
to end our ridiculous waltz, the powdery storm of
silence that we danced in, so slowly, afraid to stretch
out our hands through the icy air. I turned on her,
pressed her against the icy bricks, pressing my mouth
to hers, a cruel kiss, a loveless betrayal. But she could
not fight, could just stand there awkwardly, unsure of
what to do with her hands. And I gave in, stopped
fighting against her, against the sky pressing down on
the rooftops, put my hands around her shoulders,
pulled her to me, wrapping us both in the folds of
the cape. And I let her cry, murmuring, “I’m sorry,
I'm sorry, I’m sorry,” walking slowly out of the alley,
into the lighted street, my arm wrapped around her,
her head on my shoulder, moving towards sleep.

I met Eva in the train station when I first came to
Paris. She was returning from a visit to some relatives
who lived to the east of the city. I had just finished a
summer in Spain, working the vineyards near the
French border. She was wearing a flowered dress
and ballet slippers, carrying a wicker basket filled
with summer fruit, playing at a Renoir painting. I was
wearing one of my pairs of American jeans, a striped
sailor’s maillot and rough peasant’s sandals, carrying
a cardboard suitcase held together with cord. When
she dropped the basket, I stopped and helped her
gather the plums and wild raspberries that had scat-
tered, like so many colored circus balloons, on the
floor of the station.

When I left Paris, in the early Spring, Eva did not
see me off. I could not say goodbye, left a cowardly
note on her dresser, tried to step onto the train with-
out looking back, heading into Italy, hoping to see the
sea. But I could not make a clean break. I carried
her key with me, still hanging on that bit of crimson
thread, believing that I could return to that world so

easily, that the rooms and the few things I'd left
would always be there.

Cat Nilan

BLOODROOT

a feminist restaurant: bake store
with a seasonal menu

Dinner 6:00-11:00

Thursday, Friday,
Saturday.

1:00-2:30

Black Rock: Bridgeport, Ct. 00605

205-576-168