MESSAGE FROM THE EDITOR

The night we finally got heat in the apartment (Jan. 14 - mazeltov!) I had a celebratory dream. I dreamt that my roommates and I were at a bar, and had found the way to resolve the fundamental issues of class, race and sex. If we each had five drinks, the workers would triumph in Poland, create an independent socialist state, and bring the presently oppressive world order to its knees. Seven drinks each, and people of color everywhere would ascend to power. Ten drinks each would bring about a global subversion of gender roles; the hitherto unpublished letters of John Wayne would reveal his romance with Elvis, men worldwide would go hysterical, the E.R.A. would pass, heterosexual children everywhere would be admonished for their lack of imagination.

The next morning I shook off my bliss. Drinking and sleeping are but two convenient ways to escape the powerlessness we've been feeling. Here is reality: after five drinks a college graduate told me I shouldn't read Marx because communists worship the devil. Seven drinks, and a fraternity at a small New England college went on a cross-burning spree. Ten drinks, and a couple of guys at a large New Haven university held a gay man outside a fourth story window by his ankles. The morning after these guys are still violent homophobes. The fraternity brothers are still malignant racists. My college-educated friend, and millions like her, still exist in a cold-war mist of good and evil, us and them. I remind you thus, sisters and brothers, that we'd better stay sober and awake for the greater portion of the day. We have a lot of work to do. Ignorance and arrogance surround us, greed and intolerance threaten our lives. Yet hope must not elude us, how can it, when we have so much to learn from people, and so much to tell them. Susan B. Anthony once said “failure is impossible.” It is only as impossible as a nuclear war; we must fight with all our energies to realize our human possibilities.

Yes spring is here, and so is Aurora, and so are we all. The editorial board thanks you for your interest and contributions.

Maia Ettinger

CONTENTS

Message From The Editor........... Maia Ettinger

How We Began Our Autumn 2.00... Lisa Jones

Battering at Yale: The Real World is Alive and Well and Perpetuated in the Ivory Tower

Samia Halaby, Ruth Santer and Craig Flanagin

My GratidinOthers Stories Catherine Liu

The Most Revolutionary Aspect .......... Michael Cowan

Reaganomics? Patricia Buck Wolf

Language and Oppression: Gay Pride and the Problem of Specificity ............. Donna Minkowitz

Old Boys/New Girls: Connecticut Women in Politics ........... Barbara Heffernan, Ernestine Abel

Fiction Contest Winner: At Least Me and Rafael Tried ............... Paul Butler

Active Agents in Our Own History: An Interview with Hazel Carby ...... Maria M. Perez

Separatism Revisited: Toward a Political Economy of Lust... .......... Nora Janeway

White Feminist Theory and Practice: The Race/Sex Analogy. ........... Renee P. Raymond

Red: Roba Bettina Edlestein

FASHION Joanna Wissinger

The Lesbian Body: An Imitative Discourse ....... Lisa Clark

Book Reviews ......... Marie Deer

Ann-Marie DeGraffenreidt

. Anonymous

. Maia Ettinger

Deborah Gaines

Hettie Jones

Lisa Jones

Lisa Kennedy

Edith Sodergran

Front Cover: The Return, by Katy Briber

+ Betsy Shrader

13

17

Aurora Staff

Editor

Associate Editor

General Manager

Graphics/Art Editor

Business Manager

Fiction Editor

Assistant Editor

General Staff

Robin McHugh

Melissa Binder

Laura Bienen

Marie Deer

Ann-Marie DeGraffenreidt

Judy Grayson

Barbara Heffernan

Miriam Jaffe

Lisa Kennedy

Donna Minkowitz

Ruth Santer

Betsy Shrader

Polly Shulman

Joyce Williams

Verena Bent

Katy Briber

Lauren Caulton

Many, many thanks to our sponsors:

Henri and Jean Abel

Verena Bent

Judith Brandenburg

Helen Day

Marie Deer

Gulbin Ezer

Jane Greenberg

Margaret Homans

Maia Ettinger

Lisa Jones

Ernestine Abel

Craig Flanagin

Claudia Mesch

Benedicta Misner

Kathrin Day Lassila

Aurora Artists

Katy Briber

Lisa Jones

David Lee

Jennie Livingston

Fido

Craig Flanagin

Ruth Santer

Samia Halaby

Barclay Smith

Calligraphy on p.7 by Ellen Hertz

Barbara Johnson

David Kennan

Jeffrey Merrick

David Myers

Robert Neediman

Leslie Ann Raso

Annaliese Soros

Jean Wrean and others.