Betty Friedan,

32

by Meg Starr and Jenny Wriggins

In Betty Friedan’s recent article from the  
November 18th New York Times, Friedan, the  
author of The Feminine Mystique, It Changed My  
Life and a ‘founding mother’ of N.O.W., called for  
a second stage in the Women’s Liberation Move-  
ment. Feminists, she believes, must now reempha-  
size their commitment to the family. Friedan’s  
article has been seen by some feminists as a  
reactionary contradiction to Friedan’s earlier work.  
How could the woman who, 17 years ago wrote The  
Feminine Mystique, a searing analysis of the place  
of the nuclear family in the oppression of women,  
now wish to revitalize the family structure?

Two staff members of Aurora interviewed Betty  
Friedan about her call for a second stage of  
feminism. Because of Friedan’s heavy schedule,  
(she is currently at work on a book which will be an  
outgrowth of her New York Times article) we were  
scheduled to watch her as she was interviewed by a  
television station and then to ask her a few of our  
own questions at the end of her television  
appearance. Though we did not realize it at the  
time, it was appropriate that we should get an  
opportunity to watch Friedan, who described the  
mass media’s active role in the mystification of  
women’s place, being interviewed by one of the  
main branches of the media.

Friedan made it clear that her intention in  
reemphasizing the family was not to return to the  
old form of the one-breadwinner nuclear family.  
“When I say feminists have to move towards the  
family that is not a return to the past. We can’t go  
back on equality. But the needs that people have  
looked to the family to solve, these remain and we  
must take these into account. We must realize that  
the family is going to evolve though, it’s not just  
that the mother and father work and  
parenting. That doesn’t tell the whole story. There  
will be all sorts of new forms of the family. There  
will be homosexual families, there will be people  
living together, seeking emotional caring and  
economic support in ways that may have nothing to  
do with sex at all or even child-rearing."

Friedan argues that as long as it is still hard for  
men and women to combine careers with emotional  
relationships and child-rearing responsibilities there  
will be danger of backlash against feminism “and it  
won't be from men but from women. There will be  
no winning for women as long as it’s still an either  
or choice.”

Though Betty Friedan’s redefinition of the family  
may not be a retreat into the past, it may not be a  
real step forward either. Friedan’s stage of  
Women’s Liberation contains many contradictions.  
She seems to rely heavily on the flexibility of the  
capitalist structure and the cooperation of men, or  
in other words, the willing surrender of power by  
the powerful. Indeed, to call for a change in human  
relations in the name of the family becomes  
ambiguous in light of the strength that the  
idea of the nuclear family still has in our  
culture.

The Family & Feminism:

An Interview

Crucial to Friedan’s proposal for the second stage  
of feminism would be a change in child-rearing  
practices. Child care centers would have to become  
a top priority. She also advocates “flex-time,” a  
new flexible hours program certain industries have  
instituted for working parents. “But you'll only get  
flex-time and these other changes in any wide-  
spread way because the men demand them as well  
as the women. The women don’t have enough  
power to get them alone.” This is one reason why  
Friedan believes that the second stage of feminism  
must be a human values revolution, incorporating  
men and children as well as women.

She believes that there are indications that men  
are beginning to become more concerned about  
child-rearing. Friedan cited surveys which showed  
that young men now see family commitments as a  
top priority over career advancement. However she  
feels that there is a new danger in “an unfaced  
ambivalence on the part of many women towards  
giving up power in the home. That power was their  
pay-off for having no power in the world. When the  
woman moves into a position of not very great  
power in society the price is that she has to share  
the power in the house. But sharing means  
something quite different than being The One.”

When Friedan’s description of the woman’s  
ambivalence towards giving up her power in the  
home is placed in the context of the fact that, as she  
says, “the average woman earns 59 cents for every  
dollar that the average man earns,” we see that  
women are still in a position of not having a very  
secure base of power in our society. Women are  
very likely to feel more ambivalent about both their  
work and their home life than are men. Friedan said  
“the young women of today have an agonizing  
conflict” yet she seemed quite optimistic about the  
prospects for change. She said that the fight for  
economic equality must continue but that there  
must also be a new emphasis on human values.  
Betty Friedan argues that “one of the interesting  
things about the two-income family is that it  
releases both the man and the woman from  
complete corporate control.” In that way Friedan  
believes that men and women will be free enough to  
demand a restructuring of the workplace according  
to human values. When we asked what gives men  
and women the power to make that demand? She  
responded, “I believe that American Capitalism  
with all its successes and all its sins is a flexible  
system.”

We felt that Friedan has not yet presented a  
convincing argument for the possibility of restruc-  
turing of the workplace. Instead of the two-pay-  
check family releasing both the man and the woman  
from corporate control, it may be the ultimate form  
of corporate control.

We asked Friedan what she felt about collective  
structures and other alternatives which combine  
economics and human relations in new ways.

“Well I don’t know how successful the communes  
have been. But on the other hand I think there’s  
going to be more and more experimentation out of  
economic and housing necessities as well as  
emotional necessity. People will have different  
patterns of life beyond what we used to think of as  
the family. The government never talks about these  
new forms when discussing future plans and I find  
myself doing the same thing in all these interviews.  
The nuclear child-rearing family just isn’t the whole  
picture.”

Then we said, “I wish you'd said that on T.V.,  
especially because the feminine mystique existed  
until so recently that when you say ‘family’ people  
are going to misinterpret what you mean by it.”

Betty Friedan said, “I know, I realized it, that  
would be a legitimate criticism of the interview.”  
She asked the camera crew to let her make one  
more statement. While they were rethreading their  
film, Friedan talked about the family in more  
al terms.

“I had a halfway house or a so-called commune  
with a lot of my friends, other middle-aged women  
who were in various stages of divorce. The  
commune went on for about 6 years. At the time it  
certainly served a purpose then different people  
dropped out or got married and dropped out and I  
just got sick of being the Den Mother of the whole  
thing. But who was a part of that feels very close still. It was a real extended family.

“We don’t know ten years from now what will  
have happened. We may be seeing the evolution of  
new forms of the family much more clearly than we  
see them today. I had lunch with four friends of  
mine recently, all quite successful women. We were  
just kidding around but it was clear that all of us  
think of life somehow as if the only thing we could  
really do is get married again. I sometimes think  
that is our cultural lag.”

When the camera crew was ready Friedan  
explained what she meant by the family very clearly  
on television. However, though her concept of the  
family includes change and new structures of  
human relations we think she will continue to be  
misinterpreted for several reasons. The very fact  
that, as she said, Betty Friedan’s interviews about  
her family article have all (with the exception of this  
one) centered around a fairly conventional nuclear  
family unit suggests that the media has not gotten  
as far from the old paradigms of the family as one  
would hope. Part of the reason Friedan received so  
much publicity about her article is that there is a  
certain shock value in announcing that a famous and  
respected feminist wants to return to the family.  
Another reason that Betty Friedan’s message will  
be misinterpreted is that in practical terms her plan  
is very vague except for her points about child care  
and more flexible work hours for parents. On the  
level of implementation Friedan’s program does not  
encompass any form of family but the two-paycheck  
nuclear family.

This practical hole in Friedan’s program is very  
understandable. It is hard to describe new emerging  
trends; we all suffer from a “cultural lag” in that  
the forms of society which have been strong in the  
recent past and which are still prevalent are the  
ones that are easiest for us to conceptualize.

That is why it is often easier to criticize an  
existing system than to propose a plan for positive  
change. We want to credit Friedan for her attempt  
at a program for constructive change even though  
we are pessimistic as to its results. While our  
society remains in the control of the corporate  
industrial structure, while men are still receiving  
more benefits from that structure than are women it  
is hard to imagine men and women working  
together successfully for a human values movement.