Women Who Kill

reviewed by Robin McHugh

Women Who Kill

by Ann Jones

333 pp. New York:  
Fawcett Columbine, $7.95

Lizzie Borden, whom you probably  
know as the girl who axed her mother  
and father for reasons known only to  
God or the devil, was not a young girl,  
nor was it her mother that she killed.  
Lizzie was thirty-two years old, and,  
before killing her father, she killed her  
aged stepmother who stood in her way  
as the main beneficiary of her father’s  
substantial estate. Though rich, Andrew  
Borden was very miserly, and Lizzie ap-  
parently longed for a more ostentatious  
lifestyle; after her acquittal she bought  
a much larger house, with indoor plum-  
bing (a luxury for 1893) and enjoyed be-  
ing driven around Fall River,  
Massachusetts by a hired coachman in  
a new horse-and-carriage.

Mrs. Borden’s death and Lizzie’s  
possible financial motive were largely  
ignored at the trial. The real issue at  
stake seemed to be whether or not a  
“lady” could murder her father. A  
reporter at the trial noted that the pro-  
minent lawyers for the defense and the  
prosecution worked “in almost un-  
broken harmony” to assure the jury,  
which was deliberately made up of  
men with daughters Lizzie’s age, that  
such a deed was impossible. As long as  
Lizzie played the part of a lady by  
weeping at the proper moments and  
dressing correctly, everyone was willing  
to suppress the fact that she burned a  
dress right after the crime. And the  
bloody towels which Lizzie washed out  
after the murders were just considered  
too delicate to discuss—because of  
their possible relation to “monthly  
sickness”—even though the act was  
suspicious since she was not  
menstruating at the time. Many  
observers suspected Lizzie of over-  
acting in her manifestations of  
ladyhood, but the patriarchy bought  
the charade (Indeed, they had organiz-  
ed it.) and let her go free. None of them  
wanted to believe that women desired  
economic independence, were capable  
of planning ahead, or could commit  
violence against their fathers.

In Women Who Kill, Ann Jones  
analyzes many such famous cases of  
American murderesses, describing their  
trials as “didactic theater.” She  
scrupulously augments popularized  
versions of these cases with forgotten  
or ignored aspects, in an effort to con-  
vince her readers that “the story of  
women who kill is the story of women.”  
Even though only fifteen percent of all  
murders are committed by women,  
these crimes are not freakish isolated  
incidents, Jones crowds each chapter  
with background in women’s history to  
show definite trends in the motives, vic-  
tims, and punishments of women who  
are driven to homicide.

In the colonies in the seventeenth  
and early eighteenth centuries a  
woman was responsible for her own  
religious salvation, could become a full  
church member, could own and inherit  
property, and generally would receive  
pay equal to that of a man for com-  
parable work. She was also held  
responsible for her crimes. Dozens of  
women were publicly burned or hang-  
ed for murdering their husbands,  
masters, or illegitimate children. Infan-  
ticide was the most common of these  
crimes. At the time, free women and  
their illegitimate children could be  
bound into servitude to their towns, un-  
married bonded servants with children  
had to serve an extra year or two, and  
slaves’ children automatically became  
slaves. Not surprisingly, then, the im-  
pulse to destroy the unfortunate babies  
was strong (birth control and abortion  
not being easy alternatives). Women  
who took such action hardly deserved  
to be executed, though, especially  
when men convicted of equally brutal  
crimes often got off with a mere whip-  
ping. Jones maintains that these  
women were punished primarily for ex-  
ercising control over their reproductive  
capabilities. Such a serious offense  
against the patriarchal society in which  
they lived had to be discouraged at all  
costs to prevent more widespread  
rebellion. The minister Cotton Mather  
showed the prevailing attitude when he  
compared one convicted woman to a  
“disobedient child.”

As time went on, women were no longer publicly  
executed. “Woman's sphere” began to  
diverge significantly from man’s as the  
United States moved into an industrial  
market economy. Non-paying domestic  
chores were relegated to women, and  
the home came to be seen as the only  
suitable place for a woman. (This idea  
was popular even though women out-  
numbered men in places like the textile  
industry.) According to Jones, the law  
became a “positive and deliberate in-  
strument of constraint” as well. Wife-  
beating was a widespread, sanctioned  
tool for enforcing this system of  
segregation. Perhaps it is no surprise  
that many women turned to poisoning  
their husbands. Almost invariably,  
however, these suspects were acquitted  
for “lack of motive.” By denying  
through acquittal that women had  
legitimate complaints, these acts of  
“chivalry” saved men “from the fear of  
household fiends.” Jones asserts that  
“favoritism toward women under the  
criminal law was the trade-off men  
made for stripping women of rights  
under the civil law.”

Women who killed their “seducers”  
(Many were really rapists.) also grew in  
number in the 1800s. Feminists cam-  
paigned for anti-seduction laws, but  
lawmakers preferred instead to excuse  
women’s crimes with the argument of  
“insanity.” A woman was not thought  
to be capable of premeditated  
vengeance, but she was believed to be  
predisposed to irrationality, especially  
during menstruation.

When insanity couldn't get a nine-  
teenth-century female criminal off the  
hook, it was because everyone agreed  
she didn’t really have a woman's  
nature. Less refined poor women were  
especially likely to be condemned by  
this argument; Lizzie Borden’s wealth  
allowed her to be released precisely  
because she was a proper lady. One  
“expert criminologist” was reported to  
have described an executed woman as  
“the most perfect combination of the  
wolf, the tiger, the hog, and the hyena  
that (he) ever came across.”

Even well into the twentieth century,  
criminologists and the media portrayed  
women murderers as either “mannish”  
or else as incredibly immoral so that it  
was clear they weren't “real” women.  
Following the “sexual revolution” in  
the Twenties, a backlash against  
women occurred. They began to be ex-  
ecuted in increasing numbers (in the  
1930s). One woman, who killed her  
husband, was on trial more  
“for adultery instead of murder,” in the  
words of a newspaper columnist.  
Another woman, accused of killing her  
children, was convicted chiefly on the  
evidence of three years’ worth of tapes  
made by the police recording her sex-  
ual affairs.

In the past twenty years a few  
women have been acquitted, on the  
grounds of self-defense, of the murders  
of rapists and husbands who physically  
abused them. But the media often gave  
such wide coverage to these cases that  
men feared there would be “open  
season” on them. They retaliated by  
unfairly convicting many others. Jones  
concludes her compelling and well-  
documented research efforts with the  
statement that “it is precisely at those  
stressful moments in history when  
everything seems to be changing that  
we worry most about woman’s proper  
place.” Perhaps when things really  
change women will stop killing their  
“nearest and dearest,” or at least they  
will no longer be judged for the crime  
of stepping out of their traditional posi-  
tions.

IRVING L. FAIMAN

Full Service Instant  
COPYING

@ LEAFLETS © STATIONERY  
“WE NOW PRINT - T-SHIRTS”  
* FULL LINE OF WEDDING INVITATIONS

TOP QUALITY

inc.

TYPESETTING  
¢ PADDLING © STAPLING  
© FOLDING © COLLATING

789-1600

1207 CHAPEL ST., NEW HAVEN  
(Loc. 1/2 Block From YMCA)

On Ladies’  
continued from page 6

special exhibit, I think, separate from  
the other dresses. If the women were  
married, would her husband’s suit be  
put on display? The notion of a male  
wax mannequin, in suit and tie, in-  
vading the privacy of the nation’s First  
Ladies, is a perturbing one indeed. But  
if our focus on women in the White  
House is limited to women as First  
Ladies, we will probably not have to  
bother with these questions.

This hypothesis leads us briefly—and,  
if I might add, bravely—into the  
philosophical world of logic and Mr.  
Benjamin Lee Whorf. Mr. Whorf is a  
modern spokesman for the linguistic-  
relativity theory. He asserts that the  
structure of one’s language affects  
one’s thought processes. A person’s  
worldview is confined by the words he  
uses. Mr. Whorf writes, “We cut nature  
up, organize it into concepts, and  
ascribe significances as we do, largely  
because we are parties to an agreement  
to organize it in this way.”

Our thoughts are restrained by the  
words we choose to represent them.  
Thus, we might consider “lady” a con-  
fining word, restricting the way we view  
women and the way women view  
themselves.

The words which Mrs. Jean Harris  
chose to characterize her hopes for  
Madeira girls described virtues inherent  
in ladyhood. She spoke of “duty,” and  
of “caliber,” and, most importantly, of  
“integrity.” During her trial, Mr. Bolen,  
the prosecutor, asked her what she  
thought of Lynn Tryforis, Dr.  
Tarnower’s clinical assistant and lover.  
Mrs. Harris replied, “I think she  
denigrated me, and she gave me a great  
deal of trouble with my own integrity.”

“Was it a question of her  
education?” asked Mr. Bolen.

“She lacked common sense and  
taste,” answered Mrs. Harris.

“No: taste?” questioned the pro-  
secutor.

“You have to judge taste by the  
things people do,” Mrs. Harris replied.

On the evening of March 10, 1980,  
patrolman Brian McKenna found the  
body of Dr. Herman Tarnower, 69,  
sprawled crookedly in his upstairs  
bedroom. He was lying between two  
pools of blood, with multiple gunshot  
wounds in his shoulder, arm, and chest. The  
behavior of Mrs. Harris, we must con-  
clude, was somewhat lacking in taste.  
Murder is not included in books of eti-  
quette for ladies.

Later in the trial, the prosecutor ask-  
ed Mrs. Harris how she had referred to  
Mrs. Tryforis in a letter she had written  
to Dr. Tarnower.

“In many unattractive ways, as I had  
experienced her,” Mrs. Harris replied.  
“Dishonest, adulterous, a whore—that  
pretty well does it.”

Mr. Bolen asked her about the use of  
the word “whore.” “Is that your usual  
language?”

“Those are not words I customarily  
use,” Mrs. Harris replied.

“Whore” is not a word customarily  
used by ladies. Murder is not con-  
sidered conduct appropriate to a lady.  
Yet Mrs. Harris—a well-bred socialite, a  
fashionable dresser, and a symbol of in-  
tegrity—is a lady. It is certainly puzzl-  
ing. Remarks one prominent Madeira  
alumna, “Mrs. Harris is most graceful.  
She's so very proper. The whole thing  
sounds so incongruous.”

Incongruous? Perhaps it is the word  
“lady” that is incongruous. For if one  
does not limit oneself to viewing Mrs.  
Harris in terms of this word, her  
behavior is not so puzzling. For a long  
time Mrs. Jean Harris has been thinking  
very unladylike thoughts: hostile,  
desperate, angry thoughts.

There is nothing wrong with a word  
which does not fully capture the  
essence of a person’s character or of a  
given situation. But one should pay  
close attention to the use of a word  
which somehow limits, or even  
obliterates, that which it is put forth to  
describe. “Lady” is not a word to be us-  
ed loosely—and for those particularly  
concerned with proper vocabulary and  
pointed description, it should probably  
not be used at all.

No matter what you fight, don’t be  
ladylike! God Almighty made women  
and the Rockefeller gang of thieves  
made the ladies.

—“Mother” Mary Jones (1830-1930)