Ruth Santer and Craig Flanagin

In 1973, Samia Halaby was offered tenure at Indiana University but refused in order to come to Yale, where she has since been teaching in the School of Art. Her appointment came up for renewal last May 13, and she was not given tenure.

At the same time, two other women on the faculty of the School of Art came up for tenure and were denied. Of the 27 members of the Art faculty, only 2 of those who will be returning next fall are women.

Samia Halaby feels that the key reasons for the denial of her tenure application are her political stance, her outspokenness, and her attitudes about art. She also feels that she has been harassed as a Palestinian woman and that women in general are excluded from school policy and decision making. She is convinced that there is an inbred network within the school that is involved in all hiring procedures, including those of graduate students applying for jobs elsewhere. A statement detailing her grievances is available to those interested. She is eager to discuss her situation and that of women in general on the faculty.

We talked with her in her studio and at the New York gallery she owns with four other artists, where her work is being shown.

Q - Where is your disagreement with the faculty here?

S - I don’t think you should imitate. I think you should learn from the great artists and how they were in history, but not to redo what they did. That’s a cruel joke on history, and a cruel joke on the young artist who's trying to learn. It would be a waste for you to try to imitate Ingres or Leonardo. I’m telling you to go and see the most modern things. Experiment. The way I differ is that I’m willing to have students do anything, sometimes stimulating the wildest experimentation. I’m trusting that they’re intelligent people and that the art of recognition will take place. And they will say this I like and this I don’t like. In fact, when I’m teaching, I’m always amazed how few of the students don’t make an assertive act of recognition. Very few students say, “I’m completely lost, this is all just scribbly garbage to me.” I think when someone does something really new perhaps it scares them, because art does liberate individuals. They begin to feel a freedom to really do the things of today. They begin to talk about the experience. You feel a certain liberation and when you feel that, you start asserting that this is how the school should be...and also we should say something about how education should be.

I don’t think students are just empty containers that we stuff full of things then wind up and send out to operate. I think there’s a resistance that has to come from the student, a very strong resistance, where they say “I recognize this and I don’t recognize this.” There should be a discussion about this course or that course? All those things should be open for change. As a teacher, who receives my services? It’s you the student. And I think you should have some say about how that service is given and how effective it is.

Q - How do you think art affects society?

S - I really don’t think painting leads society. I think there is a total social, technological, economic development and the artist has to be at the forefront with it, try to comprehend it, give form and language to it, and present it. I don’t think individuals have the power to lead or form the direction of society. It’s an evolutionary process, if you as an artist study the history of art and the history of space development you can, with an open eye to the present and an open mind about the present, have predictive power about the future. But it’s not a prophetic power that’s independent of the social tensions so to speak - the social presence.

Q - You can’t be visionary?

S - What seeing ahead is, is being at the forefront and being that individual who’s able to see what the whole society has accomplished but hasn’t individually seen, hasn’t written about, hasn’t documented, or hasn’t even used. That's where painting is and that’s why I think the young painter now has a responsibility, and that’s where education has a responsibility to tell the young painter that that’s where she is heading or he is heading, and that’s what they have to accomplish, and not an imitation of the past. The past is vital, but you can’t waste your time reinventing it. You have to be involved with the world the way it is now.

Q - This being involved with the present is what you mean when you talk about our duty to the future as artists.

S - Yes. Our duty to the future as painters and my duty as a teacher, or your duty as a student to be really resistant, if you think things are not being done right, or if you don’t recognize the ideas I’m telling you about. I think teachers should be recalled by students when students aren’t happy with them.

I really think that it should be a cooperative. I think there should be committees of students, teachers, and workers who run a school.

Q - You said in your statement that the art faculty here believes there is a spiritual content to art.

S - Yes, and I don’t at all. Mondrian and Rothko - their paintings are said to be about higher things - about the spirit, not about the city, not about light and windows and doorways. Mondrian observes details in nature - he drew cathedrals, piers, flowers, trees. His “plus and minus” series is a distillation of the details he saw - the relationships that were common to all the things he saw. But they mean something to us because we can equate them to something we need and is real in the world. I'll tell you the difference. Here they think that abstract art comes from the brain.

Flying High with Hope for Local 34, No. 2. by Samia Halaby