page 10

by Margaret Jacobs

The two black dogs who loll about on  
the bottom half of my bed are licking their  
paws. My bed shakes with their concen-  
trated, steady licking and gnawing. My  
legs are cramped between them. I am  
trying to sleep.

Sleep, though, is elusive. Every few  
minutes I doze off, perhaps have a short  
dream, and then wake abruptly as if an  
alarm has gone off. I attune my ears to the  
room next door to make sure I hear an oc-  
casional cough, or snore, or general  
breathing. The clock ticks off the time left.

I reach my hand outside my quilt. It has  
gotten a little too hot. In fact, my whole  
body is a little too hot. So I throw off the  
top of my covers. The dogs are momentar-  
ily irritated, but quickly go back to their  
licking. Then it is too cold — I put the  
quilt back around me but leave one hand  
out. I bend it back and forth, cracking my  
wrist. I can’t seem to stretch it enough.  
When I extend my five fingers out, the  
gaps between them aren’t large enough.  
My fingers want to tear apart from my  
hand, and fly off in every direction. I tuck  
my discontented hand under my pillow,  
hoping to give it some of the solace of the  
cool tranquil space between pillow and  
sheet.

My hand glides happily along under my  
pillow until it encounters a foreign,  
strangely-textured object. A flimsy piece  
of some sort of paper, slightly folded. I  
pull it out — a piece of Kleenex, the  
scented kind. My grandmother’s brand. So  
now I know; she’d been in my room,  
maybe even sleeping in my bed. I can’t go  
anywhere in our house without coming  
upon one of those nasty things. Why can’t  
she dispose of them like a normal person,  
in a trash can, instead of tucking them dis-  
cretely under pillows or in the pages of a  
book, or in the pockets of her smocks. I’ve  
asked her a million times why she insists  
on trailing Kleenex around the house. She  
justifies it by saying that she uses them  
over again so as not to waste any. But I  
notice her. I see her using Kleenex after  
Kleenex, never returning to the old, col-  
lecting a huge store of the barely-used  
ones in all her secret places. If we took all  
the damn Kleenex she used we would  
have enough to insulate our house. She’s  

so stubborn about doing it too, so fanati-  
cal. She just has to be like that with her  
Kleenex; she won't listen to me when I tell  
her they should be thrown away. Why?  
she asks me. Because. Because it bugs me  
to find these rotting pieces of paper with  

GOOD WOMEN AND  
MEN NEEDED  

FOR 1984/85  
RESIDENT ASSISTANT  

AURORA  

Blue On Blue  

little portions of snot on them wherever I  
go. Here I am now, lying in bed, early mor-  
ning, trying to sleep. And this silly god-  
damn piece of your Kleenex is keeping me  
awake. That’s why!

Silence.

She can sleep. She’s sleeping calmly,  
her breathing regular and strong. The dogs  
have stopped gnawing on their paws;  
they're asleep too. One is jerking his legs  
and smiling, dreaming about running out  
in a field somewhere.

I tuck the Kleenex under my mattress,  
farther away. I close my eyes, trying to  
force sleep upon myself. The dogs sound  
like great snoring hogs, my grandmother’s  
breathing seems to be piped through a  
megaphone into my ear. The wind rattles  
against my window. The clock buzzes—  
along. What time is it anyway? 7:15. Soon  
the rest of the house will awaken. Then  
they will come to my door one by one and  
shake their heads and whisper, “She sure  
sleeps a lot,” to themselves. Then if I turn  
my eyes upon them, puzzled eyes stare  
back at me: What's wrong? Nothing. Noth-  
ing at all. I’m happy in my bed.

From my bed I can see all that I need to  
— out my window, the sky, the bare tops  
of trees. Inside I can see my coiled rug, the  
light above me on the ceiling, spiderwebs,  
the light switch on the wall. My sagging  
unwatered plants on my deserted book-  
shelf. My colorful quilt and my sighing  
sleeping dogs. I can even see myself in my  
huge old antique mirror if I rouse myself  
to sit up.

But I'd rather stay lying down.

I study the sky — pure gray today. No  
trace of either black or blue. There are no  
patterns to imagine in it. It is empty gray. I  
used to awaken in summers long ago and  
play with the clouds outside my window  
before getting out of bed. I conjured up  
dragons and ships and enchanted people  
and faraway exotic places. I thrust myself  
into the clouds, knowing that someday all  
the patterns in them would be real so I had  
better practice.

All grayness now.

I try to shift my vision to the ceiling but  
my eyes keep returning to the sky. Hoping  
to find some lighter trace or darker line,  
something to draw a figure with. I search  
for movement, for clouds floating, ghosts  
dancing.

But nothing. Grayness unmoving. I turn  
over and away.

In my new position, curled and inward,  
I cloak myself in my old quilt. My warmth  
and color after looking at the gaping,  
blank sky. My quilt is full of colors that  

POSITIONS  

issues in the residences, consider applying to be an RA.

If you're interested in raising awareness of crucial political and social  

Statements of job expectations, compensation information,  

the Residential Education Office, 311 Old Union, 497-3044.

descriptions of the selection process and applications are available in  

Completed applications are due by 4 p.m. on Friday, April 6.

have been faded through annual wash and  
dry cycles. It is torn and flawed, but all the  
more lovable because of it. Grandma and  
I made it when I was eight. I would  
pretend to be sick and stay home from  
school so I could watch her stitching and  
help piece it together and thread the yarn  
through each square to tack it. Hours of  
fascination.

Out of the silence — breath on breath on  
breath on breath. Steady, steady. I listen.  
She will never get up again. Her bed is her  
home. I understand, lying down, absorb-  
ing, not exerting or expending any energy.  
Quiet. Warm. I won’t get up.

I slept just now. A good twenty minutes.  
But awakened by a face in the doorway.  
Mom. Frowns: What has happened to  
you? “Do you want some breakfast?” she  
asks. I shake my head. “Aren’t you  
hungry?” Shake my head no again, “Grandma had  
toast and coffee this morning.” I nod. “Do  
you want some too?” Shake my head no.  
“Why not?” I shrug.

All silence. She shrugs back. And she  
turns and is gone.

My dogs have jumped off the bed. I  
spread my legs gratefully. Space in my  
bed. I flay my toes in all directions. I  
stretch my ankles, the bones crack after  
being so long confined. Once stretched  
they refuse to return to resting position.  
The tension of my old discontented hand  
has invaded the rest of me. My arms start  
to feel bound. They beg for more room. I  
must get them out from under my quilt. I  
must stretch. My back is sore and aching. I  
must arch it and bend it. My body is  
cramped in every muscle and bone, and I  
can’t, I just can’t extend it enough. But I  
want to rest here in my bed, I don’t want to  
get up and stretch. I don't ever want to get  
up. I am comfortable here, wrapped in  
warmth. I can breathe and stare and that  
is enough. No need to get up. I want to  
sink into my bed until I become just an-  
other part of it.

I hear a moan from next door. A sudden  
jerk in my body, alert. But I sink down  
again. I hope Mom hears her. I don’t want  
to go in there anymore. And I don’t want  
to get up. Another moan now. My body,  
taut, must clamp itself to the bed. Come on  
Mom, take care of it. No footsteps, no other  
sounds. Another moan. I pull my pillow  
over my head, and sing to myself. “On a  
Clear Day” loud in my head. But the  
moans seep through my pillow. I throw off  
the pillow, the quilt; I get out of bed. The  
cold air immediately shoots into me, get-  
ting right to the empty gaps in my bones. I  

LOOK TO THE COFFEE  

March 1984  

walk toward the closet to get a robe. I falter  
and stumble, achy and dizzy. The moans  
continue. She needs someone, she needs  
me. Fast. The robe is on, tied. I rush out of  
my room to go next door.

Her hand is clenching at the air above  
her head, her eyes closed, locked way back  
in her head. I reach and clasp her hand,  
her bones as sharp and cold as icicles. She  
opens her eyes and she stares. Blue, blue  
eyes, frightened. Not puzzled or implor-  
ing. Not judging. Frightened. We stare at  
one another. I, angry, mad at being driven  
from my bed, besieged by the cold. But her  
eyes and my eyes transfixed on one an-  
other, blueness on blueness.

I wrap around her hand more fiercely. I  

lean down and squat by her bed. We stare.  
More of her goddamn Kleenex lie scat-  
tered about even though there is a waste  
basket right next to her bed. She hasn’t  
even bothered to hide them now. Raw  
blueness staring me in the face. Her hand  
is thawing out; it is even warming my  
own.

I shut my eyes for a few seconds, the  
color in her stare overwhelming me. I  
open to more blue, and I notice now the  
tender etchings around her eyes. They  
wander all over her face. I reach out with  
my other hand, with my fingertips. I want  
to trace these graceful lines. We stare, we  
clutch, I trace. I linger on her forehead; I  
play with her fine white hair. Soft clouds  
of hair. I stroke down to her mouth; the  
corners spread, the lips open. Smile.

We stare, fear and anger melting. Now  
all I see are great gushes of blue. I am an  
innocent child again, full of wonder at this  
wild rawness, at this adventure, this life I  

cont’d on pg. 11  

for superb coffee, espresso drinks, fine food,  
desserts, pastries, premium beers and wines,  

outdoor garden patio, and live entertainment.  
The student hot spot on campus.

Open days and evenings.

located in Tresidder Union  

Students serving students