IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Rules:
1. Fix obvious OCR errors (like '0' instead of 'O', '1' instead of 'l')
2. Preserve the original line breaks and text blocks.
3. Preserve the original meaning and historical context.
4. Do not add any additional text.
5. Do not delete any text.
6. Process EVERY line - do not skip any content.

Corrected text:

ie” OF

Frances  
Had Been  
Left Alone  
Too Often  

Bill’s occupation with business, his insensitivity, his  
indifference had drained their marriage of meaning  
and warmth.  

Yet it never occurred to her to think of divorce—or  
to have an affair with another man. It was easier to  
shut herself off from all desire, all feeling.  

It was like being dead. But it was safe.  

Now, Bake—with her dark, knowing eyes, her tense  
young body, so alive, so full of passion and hunger,  
had changed all that.  

FAWCETT WORLD LIBRARY  

toy O- Dibbell ©1465 OU  
at -n ak You Know, BAB, |  

The Pink Pussycat Bow Tie!  

VIGIT  

4  

Ko  
ae? y  
£ x 7 The Color  
ae eee  
. :  
. y iy  
: UG  
Uy,  

Te  

iy  

A DYKE FOR IKE F  

The following is an excerpt from a letter which appeared in The Ladder in  
March 1958. It exemplifies the relative unsophistication of lesbian politics in the  
1950s. I wonder if Sandra Pine knew that Eisenhower signed Executive Order  
10450 which extended President Truman’s loyalty-security program to include sex-  
ual perversion as grounds for automatic dismissal from federal jobs (D’Emilio,  
p.44)? Miss Pine had been involved in a fifteen-year love affair, and was an ex-  
ecutive with a major corporation, when she wrote to The Ladder to proclaim, “Yes  
I am!”:  

When my secretary, a clever young woman who had been with me for ten  
years, said to me recently when she accidentally saw my copy of The Ladder:  
“What do you want with that stuff—you’re no homosexual,” I knew my mask had  
never slipped, and I was secretly proud of the fact. But I pine for the day when  
I can say “I am a Lesbian” with the same ease I say “I am a Republican.”  

A Catchy Tune  

Del Martin and Phyllis Lyon reminisce about the difference between East and  
West Coast dykes in the 1950s:  

We were holding our first ever National Lesbian Convention and Lisa Ben thought  
of this great song. It went like this: “We are the gopher girls, we only go fer girls,  
we never go fer men, so here we go again. Did you have yours today? I had mine  
yesterday. That’s why I walk this way. Tararaboomdeeay!” Well, we all loved it  
but Barbara Grier from the New York DOB chapter thought it was just awful!  

nate VES oe cme eort  

oBIA 2B  
} = zis INTO my SORE WHERE THEY  
$aL nasty  

Device  
ss,  

ol  

i  

On IN 4 ITT OCA Aer,  
YEAH. Gosh, RACISM WST PERMEATES  
EVERY PART OF OUR SOCIETY:--