Alexander v. Yale —

The Sexual

Harassment Suit

By Anne E. Simon

For what must have been the fiftieth
time, I was hearing it again—sexual ha-
rassment of women students was not a
big problem; if it happened (which it
probably did not), then surely the
university would take care of it; why
were we wasting the time and
money of the federal courts on such a
trivial non-problem? The speaker, a
male lawyer, was making these points
at the top of his lungs, in the grip of
deep and powerful emotions—that
showed in the tension of his face and
body, as well as the volume of his voice.
So if sexual harassment is such a trivial
non-problem, I asked myself for the fif-
tieth time, why is this man so upset?

In the summer of 1977, a group of
women students and a male faculty
member at Yale were questioning the
same thing. They decided that the time
had come to bring this “non-problem”
into the open, and try to make the peo-
ple in authority at Yale give it the atten-
tion it deserved, but they had denied.

The students and faculty person chose a
straightforward, very conventional
method: they sued. Specifically, they sued
Yale for violating Title IX of the Educa-
tion Amendments of 1972, which forbids
sex discrimination in educational pro-
grams receiving federal funds. The suit
claimed that Yale discriminates against
its women students because, by failing
to have a policy against sexual harass-
ment, and failing to have an adequate
mechanism to deal with complaints, it
tolerates and condones sexual harass-
ment.

The work that became Alexander, et
al. v. Yale University, filed in July 1977
in United States District Court in New
Haven, began long before anyone
thought of lawsuits. Members of the
Yale Undergraduate Women’s Caucus
realized that many stories about sexual
harassment were told on campus; the
consistency and persistence of the re-
ports led to a decision to do a systemat-
ic investigation. Several important
things emerged during these months:
first, there was a serious problem of
sexual harassment; second, each victim
often thought that she was the only wo-
man to have such a problem, and that it
must, in some way, be her fault. Third,
the numerous victims uniformly found
that there was no procedure (nor even
any person) within the university struc-
ture that was available for their com-
plaints. Fourth, the Yale administration,
far from being grateful that a major fail-
ure of its educational program had been
brought to light, and taking steps to
correct it, instead did its best to discou-
rage and intimidate the Caucus investi-
gators, and minimize and deny the re-
sults of their work.

Several of the people who had come
forward to confront the administration
during the Caucus investigation in the
spring of 1977 decided during the
summer that their only recourse was the
courts. They sued the university, seek-
ing a workable, effective procedure for
dealing with sexual harassment com-
plaints, including some way of disciplin-
ing offending faculty members.

After the suit was filed, a small story
about it appeared in the New Haven
Advocate. Within a month, a large num-
ber of stories in the conventional press
were about “sex and scandal at Yale.”
A few took the claims seriously enough
to report them correctly, but almost
none had any perspective or analysis.
Nevertheless, the Caucus and the plain-
tiffs’ lawyers received large numbers of
inquiries from women around the coun-
try, who recognized their own situations
in what had been reported.

The news coverage took a tack that
was to be a consistent theme, not only
of the media, but of Yale and the
courts, throughout the litigation. The
claims of the plaintiffs were seen as
totally individual, particular interperson-
al incidents that had no relationship to
Yale as an institution, to the process of
education, or to the experience of other
women. This view was annoying, if
somewhat understandable, when taken
in a half-column news article. It was
strategically necessary to Yale’s de-
fense, since it reduced the scope and
political import of the allegations.

The plaintiffs faced a number of ob-
stacles in presenting their claims in
legal form. The first legal issue of great
importance is obvious, but so over-
looked in the treatment of the case that
it merits special mention and analysis.
At the time Alexander was filed, no
court had ever said that sexual harass-
ment in education was sex discrimina-
tion, illegal under Title IX. The signal
victory of the lawsuit came in the first
ruling, in December 1977, holding that
sexual harassment was sexual discrimin-
ation, and educational institutions were
responsible for doing something about
it.

This result has proven hard to digest
for the media—which still have hardly
noticed it—and for the court. Having
made the breakthrough, the court
limited it as much as possible, saying
that the only one among the plaintiffs
who was even in a position to try to
prove sex discrimination was the one
who alleged:

1. a straight-up grade-for-sex proposi-
tion, and

2. her outright refusal, and

3. her punishment by a lowered
grade, and

4. her persistent complaints to numer-
ous university personnel, and

5. their failure to take appropriate ac-
tion, and

6. her view that this failure was part
of a systematic failure of the university
to deal with sexual harassment.

One other plaintiff, alleging rape, which
she complained about but Yale did not
investigate, was not allowed to go to tri-
al. Another woman, who was assaulted
but did not complain because there was
nobody and nothing to complain to, was
also dismissed.

It was, however, a landmark decision.
Once sexual harassment was established
as sex discrimination, the way was open
for victims of sexual harassment to sue.
The hurdle that required most of the
legal work, and had the most devastat-
ing effect on the suit, was the issue of
whether individual students and faculty
members could sue their universities for
violating Title IX, or whether injured
students and faculty could only com-
plain to the Department of Health, Edu-
cation and Welfare about sex discrimin-
ation, leaving it up to HEW to do (or
not to do) something about it. At the
time the suit was brought, the scant
legal authority suggested that individu-
als could not sue universities directly.
To Yale, this was the major issue raised
by the suit: whether Yale, as an institu-
tion, could be made to answer for its
policies and conduct in a federal court.
It vigorously resisted the possibility, to
the point of trying twice to have the suit
dismissed, on identical legal grounds.

However, Yale’s position was rejected
by the Supreme Court in another case,
Cannon v. University of Chicago, which
upheld the right to sue. The effect of
this decision on the five Alexander
plaintiffs dismissed prior to the decision
made in Cannon is one of the issues in
the appeal that is now pending.

The plaintiffs’ view that the case
was about all women’s success at Yale
request for class action status, in effect
refused to consider the system-
ic nature of sexual harassment, and its
pervasive effect on all women, not just
those who are directly forced to
choose between bad grades and unwanted sex.

The case came to trial almost a year
ago in January 1979. Despite the fact
that the entire case was about discrim-
ination, the judge did not permit evi-
dence of any incidents of sexual harass-
ment other than the one involving the
named plaintiff. Nor was any evidence
allowed about Yale’s response, as an in-
stitution, to sexual harassment or sexual
harassment complaints. The entire issue
was compacted and distorted into “her
word against his,” and treated as an
unfortunate accident, like a car crash.
Yale was able to appear, not as one of
the culprits (it was, after all, the only
defendant), but as a concerned passer-
by, voluntarily trying to help anyone in-
jured in the accident, but without any
obligation to help—or to have tried to
prevent it.

Not surprisingly under those circum-
stances, the case was lost at trial.
Under the auspices of the Center for
Constitutional Rights, in New York City,
it is now on appeal to the United States
Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit.
The plaintiffs hope to come out of the
appeal with a broader, more realistic
definition of the legal injury of sexual
harassment, and a model of proving a
case at trial that would actually make it
possible for the woman to win.

Liberating the courts as a forum for
discussing such a significant problem
for women has been a major contribu-
tion of the Alexander suit. More import-
ant, however, has been its effect on
women across the country, who are now
beginning to fight back—and they are fighting back
by organizing on scores of campuses.