34

‘Ten Years Of Women At Yale

Two Conferences

“Ten Years of Women at Yale” was
the general theme of two very different
conferences which took place in October
1979. “The Women of Yale” was the
topic of the Association of Yale Alumni
(AYA) Fifteenth Assembly, which will
move on to consider “Athletics” at the
Sixteenth Assembly this spring. “Women
at Yale: Transitions” was discussed in a
day-long alumni-student conference
sponsored by the Office of the Education
of Women.

Few students attended the AYA
Assembly, while more than nine hundred
came to the Office of Education of
Women’s conference held the next day.
Wendy McCredie is one of the very few
students who went to the two conferences;
this is a review of both.

~By Wendy McCredie

The Association of Yale Alumni
(AYA) conference, “The Women of
Yale,” functioned mainly as an analysis
of the first ten years of women in Yale
College: what their effect has been on
the University at large and, more specifically, on the life in Yale College. There
was a tendency to concentrate on the
latter question. The general view at the
conference seemed to be that having
women at Yale improves the atmosphere
that the men live in. They familiarize
themselves with women, they learn the
social graces; which, as one man at the
Transitions conference that took place
the next day pointed out, was a major
reason that women were admitted to
Yale College ten years ago. The first
classes of Yale women were divided
equally among the twelve residential
colleges—about fifteen per college—so
that each would have its “fair share.”
As a consequence, many of the first
women undergraduates were very lonely
their first year here and felt no sense of
solidarity. Nevertheless, many returned
the next fall recognizing the importance
of a supportive community of other
women and they joined the already
existing women’s group, the “Sister-
hood,” which previously had had only a
small membership.

In the “Quality of Undergraduate Life
at Yale” workshop, the question of a
need for an all-women’s group such as
the Yale Undergraduate Women's Caucus
was raised. One alumnus asked if it
were really necessary; if some women
were not simply “chasing shadows” since
all the other women seemed to adapt
quite easily to the pressures of the Yale
environment. We, as women, were not
being oppressed; rather, he implied, we
were simply incapable of handling the
pressure at Yale and had found a scapegoat—namely sexual oppression—for our
own frustrations.

This attitude is not limited to alumni,
unfortunately. Many undergraduates,
both men and women, feel the same.
Why do we women—some of us anyway—
complain? Don’t we have everything
the men have? Isn’t the ratio of men
and women undergraduates almost
equal? (What about the ratio of men
and women graduate students?) Aren’t
all the buildings open to us? Even
Mory’s allows female members. How
much more can we possibly want?

MORE TENURED WOMEN PROFESSORS. The administration replies that
there are fewer qualified women than
there are qualified men; that there are
few positions open or opening up; that
women don’t like Yale/New Haven (it’s
difficult to tell which one they mean);
that women follow their husbands so it
is “useless to provide one with a perma-
nent position.” However, as Professor
Ruth Marcus, one of the panelists at the
AYA conference pointed out, it is tre-
mendously discouraging for a woman
student not to have any vision whatso-
ever of what she may aspire to. The
lack of tenured women professors is an
“impediment to her hopes and self-con-
fidence.” She continued, explaining that
on a purely intellectual level, role
models aside, women have a right to be
in tenured positions; they ought to be
there. Yale does not need women pro-
fessors because they serve as role
models; Yale needs them because it is
their right intellectually to be there.

We are women. We are not men and
we have something different to offer
because we have been oppressed for so
many centuries. We have a different,
though no less valid understanding of
the system. We see it through the eyes
of an oppressed person, while the white
male student sees it with the eyes of a
person who, simply because of sex and
color, the system favors overwhelmingly.
He has a tradition of being at Yale—of
dominating. He is, however, oppressed
just as women are, although in a different
way: being such a part of the system
makes it extremely difficult to break
away from it or sometimes to even see
beyond it.

There were very few women at the
conference on The Women of Yale, and
those who did attend participated only
slightly in it. In the more intimate
workshops, several women other than the
facilitators spoke. They were mostly
wives of alumni. One of them questioned
the lack of alumnae and asked her
husband why there were not more
women representatives at a conference
about women. He was embarrassed and
mumbled a comment that women were
not interested in the AYA conferences.
His wife persisted, asking why no effort
had been made to specifically include
them in the conference. Her husband
replied that it simply was not AYA
policy. It was up to the women them-
selves to find out about the conference
if they wanted to participate in it.

Granted, since many women have been
at Yale for only ten years, there are
many fewer women graduates; however,
as the alumnus’ wife pointed out, this
would be all the more reason for them
to have a specific interest in this partic-
ular conference. Also, they might have
been able to contribute valuable insight
to it, particularly in the area of career
counseling.

But basically the AYA conference was
about Yale women, from the outside.
“The purpose of the conference,” said
a male alumnus involved with planning,
“is to show old Blues that women aren’t
that bad.”

At all turns, the Conference failed to
address the alternative lifestyles that
are becoming more and more necessary
as women fill highly demanding posi-
tions. The panel failed to answer one
man who dismissed the problem of
choice between family and career with
his observation that, “We men face
exactly the same choice as women—ei-
ther be successful or a father.” It was
not pointed out that for many women,
there is no choice between success and
motherhood. They are one and the same
thing in the eyes of the world. A woman,
as society sees it, has the choice between
being a success (as a mother and woman)
or being a career woman and giving up
on success as a wife, a mother, a woman.
A woman’s choice now is becoming more
and more between a career outside the
home and one within it, an either/or
situation. A man is in a different bind
since the choice has already been made
for him: he will have a career outside
the house. Traditionally, the woman will
care for the home and for women a career
outside the home. This must be a joint
project, not one for men or women alone.
Both sexes are missing out on valuable
experiences; men on the joys of a family,
and women on the pursuit of a life out-
side the family.

Another workshop, on career plan-
ning, also failed to address the question
of alternative lifestyles. It was admitted
that neither Yale nor the Alumni
sources provide much information or
help for people, both men and women,
who are interested in pursuing careers
other than law, medicine, business,
finance, etc. Perhaps they feel that any-
one coming out of Yale with such inter-
ests must have enough strength to pur-
sue this on their own with no guidance
whatsoever from them. Again, here was
a confirmation that women are fitting
into the Yale mold and Yale jobs.
Rather than change the elitist Yale
image, they are perpetuating it while
giving it the grace that women are tra-
ditionally attributed with! As one woman
at the Transitions conference pointed
out, when women were first admitted
to Yale College it was said that despite
this fact, the institution of Yale would
continue to turn out one thousand male
leaders each year...

The AYA conference justified the
presence of women at Yale by proving
to the Alumni that women have not
changed their school; that women pose
no threat to the institution. Yale has
succeeded in indoctrinating its women,
just as it has its men, in making them
part of the system even though the sys-
tem’s very nature excludes them. This
can be demonstrated by the fact that
many women, as well as men, see any
women’s group as unnecessary and
even threatening since these groups ad-
vocate change. Many women see no dis-
crimination against them because they
have integrated themselves and accom-
modated themselves to a system that
does nothing to accommodate or even
welcome them.

TRANSITIONS

Dean Judith Brandenburg opened the
Women and Yale: Transitions confer-
ence on an optimistic note, pointing out
that there are now women in almost all
areas of the University (how many is a
different story) and that there are
several support systems that have been
established to serve women’s specific
needs. Voicing the hope that budgetary
constraints would not erode the prog-
ress already made, she next commented
on the lack of women on the faculty and
gave several reasons why this is so (the
same reasons that Dean Howard Lamar
had given the alumni the day before).

1. Statistics—there simply are not as
many qualified women as there are
men. (Is a determined search being
made?)

2. Climate—Yale simply does not
appeal to women professors because of
its environment, e.g., the portraits of
men looking down from the walls. (Why
is nothing done to change this or at
least make it more palatable?)

3. Women are loyal to their husbands
rather than to Yale. (Perhaps there is no
reason for any commitment on the
woman’s part. Is Yale so committed to
her?)

With these thoughts Dean Branden-
burg introduced the panelists.

Judith Rodin, a professor of psychol-
ogy at Yale, and Laura Bornholdt (Smith
‘42, Yale ’45) were the first speakers;
both agreed that the discrimination they
felt and feel is on a social rather than
an intellectual level. Bornholdt pointed
out that during her years at Yale there
were no women administrators, no
women professors, and there were
library rooms that were closed to her
simply on the basis of her sex.

The next panelist, Betsy Hartmann
(Yale ’73), told us she was delighted,
upon coming back to Yale as a seminar
instructor, to find a “support system of
organizations” for women. However,
she posed the question of whether we
as women wanted to assimilate into the
elitist institution and “climb the same
ladder” as the men, or whether we
should change it. She concluded saying
that we as women must fight the elit-
ist tradition that Yale not only repre-
sents but also strongly supports.

Traci West, a current student in Yale
College, continued in the same vein,
stating that women must stop reacting
to the male system and begin to define
themselves in relation to themselves
and their own forgotten history rather
than in relation and reaction to men and
their traditions. We as women must
create our own tradition or resurrect it.

Sonya Alvarez, a graduate of Smith
College and currently a graduate stu-
dent in the political science department
at Yale, brought the discussion back to
the more specific topic of Yale itself,
suggesting that structural change would
be necessary before any real progress
would be made. Sexism, she said, has
become institutionalized. (This did not
surprise some of us.) She went on to
analyze the choices women face when
they enter an institution such as Yale.