27 The Lesbian Body:

An Imitative Discourse

cont. from p.25

The ‘women’ are the goddesses Sap-
pho, Aphrodite, Persephone, Ishtar,
Albina, and more. The women are also
non-deities, sometimes Amazons, sea
nymphs, Dionysian dancers, servants,
disciples, or a Greek Chorus.
Sometimes they worship us, bringing us
offerings of exquisite perfumes,
sometimes they keep us apart, loosing
the dogs of the islands on me so I can-
not approach you, and sometimes they
crucify one of us, once putting me into
a fire to burn. The unpredictability of
our relations with the “women” imitates
the changeability of the bonds between
you, I, and the goddess, as the shape
and situation of the island resemble
whirlpools in the sea.

I make known to you the origination
and destination of our arrow-like
journey within the first two episodes of
the story. We begin “in this dark adored
adorned gehenna,” aiming to reach
“the slow sweet poisoned country from
which one cannot return” if Sappho
will lend me “the lips the tongue the
saliva” that we need in order to get
there. Like the arrow, our method of
travel is flight, which we practice
throughout the tale.

Now we are spinning rapidly at the
top of the palm trees and suddenly
my most ravishing one you begin
to laugh while you draw me in a
straight line above the island dwell-
ings towards the sea.

We must rise from this ‘gehenna’, a
New Testament term for hell, to
achieve our destination, “the slow
sweet poisoned country” which is fatal ~~
because we cannot return from there. It
is a wet place, entered via “the lips the
tongue the saliva,” like your vagina,
like the sea.

Once, we are in Golgotha, where
Jesus was crucified. I feel painfully
lonely for you. You are there beside
me with all the women but all of you
are asleep while I suffer in my lone-
liness, a personal hell. Like Jesus in the
Garden of Gethsemane, three times I
cry up to the mother goddess, “mother
mother why have you forsaken me?”
believing, like God, you mother god-
dess reside in the Heavens above.
Neither you nor the mother goddess
nor the other women respond to my
screams.

We have our own trinity, you, I, and
the goddesses, which resembles in form
the Holy Trinity of God, his Son Jesus,
and the Holy Spirit. The Trinity is im-
agined standing upright, with God
resting at the summit transferring
his authority down to Jesus, and all
mankind, through the Holy Spirit. Our
trinity is more circular, and more fluid.
It floats horizontally in the water.

After you did not answer my cries of
“mother mother why have you for-
saken me?” I swam out to sea and
shouted for you there. I found you:
suddenly it seems to me that you
are the water which comes and
goes in the closest confines of my
body my very glorious one my
most eternal beloved...

As our love enriches, I learn that I do
not need to define you to know you, as
Adam felt he had to define woman.
Sometimes we assert the right to name
the other, rising up above the other as if
we were God. Once, I claim to be an
island chieftain and you are my guest
for dinner. Because you do not respond
to my affections, I assault you after
the meal. “I rank your back and flanks,
when at last you turn towards me cry-
ing my name.” But for you to fix me
with a name affords us no lasting hap-
piness. Only when I relinquish my
powerful stand, give up my name, and
accept you as nameless, do we
discover our nirvana.

I am the sovereign one...but I im-
mediately relinquish my in-
dubitable hierarchical position at
your arrival... raising you from your
kneeling position... I say blessed art
thou among women who art come
first to release me from my condi-
tion glittering maybe but sombre
nonetheless because of my very
great solitude, may you lose your
sense of morning and evening of
the stupid duality with all that
flows therefrom, may you conceive
yourself as I at last see you over
the greatest possible space giving
yourself to sit at my side at the
apogee of the figuration of lesbian
love my most unknown.

When I step down from my in-
dubitable hierarchical position, you lift
up to my side. Our apogee is unlike
God's lofty apogee, situated in the sky
above the earth. Our apogee
transcends “the stupid duality” so that
while we rest at the apogee we also dif-
fuse from the center of “the greatest
possible space.” The apogee is the con-
summation of our physical love, like an
orgasm, and our love is so real that I do
not even need to know your name. In
your namelessness, you are “my most
beloved.”

At the end of the saga we have final-
ly practiced our flying often enough
that we are ready to recreate the

Annie’s features

California Cuisine

Experience the ultimate
in fresh ingredients and
creative preparation

19 Edwards Street -
New Haven 865-4200

Annie's

Firehouse
Restaurant

Open 7 Days
Lunch and Dinner
Sunday Brunch

Stiggin' on teaching the sea.

Ascension. In the second-to-last
episode we escape from the island to
there where the sun can melt the
wings of wax you bear me O ra-
diant Felise in the wavering journey
you undertake with some temerity.

You, “O radiant Felise” —meaning
‘feline’ or ‘felix’ for happiness—and I
aim for the sun because the sun is the
eye of Heaven, the symbol of God. To
recreate Jesus’ ascent, we must pretend
to be seeking God. But like Daedalus
and Icarus, we come too close to the
sun, and our wings melt. Unlike Jesus,
we were not meant to climb that near
the Holy male God.

I am the first to succumb, I fall
backwards my wings broken you
following me closely headfirst the
women are all very far down below
standing watching the most ir-
remediable fall of all...

Our journey was doomed to fail.
Firstly, it was “wavering” and “under-
taken with temerity,” whereas a flight
of this import should be steady and the
flyers should be confident. Other “ir-
remediable falls” include Adam and
Eve’s fall from the state of immortal
grace, which made them and their
children mortal, and which determined
women’s subordination to men. But this
is “the most irremediable fall of all”
because it confirms, once and for all of
us, our alienation from God, our
separation from the God-myth, and our
distinction from men and male
language. This fall also carries us to the
locus of our own truth, the sea.

May the goddesses ensure that you
that I will be able to hear their

The sea holds many memories for us.
It is where I found you when you would
not answer in the Garden. It is where
our trinity floats. It is where Aphrodite
was born, rising out of the foam, and
therefore is the reservoir of love. It is
dark and wet like your vagina. Long
ago, I begged Sappho to give me “the
lips the tongue the saliva,” to coax you
to “the slow sweet poisoned country”
of our dreams. Like waves which wrap
around our bodies, we are submerged
in that fine salty fluid, ‘sweet’ and
‘poisoned’ because we can never
return. Only “their cries,” the cries of
the women or the goddesses or both,
will remind us in our ecstasy that we
rose and fell not only for ourselves but
for all womankind.

As we learn not to name each other
through the story, the language of the
women is transforming. Once, the
women awaken from sleep to discover

WORLD CAPITALIST CRISIS
AND THE RISE OF THE RIGHT

Edited by Marlene Dixon,
Susanne Jonas & Fony Platt

A powerful analysis of the Right
which takes into account the
deepening crisis in the U.S. and
world economy. Theoretical es-
says by Marlene Dixon, Immanuel
Wallerstein, Andre Gunder Frank
and Rod Bush provide new insights
into the growing dangers of neofas-
cism. Other essays also examine this
subject in relation to racism, the
attack on women, and corporate ties
to the religious Right. Related
works by Bertram Gross, Victor
Navasky and Manning Marable are
also reviewed in this 160-page
volume $6.50

“the pure and simple disappearance of
the vowels.” Their speech sounds ap-
palling without the vowels, but they ac-
custom themselves quickly. They pro-
ceed to sing and then dance and touch
to replace the loss. One night, I watch
the women saying good night to each
other. They “kiss each other on the
mouth one after the other” and “they
repeat a phrase stressing the sound
s...or something like that.” The sound s
recalls the hushing sound of the waves.

The women do not effect the change
of their speech themselves, for they
awaken to discover the vowels are
gone. We, by our sacrifice, have deter-
mined the transformation of the
women’s language by inscribing the sea
as the equivalent of Heaven into our
mythology and thus have built a pier
upon which our new language can be
secured. The rest of our mythology is
this story.

Having performed our duty, you and
I hear the cries of the women, which
return us to the island. Coming out of
our ecstasy, we are on the island in real
time and space. A carnival is going on.
Amidst the games, reminders of our as-
cent and fall are evident. “All are to be
seen head-over-heels” or “someone
begins a standing double somersault”
reproduce the arrow-like movement of
our journey. The women, as before,
sing and dance, and the eddy-like
movement is used to describe their
singing in circular form. Furthermore,
they do not use words, having learned
by our legendary demonstration that
words do not convey what women
want to say. But sadly, they have not
yet incorporated physical touch into
their new vocabulary. The singing, the
dancing, the smell of praline mixed
with flowers creates a peaceful picture
that screams with tristesse. The women, though
they sing happily, wear number tags
markers on their shoulders like
prisoners of war. I watch you and try to
catch your gaze, but you only stare out
towards the sea, remembering the
heights of love we reached there, and
are prohibited from experiencing now.

The absence of physical touch im-
prisons the women on the islands. We
must know our bodies if the new
language is to be incorporated into our
daily lives. Can it be done? The words
that describe the parts of the lesbian
body are capitalized and interjected in
chant-like lists to remind us where we
must begin. Even if we are women all
together, until we experience the depth
of lesbian truth, we shall be held to our
island and we shall never have the ex-
hilaration of being at sea either for
ourselves, or in our mythology.

WOMEN IN CLASS STRUGGLE

by Marlene Dixon

Clarifying the real position of
women in society, this book
explodes the myths dominating
women's lives. It provides an
unsurpassed analysis of the relation
of class and women’s oppression
by examining superexploitation,
anti-woman ideologies and sexism,
and addressing such issues as family
life, abortion and sexuality.

An activist and organizer since the
1960s, the author also critiques
anti-gay and anti-feminist attitudes
and practices in the Left and the
limitations of the women’s liberation
movement. $5.00

BOOKS AVAILABLE FROM
SYNTHESIS PUBLICATIONS
P.O. Box 40099, Dept. AU, San Francisco, CA 94140

Send a self-addressed stamped envelope to receive our catalogue.