**Abortion Rights**  
On  

by Leslie Blackhall  

Two hundred women a year have abortions at  
Yale’s Department of Undergraduate Health. If you  
are a Yale College student, by the time you  
graduate you, or a friend of yours, will have had an  
abortion - that is, if you can still get an abortion by  
the time you graduate. Most of us are too young to  
remember the days when a missed period was a  
matter of desperation, of searching for a sympathetic  
doctor or someone, anyone, who would  
perform an illegal abortion. We have never had to  
face the terrifying alternatives of knitting needles  
and coat hangers, and as a result, we have come to  
take for granted the freedom to end an unwanted  
pregnancy. Our complacency is both foolish and  
dangerous: all over the country laws are being  
passed which restrict women’s freedom of choice.  
Indeed, for thousands of poor women across the  
country, the dark ages of back alley butchery are  
here again. This article is dedicated to Rosie  
Jimenez, the first woman known to have died of an  
illegal abortion because of the denial of Medicaid  
funds. Let Rosie Jimenez’s death serve as a  
reminder of the hundreds of thousands of women  
who suffered - and died in the days when abortion  
was illegal, and as a warning that those days could  
soon be here again. Let Rosie Jimenez’s death serve  
as a call to action on behalf of poor women, and on  
behalf of all women.  

But why do we have to fight this battle again?  
Wasn't it all decided back in 1973 when the  
Supreme Court ruled that all women had the right  
to a safe, legal abortion during the first two  
trimesters of pregnancy? Well, not quite. It isn’t so  
easy as that. The Supreme Court does not operate  

in a vacuum, and neither does Congress. Laws are  
passed, decisions are handed down within the  
context of a specific climate. The 1973 Supreme  
Court decision occurred in the wake of the many  
social changes which were brought about by the  
Women’s Liberation Movement, by the unrelenting  
pressure from feminists for women’s rights in  
general, and reproductive freedom in particular.  

Social climates change; however, and since 1973  

there has been a backlash against the women’s...  
This backlash has taken many forms.  

The first is overt and blatant; it consists of groups like  
Stop-ERA and Right to Life. The second is subtle  
and insidious, and it consists of the “you’ve come a  

long way baby” lie - the lie that says we’ve already  
got our equal rights so we can stop fighting. It’s a  
comforting lie, a lie with a grain of truth so it goes  
down easy, and too many women who should know  
better, including most women at Yale, have  
swallowed it whole. The lie has done exactly what  
it was intended to do - it’s made women  
complacent, kept them politically inactive and blind  
to their true situation. In the meantime, the Right to  
Lifers are free to run around foaming at the mouth  
with stories of how abortion is a lesbian/communist/satanic plot to destroy the Family and Our  
American Way of Life to congresspeople who, in the  
absence of feminist pressure, are only too glad to  
buy this sort of garbage. The deadly combination of  
political inactivity on the part of those who believe  
in legal abortion and the well-organized, well-financed  
scare tactics of the Right to Life movement has  
resulted in a frightening string of anti-abortion  
victories in the courts and the legislature. It has  
resulted in the cut-off of abortion funds for women  
in the Peace Corps and the Defense Department (we  

so-called “informed consent” laws in which a  

woman is required to listen to a nauseating series of  
half-truths concerning fetal development and then  

wait forty-eight hours before having an abortion. It  
has resulted in fourteen states calling for a  
constitutional convention to put a “pro-life”  
amendment in the constitution. And, if none of this  
is enough to strike fear into the hearts of women at  
Yale, consider this. This fall the House of  
Representatives passed, and the Senate only  
narrowly defeated, an amendment which would  
have prohibited abortions at all universities receiving  
federal funds, in which the students pay into the  
health plan. This means you.  

So, what is to be done? First, we must stop  
swallowing the lie. We must remember that ten  
years doth not a revolution make - not even Ten  
Years of Women at Yale. We must realize that  
unless we become politically active now, we are in  
danger of losing our abortion rights. To believe it  

can’t happen is to sign the death warrant of  
thousands of women like Rosie Jimenez, and,  
eventually, to sign our own death warrant. This fall  
a petition, circulated by the Yale Undergraduate  
Women’s Caucus supporting our right to abortion,  

was signed by 1,600 students. If all these people  

thought you might be pregnant, consider. Do you  
want to live in a country where abortion is illegal?  

Women’s