When I began working on the Yale  
Women’s Athletic Organization three  
years ago, we had many long, drawn-  
out debates about the politics the  
organization should espouse. Should  
we affiliate with the women’s center?  
Should we co-sponsor Women’s Week?  
Who are we going to scare away with  
such affiliations? Is our purpose to at-  
tract the largest following or are we go-  
ing to stand up for some important,  
though unpopular ideals? These ques-  
tions all stem from a fear, a fear of  
disapproval. For too long women  
athletes have allowed the status quo to  
dictate the terms upon which we will  
compete. Now we must begin to  
challenge these dictates and our  
challenge must start with the nature of  
a woman's participation in sport.  

All year long I have felt frustrated  
and concerned about the homogeneity  
of the Women’s Athletic Organization.  
Seldom do women of color show up.  
Few of us would consider ourselves  
feminists, much less radicals. Only  
once have we addressed the issue of  
lesbianism in sport—“No, we can’t.  
Freshmen and new members will be  
scared away.” I, for one, am tired of my  
own silence on this volatile issue. We  
have allowed ourselves to be silenced  
by the taunts and accusations of reac-  
tionary groups on campus, perhaps  
more to the point, the taunts and ac-  
cusations of boyfriends or potential  
boyfriends. It is time to confront those  
accusations, to show that we are not  
afraid and that we will participate in  
sport on our own terms.  

I am tired of the well-trained woman  
athlete being labeled “lesbian.” I am  
tired of it because we are all paralyzed  
by that label. How many of us have  
chosen not to go to the Women’s  
Center because “it’s just a bunch of up-  
tight dykes anyway?” How many of us  
are a little afraid to go out in large  
groups of women, teammates or other-  
wise, because we don’t want to be  
labeled “lesbian?” How many of us feel  
obliged to keep a “token male” around  
for the same reason? And how many of  
us will never quite reach our fullest  
potential as athletes for the exact same  
reason?  

I want to disarm the label “lesbian.”  
When someone sees me or any other  
female athlete training hard and then  
sneers under his breath, “DYKE” I want  
to feel pity for him. But, I do not want  
to cringe. I am tired of cringing. If as  
women athletes we can come to accept  
one another for what we are, whether  
that is black or white, Catholic or Pro-  
testant, lesbian or heterosexual, then  
we will soon be able to participate in  
sport without fear of censure. We must  
move towards an understanding and  
acceptance of the varying needs and  
orientations of all our teammates.  
Some of us are lesbian and others are  
heterosexual. Isn’t it time that we all  
had a more honest dialogue?  

Missy Park  

Women’s rugby seems to be the on-  
ly team on which one can openly  
scope the opposition.  

By my rough estimates, about half  
the team are out lesbians. “Out” is a  
relative term, of course. The lesbians  
on the team don’t sit down with every  
heterosexual player and explain, but  
certainly all the lesbians know who  
each other are, and if the straight  
players have their eyes open, it’s not  
hard to figure out who sleeps with  
girls. The sex banter that is part of  
every team’s social life is mixed with  
references to boyfriends and  
girlfriends, and tasty babes of both  
sexes are discussed in admiration.  

Why is rugby different? The reasons  
are many. Possibly because rugby is  
more of a contact sport than the other  
women’s sports. The issue of lesbian  
relationships comes up a little more in-  
sistently because, after all, these  
women are reaching up between each  
other’s legs and grabbing each other  
by the underwear. The straightforward  
touching inspires dyke-baiting from  
observers of the sport, and a response  
to this projected image from the  
players. In the early days of Yale’s  
team, the response was defensive.  
Four or five years ago, the women  
asserted they could “play rugby and  
still wear high heels.” In other words,  
their bodies could be powerful, ag-  
gressive and dangerous on the field,  
but off the field they would be once  
again be vulnerable and athletically  
impotent for the sake of men. Today  
the response is much different. Now  
we often freely admit that some of us  
are lesbians and some are heterosexual.  

Rugby’s unique tradition of singing  
about sex after games had something  
to do with the team’s change in at-  
titude. It’s hard to avoid the question  
of sexual orientation when you're sing-  
ing explicitly about what you're do-  
ing in bed with whom. Gradually, as  
more women started to come out to  
themselves and each other, there was  
increased resistance to singing ex-  
clusively about screwing. “Boyfriend”  
was changed to “lover” when possible  
and the gender of pronouns became  
up to the singer’s discretion.  

Finally, after a match against Har-  
vard two years ago, the official Yale  
women’s rugby song was invented by  
some drunken officers. It’s sung to a  
slow and dignified tune.  

Old Eli women, we don’t  
discriminate. Some of us are lesbians  
and some are straight. Suck, squeeze  
and blow, please them as you will,  
some of us don’t have to worry about  
the pill.  

The first time I heard that song,  
I was happily surprised. I had never  
heard the issue addressed in mixed  
company in such an apparently relax-  
ed and humorous way.  

There’s nothing quite like singing  
that song in front of thirty large,  
drunken men from Southern’s rugby  
team. I was convinced the first time  
we did it we’d be met with looks of  
disgust, if not blows. No injuries were  
incurred, however.  

We probably get away with that  
song because the other team is often  
too drunk to care. Or I could imagine  
it's because the strength of our unity  
as women psychically overpowers the  
brute force of many men. The latter  
explanation would be somewhat of an  
exaggeration.  

Yes, the song is unusual, but who’s  
to say that homophobic feelings  
wouldn’t be as prevalent on the team  
if the straight women simply out-  
numbered the lesbians, or if rugby was  
a varsity sport instead of a club.  

The problems that exist for women’s  
athletics haven’t been completely  
overcome by the rugby team. If there  
was more public (male) attention  
focused on rugby, the divisive dyke-  
baiting would be far more intense, and  
probably the atmosphere on the team  
for lesbians would not be as com-  
fortable.  

Still, I feel there is a point to be  
learned from teammates proclaiming  
together that there are both lesbians  
and heterosexuals on their teams. The  
consequences would probably be both  
positive and negative. There may be  
some players who are deeply homo-  
phobic and would be unable to be  
comfortable on the team. This prob-  
lem has arisen subtly on the rugby  
team. But there is also a team unity  
which comes from every player's life  
choices being respected and openly  
acknowledged. And finally, there is a  
freedom from dependence on the  
opinions of men, which often  
translates as freedom to be a better  
athlete.  

Dominique Dibbell