AICIRORA

FEMINIST NEWSPAPER FOR THE SANFORD COMMUNITY

September 28, 1981

Rape Awareness at Women’s Center News

Stanford

by SHERRI CAUZ

For the past several months, representa-
tives of various groups on campus have
joined together with the Rape Education
Project and have been meeting regularly in
hopes of creating a week-long program of
activities entitled “Working Against
Rape.” Hard work and determination have
turned this hope into a reality, and the
program, which is being coordinated by
the Office of Student Activities, is
scheduled for October 5-10 this quarter.

The Take Back the Night march held in
February of this year was a prime inspira-
tion for this project. Many people have
been involved in the planning and dona-
tions have been received from over 25
funding sources within the university.

Patricia Brandt, Assistant Dean of Stu-
dent Activities, Trini Tonies, Coordinator
of the Rape Education Project, and others
questioned the strategies women were
being taught to avoid rape. “One strategy in
the past has been to tell women to stay at
home,” Patricia stated. “This reinforces the pattern of being dependent and afraid. Women must be able to go out at night. If
we can’t go to the library, visit with friends
or work late, we’re being deprived of free-
doms every person should have. My goal is
to build Rape Prevention programs which
are based not on increasing women’s fear,
but on reducing the need for fear.”

The program for the week will include
the following: A symposium entitled
“Working Against Rape” will examine
some of the most current academic re-
search in the field of rape prevention and
the effect of the fear of rape on women. The
symposium speakers are some of the
foremost authorities on the subject of rape
and will be on hand to discuss their latest
findings. The selected speakers include
Pauline Bart of the University of Illinois,
Stephanie Riger of Lake Forest College,
Catharine MacKinnon of the Stanford Law
School, and Ann Wurr of the Mid-
Peninsula Support Network.

Bart has recently published a major
study comparing strategies used by women
who were attacked and were able to avoid
being raped and those who were not able to
avoid being raped. This event will take
place Monday, October 5, 1981 at 7:30 p.m.
in Bishop Auditorium.

Programs in the residences

Tuesday afternoon, the symposium
speakers will be presenting programs in
campus residences (check O.A.T.Q. for
times and places). Wednesday, October 7th
at noon in the Stanford Women’s Center, the
pros and cons of self-defense training for
women and a look at the attitudes women
hold about defending themselves will be
discussed in “Issues of Self-Defense.” After
hearing about self-defense methods you

P.O. BOX 3709 STANFORD CALIFORNIA 94305

will get an opportunity to view demonstra-
tions by representatives of various self-
defense groups on campus at 7:30 p.m. in
Roble Gym.

Realizing that rape is only one aspect of
violence in our society, “The Origins of
Violence — and How to Stop It” will be a
panel discussion which will take place at
4:30 p.m. in the Meyer Forum Room.

Men and violence

Thursday, October 8th at 7:30 p.m. Rich
Snowder will present a slide show and lead
discussion on “Men Against Male Vio-
lence.” We'll take a look at the images of
men and women in pornography and the
media, and explore how men see them-
selves and their roles. Men are cordially
invited to all of the programs during the
week and may want to make a special effort
to partake in this event at the Bridge.

Friday, October 9th includes an “Asser-
tiveness Training for Women” workshop
which will be held at noon in the Stanford
Women’s Center. This skills training work-
shop focuses on encouraging women to de-
fine and defend their rights. Special atten-
tion will be given to saying, “No” clearly
and setting limits before one gets in a
dangerous situation. At 7:00 p.m. in Toyon,
Susan Griffin

“Celebrating Our Strength” will be a
community gathering culminating the
five-day program during which people can
share in poetry they have written, or read
and appreciated on the issues of violence
against women and/or increasing our
strength. Susan Griffin, a Bay Area writer
and poet, will be joining us in a time of
poetry sharing, popcorn eating, and wine
sipping.

A “Tear Gas Certification Class” will be
held on Saturday, October 10th from 9:00-
11:00 a.m. ending the week-long program
of activities. This class will take place in
Room 30 at the History Corner.

With the exception of the Tear Gas Cer-
tification, all events are without charge to
participants and open to everyone.
Throughout the week, an hour-long vid-
eotape, “Working Against Rape” pro-
duced by people at Stanford, will be shown
in all of the first-year dormitories. Discus-
sion leaders will accompany the videotape.
People are encouraged to view “Working
Against Rape” and may contact Alice Sup-
ton at the Office of Residential Education
(497-3044) for more information on how to
obtain the videotape for their group or or-
ganization.

For those unable to attend the seminars
and workshops during the week, a series of
programs will be aired on KZSU during the
course of the week. The programs will in-
clude: Monday at 7:30 “Working Against

con’t on page 2

photo credit Raquel Tonies
Photo credit Lisa D. Adams

The newly redecorated Stanford Women's
Center.

As one enters the newly redecorated
Stanford Women’s Center (located in the
Eating Clubs behind Toyon), one im-
mediately senses that there has been high
energy happening over the summer. “We
have big plans for fall,” affirmed a women’s
center staffer. “We've set up an answering
machine to serve as a communication
center for women and women’s groups on
campus, and we're going for a fall quarter
fee assessment so we can sponsor more
speakers, events, and activities.”

With their last fee assessment the Wo-
men’s Center sponsored a Third World

Title
“Working Against Rape”
Speakers to present programs
“Issues of Self-Defense”

“The Origins of Violence —
and How to Stop It”

“Self-Defense for Women:
A Range of Options”

“Men Against Male Violence”

“Assertiveness Training for Women” Fri. Oct. 9

“Celebrating Our Strength”
“Tear Gas Certification Class”

WORKING AGAINST RAPE
SCHEDULE OF EVENTS

Date
Mon. Oct. 5 Bishop Aud,
Tues. Oct. 6 Residences

Wed. Oct. 7 Stanford Women’s Center Noon

Thurs. Oct. 8 The Bridge

Sat. Oct. 10 History Corner, Rm.

Vol. V, No. 1

Women’s Film Series, brought women’s
music star Holly Near to campus, and co-
sponsored events with a wide range of
campus organizations. The Women’s
Center is also providing major funding for
this year’s Rape Awareness Week (see story
this page).

With money from the upcoming fee as-
sessment, women’s center staffers hope to
purchase a film projector for multi-group
use, co-sponsor a winter quarter visit from
author-poet Adrienne Rich, and continue
to fund events (such as a Stanford Women’s
Week) with other campus groups.

The Women’s Center will have an open
house Tuesday, September 29 at 4 p.m. for
all returning and new students. Staffers
will be available to talk informally about
Stanford’s new Feminist Studies Program,
the Women’s Center and the upcoming
Rape Awareness Week.

Other events
Patricia Brandt of the Office of Student
Activities will be at the Women’s Center
Monday, September 28 at 2 p.m. to discuss
“Women’s Issues at Stanford”; author June
Brindel will read from her work Monday
October 12 at 8 p.m. at the Women’s Center
to discuss rewriting myths from a feminist
perspective; The Women’s Center Moon Dance happens Tuesday October 13 in White Plaza to the sounds of Bandana Rose, an all-women’s rock and roll band; and a “Speak Bitterness” meeting on sexual harassment is scheduled for Tuesday night October 20 at the Women’s Center. Also, plans are underway to have Andrea Dworkin and Catherine MacKinnon teach a class on Pornography through SWOPSI. Contact the ASSU Guest Professorship Board to support this project.

Sign Women’s Center petitions. Vote
Oct. 28 & 29

Place

Meyer Forum Room 4:30 p.m.

Roble Gym

7:30 p.m.

7:30 p.m.
Noon
7:00 p.m.
Room 30 9:00 a.m.

Women’s Center

Toyon