~*

Page 12

Holly Near cont'd from pg. 4  
just tactical from time to time to produce  
-an album that has a hit song on it so that it  
will get air play on the a.m. radio. We get a  
lot of letters from people who say that they  
had no idea that this music even existed  
until they were driving along on the  
freeway listening to their a.m. radio and  
some station dared to play our music. And  
then they went out and bought the record.  
We want people to know that this music  
exists, not just mine, but hundreds of al-  
ternative artists that are not getting played  
on the radio.  

Do you think that you've had to work  
harder than male musicians because  
you're a woman?  

Sometimes I think that women would  
work harder regardless!  

Sexism exists in society from the foun-  
dation up. It exists in me because I grew  
up being taught that in society I was “less  
than” or that I was an exception, “good for  
a girl.” I myself put down other women for  
being stupid. We become competitive  
with one another or devalue our women  
friends. And in the music industry, if you  
don't grow up thinking that you can plug  
in your acoustic guitar to make an electric  
guitar, then when all the guys in your  
class start plugging in and the rock bands  
start happening, you become the girl  
singer, as happened in my case. It’s for the  
best now, because I really like not having  
an instrument between me and my audi-  
ence.  

Women don’t grow up being encour-  
aged to play the electric bass or drums or  
saxophone, and when we decide that we  
want to, we have not only to learn how to  
play and to get over our own self-  
oppression, but we also still have to get  
over the attitudes of those who think that  
we can’t play. If a woman walks into a gig  
with a horn, she better play twice as well  
as a man. She is really going to be  

3; AN  
3 EVENING  
WITH  

MARGIE  

ADAM  

Celebrated pianist, singer, and songwriter  

THURSDAY, MARCH 15  
KRESGE AUDITORIUM  

8 PM  
TICKETS  

$6/Student $8/Adult  

Available through Tresidder  
Box Office/ Bass Outlets  

Kresge Auditorium is  
accessible for wheelchair  
users. For information call  

(415) 497-0545  

AURORA  

scrutinized, so she isn’t going to get away  
with being mediocre. I think that it has  
been very very hard to live under that  
scrutiny and pressure. Because singing is  
an acceptable art form for women, I  
haven’t had to face it as much as in-  
strumentalists.  

You sing disparagingly about male  
musicians who leave their lovers or their  
wives at home when they go on the road.  
How do you balance your work with your  
personal life?  

You're asking me how my wife is, is that  
it? If society had been turned around, or if  
I had been a man, there would be more of  
an assumption that it would be o.k. for me  
to have a wife at home and that she would  
take care of paying the bills and keep my  
home together and raise my children and  
be there when I was lonely so that I could  
call her up. But I would never do that to a  
woman, nor would anyone I’d ever fall in  
love with accept that, or they’d be getting  
encouragement from me not to, so that  
dynamic would never start up. ...  

My music and my politics are like a rela-  
tionship. They demand a lot of attention  
and a lot of care, and I demand a lot from  
them. I have Redwood Records and the  
very supportive women who work with  
me, and I have my audience. Night after  
night this incredible wave of love and sup-  
port and affection sweeps up on stage. I’m  
not trying to say that it is the same as one-  
to-one intimacy. I get incredibly lonely  
sometimes and I don’t even know it be-  
cause I’m working so hard. When I slow  
down and begin to recognize it I just get  
busy again. It's not easy to be a traveler.  

You have sung at many functions which  
were organized to fight for some of the  
causes that you live benefit  

(NEAR STANFORD  
LAW SCHOOL  

Sponsored by  
Stanford Women Center  

for the United Farm Workers, an evening  
of music to kick off the Continental Walk  
for Peace and Justice, and at places where  
you'd like to bring hope such as the Cali-  
fornia Women’s Prison. How do you feel  
about being at Stanford tonight?  

First of all, I'll sing almost anywhere be-  
cause I feel like people gather in all kinds  
of places, and just because they look a cer-  
tain way, they go to a certain school, they  
have a certain football t-shirt on does not  
determine what's going on in their minds  
and hearts. I hope that a lot of diverse  
kinds of folks come to this concert. If we  

can find a way to connect on a lot of differ-  

ent human levels and also realize that it  
takes time to change attitudes that have  
been taught since childhood, then maybe  
we'll have the courage to help each other  
when we’re misbehaving. We'll know that  
it’s not malice; it’s that we’re misin-  
formed. We’ll be more patient while  
people are changing.  

When I first got in touch with feminism  
I got so angry with men. “Here I told you  
that you’re being sexist; why don’t you  
just stop?” Then I looked in the mirror one  
day and asked myself, “How long as a  
white person have you been struggling to  
unlearn your own racism when every day  
it’s given to you as an institution? Why do  
you think that men are going to turn  
around and immediately lose everything  
they've been taught as men?” That doesn’t  
give them permission to go any slower or  
to not challenge their own sexism all the  
time. But it has made me realize that I  
have to have a certain amount of tolerance  
for the growth period that it takes to  
change because my own process is  
sometimes slow. So in a concert like  
tonight all kinds of people will come and  
everyone will know about something very  
well and there will be some things about  
which they need to learn.  

Research and Innovation in Education  
AV AGRO  

March 1984  

Do you think that your music raises  
people's consciousness then, or does it  
appeal to an already established commu-  
nity?  

I think that people’s consciousnesses  
are raised constantly every day whether at  
a Holly Near concert or not. I try to do a lot  
of it in a short amount of time with the tool  
of music. Music just dives into our hearts;  
it can rip you apart and blow you wide  
open, it can heal you or energize you,  
refuel you or challenge you. Music is real-  
ly something; it’s powerful stuff.  

Sometimes people come to concerts and  
they’re all ready so full they’re ready to ex-  
plode and somehow the concert environ-  
ment gives them permission to feel as if  
their life was changed that night. I don’t  
think that there will ever be an audience  
that can be defined as The Convinced be-  
cause there’s always more to be learned  
from others who are different than our-  
selves.  

You can’t be a feminist and believe in  
the liberation of all women while our gov-  
ernment is destroying the lives of women  
all around the world. The women’s move-  
ment by nature has to fight racism, war,  
antisemitism, class insensitivity, insen-  
sitivity to lesbians, for example straight  
women saying, “don’t say you're a les-  
bian; you'll rock the boat.”  

As long as we let the U.S. government  
bomb other countries, send soldiers down  
to bayonet little babies in El Salvador and  
the Honduras, and as long as we have the  
war going on in the Middle East, the wo-  
men’s movement has a huge task. We have  
to move together as a block; we have to say  
that we are all these things: Palestinian,  
Jewish, El Salvadoran, South African. We  
are white; we are black. It sounds big, so  
we might as well get a move on it. That's  
what the women’s movement means to  
me.