Side of My Face

Photography, Kruger comments, has at-
tained the status of a “propagator of
convention, informal directive, and
cultural commodity.” It presents
images and claims to represent reality.
With this background, Kruger
manipulates gaze in photographs. She
has chosen to expose this popular
medium as she has chosen to expose
popular images. She challenges the
control over what may be seen in a
photograph by photographing it
herself. A photograph of a photograph
reveals the nature and the devices of
the original

reversing their intentions; Kruger en-
courages a critical standpoint, instead
of an accepting one. She plays with
gaze and reminds viewers of the cir-
cuitous path of interpretation and
representation the object they see has
taken: someone saw and sculpted the
head of a woman, someone saw and
photographed the sculpture, Kruger
saw and photographed the photograph,
and now the viewer gazes at the
photograph.

“Your gaze hits the side of my face”
is a good example of Kruger’s kind of
re-visioning. The words are positioned
down the left side of the photograph
behind the ear of the head of the
woman, which faces away, towards the

right of the photograph. After following
the phrase from top to bottom, my
gaze sweeps up and, yes, hits the side
of her face. I smile in concession. The
phrase has almost become a command.
Kruger has showed up the rigid control
of vision that the imposed perspective
of a photograph has. Perhaps the
sculpture, in Kruger’s incarnation, is at-
tempting to control gaze and asserting
her own power of gaze. She obviously
knows the viewer is watching her when
she says, “Your gaze hits the side of my
face”; she exposes the viewer's
voyeurism. A stone sculpture has no
sense or perception, but Kruger endows

this woman with voice and vision, two
powers historically denied marginal
groups. The woman’s mouth is
definitively closed, yet she speaks. The
idea that she thinks and speaks brings
life to the sculpture; perhaps the
shadow at the corner of her mouth is
the shadow of a smile or of determina-
tion. She cannot gaze directly at the
viewer, but nevertheless can see the
viewer. The shadow cast on the blank
eyeball by the light which hits her face
(not on the side) suggests an iris and a
focused gaze. She has countered a
gaze that will glance off the side of her
face, as the light does, by exposing its
technique and voyeurism, reflecting
her own perspective and thought, and
deflecting the gaze with stone.
Kruger virtually constructs a new
way of “looking and seeing” for the
woman in “Your gaze ...”. That re-
vision of the image of the woman is a
model for all her work. “I see my work
as a series of attempts ... to construct
an altered subjectivity and to welcome
a female spectator into the audience of
men,” Kruger explains. The powers of
vision and voice she gives the stone
woman are the powers she claims for
herself when she photographs images
and words. Once she grabs your atten-
tion, Kruger revises, reinterprets, and
re-presents the issues she raises with her
images, words, and techniques. She
turns a classical stone rendition of a

stereotypical manikin head into a
perceptive woman who looks and
speaks. With a brief text, she changes
the context. Functioning as creative
graffiti does, the text suggests an entirely
different subversive context and so
illuminates and comments on the
original context. Kruger gives no credit
to the original sculptor or
photographer, for she is undermining
their intentions and perceptions. She
refuses to pass on their visions. Her
decision parallels filmmaker Bette
Gordon’s decision not to reproduce

pornography in her movie “Variety”.
Gordon presents only the woman pro-
tagonist’s impressions of and responses
to the porn. Kruger’s “theft” of the
previous photograph is like a response
to Linda Mulvey’s statement that
“women’s images have continually
been stolen and used for voyeuristic ac-
tive/passive mechanisms;” Kruger has
stolen back, repossessed, the image.

She reinterprets language by similar
mechanisms. The careful clever jux-
taposition with images suggests new in-
terpretations. “We have received
orders not to move” written across the
silhouette of a woman pinned down
with drawing pins behind a fence-like
lattice makes the viewer cringe. Kruger
takes her texts, like her images, from
mass media, but by slightly altering
them she draws humor and attention as
well as reconsideration of tired phrases.
A “slice of life” becomes “I am your
slice of life” underlining a photo of

three scalpel blades.

Kruger makes subversive use of com-
mon media graphic techniques as well
as of common images and phrases.
“Your gaze ...” could be a page of a
pop women’s magazine if the words
were changed to “Highlight your
cheekbones.” The headline lettering
across the photograph recalls
catalogues, advertisements, billboards,
posters, and cartoons in addition to
popular magazines and newspapers.
Her older works expose the techniques
more explicitly. For example, a 1979
work labels different areas of itself,
“SLANT = BIAS”, “PINK = EMOTIVE/
TRANSPARENCY”, and “BLACK =

OPAQUE/ASSUMPTIONS.” The newer
works use those techniques in surpris-
ing ways by employing them to revise
images that usually portray.

Bette Gordon describes her own
work as “intervention with the way
dominant culture presents ideas.” She
could be characterizing some of
Kruger’s work. Kruger’s twists, interrup-
tions, and displacements are pro-
vocative, comic, disturbing, and
challenging. Such interventions call in-
to question some of the norms and
representations of the mainstream and
the processes by which they are
formed. They are Kruger’s attempt to
“detonate issues and raise questions ...
which address the material conditions
of our lives and the oppression of social
relations on a global level.” Kruger
claims this “global” interest as the
motivation for her photographs, but her
work seems expressly limited. Her
photographic discourse successfully
calls for reassessment of mass media
techniques, specifically with regard to
the representation of women. However,
it fails to critique other oppressions
such as racism. For example, almost all
the actors in her photos are white. Such
omissions are disappointing in the work
of an artist who, in other ways, adheres
to her own maxim: “I am concerned
with who speaks and who is silent.”

1. Barbara Kruger, “No Progress in
Pleasure,” Pleasure and Danger: Exploring
Female Sexuality, ed. Carole S. Vance (Boston:
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1984), p. 210.

2. Idem.

3. Idem.

4. Laura Mulvey, “Visual Pleasure and Nar-
rative Cinema,” Screen, vol. 16, no. 3, p. 11.

5. Kruger, op. cit., p. 210.

6. Idem.

7. Idem.

8. Mulvey, op. cit., p. 18.

9. Bette Gordon, “Variety: The Pleasure in Look-
ing,” Pleasure and Danger, ed. Carole S. Vance
(Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1984), p. 194.

10. Kruger, op. cit., p. 210.

11. Idem.