October 14, 1982

by Diane Greening  
(reprinted from the Stanford Independent)

Behind the banner that was unfurled  
from the lower roofs of Hoover Tower at  
the May 8th Hooverville-Reaganville rally  
was a group of women dedicated to getting  
their message across.

“Phallocentrism, male dominance,  
militarism,” and, written across the symbol  
for women, “hear us” was painted in red  
and blue across 22 bedsheets. The banner  
hung for five minutes before singer Holly  
Near’s performance at the rally.

A collective of approximately 25 women  
worked on the banner, which was not a  
part of the Hooverville organization’s  
plans, beginning with the conceptualization  
the week before and culminating in  
the scaling of Hoover Tower.

The planning for the banner began the  
Sunday before Hooverville. In early meet-  
ings the women discussed the size and  
shape of the sign, which they planned to  
hang lengthwise from the top of Hoover  
Tower, and the words to be used. One  
woman who worked closely with the plan-  
ners of Hooverville was worried that a very  
large centralized sign might be seen as an  
attempt to dominate Hooverville, and the  
method of imposing ideas would be  
counter-effective to the ideas themselves.  
But the group did decide to use a large sign  
hung from the tower itself because, Shel-  
ley Antonio said, “women can never be too  
loud because of their position in society.  
The banner cannot be too big, it cannot  
be heard enough.”

Other ideas included playing on a list of  
words starting “Reaganismo, machismo  
... “ until it was realized that using  
“machismo” could have racist implica-  
tions. The collective deliberated over the  
choice of wording in three meetings. The  
end result came because “more than any-  
thing else, those words fell together,” said  
Anne Larson. The smaller, less visible  
“Hear us,” tucked in the lower right-hand  
corner was “really important to the rest of  
the banner,” remarked Anne Bekker, but it  
was not as well-remembered as the larger  
message. Kim Overton added, “why we  
came up with those words, and rejected  
others was explained on our flyer.”

The flyer which was distributed when the  
banner was hung pointed out that what  
created Reagan and his policies is a  
“militarist ideology that is inherently  
sexist.” It continued, “Militarism is an out-  
growth of a system based on dominance,”  
— dominance of a country, a race, a class, a  
sex, or a sexual preference over another.  
The flyer called the language of war, “phal-  
locentric,” and concluded “our banner as-  
sures that the connection between the  
phallocentrism expressed in Hoover To-  
wer, war, and women’s oppression does  
not go unrecognized.”

The collective discussed how to hang the  
long banner down from the top of the  
tower at Friday lunch, but after they split up  
to re-examine Hoover Tower they dis-  
covered that the University had closed the  
observation deck for the day. Betsy Jelliffe  
described the unexpected tower closing as  
“a crisis. Our week's plans folded,” she  
said. However, at that point, “there was no  
way we could give up,” said Toby Weaver.

Carrie Rader explained that they decided  
to put up the banner running horizontally  
at the base of the tower. Using imagination  
and the skills of former cheerleaders, the  

AURORA

Banner Flies Over Hooverville

women hoped they could build a human  
pyramid to get people on top of the base’s  
roof, but their original estimate of the  
height of the base had to be revised up-  
wards from two and a half people to four  
people tall. The pyramid idea was not  
working.

Meanwhile, the banner was being  
painted on Florence Moore field. The  
women waited until dusk to avoid attract-  
ing too much attention, which created  
another problem. The water-based paint  
began to run as the evening dew soaked  
the field and the banner. Rader said they  
even considered “taking it to Meyer (which  
has outdoor electrical sockets) and giving it  
a blow dry.” Finally, they dragged it to the  
higher weeds between the new row  

houses and Flo Mo where air could circu-  

late underneath it.

Another difficulty, assuming the women  
discovered a way to reach the roof of the  
tower, was how to hang the banner. They  
had sewn a casing through which a rope  
could be strung, but in painting the banner  
had left little room to attach it. The collec-  
tive feared sewing it to the wet banner be-  
cause of the danger of electric shock. (La-  
ter, those on the roof attempted to staple it  
together, but the staples were not strong  
enough to hold. Finally they made a series  
of knots in the top, to which they attached  
loops of rope, and through which they  
threaded the rope tied to the house on the  
roof.)

The next step was moving the banner,  
which had gained about 20 pounds in wa-  
ter, to the tower. The group blotted the  
sign papers and rolled it and hoped and hoped the  
paint would not run, and that the banner  
would remain legible.

Using ledges and gutters, rock climber  
Eric Doub scaled the side of Hoover Tower  
and lowered ropes and slings for the others  
to follow him up. By 3 a.m., Govindarajulu,  
Overton, Rader and the banner were  
camped on the top of the base of Hoover  
Tower, with food, sleeping bags, and, as  
the wind came up, too few pieces of warm  
clothing.

By daylight they had established them-  
selves in a little house which sheltered a  
skylight to the tower lobby below. They  
managed to sleep on the casing meant for  
the banner until 8 or 9 a.m. when a police-  
man entered the lobby. As he stood there  
muttering, the three women realized that if  
they could hear every word he said, then  
he could probably hear them too. They  
remained silent, communicating by pas-  
sing a pad of paper around, until it was  
clear that the tower was securely closed  
and they could hear visitors rattling the  
locked door below.

By 11 a.m., the scheduled start of the  
rally, the women waiting on the roof ex-  
pected Doub to return to help them lower  
the banner, and to hear a prearranged sig-  
nal from below: two whistles to hold the  
banner, three if they were to unroll it. The  
women on the ground were hoping to get  
Holly Near’s endorsement and/or permis-  
sion to display the banner during her per-  
formance. They were unable to reach her,  
and decided to delay the decision on when  
to hang the sign until after they talked to  
her. Since the women on top heard no  
signal, and Doub had not yet returned,  
they, too, waited.

Unable to reach Near earlier, the women  
on the ground waited for her to arrive.  
Asking the permission of one of the or-  
ganizers to speak to her, they explained  

what they had created. Toby Weaver said,  

“that it  

“He knew that women were planning  
something. (When we told him) his anger  
stemmed from the fact that we didn’t tell  
anyone about it and did it clandestinely. He  
thought that was poor practice." Antonio,  
Jelliffe, and Weaver were allowed to talk to  
Near who chose not to take a stance on  
Hooverville’s internal politics by endorsing  
the banner. She asked that the banner not  
be lowered during her performance, when  
it would disrupt her show.

Hooverville organizers told the women  
that the banner could only remain up for  
five minutes, while the explanatory flyers  
were being distributed, according to  
Weaver. Otherwise, they were told, if the  
banner remained and latecomers who did  
not receive the pamphlet saw it, they might  
see it as an integral part of Hooverville. The  
organizers said that unless the women ag-  
reed to have the banner down in five  
minutes, they would publicly disavow it.

Jelliffe relayed the message to the  
people on the tower that the signal would  
be a whistle and that the banner was to be  
there only five minutes. Rader says that  
after spending all the time on the roof,  
their reaction to the time limit was “forget  
it, we're going to leave it up.”

Shortly before Near’s performance, the  
whistles blew, and the banner was un-  
furled over the top of the tower base. But in  
the end, it was neither the women in con-  
trol of the banner nor the people in control  
of the microphone who decided the fate of  
the banner: it was the weather. The wind  
made the banner billow up and flap against  
the blocks of wood. When they began to fly off,  
the people at the top realized the danger  
and pulled the banner in.

The idea to make a women’s statement  
apart from the planned Hooverville ac-  
tivities was born out of an increasing dis-  
satisfaction with the lack of attention given  
to women’s issues in the organization of  
the rally. Women had trouble feeling they  
were a real part of Hooverville, according  
to Govindarajulu. “A lot of us were not  
involved, and we felt bad about that. We  
couldn’t understand why we walked out of  
planned meetings and felt generally un-  
psyched about the whole process.”

The issue was raised in a meeting of the  
Columbae women’s support group, and  
the problem identified. A consensus de-  
veloped that coalition-building had started  

too late and that groups perceived “special  
interest,” such as ones concerned with a  
feminist analysis of what created the soci-  
ety that created Reagan, were pulled in  
later to do work for Hooverville, but not in  
the early stages to help form policy.

Paul Baer, one of the organizers, said he  
became aware of the women’s concerns  
after Leah Halper, a prominent feminist on  
campus, dropped out of the Hooverville  
planning process due to the narrow focus  
she felt the event was taking. The issues of  
women and minorities were raised, ac-  
cording to Baer, but, “there wasn’t much  
we could do about it at that point. We  
acknowledged it, to some degree, but we  
had to let it run its course because of the  
situation at the time. There were time pres-  
sures, and a lack of ways to address the  
situation.”

Women joined the banner project with  
varying points of view about Hooverville  
and their own reasons for wanting to make  
the banner. Many felt as Anne Bekker (who  
continued to work for the Hooverville pro-  
ject) did, that Hooverville was “making an  
important statement, but the focus (of the  
rally) was a little off.” Others were more  
fundamentally opposed.

Jelliffe commented on her personal ob-  
jections to the Hooverville plans, “As  
much as they thought that they espoused  
women’s issues, it was clear that the  
feminist analysis was not considered in the  
process. We (women) were not being  
heard. At first, it wasn’t clear whether there  
would be any women speakers at all.” One  
Hooverville organizer said that he  

approach to presenting it. . . I felt that the  
women’s collective could have been more  
open as a whole. It’s difficult enough to put  
something like this together without hav-  
ing to worry about what people with whom  
you are essentially in agreement are plan-  
ning.”

Jelliffe explained some of the reasons  
why the Hooverville planners were not in-  
formed of the women’s ideas. “At first we  
didn’t know what we were going to do, but  
it became important that it was ours: not  
co-opted or translated into someone else’s  
terms.” Antonio concurred, “We started in  
secret to avoid problems with the police.  
We continued because we felt like this was  

(continued on page 11)

OCTOBER 5

Donna Shalala, President, Hunter  
College, New York, 8:00 pm, Kresge  
Auditorium

OCTOBER 13

Margaret Burbidge, Professor,  
Astronomy, Univ. of Calif. at San Diego:  
Director, Center for Astrophysics and  
Space Sciences UCSD, 12:00 noon,  
Terman Auditorium

OCTOBER 20

Marion Sandler, President and Chief  
Executive Officer, World Savings and  
Loan Association, 12:00 noon, Terman  
Auditorium

NOVEMBER 1

Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Judge, U.S.  
Court of Appeals, District of Columbia  
Circuit, 12:00 noon, Terman Auditorium

NOVEMBER 10

Liz Gallese, Staff Reporter, Wall Street  
Journal, 12:00 noon, Terman  
Auditorium

NOVEMBER 30

Pat Schroeder, U.S. Congresswoman,  
Colorado First District, 8:00 p.m.,  
Kresge Auditorium