12

Homebound: Putting Battery in Context

by Tammy Schapiro

Contrary to the misconception of one congressman, “domestic violence” has nothing to do with terrorism at airports. Although he may not realize it, millions of women are hit, kicked, punched, burned, cut, stabbed, and shot by their husbands or boyfriends every year. Times are hard, and families are under a great deal of stress, but when push comes to shove it’s the woman who ends up with a broken collarbone. While it would be a mistake to forget the physical and psychological pain invested in the term “battery,” there is equal danger in viewing spouse abuse as an isolated confrontation between individuals. The latter perspective risks ignoring the social, political, and economic context which likewise determines the meaning of “battery.” The purpose of this article is to show that domestic violence is a feminist concern, not only because it provides a graphic example of men’s abuse of women, but because it brings to light the multitude of barriers which force women to stay and endure another round.

The extent of battery is difficult to determine due both to the “private nature” of the problem and to a lack of statistical data. Nationwide, the number of battered women is estimated at 1.8 million. Over 50,000 women in Connecticut alone are believed to be victims of spouse abuse. While these statistics are large enough to convey the frightening extent of the problem, it should be kept in mind that they do not include those incidents which never show up on police reports or in hospital emergency rooms, of which there may be equally many.

A number of studies conducted within the last eight years testify not only to the sheer numbers of battered women but to the degree of their suffering. According to FBI Uniform Crime Reports, forty percent of all female homicide victims are killed by family members or by boyfriends. Two researchers at Yale-New Haven Hospital found that battering accounts for one in four suicide attempts by women. The same team concluded that, of the injuries suffered by women requiring emergency care, almost half had been inflicted by husbands or boyfriends. A study in Texas found that of abused women, one fourth were victimized at least every week. Reports such as these reveal that battery does not only include the occasional slap in the face; large numbers of women endure verbal and physical assault on a regular basis, often living in constant fear for their lives.

Contrary to common misconceptions, battery is not confined to any particular class or race. Riley McRae, Assistant Director of Men Against Domestic Violence, a local counseling program for batterers, finds that the racial mix of men he treats is “about in proportion with the population.” The profile of the batterer outlined by Fagan, Stewart, and Hansen is typical in its conclusion that the batterer “is as likely to be white as nonwhite.” It is not uncommon, moreover, for the New Haven Battered Women’s Project to receive calls from wives of wealthy professionals or prominent Connecticut figures. “We're talking about men with prestigious positions in this community who batter their wives,” said Jennifer Holme, shelter coordinator for the Project. In Washington, the head of emergency services at George Washington University Hospital testified before a House subcommittee that he regularly treated wives of high-ranking government officials. “Wives of congressmen will admit [being beaten] to the nurses,” he said, “but they don’t want that on their charts.”

To fully appreciate the extent of the violence is to realize that no matter what neighborhood we live in, the man next door could be beating his spouse. Only then does the conspiracy of silence which has kept the issue “private” for so long become evident. The word “conspiracy” is not intended to conjure images of an elite circle of decision-makers who take it upon themselves to suppress all talk of wife-battery. Rather, I use the word in order to emphasize that the battering syndrome as it exists today does not “just happen” as a defect might occur in nature. Silence shrouds the issue because outcry has been systematically suppressed by a tradition which considers woman to be man’s possession and the home his sacred realm. These are the attitudes which found the tendency to treat domestic violence as something less than criminal and the battered woman as something less than a victim. The result is that little effort is made to provide for the legal, economic, and emotional support systems which would allow a woman to escape a dehumanizing situation. The common yet misguided question, “Why do they stay?” provides a clear example of how patriarchal attitudes inform society's response to the battered woman.

The most crucial implication of the question is the suggestion that the woman is somehow “in on it.” Underlying the enigma is an assumption that any rational person would not tolerate being hit and kicked on a regular basis; any woman who stays, therefore, must be irrational in some way. This innuendo may be subtle, but it belies the general attitude towards woman-as-deviant so central to misogynist thinking. As Laurie Wardell points out in her essay, “Science and Violence Against Wives,” it is this attitude which has given rise to an entire body of psychological research on the battered woman which rates her in terms of “learned helplessness,” “traditional sex-role socialization,” and “provocative potential.” “The theory of learned helplessness,” she writes, “merely labels as a peculiarity of the battery victim what is in fact a reasonable response to an unreasonable situation, and thus diverts attention to her from it." By continually focusing on the victim as object of examination, social science invents a vocabulary which classifies her as abnormal, and therefore complicit. Wardell concludes, “... the persistent emphasis on the wife simply reveals an a priori assumption of victim-blaming.”

If “objective science” is not immune to this tendency, neither are the individuals and institutions upon which the battered woman must depend for support. Often she is accused by family and friends of failure to keep the home intact. Even if a woman overcomes stigmatization by the people with whom she is closest, she faces insensitivity on the part of the police officers, prosecutors, welfare agents, housing officials, and therapists who ostensibly seek to help her. A recent report on domestic violence issued by the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights stated explicitly that “prosecutors often treat victims of spouse abuse as if they, rather than the defendants, were accused of criminal conduct.” Amy Eppler, law coordinator for the New Haven Project, all too frequently hears “horror stories” of police insensitivity. The latest involved a Bridgeport officer who, having been called by a distressed woman, “ended up smoking reefer on the steps with her husband.” “It’s not unusual,” Eppler added, “for the police to arrest the woman instead of her husband.” Dina Yazmijian '86, a shelter volunteer, stressed the extent to which this disrespect plays a role in the daily life of a battered woman seeking independence. “Welfare agents can be just harsh, really insensitive,” she said. “It’s gossip to them. They'll ask, ‘Why the hell did you stay? Why the hell did you take that shit?’ And that’s not the kind of thing you want to hear.” Even professionals are prone to callousness. “I’m amazed sometimes,” Yazmijian said, “when finally you’re able to convince women to go into therapy ... they come home with stories of just incredible insensitivity.”

The question, “Why do they stay?” not only accuses the victim of complicity, it also implies that a better alternative is open to her, if she would just choose to take it. Richard J. Gelles, in his article, “Abused Wives; Why Do They Stay?” conducts elaborate research to discover what most women could have told him: We conclude that the fewer resources a woman has, the less power she has, and the more trapped she is in her marriage, the more she suffers at the hands of her husband without calling for help outside the family. (Social science does it again.) Cartoonist Nicole Hollander makes the point more effectively when she writes, “Oh, ancient Guru, Mother of the World, why is it that many battered wives choose to endure constant abuse rather than leave their homes?” — “Ah! Why is it hard to dance when your toe shoes are nailed to the floor?” For a woman who has no children, a safe place to go, a credit card in her own name, a steady job, a supportive family, a guarantee that her husband won’t find her, and enough self-respect after years of abuse to actively fight social stigmatization, the task of leaving may not be too difficult. For women lacking in any one of these areas, escape may not be worth the cost. If she is being threatened by her husband or lover, a woman has no assurance that leaving will end the terror. More important, opting to get out usually entails a sacrifice of all economic support, a loss which jeopardizes not only the security of the woman but that of her children as well. Finally, she must deal with the pain of suddenly ending an intimate relationship in which she has invested a great deal of emotional energy. In short, for most battered women, the prospect of staying and enduring further beatings poses fewer risks than does the prospect of leaving.

Efforts are being made on various levels to provide battered women with a more reasonable set of options. The shelter movement aims primarily at serving the immediate needs of those in crisis situations who cannot find safe, emergency housing elsewhere. Because

continued on page 17

The Opportunity Of A Lifetime In A Summer

Summer is coming, and you wonder how you should spend it. You want it to be enriching, intellectually rewarding, and an experience that you'll remember for many years to come.

World renowned for its faculty, courses, and facilities, Yale University now makes its resources available to qualified undergraduates, college graduates, pre-college students (age 16 or over), and adults holding a high-school diploma. Offering fully accredited courses in a wide range of disciplines, Yale Summer Programs give you the opportunity to learn from great minds, share experiences with students from all over the world, and take part in a wealth of cultural and recreational activities that are as much a part of Yale's heritage as its dedication to learning.

Sciences: June 3-August 9
Laboratory Sciences - Biology, General Chemistry, Organic Chemistry, Physical Chemistry, Physics, Computer Science.
Summer Language Institute: June 17-August 9
Modern European Languages - Czech, French, German, Greek, Italian, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Serbo-Croatian, Spanish. Modern Oriental Languages - Chinese, Japanese. Near Eastern and Classical Languages - Arabic, Greek, Hebrew, Latin. African Languages - Afrikaans, Hausa, Swahili.

Humanities, Social Sciences, and Mathematics: June 17-August 9
Afro-American Studies, American Studies, Anthropology, Art and Photography, Art History, Economics, English, Film Studies, History, Mathematics, Philosophy, Political Science, Psychology, Statistics, Women’s Studies.
The Five-Week Semester: July 8—August 9
Classical Civilization, Computer Science, Creative Writing, Dance, Drama, Film Studies, English and American Literature, Expository Writing, Mathematics, Political Science.

When planning for your summer, plan for one you won't forget.

» YALE SUMMER PROGRAMS

53 Wall Street - Dept. X
P.O. Box 2145, New Haven, CT 06520

Telephone (203) 436-4217