30

Israeli Women

And The Myth Of Liberation

In calling for alternatives to the present socio-economic system, many would-be
reformers have suggested socialism. However, in the next article Carol Lynn
Barash discusses a case where socialism and equality of the sexes do not seem to

coincide.

by Carol Lynn Barash

“The concept of woman as woman, rather than as
human being, is probably the greatest crime against
women in Israel.” Because Israel’s first commit-
ment is to the maintenance of a Jewish state, an
orthodox religious backbone combines with military
muscle, extending into social and political arms of
the community and constantly denying women
equality under the law since we are “biologically”
(or “demanded by God,” depending on one’s
religious orientation) destined to bear children and,
therefore, stay at home. These gender-identified
expectations are perpetuated to serve the state, not
its individual citizens, and have, from Israel’s
beginnings, minimized the feminist potential of its
radical, socialist-communist roots. This article draws
on several contemporary accounts of women in
Israel, especially Lesley Hazelton’s Israeli Women:
The Reality behind the Myths, as well as my own
experience of living and working in Israel for three
months.

Seventy percent of the Israeli population does not
consider itself “religious,” but Israelis believe
enough in the maintenance of Judaic ties, at least at
a symbolic level, to grant power to the reactionary
orthodox in Israeli politics. Since the founding of the
state in 1948, the ruling coalition has depended on
the National Religious Party to maintain power. This
interfusion of politics and religion at the core of
Israeli life can be traced to the omnipresent fear of
religious oppression as has happened in the past. In
1953, when the atrocities of the Holocaust were
becoming public knowledge, the Rabbinical Courts
Jurisdiction Law granted religious authorities con-
trol over all marriage, divorce, and family laws. In
practical terms, this means that civil legislation
towards equality is often a front for the underlying
sexism of Judaism and the Israeli people.

Judaism’s male standard goes far beyond the
morning prayer, in which men thank “God who has
not made me a woman.” Women cannot testify in
court—the Talmud considers women emotionally
unreliable and light-headed. Women are the
property of their husbands—the Hebrew word for
husband means owner—and divorce is totally
dependent on the husband’s decision to free his
wife. Therefore, even if her husband abuses or
deserts her, an Israeli woman cannot divorce
and/or remarry. And if a woman has any
extramarital relations, she is forbidden from
remarriage. Polygamy and physical abuse are not
only religiously sanctioned, but also practiced by
many Sephardic (non-European) Jewish men before
coming to Israel. Finally, a plethora of laws and
rituals derive from the biblical injunction to “be
fruitful and multiply.” Masturbation and homosex-
uality are taboo because they “waste semen.” (It
seems that lesbianism figures very little in Rabbinic
fears.)

viewed by those who pull the strings in Israeli
government. Sexual intercourse, for procreative
purposes only, is confined to the most fertile days of
the woman’s menstrual cycle. For at least twelve
days each month, she is allowed no physical contact
with men. And since it is impossible to know when
an individual woman will be menstruating/“impure,”
all are excluded from time-bound observance
and separated from the Torah-touching male
congregation at all times. This overriding religious
concern with marriage, fertility, and racial purity
has led to many violations of civil liberties. In 1975,
the Minister of Religious Affairs and the Rabbinical
Court was caught circulating lists of “untouch-
ables” (women who are undivorced and therefore
bound to dead or missing husbands) and “bastard
children” (of illegal, i.e. adulterous, not unknown,
paternity), when they slipped into the hands of the
Jerusalem Post.

As anachronistic as they seem beside Tel Aviv’s
country club and skyscrapers, these inequities
reign. Perceived as helpless, women are expected to
ensure the sanctity of the home and the continuity
of the Jewish people beyond the country’s ongoing
military engagements. David Ben-Gurion was the
first to equate fertility with women’s duty to the
state of Israel. But even Golda Meir, to whom
Israelis often point as a symbol of sexual equality,
actively fought feminism as prime minister:

“You mean those crazy nuts who burn their bras
and walk around all disheveled and hate men?
They're crazy. Crazy. How can one accept crazy
creatures who deem it a misfortune to get pregnant
and a disaster to give birth to children?”

Although Meir led the Labor Party coalition to
protect women’s rights, laws like mandatory mater-
nity leave and prohibitions against night work for
women limited equality at the same time that they
protected women from abuse in employment.
“Golda” became a political leader because she
fought “like a man” (her own words) and because
she was a family-centered Eastern European
Zionist. She was an exception to the male world of
Israeli politics, forever doubting herself as a woman
and denying other women the opportunity to pursue
fruitful careers outside the home as she had done.

Unfortunately, less, rather than more, sexual
equality has evolved with the development of Israel.
Under Begin’s Likud coalition, “even the lip service
to equality faded into insignificance as the politics
of pragmatism replaced the politics of ideology and
as Orthodoxy came into its own.” A recent Reform
marriage, the first in Israel and an attempt “to
break the total monopoly of Orthodoxy over Jewish
life” has not been recognized by either civil or
religious authorities. Far from the gun-slinging
Sabras portrayed in the media, Israeli women need
only declare themselves “religious” to be exempt
from “compulsory” military service. Furthermore,
despite 60,000 illegal abortions annually (in a
population of 3 million), there are no state funds or
facilities for abortion. Inadequate birth control
education and availability combine with an intense
need to replace those who have died in combat,
producing scores of unwanted pregnancies.

Showing another combination of medical/technical
knowledge and moral/ethical denial, the method of
birth control practiced by over half of Israeli women is
“coitus interruptus backed by illegal abortions.”
A study taken after the Yom Kippur war showed
that although it was Israeli men who needed to have
more children immediately after the fighting had
stopped, the women believed that getting pregnant
was a means of serving the country and of
“mothering” their husbands’ war wounds. As with

(woman’s realm) rationalizes the intense pain and
alienation of a country incessantly bound to war and
survival.

In theory, the kibbutz was to have been a non-
sexist, communist living situation with communal
dining halls, laundries and stores, dormitories; with
trained nurses for all children (both sexes living to-
gether), free health care and individual salaries, wo-
men were to assume equality for the first time. But
the early kibbutzim were military institutions as
well, placed in strategic locations to control Pales-
tine for the Jews. And with war an imminent threat,
men had little time to teach women the skills neces-
sary to move beyond the kitchen and nursery. Born
of the nineteenth-century European feminism, the
strength of kibbutz ideology was diminished by out-
side pressures—war, influx of non-Europeans, and
the capitalist economy of the state as a whole. So-

stecling silver
14 carat gold
gece S

leather goods

1014 Chapel St.

eo eee

cialized first as Jews/Israelis, and second as kib-
butzniks, children soon learned the sex-role expecta-
tions of the broader culture. Traditional women’s
occupations such as cooking and caring for the sick
were still undervalued and therefore not considered
part of the primary task of nation-building. Women
who pushed into “male” occupations often did so in
addition to performing “women’s tasks.” Men
never moved into traditional areas, in contrast.
Perhaps the present generation’s deference to
motherhood and traditional roles is a means of
doing compensatory time for their mothers’ overex-
tension.

Although I lacked the numbers and figures to
back my instincts at the time, when I lived in Israel
I was overwhelmed by how far from equality life
remained for the “liberated” Israeli woman. In
answer to my questions, I received two contradicto-
ry arguments: that Israeli women were already
equal and chose to be mothers first, or that femin-
ism was something to take care of after everything
else—basically war and poverty—was settled. The
first argument is a middle-class myth, perpetuated
by those women, mostly living in cities, who can
live with relative economic ease and who often have
domestic assistance anyway. But the third of Israeli
women who seek employment outside the home re-
ceive only 60% of the wages paid to men, and they
are almost always the first to be fired in a down-
ward spiraling economy. I believe the second argument, that
feminism is an American woman’s privilege which
is irrelevant to Israeli survival, not only negates the
potential force of women as a collective entity, but
also denies the validity and urgency of women’s
issues in history. And if we were to refuse to bear
children into a world of war, peace would inevitably
follow.

The yoke of religion makes Israel a country of
oppressions and contradictions. Because no one else
will sell them oil, Israeli leaders must import from
South Africa. The same orthodox men who make

men in Israel could lead to the equally important
equality between racial groups and bordering states.
The stress on legal and theoretical equality, rather
than on real change, faced by Israeli women is pre-
cisely the same argument/lie thrust on the “self-de-
termined” Palestinians. Israel cannot continue to
rest these contradictions on its utopian, biblical stat-
us. In the final analysis, Israeli women, to gain free-
dom and equality, must learn the same lesson which
perpetuates the Jewish people as a whole.

“History tells that every oppressed class gained
true liberation from its masters through its own
efforts. It is necessary that women learn that...her
freedom will reach only as far as her power to
achieve her freedom reaches.” -Emma Goldman.

777-8480.

New Haven CT