The

1950s:  
Eisenhower, bomb shelters, blacklists.  

McCarthyism,  

“Father Knows Best,” and the  
“Feminine Mystique.” Yet it was in this  
repressive era that lesbians and gay  
men began to bridge the gap between a  
private, secret subculture, and a visible,  
politically organized community. In the  
1950s, for the first time, gay men and  
lesbians successfully organized in such  
groups as the Mattachine Society, the  
ONE, Inc. and the Daughters of Bilitis  
(DOB) to promote an enlightened  
public discourse about homosexuality.  
Throughout the decade these organiza-  
tions struggled to strengthen gay  
cultural identity and to end society's  
oppression of homosexuals. Walking a  
thin line between their commitment to  
change and their fear of public  
backlash, these gay political pioneers  
called themselves the “Homophile  
Movement.”  

Although they attempted to include  
women, Mattachine and ONE, Inc.  
never successfully attracted  
widespread lesbian participation. DOB  
was founded in 1955 in San Francisco  
as a social alternative to lesbian bars,  
and soon became the vehicle for  
women’s participation in the move-  
ment. The name Daughters of Bilitis  
was inspired by a Pierre Louys poem,  
“Song of Bilitis,” about a fictional con-  
temporary of Sappho. The founders  
thought that if discovered by an out-  
sider, they could call themselves a  
women’s poetry group or social club  
such as the DAR. Their initial paranoia  
eventually subsided as they recognized  
the necessity for a public-oriented les-  
bian organization. Many DOB  
members were threatened by this deci-  
sion and split off to pursue their  
original aim of a private lesbian social  
club. Meanwhile, Del Martin and  
Phyllis Lyon established DOB as the  
lesbian voice of the Homophile Move-  
ment.  

The male-dominated Homophile  
organizations gave DOB much support  
and assistance during its early years,  
and therefore had a great influence  
upon their ideology and practices. Lyon  
and Martin first learned about the ex-  
istence of the movement by attending  
ONE’s Midwinter Institute in Los  
Angeles. They co-sponsored their first  
public forum with and subletted office  
space from the Mattachine. Their state-  

Mr. and Mrs.—  

- [Taree RAIDEN |]  
a LADIES  

WHO'S MOVED IN DOWN THE STREET?  

I Shot Think They Do  
BE Timid ALL ALONE  
In THAT BIG HOUSE  

Joe's Fears Prove Groundless  

HERE THEY Come  
Now, JOE  

Dyke Pioneers  

ment of purpose greatly resembled that  
of the Mattachine, emphasizing educa-  
tion, integration, cooperation with pro-  

fessionals, and modifications in the  

criminal code. The Ladder, DOB’s mon-  
thly magazine, reflected the fact that  
DOB viewed itself as the lesbian wing  
of the greater Homophile Movement.  
Its writers viewed lesbians and gay men  
as belonging to the same group and suf-  
fering similar oppression, and reported  
extensively on Mattachine’s and ONE’s  
activities, or general news which often  
had little to do with the interests and  
concerns of lesbians. Lately, lesbian-  
feminists, in looking back at The Lad-  
der, have criticized it for its male con-  
tent and seeming lack of feminist con-  
sciousness. Recently, I interviewed Del  
Martin and Phyllis Lyon about the early  
days of the DOB. Phyllis commented  
on such criticisms:  
I think it's hard for people to under-  
stand what it was like in the 50s... over  
and over again we’ve had women put it  
down for not being where it would be to-  
day, not understanding what was going  
on in the 50s and 60s. “Why were they  
using these words?” “Why were they  
writing about men?” We saw The Ladder  
... early on as a communications vehi-  
cle, and the only way that lesbians tak-  
ing The Ladder would know what was  
going on in the movement was if we  
reported on it. So we reported on all of  
Mattachine’s and ONE’s conventions  
and anything else we could find that  
was of interest.  

Del also commented on the necessi-  
ty for DOB to keep “tabs” on the male  
organizations:  

In those days, we only had three  
organizations, and we wanted to find  
out what was happening, what was  
developing. And what they were doing.  
Anything that they did politically we  
would have to pay for too.  

Society for the most part defined  
homosexuals—male or female—in  
terms of gay male culture and sexuali-  
ty, thus it was politically expedient for  
DOB to work with the male organiza-  
tions on issues which immediately af-  
fected only gay men. Gay male culture  
was much more visible than lesbian  
culture. Gay male bars were numerous;  
lesbian bars few. Gay male sexual pat-  
terns included far more street cruising  
and public sex. Their greater visibility  

made gay men more vulnerable to  
criminal prosecution, psychiatric op-  
pression, and job dismissal than les-  
bians, although lesbians certainly faced  
similar treatment. For these reasons,  
gay male issues were much easier to  
identify and define than lesbian issues.  
At a superficial level, it seemed logical  
for the Homophile Movement to focus  
its energy on issues such as police har-  
assment, bar raids, and changing the  
laws. As Phyllis remembered,  
We spent all our time worrying about  
the boys getting caught in toilets... and  
you know, the whole spectrum of gay  
male problems, most of which had to do  
with the criminal justice system. We  
wanted to change the laws. We went to  
Macy’s and told them to quit raiding the  
bars—because those were the issues,  
but no one had ever been able to talk  
about the issues that were specific to  
lesbians.  

But, what were the issues that were  
specific to lesbians? It was difficult for  
DOB to separate itself from the male-  
defined public discourse about  
homosexuality and pinpoint lesbians’  
distinctive concerns. Nevertheless, with  
these obstacles and without the advan-  
tages of modern feminist theory, DOB  
managed to develop a broad agenda  
that according to Phyllis, was “amaz-  
ingly feminist,” despite their sexist  
language:  
Our language was terrible. Hey listen, I  
ran across a letter—we’d call each other  
girl, called the boys boys or “the kids.”  
It was a letter I had written to somebody  
in DOB, one of the other chapters, in  
which I said, “Oh, we’re just so hap-  
py to see you girls!” “It’s going to be so  
wonderful for all of us girls to get  
together!” Oh, it’s just hilarious! But, we  
were talking about equal pay for equal  
work. We were talking about legal  
discrimination against women, about  
discrimination against women in the  
movement, about lesbian mothers.  

In addition to these proto-feminist  
issues, DOB was continually concerned  
with the difficulty of lesbian isolation.  
Interestingly, on a social level, lesbians  
often broke out of isolation through the  
help of more visible gay men. After  
moving to San Francisco, Del and  
Phyllis became friends with a gay male  
couple while going to bars looking for  
other lesbians:  

P: Well, I guess they were really the first  
friends we made when we came here  
(San Francisco). And, uh, they were an  
odd couple. Jerry was quite a bit older  
than Ricky was, and Ricky was very ef-  
feminate. And so they had really a kind  
of husband/wife relationship.  

D: We must have met them in a gay bar.  
Jerry was bartending at one, the 299,  
and it wasn’t doing much business at all  
and we stumbled in on it one night.  

P: Yeah, that’s what happened. We  
wandered in there by accident, I think,  
and there wasn’t much happening so we  
ended up talking to them. And then we  
just got to be friends. Everyone was pret-  
ty isolated. I think we would have  
become friends with anyone we met at  
that point. We didn’t know anybody.  
And we were really looking for lesbians,  
but we found Ricky and Jerry instead.  

Eventually, Ricky and Jerry intro-  
duced Del and Phyllis to other lesbians.  
The scarcity of lesbian bars, even in San  
Francisco, made it difficult for Del and  
Phyllis, as newcomers to the city, to  
find other lesbians. The gay male bar,  
more visible and accessible, helped end  
their isolation. DOB addressed the  
problem of isolation in several ways. It  
sponsored public discussions, ranging  
in topics from lesbian mothering, to les-  
bian legal rights, to general topics con-  
cerning homosexuality. Lesbians could  
come and appear simply as the “in-  
terested public,” while gaining impor-  
tant information about DOB and les-  
bianism. The Ladder also addressed the  
issue of isolation. In her presidential ad-  
dress, in the first issue, Del wrote about  
the need for lesbians—“those elusive  
creatures”—to end their isolation and  
join the ranks of the movement; “Why  
not discard the Hermitage for the  
heritage that awaits any red-blooded  
American woman who wants to claim  
it.” DOB also functioned as a support  
network for lesbians in need. In addi-  
tion to staffing their office for drop-in  
peer counseling, DOB also had an  
alliance with Suicide Prevention.  

Many lesbians feared the backlash  
that might follow DOB’s breaking out  
of the “safety” of secrecy and invisibili-  
ty. Del reflected, “I think there were a  
lot of lesbians back in the fifties who  
wished to hell that we would shut up.”  
It was such fear that caused many  
women to leave DOB when it began its  
transition from social club to political  
organization.  

The fear of public backlash forced