also an important example of relation-  
ships based on equality and partnership  
rather than on roles. The Gay Report by  
Jay and Young found that “lesbians and  
gay men often cite the absence of rigid  
role playing as a major advantage of  
the homosexual lifestyle.” According  
to psychologist Letita Anne Peplau,  
although some homosexuals of both  
sexes conform to social conditioning  
and imitate traditional marriage pat-  
terns, “today sex-typed role playing is  
much more characteristic of heterosexual  
couples than of homosexual ones.”  
The male-female antagonism will on-  
ly be abolished with the elimination of  
sex roles. Only homosexuals decisively  
and consistently alter the base of their  
gender identity. While only the privileged  
few who can afford to be out of the  
closet actually live this difference day  
to day, all self-identified gay men and  
lesbians embody a successful  
resistance to the combined forces of  
family, religion, and culture. Our socie-  
ty explicitly condemns homosexuality  
and insists that homosexuals cannot  
lead fulfilled lives. In fact, the  
homosexual who doesn’t crumble in  
despair from the stigmatization which  
her/his lifestyle provokes, but asserts  
her/his choice as positive and finds sup-  
port in the gay subculture and com-  
munity, has reached a level of fulfill-  
ment which is exceptional in our socie-  
ty. Heterosexual norms, which include  
expectations of social, political, and  
personal conformity, predefine values,  
and the individual’s relation to these  
values. Self-image and self-esteem are  
intrinsically bound up and limited by  
heterosexist culture. Both men and  
women who feel compelled to live ac-  
cording to traditional standards must  
modify and control their behavior to fit  
expected norms. Despite conditioning  
from earliest childhood, the creative in-  
dividual nature of the human being  
rebels against the position she/he has  
been born into. Some women channel  
the rebellion into feminism, but many  
men and women experience anxiety,  
alienation, and dissatisfaction which is  
seen as personal neurosis, and is dealt  
with through therapy or tranquilizers.  
The self-avowed homosexual is in  
the unique position of knowing and be-  

ing constantly reminded that she/he has  
rejected the promise of heterosexual  
success; every role model which our  
culture provides directly contradicts  
her/his self-image. This self-image con-  
tains a crucial element of self-worth  
and defiance of the consumer society;  
only faith in counter-cultural, non-  
legitimized priorities can achieve it.  

For the purposes of my thesis I have  
hitherto presented homo- and  
heterosexuality as separate realms, but  
this separation is actually a product of  
rigid sex role conditioning. As David  
Fernbach says in Pink Triangles, “the  
psychological production of masculinity  
and femininity involves the repression  
of homosexual tendencies.” No  
further proof of people’s innately bisex-  
ual nature is needed than the staunch  
refusal of most heterosexuals to  
acknowledge the existence, or even  
possibility, of normal, well-adjusted  
gay people. In facing the homosexuality  
in others, people must face it in  
themselves. As all openly gay people  
know, the most vehement hostility  
against them comes from the people  
least secure about their own sex identi-  
ty.  

continued on page 14  

We are Connecticut's Largest Full Service Copy Center  

TYPING - XEROX COPYING - BINDING  
XEROX COPIES AS LOW AS 3½¢ EACH  
OFFSET PRINTING - TYPESETTING  

by Dennis Earle  

I am a man. I speak as a person, but  
also as a man; I can only express my  
point of view from a male perspective.  
This is most pertinent to a discussion of  
feminism.  

I am ignorant of the feminist insights  
that the literature of feminism might  
provide, and can speak only from the  
experience of feminism gained from  
my personal interaction with feminist  
women. This article is not an attempt to  
enlighten anyone with respect to  
feminism, but rather to give an account  
of a male experience and some per-  
sonal comments about men and  
women seeking change and fulfillment.  

How may I relate men in general to  
feminism? Is there such a thing as a  
male feminist? For many men,  
feminism is just one more manifesta-  
tion of the general struggle for human  
justice that has been going on for cen-  
turies. Feminism certainly has some  
concrete “male-world” goals, such as  
economic and legal equality to be ef-  
fected and protected by new laws and  
institutions in the world in which we are  
now living. I think that most men  
understand the general character of  
these goals by now. Some support what  
they believe is the attitude that pro-  
duces such goals, and have found con-  
crete ways to help win concrete vic-  
tories. These are good steps for anyone  
who values such goals.  

Working towards specific and tangi-  
ble social or political change, however,  
is not a process by which a man may  
become a feminist. Such changes are  
not necessarily inconsistent with the ra-  
tional ideas of our male-dominated  
western society, which call for equality  
among all people in (male) world terms.  
A generous chauvinist (like a true  
democrat or a good liberal) can lay  
claim to such a male  
“feminism”—which is hardly feminism.  
It seems to me that feminism is not  
egalitarianism, or socialism, or uto-  

pianism; it is a female movement which cannot be taken on male  
terms. It is women dealing with a  
women’s problem in a women’s way.  
Enlightened men and liberated women  
continue to cooperate in pursuit of  
real-world goals, for many reasons. But  
the exclusion of, hostility toward, or  
lack of communication with men in the  
feminist struggle is a matter for  
feminists to decide; for they are, in this  
instance, excluding male sympathizers  
and not feminists.  

In order for me to assess my relation-  
ship to feminism, I must look at  
feminism, myself, and men and women  
in general on a basic and personal  
level.  

What is most important to me about  
my encounter with feminism is that it  
has revealed to me some of the most  
basic needs of men and women, and  
has given me hope that mass recogni-  
tion of these needs and their relation to  
our social structure can bring about  
positive change. This revelation and  
this hope do not strike me as  
characteristic of most men’s experience  
of feminism; yet I cannot help but  
believe that these same basic needs ex-  
ist, and exist unmet, for nearly all men.  

Mail Orders Accepted • Orders Processed in 24 Hours  
For Further Information Call or Write:  

TYCO COPY  
27 Broadway  
New Haven, CT 06511  
(203) 562-9723  

Learning From Feminism  

Feminism has shown me the pro-  
found beauty of the way that women  
exchange love and strength among  
themselves, and the wondrous energy  
this exchange produces. I do not claim  
to understand how this happens, but I  
find its beauty compelling, even as I  
am aware that much of the positive  
energy generated is directed towards  
freeing women from men’s domination  
of society. The glimpses I have had of  
the culture feminists are creating have  
filled me with excitement, and yet also  
with frustration; for we are not yet able  
to have such positive and beautiful in-  
teraction between men and women (ex-  
cept perhaps in what some of us  
understand to be true love between a  
man and a woman). There is almost no  
trace of mutually generated love and  
strength within groups, or even pairs, of  
men (with the possible exception of  
homosexual love). Men need—and I  
need—something of this “feminine”  
quality in relationships with men and  
women. Perhaps men can develop a  
similar energy, a similar exchange of  
love, among themselves. Perhaps  
women can teach us.  

Men must find out what is true and  
what is false in their society's and their  
own understanding of themselves. I am  
convinced that, beyond the “putting in  
order” of our moral and legal attitudes  
toward women and men, we can gain  
some ground in the pursuit of strength  
and comfort—the vigorous state of  
peace—that I believe feminism is seek-  
ing. An alternative must arise to the pro-  
bably false notion of male feminism: a  
male movement which will draw upon  
the positive qualities of men to support  
each other and meet common—and  
very deep—needs.  

I believe that women can teach men  
how to begin fulfilling the need that  
current norms suppress. Men have  
taught women a great deal in the past,  
most of which works against the goals  
of feminism; nevertheless, the sexes  
can teach each other. At this point, I  

indicates that women can do so for  
the sake of men. Women have come a  
considerable distance toward meeting  
their own needs in a sexist world,  
without a whole hell of a lot of help  
from men. And yet I do believe—to  
think otherwise would not be consis-  
tent with the nature of the most power-  
ful encounters I have had with  
feminism—that women will reach out  
to men. I have met with some hostility  
and exclusion in dealing with feminism,  
and this is frustrating and saddening to  
me, although I accept it as necessary.  
The women whom I know personally,  
feminist or not, have been on the whole  
inclusive and giving. This is fundamen-  
tal to my understanding of women as  
women, and of feminism as a move-  
ment built upon such positive qualities.  

So often I have, like a child or a  
lover, sought the touch of a loving  
hand; I have almost always reached—  
when able to reach at all—for women;  
why? Because I knew that I have often  
been able to touch others with a cer-  
tain kind of consoling love. Men must  
try their hand at reaching for and  
touching each other. I truly hope that  
we may also learn to provide that  
touch for women, so that, should a  
woman reach out for a man, he might  
give to her the love and consolation  
that women have so often given to us.  

Postscript: I have said that I can  
only speak as a man; I should add  
that I speak as a very romantic  
man, and that I am aware that  
this viewpoint has at times cloud-  
ed my perception of reality. Fur-  
ther, I can only give the point of  
view of a heterosexual man.  

One never notices what has been done;  
one can only see what remains to be  

NEW HAVEN