hesitancy, to sales waves. When you can’t  
"PE: Well it is true, Marrone of my eee  

An Interview With  
Professor Phoebe Ellsworth  

By Jule Winterbottom  

Phoebe Ellsworth is one of the few tenured  
women faculty members at Yale. She has taught in  
the Psychology Department for the past eight years,  
specializing in non-verbal communication, and  
psychology and the law. She graduated from  
Radcliffe in 1966, having spent her first two years of  
college at Bryn Mawr. When asked if she would be  
willing to do an interview with Aurora, Professor  
Ellsworth wryly suggested that a better choice  
might be a woman who does not have tenure. The  
following are excerpts from this interview:  

Julie Winterbottom: Is there a sense of any kind of  
a feminist network within the University? One  
always hears about an "Old Boy" network, but  
lately there’s been talk of the start of an "Old Girl"  
network in academia, whether to help other women  
get jobs or simply to give them support as they try  
to keep them.  

Phoebe Ellsworth: I’ve known of a couple of groups  
that are explicitly working to establish such "Old  
Girl" networks in the social sciences at several  
different universities. And there is Judith Branden-  
burg and the Women’s Studies group around here,  
but there’s also a lot of distance among the women  
here and I certainly don’t think that women would  
support other women getting tenure within the  
Department, particularly.  

JW: Do you think that’s institutionalized in there?  
Do you think Yale is making it difficult to have  
contact with women in the university or is it just  
that it happened that way?  

PE: Well, I don’t know about all the departments,  
but I think Yale is a place where there’s just very  
little social interaction among anyone on the faculty.  

JW: So it’s more a product of that than any kind of  
fear of being labelled a "feminist professor"?  

PE: I have tenure in my department and have had research  
areas that were particularly feminist or that were  
particularly involved with gender differences or sex  
roles or anything like that. And I think that was a  
lucky or a smart move in terms of our careers,  
because I don’t think women’s studies are regarded  
as quite such a legitimate field still. So people will  
ask things like "Why is prejudice against women  
different from prejudice in general?" and "Why  
should women be a separate topic and not the same  
topic?" - which is in some ways a good question,  
but it’s an open question.  

JW: The point is it’s not being studied either way.  

PE: Right.  

JW: Have you ever considered going into university  
administration here or elsewhere?  

PE: I don’t like administration. I avoided all  
administrators during my college and grad school  
career. Most administrative positions strike me as  
too much paperwork, much too much dealing with  
financial issues that I not only am not interested in  
but am probably fairly incompetent in, and not  
enough dealing with individual people.  

JW: But they also deal with things like the women’s  
studies program, coeducation...  

PE: Yes, that’s true. I do have this nagging sense  
that if I do something like that I could perhaps  
benefit many.  

JW: Certainly administration could be a lot more  
political than it is right now.  

PE: I think women should go into administration.  
One reason for not doing it now, which is  
self-defeating, is that in some ways it’s really going  
to be hard to cut any ice with the people who really  
run Yale, now. I mean you have the same Old Blue  
professors who’ve been involved and who are going  
to make it clear that Yale means the world to them.  
And during the large majority of their careers there  
haven’t been any women at Yale. They still all know  
each other, hang around together, make the  
decisions. And many of the people who've been  
women administrators left in real frustration and  
that’s still likely to happen. But on the other hand,  
if women don’t get in there and work in the  
administration now, then the next generation is still  
going to be this group of men at the top.  

JW: In a recent N.Y. Times Magazine article, Betty  
Friedan claimed that the feminist movement that  
she helped start has gone to an extreme and that  
the family is suffering. The movement should stop  
where it is and re-examine the institution of the  
family and the large numbers of  
women (and men) to turn back to their families and  
to try to get the men more involved. Is this  
something you've thought a lot about? How you will  
combine or how can you combine career and family?  

PE: Yeah. I’m really wistful for the days when I was  
going to become a great artist. I had the right idea  
in those days. I’m not sure I buy the position that  
the breakdown in families is in a major way due to  
women having careers. The divorce rates were  
already skyrocketing before that and it’s very salient  
to me because I just talked about divorce in class  
today and it was one of those spellbound classes in  
which for about 45 minutes of cathartic questions  
and in many of these questions it was clear that  
people were making hypothetical questions out of  
their own families. I think these kids are not kids  
whose mothers had careers when they were little; it  
could be that their mothers went out and had  
careers when they were grown up. I think the  
breakdown in families predated the large increase in  
careers for women. And I’m not even that sure the  
increase numerically is as large as the change in  
consciousness.  

JW: I’m interested in the work you've done with  
non-verbal communication and how it might relate  
to an observation made by a professor in the  
"hard" sciences who was interviewed for this  
magazine. She remarked that she believes the  
problems for women, especially those in the  
humanities, is that there is a kind of male code of  
body language and rhetoric which they are used to.  

A woman who tries to enter the profession is in  
some sense shut out or excluded from a certain kind  
of communication that’s going on. This professor  
felt it was a greater problem in the humanities than  
in the "hard" sciences just because in the sciences  
there is always the fundamental abstract empirical  
language of numbers and "facts." Does this theory  
seem valid to you from your experience?  

PE: Yes, and I agree that it’s probably worse in the  
humanities. I think men in the humanities depart-  
ment are quite clubby. And even in psychology  
there’s a number of people on the faculty who go to  
the football games together every week. Now I  
happen to go to several games which is the reason  
every time I go to a game I see the same four or  
five male professors. I don’t think they really "hang  
out" together or sort of roll up their sleeves and  
drink beer together. There is a well-known poker  
game that comes and goes and has been going on in  
the Psychology Department at Yale for years and  

JW: Do you think women have to work harder  
than their male colleagues to be treated as equals?  

PE: No, it’s not like that. It’s more that the women  
must be fully-rounded people in every aspect. A  
woman can’t be a wimpy little genius who sits in  
the corner. She must be outgoing and sociable and  
friendly, as well as being tops in her field.  

JW: A real "pleaser?"  

PE: Exactly.  

JW: Thank you.