March 1984

Blue on Blue cont'd from pg. 10

can feel with my fingertips. My hands
begin to shake, the bones beginning to
break the ice that has formed in them. My
grandmother grasps my hand more firmly.
She reaches her other hand out from under
the covers and sheathes my other shiver-
ing hand. She closes her eyes.

My blueness is suddenly extinguished. I
grab at her hands more firmly but her grip
is already loosened, she does not open her
eyes for me.

Open, goddamnit, open. I shake her arms.

Open! Open! She is asleep. Let me in, let me
in. My blue is gone. I am freezing. I stand
paralyzed, staring at her in her bed, her
limp hands resting on my palms. She will
not awaken for me. She will not let me
escape into her blueness or her warmth. I
squat down, unsteady, forming into a hard
cold crystal. I cannot even make it back to
bed.

What happens now? Squatting here on
the floor and unable to move, becoming a
statue. At least in bed I was comfortable
and warm. Here I am vulnerable to the
cold of our airy house, prey to the ghosts
who live in all the corners. My muscles
and bones are already congealing into this
frog stance. All I can see is my grand-
mother’s bed, her cast-about tissues, the
sketch of her frailness under the blankets,
her slumbering face. If I could only move
to get under the blankets with her, much
closer than my room, and then I wouldn’t
have to get out of bed when she woke up.
And I could learn from her all the ways of
the bed; the peaceful idleness, the time
with your own thoughts, the wisdom
found in the ceiling. And I could glimpse
the blueness once in a while, more often.

AURORA

fingers and position it behind me on the
floor. The other hand I place in front of me
on the floor. Cold, cold floor running up
through my veins. Now push, push up-
ward. Pull, pull myself up with my hips.
Progress. Yes. I am crouching, my finger-
tips still lightly braced on the floor, my
legs bent, ready to stand. Potential energy
on the end of every nerve. One last gigan-
tic exertion to pull myself upright. Heave.
I totter but I’m standing. Still, straight.
But how dizzy I feel. The arm of a chair
presents itself for me. Balance. Now stand-
ing I have a different view than just the
bed, I can see the dresser on which dozens
of framed photographs perch and smile at
me. I can see the TV set in the corner, dis-
regarding our presence. I can see all the
vases and pots of flowers displaying them-
selves on the table. I can see another per-
son with bad posture in a dirty yellow
robe and tangled webs of hair clutching at
the arm of a chair. She peers at me, her
eyes curious yet tired. Something in her
face beckons me, enchants me, draws me
closer. Perhaps it is her aloneness, or per-
haps her solemnity. I don’t know but I
must move closer. Now my body rushes
forward, suddenly unbound from its
paralysis.

Closer, closer, I am facing the stranger.
Stare. Blue on blue again. Her eyes are
more subdued, though, filmy and veiled.
If I could I would learn her life by the
tracings on her face. But she is pale and
smooth, uncarved except for tiny rays
emanating from her eyes. Features like
Grandma’s, but unengraved. Pure and
barely touched. Yet such old, hollow eyes.
Closed, sunken in, pools turned upside
down so no light can reflect from them.

page 11

DESTROYED

“Gay Liberation”

SCULPTURE

Gerard Koskovich

George Segal’s recently installed “Gay Liberation” sculpture was destroyed Tues-
day night. The unidentified assailant struck each figure several times with a ham-
mer, causing irreparable damage. The sculpture was removed Wednesday, March
7. Noel Hanrahan, of the steering committee of the Gay and Lesbian Alliance at
Stanford, expressed the gay community’s outrage: “This sculpture is not only a
piece of art; it’s a political statement. This attack is an affront to every gay and les-
bian.” There will be a demonstration in White Plaza, Monday, March 12 at noon.

Buried blue.
I turn from the stranger, her sorrow too
much to bear. I look out the window. Gray-
ness greets me through the bare branches.
I turn the other direction to study my

and cottons, breathing serenely, her face
upturned peacefully to the cold air outside
her bed, her hair softening the meeting
that is inevitable between bed and air.
Her skin, so accustomed to life
than in my own bed. Yes, here would be a
solution, if I could only coerce my body
into straightening, walking those few
steps, and climbing into bed.

I loosen my hand from Grandma’s long

Standmother, swathed in

Margie Adam cont'd from pg. 7
On The Feminist Movement & University Women:

As an oppressed group, women may be the only group that gets more radical with
age. The longer we live, the more we realize how it is, how it could have been, and
who's responsible.

I sat with a group of Yale women and the woman said to me “I don’t know if there’s a
reason for me, in my life, for the women’s movement because I feel absolutely clear
that any Yale woman of quality will find her way.” I looked at her and I thought,
“You will be safe as long as you're here, but when you move beyond these protective
walls, there’s a whole other reality out there. Unless you intend to wear your Yale
badge on you, sooner or later someone is going to treat you just like another woman.
Then you will get to find out what it means to be a woman in our society.

I graduated from CAL, I had a degree, I was articulate, I was quite bright, I had grown
up with all the advantages of an upper middle-class background. I wound up at a sec-
retarial job at an Air Force Base. I was treated just like the woman at the other desk,
who had no education, didn’t have the advantages. At first, I tried to distinguish
myself from her: “Don’t call me honey! Don’t call me those names! I’m not like her.
She’s not educated, so if you want to demean her, that’s fine, but I’m educated, I’ve
got a degree! How dare you! Who do you think you are?” And it became very clear
... they were men, and they get to do that. And I, in my own little insulated upbring-
ing had never had to experience that. And it became immediately clear, that the only
thing that had ever separated me from that other woman was my class, and my fa-
ther’s privilege. Not mine, not my mom’s, but my dad’s privilege. It didn’t matter
how accomplished I was. It didn’t matter what I had done. I was put in a class which
was immediately inferior because I was a woman.

As long as we live in a society where women make less than 59 cents per dollar that a
man makes for a comparable job, we are still in the same society that systematically
devalues women. As long as the rape statistics continue to rise, and the battering sta-
tistics continue to rise, we have to understand that we still live in a society that syste-
matically objectifies women and creates a culture and a set of politics that gives per-
mission to violence toward women. We are not done.

We don’t get to be immune by virtue of the school we go to. We don’t get to be
immune by virtue of our father’s privilege or our color or our class. We don’t get to be
immune because what we all continue to share in common is that we are all women
in a society that hates women; that devalues women.

It's important for women to keep working so that we don’t wake up one day realizing
that we no longer have the amendment that protects women’s right to choose, that we
no longer have affirmative action, that we no longer have battered women's shelters
and rape crisis centers, that we no longer have women’s music. Where did they all
go? I think the realization that women’s organizations at universities are dying out is
very heavy, and it’s not too late to do something about it.

On Her Plans For The Future:

I’ve decided to come off the road for a while. I've acknowledged to myself that I
need to create a void again, like I did eleven years ago, to see what will happen. The
last time I created a void, I quit my job, moved to the country, and I started writing
music with lyrics for the first time after ten years of writing instrumental music.
What will happen this time?

For a long time, I’ve been on a three-month incremental schedule: Planning for a tour,
being on tour, or coming off the road. It's tiring psychically, although it wasn’t tiring
until it was tiring. I had all the energy in the world until I noticed I didn’t have as
much energy as I had before. It was just fine, until it wasn’t fine.

My friends keep asking me, “What are you going to do?” I don’t know. Probably go
berserk for the first three months. Probably suffer from acute low self-esteem because
I'm not out there performing. Probably go through a period when I feel like no one
will ever play my records again, because I’m not on the road. I don’t know —
whatever you do when you’ve had your identity tied up with something that you no
longer do. You go through a period where you have to struggle to find yourself in the
center of yourself, not in the center of your work. Once you get there, something will
happen — I don’t know what. It’s exciting. Terrifying, but exciting.

Margie Adam is a dynamic performer and a dynamic woman. Margie’s strength
and her passion for music stuns her audience, and continues to inspire her longest-
standing fans. Her feminist viewpoint comes through loud and clear in her songs, as
she continues to encourage people to make their voices heard in this world of ours.

To those who would say that radical feminism is not the “in” thing these days,

Margie leaves an especially inspirational statement:
“I continue to feel that the oppression of one half of the population of the world
by the other half has got to be as major an issue as anything else. We're talking
the annihilation of a spirit of half the population of the earth. That's news, and
continues to be news. My job is to encourage and to reinforce and to inspire
and to entertain and to be outrageous and whimsical and ... to keep that spirit
alive!”

Please join the women of the Stanford community and Margie in concert at Kresge

Come join in the uplifting celebration!

Auditorium, Thursday, March 15, 8 p.m. Tickets available at Tresidder Box Office.