Housework

° that all women

Wages For

And

Women  
At Yale

By Molly Ladd-Taylor

Throughout the 1970s, newspapers have con-  
tained frequent reports of women demanding and  
often winning money and recognition for their work  
in the home. The Finnish and Italian legislatures  
have been presented with proposals to pay salaries  
to full-time housewives, and women in other  
countries are organizing to increase and extend the  
money they have already won, including welfare  
and social security in the U.S., and the Family  
Allowance in England and Canada. In 1977, the  
Prudential Life Insurance Co. estimated the value of  
housework at $283.49 per week, and from Holly-  
wood to Harlem women have been fighting in the  
courts and on the streets for their wages due.

The International Wages for Housework Cam-  
paign is part of the growing movement of women  
demanding economic independence and cash recog-  
nition of our work in the home. It grew out of the  
welfare movement of the 1960s, taking the cue  
from Black welfare mothers who refused to accept  
low-paying jobs and demanded more money from  
the state. They declared that they already had a job  
raising children, and that the state was profiting  
from their work. In 1975, a one-day general strike of  
women in Iceland illustrated how central women’s  
work is to the economy - and how much power  
women potentially have. “When women stop,  
everything stops,” said the strikers, and 90% of  
Iceland’s production ground to a halt as teachers,  

nurses, housewives - all women - went on strike.  

paid for their housework from the  
government and through windfall profits, is also  
organizing to recognize as wages the money we  
already receive. A resolution passed at the 1977  
International Women’s Year Conference in Houston  
stated that, “The elimination of poverty must be a  
priority for all those workers, and those receiving  
payments should be afforded the dignity of having  
that payment called a wage, not welfare.”

Working with many groups of women, Wages for  
Housework is organizing for money and services for  
older women, disabled women, students, and  
women who have been battered or raped. In  
addition, we are fighting the harassment of  
prostitutes and welfare women, (who are harassed  
because they have already gotten some money for  
the work the rest of us do for free), and of Lesbian  
women, who are refusing dependence on men.  
Legislation which recognizes rape in marriage as a  
crime and provides financial compensation for rape  
victims, and unemployment benefits for women who  
were forced to leave their jobs because of sexual  
harassment has passed in a few states, and is being  
considered in others. Like the HEW recommenda-  
tions that social security credits be given to  
homemakers and the attempt to put a price tag on  
women’s work, these laws are a result of women’s  
massive demand for independence and for money.

Although women at Yale have more options than  
many others, we are part of the general movement  
to refuse financial dependence on men and to be no  
longer defined by the home. A Yale education  
guarantees access to a relatively high-paying job  
and the resulting social status. Those of us  
who have money are in a better position to leave  
unwanted relationships with men, to demand sexual  
satisfaction, and to share the household chores. Yet  
we are still defined by the unpaid work women do  
in the home.

Because housework is not paid, it is not  
recognized as work. Although we may have escaped  
the household chores, we are still expected to be  
perceptive, supportive and sexually responsive -  
emotional work that makes it possible to survive in  
the highly pressured Yale atmosphere. Putting  
schoolwork aside to deal with a crisis is something  
many women (and men) do without thinking - and  
want to do - but the worry about unfinished work  
and the fear of a low grade is always in the back of  
our minds. In demanding wages for housework, we  
are beginning to determine where our work and  
training let off, and where our personalities begin.  
Women’s fights against rape; to choose whether or  
not we have children; and to live openly with  
women if we are Lesbians, are all struggles against  
women’s unpaid work - and therefore lack of power  
- in the home.

KITCHEN KNOWLEDGE: THE DISHES

How do I get myself into these things?  
I’m supposed to be in three places right now,  
but here I am washing the dishes,  

It’s breaking up! It can be the light!

Because it makes our futures less secure, the  
economic crisis has made it more difficult for  
women to escape from housework. Even at school,  
budget cutbacks and freezes often limit the  
expansion (if they don’t phase out altogether) of  
programs like women’s studies, and make it more  
difficult for young professors, many of whom are  
women, to get tenure. Indeed, the economic crisis  
has made it more difficult to maintain the gains that  
students made in the 1960s, when they fought for  
the power to learn what and how they wanted.

When women organize against unpaid housework,  
we are also opening the way for men to see the  
invisible work that they do, such as schoolwork,  
household chores, and traveling to their jobs. A  
group of men called Payday has organized in  
support of the Wages for Housework Campaign, for  
men feel the burden of women’s lack of money  
(especially as they often have to pay for us!) - in  
some places, students are organizing for money and  
recognition of their work. Because it’s unpaid,  
studying like housework, becomes a 24-hour job,  
stretching out to define one’s whole life and  
appearing to be something one does for oneself.

Since college often seems all-consuming, we feel  
isolated from the “real world,” and many of us feel  
cut off and different from non-student women and  
men. University women have often not wanted to  
identify or organize with full-time housewives. That  
is because housewives are unpaid and are therefore  
in a less powerful and less prestigious position in  
society, and we want to identify with power. Yet as  
long as women are not paid for housework, we can  
only be tokens in business and the professions; a  
reserve labor force of qualified (but poor) women  
will always be available to work for lower wages.  
And as long as housework remains unpaid, we will  
always be expected to bring our pleasing “nature”  
and often sexuality to whatever jobs we get.

The campus-community split weakens the wo-  
men’s movement, not only because it isolates  
women from each other, but because it divides a  
woman from herself. A woman’s life cannot be split  
so neatly, for she is the same person, whether in  
class, working in an office over the summer, or  

walking, harassed, down the street. Last year’s  
invasion of Playboy onto Ivy League campuses, like  
the fear of street assault in New Haven, are  
reminders that even though we are at Yale, we are  
still defined by unwaged work in the home and  
expected by some men to be sexually available  
anytime.

At some universities, women are beginning to  
break down the barriers between campus and  
community, organizing for money, against rape, and  
around other issues that affect all women and  
students. At Queens College, the Women’s Action  
Group, comprised of Black, Hispanic and white  
women and supported by many student men, has  
won space and money for a women’s center, and a  
childcare center will open in the spring. Because a  
number of Queens College students are welfare  
mothers, trying to get an education and more  
money to make a better life for themselves and their  
children, the Action Group has continuously  
opposed the charges of welfare fraud leveled  
against those who receive both a student stipend  
and welfare money (which together are not enough  
to live on). This spring at Oberlin College, students  
are joining with women in the community to discuss  
how to increase women’s money, including welfare,  
career counseling, and sports scholarships for  
women.

To build a powerful women’s movement, it is  
necessary to break down the divisions among  
women, and to organize for the money and  
independence that all women, from Yale students to  
welfare mothers, are fighting for. A powerful  
women’s movement must begin with the needs and  
struggles of women at the bottom of society, for  
their lack of money means that our position at the  
top can only be tenuous and token. In the Wages  
for Housework Campaign, autonomous groups of  
Black Women for Wages for Housework and Wages  
Due Lesbians ensure that the movement will begin  
with the needs of those who have less money and  
power. That is the only way the power of all women  
can be built. For more information about Wages for  
Housework, call 624-3614.