contents;

page 1. Editorial Comment by Cat Nilan  
2. The Concept of Power: A Critique of Radical  
Feminist Analysis by Helena Brett-Smith  
4. Research: “Women at Work” by Barbra  
Apfelbaum, Sue Searer, Janice Hansel  
6. POETRY  
16. Femmes Damnées by Cat Nilan  

biographies:

Barbra Apfelbaum taught Italian last year at Yale and  
currently is Program Coordinator of the Women’s Employ-  
ment Resource Center in New Haven. She is also a member  
of the New American Movement, a nationwide socialist  
feminist organization. (p. 4)  

Liz de Bethune has finally decided she is an artist. (p. 7)  

Norma Blacke-Bragg lives in Hartford and has written a  
book of poetry called Flights and Dancers, published in 1978  
by the Blue Spruce Press. (p. 1)  

Helena Brett-Smith is a 1978 graduate. She wrote her  
essay for Judy Genova, one of the rare few who have truly  
met women’s needs at Yale. (p. 2-3)  

Nancy Brown is a sophomore at Yale who would like to  
celebrate heroism through poetry. (p. 1)  

Lisa Elias studied art at California State University. She is  
currently a freelance artist in New Haven. (p. 10)  

Eleni Fourtouni is a Greek woman poet and a translator of  
Greek women’s works. She lives in New Haven and her  
new book, Karyatids, is due out soon. (p. 8)  

Kathy Gould lives in New Haven. (p. 8, 14)  

Lisa Groom is a poet from Princeton, NJ. (p. 9)  

Emily Grosholz teaches philosophy at Yale and coordinates  
the weekly poetry readings at Down to Earth. (p. 12)  

Janice Hansel is a research assistant for an editorial project  
in the Yale library. She also helps to plan fundraising for  
WERC. (p. 4)  

Olivia Holmes writes poetry and does photography. She is  
a junior in Ezra Stiles. (p. 15)  

Caroline Hsiao is a senior in Pierson; an artist who  
returns to calligraphy and pen and ink at times. (p. 11)  

Helen Lawson is a poet who lives in Hartford. She has been  
published in Europe and the US. (p. 9)  

Mary Ann Martinsek, when asked if she had been involved  
in any feminist activities before coming to Yale, replied, “In  
Southern Illinois? Good Heavens no!” (p. 15)  

Marcelle Mékiés is a graduate student at Yale interested in  
re-interpreting the Bible along feminist lines. (p. 13)  

Diana Moses is a junior in Morse, studying in Athens. (p. 13)  
Cat Nilan, a tight-rope walker on the fine personal-political  
line. So of a ais du verbe. “I got nothin’  

EDITOR: Cat Nilan  

EDITING STAFF: Meg Starr, Jenny Wriggins, Tamara  
Ogorzaly, Denise Yuspeh, Karen Matthews, Caroline  
Revercomb, Nancy Brown, Heather Meeker, Linda  
Hoaglund, Mary Ann Martinsek, Doug Tifft, Harriet  
Dichter, Bird Brenner, Alicia Fernandez, Adrienne Cool,  
Eleni Fourtouni, Louise Calio, Marcelle Mékiés  
LAYOUT: Tamara Ogorzaly, Cat Nilan, Jenny Wriggins,  
Denise Yuspeh, Caroline Revercomb, Don Bolinger, Meg  
Starr, Doug Tifft, Glenn Wallach, Rhonda Lipkin  

ADVERTISING: Tamara Ogorzaly, Meg Starr, Jenny  
Wriggins, Cat Nilan.  

THANKS: Bob Fertik, Ron Pollack and The Banner,  
Bob Shackleton, Judith Brandenberg, The Women’s  
Caucus, Gotham Book Mart, Shelley and Dinah.  
AND EXTRA SPECIAL THANKS TO ZIRKUS  

Marcuss Oslander is an instructor at UNH and SCCC.  
“Basically as we all are—Les Jongleurs—of dishes, words,  
papers, words, kisses, woods, fishes, woods, mind, would,  
soul would, one.” (p. 12)  

Susan Pensak lives in New Haven and works for a local  
bookstore. (p. 7, 11)  

Stacy Pies lives in New Haven. (p. 7)  

Anne Elizabeth Pluto lives, writes poetry and goes to  
school in Buffalo. (p. 8)  

Patricia Roth Schwartz sees her poetry as the naming and  
claiming of women’s real experiences and its purpose as  
both political and therapeutic. (p. 14, 20)  

Susan Searer works at the Yale library and at the NH  
Women’s Center. She has just compiled an annotated biblio-  
graphy of women’s studies research tools. (p. 4)  

Joan Shapiro lives in Hartford and has been published by  
Blue Spruce Press. (p. 13)  

Patti Smith. “..who attempts to bleed from the word a  
— a space base.” (NOTICE). (a fine obsession, too).  
(p. 6)  

Helen Tartar works as an editor in Hamden, does readings  
and has been published by various small presses.  

Laura Thornton does graphic design and offset printing for  
Greater Hartford Community College. A mother of two, she  
is dedicated to art, poetry and feminism. (p. 10)  

Jenny Wriggins is a Yale senior puzzling over the relation-  
ships between feminism, myths and philosophy. She thanks  
Carol Mostow, Tasha Silver and Amanda Powell for sharing  
inspiration and a spirit which lives on. (p. 7, 10, 12)  

(A special benefit/celebration for ADRORA)  

Friday, April 13th at 8:00  
A chance to meet women artists, talk, listen to poetry, etc.  
See posters for details  

POETRY READING  

I finally have time  
to do my laundry  

© 1979, ZIRKUS Pat Schwartz