Judaism

and Feminism

by Marion Shulevitz

I am a woman.

I am a committed, practicing Jew.

I am a graduate student at the Jewish
Theological Seminary of America.

These three statements, while not
defining me, serve as an introduction to
my remarks.

As I am aware of my woman-ness, I
cannot help but be a feminist. It was
not so long ago that men and women
alike accepted the premise that women
were ipso facto a subordinate class of
human. Now, at least some men and
women no longer accept that. I was
born into and grew up in the first era;
along with my daughters I am now a
part of the second. Feminism is now as
natural to me as the fight against
bigotry.

I was brought up in an actively Con-
servative Jewish home. My father was a
very strong Jewish role model for me.
We had the father-daughter closeness
that is not uncommon where there are
no sons. He took me to the synagogue
before I went to kindergarten, taught
me to read Hebrew almost as soon as
English (both before I reached school
age) and made Jewishness as much a
part of my being as the love for music
and baseball which he also instilled in
me. (His great despair was my inability
to throw a ball properly.)

As the culmination of the preceding
statements, I am a Jewish Theological
Seminary graduate student. This last
statement is significant in a number of
ways. First, the use of the present tense.
I graduated from college some 28 years
ago, and if I were a man, I would not
now be a student but a practicing Con-
servative Rabbi with thoughts of retire-
ment beginning to crop up. Because

it has

to take this step.
Second, I am a graduate student, not
a Rabbinical student, as I would wish.

Despite pressure from Rabbis and laity
and numerous streams of favorable
testimony from both laymen and
scholars, despite the position of the
Conservative Movement’s Committee
on Jewish Law and Standards allowing
the Jewish woman equal ritual status
with men on a lay basis, the Seminary
still refuses to admit women to the
Rabbinical School or to ordain them as
Rabbis.

Nevertheless, I am here, at this par-
ticular point on a long, often very in-
direct road. It took an extraordinary
amount of support from my husband
and my children. There were many
years when I would have vehemently
denied any interest in being a Rabbi;
when I would have been horrified at
the thought of women taking religious
leadership roles! But underneath the
conventional acceptance of second-
class status, the problem simmered.

As a child I was sure that God had
made a mistake—if girls were not
meant to do the things boys did, ob-
viously I should have been a boy! I
desperately wanted a Bat Mitzvah, but
in 1946 such ceremonies for girls were
unknown in our synagogue. Fortunate-
ly, I could achieve Jewishly in other
ways. I graduated with highest honors
from Sunday and Hebrew High School,
where being a girl raised no barriers to
success. But then it started again:

“Go to New York to study at the
Seminary?! Ridiculous—you’re a girl!!
Why don’t you go to college right here
and get a teaching degree? It will be
useful if you have to support your hus-
band for a while. Besides, you really
should be thinking more seriously
about getting married. That’s what col-
lege is for, isn’t it?”

So, to the local university I went,
picking up both a BA in Education and
an MRS. And yes, it was useful to have
a saleable skill those first few years till
we could have children...

Now the urge to study, to express my
Judaism through all the many ways
open to men, became dormant. Not
completely dead: there were Jewish
Studies courses, Hebrew and Sunday
school teaching, study group leader-
ship and training as a Jewish librarian.
Eventually, as feminism developed and
reached even far-off Puerto Rico,
where we were then living, there was
the challenge to educate and galvanize
other Jewish women into reaching for
their Jewish heritage.

In 1975 we moved back to the
mainland. It was a very different place
from the “States” I had left, and
feminism, both secular and Jewish, was
one of the differences. Seven years
before, I had not made women’s par-
ticipation in all synagogue activities a
criterion for my membership. Now it
had just voted to include women on an
equal basis with men in both the Sanctuary and the Boardroom. Women were encouraged to par-
ticipate in services, to make up the ten-
person quorum or minyan needed for
public worship, and to act as officers
and members of the Board of Trustees.
Both the highly successful principal of
the day school and a future Congrega-
tional President were women. It was
here that I first saw a woman on the
Bimah or podium in her own right.

No matter how strongly one believes
in equality in theory, it is the practice
which brings it to life. I had my long-
deferred Bat Mitzvah—thirty years
late, but tremendously meaningful (and
within a month of my thirteen-year-old
daughter's). I learned the “Synagogue
Skills” that had been a prerogative of
boys only, and became comfortable in
my ritual participation. I saw the older
members of the congregation change
from grudging acceptance to en-
thusiastic recognition of the fact that
women can and would lead. And I saw
a new generation of women come for-
ward to take on the responsibilities of
Jewish adults. More and more the com-
ment was made “Why don’t you
become a Rabbi, Marion?”

All of a sudden the long-buried
dream suddenly surfaced. My husband,
who deserves an award for his loving
support, pulled up stakes with me, and
we made the move to New York. I
enrolled in the Seminary Graduate
School, waiting for the chance to shift
over to Rabbinical School. At last, I am
achieving part of the dream—I am
studying where I always wanted to
study.

Many of my friends wonder how I
can reconcile my attachment to
Judaism, admittedly a patriarchal
religion, with feminism. So many
feminist leaders seem to be disen-
chanted Jews! But for me there is no
conflict. Of course, I oppose elements
in Judaism I find demeaning. The tradi-
tional sex-role differentiation, with all
high-status roles reserved for men; the
socio-biological definition of women
only in relation to men; women’s
relegation to subordinate enabling

continued on page 18

then public? Letters and diaries
(pages 5-8)

sather the status of women in the coal

Nancy Cott
continued from page 4

substantial ground that in any other

disciplines. (Maybe this is just my view
of it because I can see more of what's
happening in history; maybe it’s my
own academic ethnocentrism. But
other people who are not historians
have said similar things.) This is just
speculation, but I wonder if it hasn’t
been easier in history because, to a
great extent, historians have always
been filling in big gaps. Traditional
history has looked at politics and wars
and kings; there’s a whole realm of per-
sonal life and social life that it hasn’t
examined. So women’s historians were
able to say, “Let’s look here and find
women.” And at the same time, other
historians were realizing that nobody
had looked at the history of the or-
dinary person. Those streams have
gone together, and the process of filling
in all those areas that haven't been in-
vestigated has created this body of
work.

But in certain disciplines, especially
in the social sciences, there has been at
least a pretension to have studied
women already and to have models
which encompass women. The
psychological models of the life cycle,
say; nobody points out (until recently)
that they are really about men’s life cy-
cle. They say, “This is the life cycle”; or
in sociology, “This is the society.” So
that there is a pretension, an explicit
one, that we are talking about human
beings, male and female. In those
disciplines, Women’s Studies scholar-
ship involves a real upsetting of
established ways of perceiving.
Historians can just say, “You've only
done from A to M, and we still have
from N to Z to fill in.” That may have
something to do with my attitudes, and
also with my acceptance here; it’s not
as though I came in and there was
somebody else already teaching in this
field whom I had to refute.

Q) You teach a class in the
methodology of women’s history. What
sources do you use in women’s
history— personal sources more often
than newspapers and international
treaties?

A) What I have used as sources in my
own research are not the only ones I
would recommend to women’s
historians; they just happened to be the
sources that I found interesting at the
time. In my current research, too, I tend
to go for personal documents. I don’t
know exactly why; maybe it’s because I
come out of a more strict humanities
background than most social historians
and I like the analysis of the text.

I’ll answer this historically: when I
became interested in women’s history, I
was very suspicious of the writing on
women that already existed, because I
felt that it had been done with a view
of woman as object. At the time, I felt
that the only way to find the authentic
historical experience of women was to
look for women’s own voices. That's
why I went to the personal document,
and that affected my early teaching
very much; I didn’t use any secondary
sources at all. I only used things like
women’s diaries and letters, and books
women had written. That method has
severe limitations, in that, even in our
culture, women have not been literate
for very long. You are limited unless
you go to folklore and popular culture
and such, which have women’s voices
in them.

My bias was to look for women’s
authentic voices, but it’s clear that
there are other sources, which can yield
mass data about women’s lives, and
can be evocative and can be inter-
preted in useful ways. I don’t see any
limitation on the sources of women’s
history; they run the gamut, from
newspapers to payroll records to parish
registers to diaries or letters or publish-
ed volumes, or any of the general ar-
mada of sources that historians call on.
Traditional intellectual history uses
published volumes by famous people,
and maybe their private letters or
writings; women’s intellectual
historians might work with the same
kinds of documents, but the writers
wouldn’t be so famous. Or a women’s
historian might use parliamentary in-
vestigative documents in researching
mines.

BLOODROOT

a feminist restaurant: bake store
with a seasonal vegetarian menu

LUNCH -- DINNER

SUNDAY BRUNCH

85 Ferris Street
Black Rock, Bridgeport, Ct. 06605
203-576-1688