Women’s Studies

The following are excerpts from an article on Women’s Studies by
professor at Princeton, and Jonathan Arac, professor at University of Illinois, soon

to be printed in the Princeton Alumni Weekly.

By Jonathan Arac and Janet Martin

“It’s everywhere!” exclaimed the
Classics major as her class discussed
the surprising twists Roman satirists
gave to usual Roman ways of thinking
about women. ‘It’ is women’s studies,
defined in the Undergraduate An-
nouncement as ‘The interdisciplinary
study of the role of women in various
societies, as well as of the changing na-
ture of social and political relationships

between men and women.’

“Research and debate are underway
in humanistic and scientific disciplines
around the world on many topics
dealing with women and women’s ex-
perience. In spite of great differences of
approach, method and purpose, some
common qualities emerge. Women’s
studies puts women—their history,
achievements, and experience—at the
center of its scholarly and curricular
commitment. By focusing on women
and beginning to fill in the blank pages
of women’s history, women’s studies
compensates for the bias of traditional
scholarship that places male concerns
and activities at the center, while rele-
gating female concerns and activities to
the margin.

“One aspect of women’s studies thus
is compensatory. For the social sciences
it adds women to the population studies
by those who investigate the nature of
individuals and of societies. In literary
studies, by giving serious critical atten-
tion to long-neglected female authors
and investigating their networks of sup-
port and influence, it adds new topics as
legitimate categories of scholarly inquiry. This compensatory scholarship al-
ready has considerably contributed to—

our understanding of human history and
society by making available much new
information about half of humanity.

“But the new scholarship is not mere-
ly compensatory. Scholars have discov-
ered that not all of its new information
and insights will fit comfortably into
current conceptual frameworks. This
problem and its challenge have emerged
in several disciplines, but perhaps most
clearly and persistently in historical is-
sues such as power, social structure,
property, the social and cultural func-
tion of symbolism and periodization...”

“But the implications of the new
scholarship about women go beyond the
university. Advocates of women’s stud-
ies hold that men and women who re-
main unaware of half of history, who
have accepted either with complacency
or with reluctance the male bias of tra-
ditional higher education, are handi-
capped as individuals and as members
of society. Recently two Princeton facul-
ty members have commented on the is-
sues from their different disciplinary
perspectives. Their comments are worth
quoting here at some length. In a new
basic text from courses in the psycholo-
gy of women, Diane N. Ruble and her
co-authors define one position:

‘We all share a feminist perspective.
We hope that the material in this book
will not only add to the scholarly under-
standing of women and sex roles, but
that it will also help women and men to
achieve greater freedom of choice for
themselves through presenting material
relevant to their daily lives and helping
them to understand the psychological
processes which reinforce sex roles. Al-
though we do not believe that truly
value-free science exists, we have at-
tempted to present material in an unbi-
ased way so that the reader may draw
his or her own conclusions about the
strongest expression—feminism we
know.’ [1]

“From the perspective of the Clas-
sics, Froma I. Zeitlin observes that

‘the Greek experience is absolutely

fundamental for any understanding of
the later Western tradition. It is precise-
ly because of the ‘familiarity’ of Greek
ideas on women that a re-evaluation is
in order, since in testing their assump-
tions, we are also testing our own...In
the humanities we are not only teaching
a body of material; we are also trying to
‘humanize’ our students, and I feel it is
part of our obligation to open up those
areas of sexual hierarchies, prejudices,
projections.’ [2] ...

“Women’s studies—in its newness, its
interdisciplinary character, and its insis-
tence on the influence of sex roles on
male and female perceptions of the
world—offers the teacher pedagogical
problems that are at the same time op-
portunities. The academic study of
women often requires recourse to orig-
inal sources and attention to questions
of method, even at rudimentary levels.
The familiar textbooks and anthologies
won’t do. In many ways women’s stud-
ies parallels and enhances other trends
in contemporary education that seek to
offer breadth and interdisciplinary
learning. Given Princeton’s past history
as a male-oriented institution it seems
important also that the content of
women’s studies, unlike that of tradi-
tional education, treats women and
women’s experience seriously, thus
helping to validate women as students
and colleagues.’’

Footnotes

[1] Women and Sex Roles: A Social
Psychological Perspective, (W. Norton
and Company, 1978) pp. xvii-xviii

[2] 1977-78 Resource Inventory, Wo-
men’s Studies Committee, Princeton
See also her article on

“Imagination in the Oresteia,” Arethusa
11 (1978).