October 14, 1982

AURORA

FATE OF THE EARTH WEEK:

Following is Stanford's
official policy on
sexual harassment.

It is the policy of Stanford University to maintain the
University community as a place of work and study for
staff, faculty, and students, free of sexual harassment
and all forms of sexual intimidation and exploitation. All
students, staff, and faculty should be aware both that the
University is concerned and prepared to take action to
prevent and correct such behavior, and that individuals
who engage in such behavior are subject to discipline.
Conduct between students is governed by the Fun-
damental Standard.

*The determination of what constitutes sexual
harassment will vary with the particular circumstances,
but it may be described generally as repeated and un-
wanted sexual behavior, such as physical contact and
verbal comments or suggestions, which adversely af-
fects the working or learning environment. Coercive
behavior, including suggestions that academic or em-
ployment reprisals or rewards will follow the refusal or
granting of sexual favors, constitutes gross misconduct
and will not be tolerated. In such cases, a single incident
would establish grounds for action.

Anyone who is subjected to offensive sexual behavior
is encouraged to pursue the matter through the informal
or formal procedures described below. Generally, the
informal procedures afford an opportunity to explore a
problem and consider alternative means for its
resolution.

Informal procedures
1. The Ombudsman’s office procedure

Without feeling constrained by specific definitions,
faculty, staff, and students should feel free to make
complaints concerning allegations of sexual harassment
to the Office of the Ombudsman. If requested, complaints
will be held in confidence, and counseling will be provided
by the Ombudsman’s office. No investigation or action
against the person accused will be taken on behalf of the
person complaining, however, unless the complainant
consents to be identified to the one accused in con-
nection with the investigation.

On the request of the person making the complaint,
the Ombudsman will consult with the designate of the
Provost (in the case of a member of the faculty or
academic staff charged with sexual harassment), or the
Office of the Dean of Students (when the person accused
is a student).

Appropriate sanctions or other corrective measures
will be decided upon by these officials, if it is determined
by them that proscribed behavior has occurred. As in
any other case in which official action is taken, if an
accused employee disagrees with the determination or
the appropriateness of the corrective measures, that
individual may contest them through the regular faculty
or staff grievance procedures. In the case of students, if
corrective measures are not accepted by the student, or
if disciplinary action is considered appropriate, the
student judiciary process will be followed.

2. Other informal processes

Staff complaints may also be brought to an Employee
Relations Representative in the Personnel Office for
informal handling, in which the procedure will resemble
that for the Ombudsman’s Office described above.
Requests for confidentiality will be observed by Employee
Relations Representatives to the extent consistent with
protecting the welfare of other employees.

All employees should also feel free to discuss sexual
harassment problems directly with their immediate
supervisors, or with the next-level supervisors (including
department chairs and deans in the case of faculty and
academic staff), and ultimately with the cognizant vice-
president, if the situation has not been resolved to the
satisfaction of the complainant. Supervisors have
general responsibility for the maintenance of the working
environment, and have the authority to institute
disciplinary procedures when appropriate.

Similarly, students may wish to consult directly with
the Office of the Dean of Students, with the supervisor of
the person complained of, or, for support and advice,
with the Title IX officer (Sally Mahoney, Registrar and
Associate Provost), their advisors, resident assistant, or
a counselor at Cowell.

Formal grievance procedures

Depending on the University position of the individual
who feels he or she has been sexually harassed and the
particular circumstances, one of the established formal
grievance procedures for faculty, staff, and students may
also apply. In those cases, the formal procedures may be
used either instead of or in conjunction with the informal
procedures. Informal procedures will not, however,
extend the normal time limit for making formal complaints.
If the individual concerned wishes to pursue the
grievance, he or she should be sure to check the rules for
the applicable procedure and file on time.

Formal grievance procedures at Stanford are:

Nonacademic Staff Grievance Procedure (see
University Guide memo 22.10)

Collective Bargaining Agreement for unit members

Academic Staff Grievance Procedure (see Academic
Staff Handbook)

Faculty Grievance Procedure (see University Guide
Memo 21.4)

Student Academic Grievance Procedure (see
Stanford University Bulletin, Information, and Regulations
Governing Student Conduct and Procedures for Their
Enforcement)

Student Employee Grievance Procedure (see
University Guide Memo 61)

Student Nonacademic Grievance Procedure pursuant to Title IX (consult Sally Mahoney, Associate Provost and
Registrar)

Space paid for by the Office of the Dean of Student Affairs. Copies of the formal grievance procedures are available...