Jenny: So now we have to write about why we’ve been working on this magazine. Why have we?

Premi: I don’t know. It seems like we’ve been working on it for so long that I can’t remember.

Jenny: Well, I think it had something to do with feminism and last year’s Aurora...

Premi: ...and the number of active women’s groups in New Haven, and the big fuss about Ten Years of Coeducation at Yale - but we sure didn’t know what we were getting in for!

So here we are. Let’s get more serious now. This is the second issue of Aurora, and we're quite proud of this fact since there haven't been any other feminist magazines coming out of Yale that have appeared twice. There has been, however, a tradition of women’s magazines both at Yale and in New Haven, and this will be discussed in greater length inside. Aurora was founded last fall as a branch of Zirkus magazine by Cat Nilan with the generous support of Master Davis of Calhoun College. Aurore Dupin, better known as George Sand, was a woman who donned male garb so as to be accepted as a writer, and it is in her honor that this magazine was named. Also, we like the name and its added meaning of the rise of response to such questions, especially the first treatise, but the contents of Aurora, we believe, to a large degree, answer this question. Feminism, said Dean of Yale College Howard Lamar at a recent Women at Yale: Transitions conference, may well be the most important social movement of the century. It is political as well as social. Feminism has changed our lives and those of scores of other people we know, and we want to share these experiences with all of you.

In our eyes, the function of this particular Aurora issue is that of a political forum - where many different ideas may come into contact.

Therefore, besides its existence as a feminist magazine which in itself is a political statement, we have tried to maintain no dogmatic editorial stance. There are even contradicting or opposing articles inside. By including such pieces, we have tried to emphasize the fact that feminism, rather than being a stagnant set of ideas, is constantly evolving both critical analyses and new alternatives. However, on the more pragmatic side, there are specific needs which a magazine like Aurora can fill. One is of a compensatory nature, that is, there are many issues concerning women which have simply not been well presented in other media, and we have tried to do so here. For example, the sexual harassment suit Alexander v. Yale is extremely important for students and educators at Yale and nationwide, and few people know much about it. Unfortunately, often the concerns of Third World women have not been well addressed by magazines of a feminist nature, or even by what is often considered “the women’s movement.” Also, gay experience, both female and male, is rarely written about at all in local media, and is even more rarely discussed from the point of view of gay people rather than at them.

However, it is dangerous and not particularly healthy to define a magazine in terms of what others are not. For this reason, Aurora’s stance is not solely compensatory and critical. It also attempts to weigh these alternatives carefully. As far as we can see, if women are really going to be treated as political and economic equals with men, only one of the many aims of feminism, some major changes must occur in the greater socio-economic system. However, to define these alternatives is much more difficult than to call for them, and is the subject of a few of the articles in this issue.

When we started editing this magazine, one of our hopes was to create a publication that would serve as a link between the Yale and New Haven women’s communities. Though this issue is an attempt, we feel we have not done as well as we could have on this score. Hopefully, this magazine will be a start in the right direction and a future issue will pick up where we have left off.

So far, we have talked about what we see as the purpose of this Aurora. However, the process of putting this magazine together, so much of both of our lives for the last six months, was quite exciting. First of all, the funding for this issue has been done in a very grassroots fashion - that is, mostly from ads, personal sponsorships, and group contributions. And then of course there are Master Davis and Dean Brandenburg who very kindly gave us their support. There were times when we stared at our bankbook and wondered whether we would ever make it.

The financial aspect, however, was not by any means the most exciting of the Aurora process. The widespread interest in the magazine itself was really quite incredible. In fact, it was very hard to get caught up in the doldrums of business problems when we were continually being inspired by the ideas of people around us. A couple of the meetings resulted in some excellent discussions, and a few of the ideas aired here later evolved into articles.

We must admit that we received much more material for this issue than we had ever expected, a reflection of the overwhelming enthusiasm involved. One result, however, of our many talks with our contributors, is that we are continuously made aware of the issues that we have not addressed in this particular magazine. The issues of women’s health and women’s studies, for example, got very little exposure here. This is not because we do not believe them important, but instead we hope that it and many other questions be addressed in yet another Aurora. There is a definite need for this type of publication, and we hope that it will continue. The material is there - the resources only have to be tapped.

This magazine is the work of several people, all of whom have contributed to its character and spirit. Special thanks to Meg Starr who got us started; Alix Kates Shulman who was always there for advice; and to Master Davis, Dean Brandenburg, Doug Tifft, Barb Hornung, Stuart Hoyt, Rhonda Lipkin, and Nancy Emery for their efforts and support. And then of course we must thank Barbara for putting up with the both of us through all of the final turmoil. We had a good time putting this magazine together, and we hope you enjoy it.

Premala Chandra and Jennifer Wriggins