‘Language and Oppression:  
Gay Pride and the Problem  

of Specificity  

Donna Minkowitz  

It has become clear to many  
feminists and gay liberationists that  
language is often a tool or at least a  
manifestation of oppression. Any  
poet who is called a poetess can  
sense that she is being belittled; a les-  
bian called queer knows that her  
sense of alienation is not self-  
induced. The choice of words is a  
grave political choice. Even the  
choice to omit or insert words is thick-  
ly political, as in “woman doctor” or  
“male nurse,” or “love” (meaning  
heterosexual love) as opposed to  
“homosexual love.” In these ex-  
amples, sex and sexual orientation are  
specified only when the sex or sexual  
orientation in question is considered  
abnormal in connection with the  
noun that it modifies; the insertion of  
these words is thus subtly pejorative.  
Sometimes even false etymologies  
are used to foster political objectives:  
one of the writers of Genesis says that  
the Hebrew word “isha,” woman, is  
derived from “ish,” man, because Eve  
was taken from Adam’s rib—but  
scholars of Hebrew say that the two  
words are actually unrelated. The  
connection that the writer chose to  
make between these words has a  
definite political message about what  
the relationship between men and  
women ought to be.  

In cases of linguistic oppression the  
undervalued person or group is made  
more specific than the valued person  
or group: “Sally my lesbian friend” as  
opposed to “my friend Jane” who is  
straight so I don’t have to mention her  
sexual orientation. Sexist language is  
employed in a similar way: to call  
Woolf “a great woman writer” is to  
imply that she is great for a woman,  
but surely not “a great writer” in com-  
parison with men. Anathema is the  
most intense form of specificity: to  
call someone “a cocksucking  
faggot” is to make his sexual orienta-  
tion the most important, the most de-  
finitive thing about him, his true  
meaning as a person. If one’s sex or  
sexual orientation have to be men-  
tioned in connection with things to  
which they are not related (occupa-  
tion or character), they must reflect  
abnormality or incorrectness.  

Since blatant homophobia (hatred  
of homosexuals) is more socially ac-  
ceptable than blatant misogyny, gay  
people are confronted more directly  
and more consistently than women  
with terms which are explicitly and  
deliberately derogatory to them.  
When a stranger calls you “baby,” it  
may be humiliating, offensive,  
presumptuous, but it is not intended  
as a violent insult. It is not the same  
as being called “faggot,” a word  
which originally referred to gay men  
burnt at the stake like sticks of wood.  
For adolescent boys, “faggot” is the  
term of ultimate abuse. Like “nigger,”  
“faggot” and “dyke” are words which  
at the same time mean only the sim-  
ple fact (“a homosexual person,” “a  
black person”) and mean also a  
cognizance of that fact as a curse, as  
something anybody ought to be  
ashamed of. Gay people defend  

themselves against such appellations  
either by insisting on affirmative  
words—affirmative because they are  
felt to be affirmative—such as “gay”  
or “lesbian,” or by using the  
“anathema words” themselves and  
thus depriving those words of their  
debilitative power.  

These acts of linguistic defense  
reflect the basic strategy of gay  
liberation: to celebrate ourselves as  
gay people, to seize on the specificity  
that society gives us and affirm the  
distinction. This is necessary not only  
to counteract antigay anathema, but  
also to show the very existence of gay  
men and lesbians in a society where  
everyone is assumed to be heterosex-  
ual. This strategy turns anathema on  
its head—to willingly wear a pink  
triangle, which gay people were forc-  
ed to wear in Nazi concentration  
camps, is to use a symbol, a sign, to  
change homosexuality from a curse  
to an object of pride.  

But such a strategy is politically  
problematic—because it is lin-  
guistically problematic. Our own  
rhetoric oppresses us. Sexuality is per-  
sonal—in fact, we insist that the state  
must not interfere in sexuality  
because it is so personal—but we  
must, for our political survival, iden-  

tify ourselves as lesbians or gays,  
that is, on the basis of  
preference. The problem of our  

rhetoric—which is certainly the pro-  
blem of all rhetoric, not just gay peo-  
ple’s—lies in specificity. To use one  
word, to name one name, is to assert  
that word, that name, as more impor-  
tant than all the words not used.  
When I come out as a gay person, I  
become known as “Donna the gay  
person” and not “Donna the poet” or  
“Donna the classics student.”  
Gayness becomes the most important  
thing about me. This is ultimately  
homophobic. It is not accidental that  
define has the basic sense of “make  
finite,” “enclose in boundaries.”  

This problem is manifest in the ten-  
sions in the gay movement between  
exclusively gay people, bisexuals, and  
people undecided as to their sexual  
preference. Many exclusively gay  
people feel that bisexuals and  
undecided people reap the benefits  
of the struggle for gay liberation  
without having to suffer the  
stigmatization that self-described gay  
people must suffer in the effort to  
build gay pride. (For this reason, some  
bisexuals do call themselves “gay.”)  
But on the other hand, bisexuals,  
undecided people, and even ex-  
clusively homosexual people who do  
not consider their sexual preference  
to be the thing that characterizes  
them, are, in effect, oppressed,  
enclosed in boundaries, by the gay  
movement's call for all those who  
have felt any homosexual desires to  
define the  

which are fraught with political  

meaning, separate all human  
attributes into discrete walled areas.  
Asked to choose one side of the wall  
or the other, bisexuals say that they  
do not see any wall. When we build  
gay communities, we build walls that  
give us needed protection but also  
create arbitrary boundaries. If it does  
not matter whether a person is gay or  
not gay, why build communities on  
the basis of sexual preference alone?  

Of course the answer is that we  
didn’t make sexual preference  
political; its politicization was forced  
upon us. We did not make homosex-  
uality more significant as a  
phenomenon than heterosexuality,  
but since it is more significant in this  
society, we need to affirm its  
goodness fiercely, to call it a blessing  
rather than a curse. Gay pride (as op-  
posed to the absence of gay shame)  
seems to be the only solution to the  
constant violence of homophobia.  

I support the strategy, and I  
employ it in my own life; it seems  
essential. But it is not a strategy for  
the future, for total liberation. In the  
free society we would not have to  
define ourselves along such arbitrary  
lines. The feminist movement seems  
to have made further advances for  
total liberation; feminism teaches us  
to call a female doctor “a doctor.”  
The removal of enforced specificity  
of homosexuality—or of any other  
stigmatized attribute—is necessary  
for the total liberation of that at-  
tribute from any more specified, pre-  
judicial meaning than its own plain  
meaning. Stigma originally meant “a  
characterizing mark.” I realize that  
there are few ways to combat  
anathematization of gayness other  
than by a self-defining “gay pride.”  
I would like to start a debate among  

Photo: Jennie Livingston