to

A View From

by Dorothy Rony

When I was growing up, I never knew
whether to ascribe the oddities in my
parents’ behavior to their personal
idiosyncrasies or to the Indonesian
culture in which they were raised. I was
puzzled by their extreme hospitality to
visitors who seemed only distantly con-
nected to us. My parents would explain
to me that they were repaying gener-
osity shown to them when they were
younger, for example, “So-and-so’s
great aunt took care of me when I was
fifteen and in boarding school,” or “So-
and-so’s brother let me stay any time
that I wanted when I was a boy.” I was
unable as a child to appreciate the im-
portance of these exchanges because I
had never been part of a community
network; few of my extended kin are in
the United States. However, my parents
were raised in communities where
these networks were not only crucial to
basic survival, but also essential in giv-
ing them a sense of identity and social
position. In the process of maturing, I
have realized that the kind of life I en-
joy, for that matter my very existence,
is predicated upon my parents’ partici-
pation in such networks.

When I became aware of myself as a
woman of color, my sense of respon-
sibility toward other people of color
followed a similar development. I
began to understand that my present
privileges are a direct legacy of the
struggles and sacrifices of people in-
volved in the Civil Rights movement,
and are also founded upon the poverty
and exploitation of Third World
peoples, not only in the United States,
but throughout the world. Thus, a

Monona Yin

crucial shift occurred when I stopped
thinking in “Us” and “Them” terms
about people of color and started iden-
tifying as colored, myself. This alliance
has been a conscious choice on my
part because I have the socio-
economic choice of “passing” within
the White culture as a privileged
minority. For most people of color,
their minority identity is an un-
changeable fact of life because they
have no access at all to the choices and
the privileges of the dominant White
culture.

It is rare for minorities with priv-
ileged status to feel an active respon-
sibility to people of color. We tend to

absorb the ethos of the dominant

White culture and maintain an in-
dividualistic ethic concerning our
achievements, “If I could ‘make it’
without any help, then other people
should be able to do the same.” We
then attribute our success to personal
initiative and merit, and regard the
social and economic rewards offered to
us by the White culture as our “just
desserts.” In the process, we often turn
our backs on our home communities
and deny our family pasts.

These basic principles are brought
home to me each time I cross from Yale
territory into the Elm Haven Housing
Projects—just two blocks from Yale
property in the Dixwell community.
The juxtaposition of the people of col-
or at Elm Haven and the Yale popula-
tion often serves as an analogy in my
mind for the relationship between the
“haves” and the “have-nots.” While
Yale is a bastion and training ground for
White upper-class, male power, most of
the households in Elm Haven are run
by Black mothers on welfare who rank
among the least socio-economically

Inside The

powerful in our country.

The residents of Elm Haven inhabit a
drastically different reality than the
students who occupy Yale dormitories
a short distance away. According to the
1983 Elm Haven Design Charrette
Report, a set of recommendations
made concerning the future of Elm
Haven, over 90% of the high-rise
households are run by single women.
Slightly less than 60% of the
households in the low-rises have single
woman heads. Sixty-six percent of the
high-rise residents depend on full
welfare aid compared with approx-
imately 44% of the residents in the
low-rise units. (p. 1) It is the extreme
poverty of communities like Elm
Haven which makes New Haven the
seventh poorest city in the country,
despite its other affluent areas.

Being a mother on welfare or with a
low-paying service job is an exhausting,
full-time strain. Basic survival is the
primary concern: single-parenting in a
poor and dangerous community; for-
ever stretching a tight budget for
necessities; dealing with the welfare
agency; hounding the Housing Authori-
ty to fix the toilet or the hole in the
wall, or to turn on the heat, or to spray
the apartment for roaches. Without
convenient transportation, simple
chores like buying groceries or doing
the laundry become major expeditions.

The situation is so desperate at the
Elm Haven high-rise buildings that they
have been marked for complete razing
with no future development of the site
planned. All of the high-rise tenants are
being relocated to other housing proj-

ects from the homes and neighborhood
where many have spent their whole
lives. By being transferred just a few
miles away, the tenants will be effec-

Master's

tively cut off from their former com-
munities. To further illustrate how
powerless Elm Haven residents are, the
Housing Authority has not paid the
agreed-upon moving fee to tenants who
must move, and some people have had
to push all their belongings across town
in shopping carts.

Although a world away, Yale always
looms large in the consciousness of
New Haven people of color. Many Elm
Haven tenants believe that they are be-
ing moved because Yale wants the site
in order to build more dormitories.
Although a lawyer at the New Haven
Legal Aid Association denied this
rumor, its persistence underscores the
fact that Elm Haven residents live

under the perpetual shadow of Yale.

Frankly, an institution like Yale feels
little interest or responsibility to a com-
munity of poor people of color living
right outside its borders. That the
wealth of this institution rests upon the
socio-economic oppression of other
people is a fact that few Yale students
grasp or want to admit. The most ob-
vious example of this is that Yale, with
its multi-million-dollar endowment,
does not pay any taxes to New Haven,
the seventh poorest city in the country.

Yale fosters an atmosphere that
makes people of color feel unwelcome
and alienated not only because
it is “white-centric,” but also because
of active harassment. Minority students
here are routinely carded by their
White peers, and have college gates
slammed in their faces.

In fact, a few days ago, I went to the
Yale Co-op with a friend of mine—a
nine-year-old boy from Elm Haven.
When we tried to make a purchase, the
cashier would not believe that the Co-
op card that I showed him was mine
(no, I do not look much different in the
picture) and he asked to see my Yale
I.D. This is actually the first time that
I have been carded and suspected of not
being a Yale student, mainly because I
am Asian-American and there are few
Asian “townies.” Later that afternoon
when my friend and I returned to look
at Easter baskets, we were harassed
once more. My friend was carrying a
carton of Easter eggs that we had just
spent the afternoon coloring, and when
we left the store, a guard
with a walkie-talkie sprinted after us
because he thought we had stolen the
eggs. The irony of the situation is that
just an hour ago, we had been coloring
those very same eggs in the Master’s
house in Davenport College. Within
Davenport I can take for granted equal
status with my White peers. But outside
of its walls, I cannot.

These incidents bothered me deeply
because I have always felt ambivalent
about bringing a child from Elm Haven
into Yale. The opulence of this school is
an affront to anyone who must live in
the poverty of Elm Haven. I also did
not want my friend to become used to
entering Yale grounds, only to have him
humiliated on later visits. If he were to
come without me to Davenport, he
would probably be chased out or ac-

cused of theft.

For myself, the Co-op incident
reminded me once again that my status
within this institution is comparable to
the position of the “house niggers” dur-
ing slavery times. “House niggers” were
the “privileged” Blacks who were al-
lowed into the Master's house to take
care of the household. They tended to
have lighter duties and were treated as
semi-human as opposed to the animal
“field niggers.” But the “house niggers”
were still “niggers”—they were still
socially and economically exploited,
they were still considered property,