EDIT

We didn't want to write an editorial at all. Just leave  
the space glaring white. It would have been a break with  
tradition but also an acknowledgement of the thousands of  
words which have come before ours. What five and a half  
years of past editors have said about the necessity, aspira-  
tions and limitations of feminism at Yale still speak elo-  
quently for AURORA today. A collection of distinct yet  
related voices - both within a single issue and over the  
magazine's history - reflects the content of AURORA far  
better than what two people could say in summation.

It is about time that our readers plunge right into the  
magazine without being admonished/encouraged to approach it  
with open minds. Yes, we present a multitude of perspectives  
and yes, we are demanding of readers by definition. But  
feminisms at Yale have come of age. They can no longer be  
contained within a single publication, social clique, or  
department. That this issue of AURORA does not speak as the  
definitive feminist voice on campus is an unequivocal sign  
of positive change. Our lesbian insert, Tender Buttons, will  
publish as an independent magazine in the fall and last  
spring's insert by Asian-American women, Dialects, offers  
the possibility of an independent magazine by and about women  
of color. But the exchange works both ways. Both of us  
came to AURORA from working on Dialects last spring and the  
staffs of AURORA and Tender Buttons have worked closely on  
production this spring.

Complexity produces dialogue and dialogue produces  
complexity. Our best way of expressing this dynamic is  
AURORA's continuing role as both an ‘outsert' for autonomous  
publications and as a forum, itself, for the full spectrum  
of feminisms.

Monona Yin

Nadia Tchao

Let our advertisers know you appreciate their support for Aurora. After graduation—  
Don’t lose touch with Aurora

Golden Thread  
Booksellers

New Haven's Feminist Bookstore

lots of books, plus  
music and  
unusual —

@

For a year’s subscription (2 issues)

send $5.00 to: | Aurora  
Box 2575 Yale Station  
New Haven, CT 06520

Tuesday - Saturday 1 - 6

21-5

9 Cleared  
978 State St. 203 777-7807