September 28, 1981

Editor:

The other evening as I was walking down  
University Avenue I passed by the Habit, a  
womyn’s clothing store. Something  
jumped out at me from the display window  
and made me angry. Deep in conversation  
with a friend, I tried not to notice. I didn’t  
want to be angry. It’s too exhausting. Five  
minutes later I was back in front of the store  
looking at three “feminine” mannequins  
dressed in white jumpsuits and red nail  
polish; each with a bag over her head.

Besides the basic atrocity of representing  
womyn as tall, extremely thin and white, a  
male racist definition of womyn which  
most womyn don’t fit into, there were those  
bags. Now just what do bags over the head  
mean to the ordinary passerby?

Suffocation! That’s right! Who of us  
hasn’t been warned never to put a bag over  
our heads for fear of suffocation? A suffo-  
cated womyn! A dead womyn!

If you’ve got a bag over your head you  
can’t very well talk. Shutting a womyn up!

And if you’ve got a bag over your head,  
no one knows who you are. Just a sexy,  
male defined “female” body, with no per-  
sonality. A non-person! A thing! A piece of  
meat!

What to do!? Should I go over to Univer-  
sity Art and buy some poster board for pic-  
ket signs? Shall I call my friends and plan  
an unseen removal of the bags, modeling  
our sweet sisters of the womyn’s Zap Ac-  
tion brigade? Or should I call and talk to the  
owner — Ugh!!

Ugh? Why UGH!! you may ask. Well, a  
few months ago, when I walked into the  
Folklorico Womyn’s clothing store, also on  
University Avenue, to protest the male de-  
fined “female” mannequin in the window,  
bound up by 30 to 40 belts, the sales per-  
son’s response to me was, “You see, you’ve  
got to get in touch with the love within!” I  
slowly backed out of the store and ran all  
the way home! Whew!

And what about the time a few months  
ago, at the Palo Alto “Take back the night”  
march, when the Varsity Theater manage-  
ment agreed to meet and discuss criteria  
for selecting future films non-degrading  
and non-violent to womyn and children.  
(they showed “Dressed To Kill” among  
other womyn hating films in the past) Five  
womyn from around the bay area showed  
up on that arranged Sunday afternoon,  
only to be stood up by the management!

However, being the eternal optimist I cal-  
led Darrel Wallace, the owner of the Habit  
and to my amazement, he told me that there  
had already been a complaint about the  

AURORA

Windowfront racism, Misogyny

display from another womyn, Deirdre  
McHugh of Palo Alto, and that he would be  
removing the bags. He said he'd thought of  
the display after seeing the “No Name  
Comic,” a comedian in L.A. He said he’d  
meant nothing else by it. (The No Name  
Comic, by the way, has holes in his bag for  
eyes and mouth; the mannequins do not.)  
Funny how so much degradation and vio-  
lence against womyn is not “meant” “that”  
way!

Finally, the owner of the Habit said he  
couldn’t take the bags off until next Tues-  
day, July 14th because the mannequins’  
wigs are being restyled. I wonder if one or  
two womyn, with bags over their heads  
(holes for eyes and mouth of course) will  
offer to help him remove the bags a bit  
sooner? It only takes one or two of us.

An old bag, and proud of it!  
Kathleen Mavourneen

561 Center Drive

Palo Alto

California 94301 tel: 325-1996

P.S. Please don’t edit. If you don’t like it  
the way it is—throw it away!

P.P.S. Womyn is spelled intentionally.

Photo credit Lisa D. Adams

The Habit, a women’s clothing store.  
An example of the racist, misogynist store  

windows on University Avenue in Palo  
Alto,

WOMEN’S CENTER FULL MOON DANCE  
Tuesday, October 13, 8:30 p.m.  
White Plaza  
ALL WELCOME!

Our society has warped the playful fun of dancing into a  
hideous, and often heterosexist, ritual of pressured role-playing  

and OBJECT-ionable display.

The time has come to reclaim our bodies, fun, and Earth, the  
matriarchal dance floor, for playing alone, in groups, and even in  
pairs.

Allow the sound of music to invoke the spirits of spontaneity  
within you. Share your body with yourself!

“If I can't dance, I don’t want to be part of your revolution.”

—Emma Goldman

A couple of months ago, I sent the above  
letter to the Palo Alto Times & the Palo Alto  
Weekly. I received no response from the  
Times. The editor of the Weekly called and  
said he (Tim Clark) really wanted to print  
the letter but couldn’t believe I'd stand by  
the spelling of the word womyn when he  
couldn't possibly allow it. He also assured  
me that there were several feminists in his  
office who had neither heard of this odd  
spelling of womyn nor of the feminist  
commitment not to edit. He refused to  
print the letter. So much for free speech!

I usually don’t waste my time anymore,  
writing to male-run publications but I felt  
the womyn of Palo Alto should be made  
aware of the subtle violence against  
womyn & racism that is occurring every day  
under our noses.

So when I saw the latest atrocity in the  

Habit’s window, I decided to use our prim-  

ary source of communication—talking.

I called the womyn’s center & Sharon  
Silverstein returned my call within an  
hour—wow! She not only was outraged but  
said she'd print the letter in Aurora & have  
a photographer take a picture of the Habit’s  
display window. The display is of two male  
defined Asian womyn (tall and thin) com-  
ing out of Chinese food boxes. WE are  
food-objects—never womyn!

About the racism. In this womyn-hating  
racist culture, womyn of color are always  
portrayed as having a primary identification  
with their ancestral heritage. This is out-  
rageous when one considers how hard won  
bilingual education and multicultural  
programs are the first to go in a tax cut. Our  
differences are beautiful and should be  
celebrated but oversimplification and  
exploitation of our differences cannot be  
tolerated—that’s racism!

I have a friend who is 5th generation  
American. Her ancestry is Chinese. Her  
mothers and grandmothers built the rail-  
roads of this country. She is constantly  
asked to translate Chinese. She neither  
speaks nor understands Chinese. She is  
asked to teach friends how to prepare  
Chinese food. She doesn’t know how and  
has only eaten Chinese food in Chinese re-  
staurants. She is middle class, the culture-  

Page Three

less goal for which Americans are forced to  
strive.

I think this story illustrates how our in-  
dividual cultures have been degraded and  
efficiently kept from us and how despite  
this fact false cultural links are emphasized  
to keep womyn of color and white womyn  
apart as in the latest display at the Habit.

I was on my way to the West Coast Wo-  
myn’s Music Festival when I saw this hate-  
ful display. I collected my thoughts (I knew  
it was horrible but had to figure out why)  
went into the store and confronted the  
owner with my articulate (I thought) out-  
rage. His response was “you're the only one  
who ever complains. Go talk to your con-  

gressman!”  
I suggest that any womyn reading this,  

check out the Habit and go by yourself or  
with a friend or two and picket for a few  
minutes or an hour in front of the store.  
Don’t wait for a huge demonstration to  
occur—it might—but then it might not  
and then what? You’ve let an opportunity  
go by to voice your outrage at what men are  
doing to us. I further suggest that every  
feminist have a collapsible picket sign in  
her backpack along with a very thick mark-  
ing pen. Then we'll be ready to de-  
monstrate on the spot. We can’t afford to  
wait and let our anger fade into apathy!

SWOPSI IN FALL

Workshops of particular interest to  
womyn (see catalog for complete  
information and course offerings):

SWOP 173 - Domestic Violence:  
Working With Battered Women, Tu/Th  
7-10 PM, Mid-Peninsula Support  
Network, Mt. View

SWOP 176 - Women in the Labor  
Force: Issues and Organizing W 7-9: id

SWOPSI is seeking course ideas and  
leaders concerned with feminist  
issues. Contact us: 590 A Old Union,  
497-4305.

HAVE SOME IDEAS FOR ACADEMIC PROJECTS?

or

* funding proposals?  
* task forces to study issues in Stanford undergraduate  
education and life?

Talk to the folks at SCIRE about ways to bring those ideas to reality.

Autonomy  
{a song}

Deadlines for applications:

FALL QUARTER CREDIT—internships listed in Clearinghouse

Autonomy  
Autonomy  
Autono ME  
Autono ME  
Auto NO ME  
Auto NO ME  
Auto Auto  
No No No  
Auto Auto  
Me Me Me  
No No No  
Me Me Me  
No No No  
Me Me Me  
NO ME NO ME  
NO NO ME NO.

: sae AHEAD

SCIRE—the STUDENT CENTER FOR INNOVATION IN  
RESEARCH AND EDUCATION, 590A Old Union, 497-4504.

Catalog (available at registration,  
RA’s, SCIRE office, Dept. offices) OCT 7

WINTER QUARTER CREDIT—self-designed internships,  

projects— NOV 30  
—Clearinghouse Catalog  
internships—JAN 13

SPRING QUARTER CREDIT—self-designed internships,  

Projects—FEB 26  
—Clearinghouse Catalog  
internships—APR 7

SUMMER QUARTER CREDIT—for enrolled students—MAY 20