3

Take Back the Night

by Marcia Eiteman

All day, all night, women lead lives
terrorized by our one indisputable
commonality: we are all vulnerable to
rape and battering, regardless of race,
class, age, lifestyle. Don’t we all run
from the night, the dark alleys, the
stranger in a car slowing down behind
us? Don’t we all breathe a sigh of relief
if we are lucky enough to make it
home—if we even have a home—and
there to lock the windows and bolt the
door, only to find that the violence we
try so hard to lock out thrives directly
within that home—in the husband, the
father, the brother, the boyfriend. 52%
of all rapes are committed by men
known by the victim. In cases of incest,
92% of all victims are female; 97% of
all offenders are male.

And yet, the violence that follows
women everywhere is accepted as
status quo. It is readily acknowledged
that we all live in a “violent society.”
Far fewer people will look at the bare
facts of violence against women and
acknowledge that we live in a woman-
hating society. FBI statistics reveal that
a woman is raped every minute and a
woman is battered every 18 seconds.
The FBI also estimates that 1 out of
every 3 women will be raped during her
lifetime. In New Haven alone, there
were 98 cases of rapes and attempted
rape reported for 1980. Many, many
more go unreported. The Yale New
Haven Hospital Emergency Room
reports that 1 of 4 women that comes
into the emergency room is a battered
woman.

Men learn to rape and batter: to hate
what is female. As women, hating our
degraded condition of woman raped,
woman battered, we also end up hating
ourselves. In a society like ours which
makes a woman’s accusation of assault
indicative of her sexual history, open
outrage and discussion about the
violence she has sustained is taboo. The
Connecticut Mental Health Center (CMHC) estimates that
only one in ten assaults is ever reported
to the police. The ordeal of police inter-
rogation, the trauma of the examining
room, the severe social stigma that
follows, or the knowledge that a hus-
band who has been arrested for batter-
ing can be free in a few hours to return,
can keep a woman from speaking out.
Meanwhile, it has become clear that
the prisons and courts for their part do
little to stop violence against women.
According to the CT Mental Health
Center, only 5% of rapists caught are
tried in court, and of those few that are,
only 2% are ever convicted.

But so long as silence is maintained,
the crime goes unchecked. It is
therefore up to women to break down
the barriers of our own silence that
isolate us from one another. In talking
openly to each other we can also dispel
many of the myths of woman’s passivity
that we have thought necessary for
survival. One myth, that a woman
should never resist a rapist too forcefully,
has been discredited by the many
cases in which women who fought
back with all their strength escaped
rape. Furthermore, regardless of
whether the woman escapes or not, she
bears none of the blame and none of
the shame.

Another myth says rape is a sexual
crime of passion, and should be
understood in this light. This is wrong.
As convicted rapists have attested, sex-
ual desire is hardly ever a factor: how
could it be, when rapes have occurred
against women between the ages of six
months and 96 years? 25% are
perpetrated against girls 12 years or
younger, 50% against girls under 18.
Rape is a crime of violence, using sex-
uality as its weapon.

Just as we often isolate ourselves to
cope with our individual experience of
physical assault, many of us know the
isolation imposed by barriers built of
racist, classist, and heterosexist
thought. The violence implicit in these
attitudes leaves a very real and painful
mark on our daily lives. Women of color
struggle for existence free from
racial, economic, and political attacks
directed at us specifically because of
our race. We constantly deal with a
pervasive racism that appears even in
the faces of our close white “politically
correct” sisters though more obviously
in confrontations with the prototypical
white male, consciously or uncon-
sciously controlling the wealth, the
jobs, the political system and its
priorities, the atmosphere out on the
sidewalks. Lower income women also
live an ongoing battle of survival, some
of us fighting for the physical essentials
of food, shelter, a decent life, others of
us battered by the comments or stares
of men and women of a wealthier class
who tell us their lives, their social
values, their political priorities are
more crucial. Lesbian women face a
backlash of violence for daring to re-
ject heterosexuality and men,
whenever we affirm our love for and
allegiance to other women. It is not
enough to confront the men who
perpetuate racism, classism, and
heterosexism, who incorporate them in-
to the institutions that repress women.
It is also imperative for all women to
understand how racism and all the
other -isms work within us; we must not
oppress each other while we try to free
each other.

Clearly, working to end violence
against women does not stop with
issues of battering and rape. Those are
the greatest physical outrages against
women. The assault on women con-
tinues in the current struggle for
reproductive rights and freedom from
forced sterilization. The attempt to
regulate a woman’s bodily processes
and to control her lifestyle, either by
forcing her to have children against her
will or by judging her unfit to have
more children because of her low in-
come, different culture or color, or her
lesbian identity, constitutes yet another
violent crime against women. In the
same way, the condemnation of
women forced to survive through pro-
stitution functions as more societal dic-
tation of ‘appropriate’ female
behavior.

Again and again the courts, the
media, doctors, politicians, male co-
workers remind women in their deci-
sions, advertising images, diagnoses,
war games, and abusive comments that
we should not have the right to a life
free of physical and mental assault.
After the release of the widely publicized
movie Deep Throat, New York City
hospitals reported a dramatic increase

continued on page 17

Gender Roles
continued from page 5

and women replaced by people allowed
to be intelligent and emotional, caring
and competent.

The radical feminist notion of men,
while woefully accurate at present,
contains no dynamic qualities, seeks no
change in men. Men are assumed com-
pletely separate from the radical
feminist realm. Women can and do
separate themselves from men, but
while this creates a crucial supportive
community for women, it avoids the
question of the human cooperation
necessary for an integrated, just socie-
ty. The lesbian personality, that is, the
woman living entirely independent of
men in rejection of traditionally male
values, is a key factor of radical
feminist thought. But, along with an ex-
amination of lesbianism, an inquiry into
the nature of man, for whom the fun-
damental male privilege is having and
using a woman, must be pursued.

While the priority of radical
feminism must be to improve condi-
tions for women, radical feminism must
also examine the presently dominant
male, and actively work at abolishing
his dominance, that is, his masculinity.
What makes a man masculine? First
and foremost, his possession and con-
trol of women. This is the base of his
masculine identity. His role as a man is
defined by his relation to a woman.
Men are “emasculated” by unusually
aggressive women. They prove their
“manhood” through their sexual ex-
periences with women. Thus the worst
example of the emasculated man is the
homosexual man, who is a sissie, a
queen, not a “real man” at all. He is an
affront to the heterosexual male. Les-
bians likewise offend men for daring to
exist independently of them. Moreover
they contradict the image of
womanhood which the great majority
of women themselves retain, for
although they can and do bear
children, they neither have children in
the interest of men, nor do they per-
form the sexual function of the “nor-
mal” woman. Both gay men and les-
bians are thus a threat to the institution
of heterosexuality, an institution which
is a political one, as it constitutes the
base of the male-female antagonism.
Homosexuals not only challenge the
heterosexual norm through their choice
of partners; homosexual couples are

continued on page 13

Ntozake Shange at the Take Back the Night Rally