ve. Mes, -
(untitled)
for P.M.M.
"New England November
~ Sunday morning ?
white walls ‘
white light

apples rosy
pile in pewter

bare trees reaching
fill the panes

% 4 4
in the bowl you break‘

soft yet persistent as a dream
behind us |
our earth-dark, cave-warm, deep night’s embrace
fingers gentle

seeking tongue shy

over us thick as your grandmother's quilt

I wrapped us tight

woman, what

with my white body’s heat
in that dark dream

I would tell you:

there is reason

beyond order light,
language, sense,

the wild heart’s cry, love,
yet in your harvest

to be tasted

books, words,

steep notes climbing,
pile these rooms,
define your day

the night
my friend

on the edge of your life-

on the crest of the break and flow
to which I held you

til the cry from vor nemeda's
at last broke free

will pull you again

sweet in the center dark
love deep in the fullness
of the sweet dream

under the durable cover of my care, love

let go let go let go

Patricia Roth Schwartz

SESTINA

” “Goddamn it--somebody blew a fuse!”

from the bowels of the basement my irate parent
cried. Bumping into corners darkened with light
lost, every moment cursing the break

that waited to be found. A dying forsythia plant

crashes to the floor, with blooms that once blazed in yellow fire.

I felt queer, spinning dizzily out of shock: So much fire
growing in my lungs, out into breath, the end of the short fuse.
I craved a cool icy wave to envelop my eyes, to plant

a nugget of blue crystal in my belly, making me parent

to my jewel self. Rock cascades down my spine, with no break
in rhythm, a piercing chronicle of faded light.

Deep in their dark, I sought a channel of water to light

my own vision, to break their colors into my prism of fire.

No need possessed me then, no urgency felt each time the brakes
screamed to a halt, choked my surging gasps, fused

me to my body, cemented vertebrae to plaster, with no apparent
design. No tools, no prayer in my book of change can plant

the seed in this house of crime. My brother walks to the plant

each morning in irontoed boots, black and gleaming in the dust light.
He saw it once, searched my eyes through transparent

fossils of belief and landed in a tailspin, welding politics with fire

in a factory. Tired, he drags home each foot, thought diffused

by steam and sweat, energy frozen in a vacuum seal he cannot break.

The other deprives himself of reason in his quest for the final break-
through in logic. I never saw him seek clear soil to transplant

his hunger from sand salt to black loam. We infuse

each hour with terror, mornings broken into shards of light,

nights of bald glare drowning our skulls in raw fire.

This burnt offering relieves the dying moans with no apparent

flaw, easing soft skin past the hard-shelled word of our parents.
Even now, we wait for the chance to love them, daybreak
blinding our hearts to their stubborn eyes. Stars fire

needles into each tightening vein/ not in vain we plant

our souls in wood and granite/ sailing through twilight

to another place, landing gently in a time we can’t confuse--

although we fuse our lives in blood, drawn by parent
and ancestor, brought to light after centuries still break
strong hearts open, planted as we are in this eternal fire.

Kathryn Gould

PL