PS STATE Fe Live

Becoming A

Pro-Feminist Male

by David Ward

“David, you’re a man, how did you become
involved with feminism?” A number of people have
asked me that question recently, and my answer to
them is, ‘It was quite natural. I have always liked
women and cared about what happened in their
lives. My interest in feminism followed easily from
there.’

My first consistent exposure to feminism came
from a Women’s Changing Roles course in college
nine years ago. It was the first time I saw that
women’s experiences are not only different from
men’s but that women are kept down: women have
to take all, or the major part of the responsibility for
housework and childcare (and all of that work is
unpaid). White women, when they work outside the
home, earn less than 60% of what white men do
(and Black women earn even less); and women have
to deal with sexual harassment, both verbal and
physical. Though all of this is obvious to me now, it
wasn’t initially. Most of that information, and its
ramifications, I had never thought about before,
since no one had ever taught it to me.

I stayed open to the ideas of feminism and to the
reality of women’s pain. I found most women were
generally appreciative of my openness and interests.
I would also listen, be empathetic and give them
lots of verbal and emotional support. I also usually
changed quickly when challenged about something I
did or said that was hurtful.

Unfortunately, I did not always change quickly. I
was kicked out of one house (where I was living
with two women) because I didn’t take my share of
the responsibility for washing the dishes and for
doing general housework. They had gotten sick of
having to remind me all the time to do my work.

I began to understand why women wanted space
for themselves without men from that experience in
the house, and from becoming more generally
aware of the often subtle ways men dominate
women. As an example, I went to a discussion years

back that was mixed men and women, on the

subject of roles, men and women, work, etc. We
had talked for about an hour when a woman said,
“I’ve been timing the amount of time that both men
and women have been talking. The men have been
talking 80% of the time and the women have mostly
been asking questions of the men.” Everyone was
taken aback, especially since we were a group of
men and women who considered ourselves somewhat
aware and wanted not to do those things. The
conversation equalized after that but it’s not always
so easy to notice such things, to verbalize them, or

After seeing ways in which I and other men hurt
women, it was difficult for a while to feel all right
about being a man. Fortunately, I went to a “Men’s
Day” conference where I met many wonderful men
who also wanted to be less sexist themselves and to
stop the sexism of other men and in the culture. It
felt great to get support from other men, since it
lessened my feelings of aloneness about being a
man interested in feminism. It also lessened my
guilt and helped make me more responsible to both
women and men. It gave me a deeper understanding too of why women like to be with other women
who have similar understandings about the world: It
helps your sanity when the rest of the world tells
you you’re nuts for seeing what you see.

In addition to many of the more subtle forms of
sexism (the ways that touch, conversation, written
language, are often used), I began to learn about
physical brutality against women. I listened to
women tell me about being raped and I read about
rape too. (I recently read this in the local paper, ‘A
22-year-old woman who says she was tied to a bed
in a city fire hall and raped for 18 hours by nine
firemen...testified the firemen repeatedly forced
her to have sex with them, after she begged them
to stop because she was in pain and bleeding. Some
of the firemen have been suspended, with pay,
pending the outcome of the case. All are free on
bond.”)

I became exposed to women-battering too.
Though initially I hadn’t listened to any battered
women, going to a conference about Battered
Women and reading Battered Wives by Del Martin
helped me to become more aware of the reality. A
battered wife wrote, “What do I mean by ‘beaten?’
I mean that parts of my body have been hit violently
and repeatedly...I have been punched and kicked in
the head, chest, face, and abdomen. I have been
slapped for saying something about politics, for
having a different view about religion, for swearing,
for crying, for wanting to have intercourse.” The
letter goes on to tell of going to a clergyman, family
guidance agency, two doctors, the police, all who
“wanted to blame me and vindicate my husband.”

Even though I had listened, read, and knew about
violence against women, and knew in my head the
statistic that a woman in this country is physically
abused every 18 seconds, I didn’t internalize that
knowledge until the time around the New Haven
Take Back the Night march. Every day, for a week
before until a week after the march, at least one
woman talked to me of being raped or battered (or a
friend being abused). It took hearing about the assaults every day for it to sink in that these are not isolated
incidents.

Over the last few years I’ve understood better
that my life is not only different from others
because I’m a man, but also because I’m white and
was raised middle class. It’s been a slow lesson for
me to learn that there are still people in this country
who have to choose between eating and not
freezing, or that you can still get killed for not being
white. (A Black woman spoke to me recently about
driving in Connecticut when she suddenly found
herself between two cars that tried to run her off
the road. After a few minutes she stopped her car.
One man got out of his car and pointed a gun at her
head and said “get moving, nigger.” He was about
ready to shoot her when another car came by and
she sped off. She reported it to the police and they
did not believe her.)

I’m beginning to understand better how many of
these different issues are related. For example, in
areas where industries pay low average wages,
there is the greatest pay differential between men
and women, between whites and non-whites. Both
the low wages and the wage differentials keep the
employees fighting each other and make more
money for the companies. Or when any man is hurt,
angry, insecure, or frustrated he can use women as
a scapegoat rather than working to change himself
and the structures that caused those feelings. The
man gets to have power over women, but not power
over his own life. Women are doubly left powerless,
with no power in the broader world and no power
vis-à-vis men. And because of these conflicts no one
threatens the power, money, control over others who
are at the top of the structure.

I’m also becoming more active. I realized that being
not enough. Women did not stop being raped and
beaten just because I didn’t do either myself. I’ve
spoken in a few schools about sexism, men, and
women; organized consciousness-raising groups,
have been doing child care each week at the
Battered Women’s Project. I’m now also in the
process of organizing with some other men, a group
to counsel men who batter, which came out of a
discussion about violence at the Take Back the
Night March.

There are lots of other possibilities that men can
work on to stop sexism. At the National Men’s
Conference, I’ve found out about groups of men in
Kansas City, St. Louis, Santa Cruz, Philadelphia,
Boston, to name a few. Some groups work on all
violence against women, some against only one
specific area, such as pornography, rape, or
battering. Emerge in Boston is one such group.

They are the ones who inspired us to want to
counsel men in New Haven. They have an
understanding of the social causes and cultural
conditioning that foster battering. They not only
have a good process for counseling but also train
people to do community work.

Seeing the work these men are doing, in addition
to that of many feminist women, leaves me feeling
very hopeful. I am confident, that despite all the
difficulties many people will work for change.
Change for the strength of all of us.

276 York St.

New Haven, CT
06511

777-0157