Pages

academic and personal s

Third World Women

At Yale

Facts, Stereotypes And Goals

In the Spring of 1979, eight Third World Women (Sally Blackman, Donna Dinkins, Sandra Howard, Dinae Louard, Yvette Martas, Lydia Perez, Cheryl Stiles, Lewellyn Tillery), elected to trace the social and political histories of Puerto Rican and Black women at Yale College since 1972. This project became the final project for Catherine A. MacKinnon’s Women’s Studies course, “Feminism and Humanism.” The task proved to be overwhelming for the women involved. We interviewed twenty Black and Puerto Rican women; three Puerto Rican and Black men; and two European women—all politically active in campus organizations.* The following are excerpts from what we termed “the tutorial” and what is still an unfinished project of the Council of Third World Women. * Council of Third World Women; Undergraduate Women’s Caucus; Yalesbians; Despierta Boricua; Black Studies Alliance at Yale; Minority Women’s Speakers Forum; Minority Pre-Health Alliance; Federacion Universitaria de Socialista Puertorriquenos.

WE GOT. HERE.....

Yale's first coed freshman class matriculated in 1969, but it was not until 1971 that Black women were represented in any large numbers. The first Puerto Rican women entered in 1972 with only four in that class. The small number of minority women reflects not only Yale’s admission policy toward women in general, but also the special difficulties of the college-bound Third World woman, particularly the Puertorriquena.

Having struggled just to get on campus, many of us expected to find a tight-knit supportive community. During the early seventies, in the aftermath of the Black Panther-National Guard confrontations, the Black community at Yale was, ostensibly exactly that. The prevailing attitude was a separatist one and was dominant among both Blacks and Puerto Ricans. We had separate tables in the dining halls, ‘floating’ counselors from our ethnic groups for acceptable for a Third World man to “cross the line.” Few Third World students had white friends, and white roommates, which we all had at some point, were always intolerable.

Most of us had been raised in communities that were culturally separatist and sometimes even nationalistic/racist. It was not until the expansion of the Pre-Registration Orientation Program (PROP) in the summer of 1973, that Asian-Americans, Native Americans, Chicanos, Puerto Ricans and Blacks began to interact socially and politically. A sense of a Third World Community developed, and this did create political allegiances between these organizations on campus. This is not to imply that racism ceased to exist but that the first steps had been taken toward recognizing a common heritage and shared oppression.

While PROP was instrumental in initiating social bonds, it also perpetuated a class difference among Third World students. Initially only minority students who attended public schools and were receiving financial aid were invited to participate. This policy excluded numbers of Third World students who were labeled “Preppies” and thus felt “socially lost” and unable to relate to white and minority students. This class difference, middle-class vs. working class and private vs. public school, has always been a focus of struggle among Third World students on this campus. The result has often been a brand of chauvinism of political ideology among students of the working class and an insecurity of identity for the middle-class students.

As of late, Third World gays of Yale as well as in the greater community have enjoyed little success in raising the issue of homosexuality as part of the liberation struggle of all people. Social relationships between the Third World gay and non-gay communities at Yale have been minimal. In the class of 1976, four gay men were active in Despierta Boricua (DB). At least three gay Blacks (two women and one man) have worked to sensitize and educate Third World people here about the issue of oppression. Third World gay people have also encountered the racism of white gays. This was a big issue in 1974-75 when there was a small Third World Gay community at Yale; but upon their graduation this social problem formed “cliques.” “Strong women” were associated with these social units which also proved to be the movers and shakers of campus political organizations. Even on an interpersonal level, the dynamics between women and men within these cliques are similar to those within the political organizations. Some men expressed surprise that Yale women did not cook meals for the men. One man observed that “the men come here expecting to get their asses kissed and don’t.” Third World men perceive that the biggest social problem for women is that they are treated asexually and are always “struggling to be feminine.” The “asexual” stereotype becomes one of “castrating bitches.” These social dynamics make their way into the political arena almost every year when the Black male freshmen meet to air sexual gripes. These meetings focus on the complaints, “Why aren’t we getting over?” and “What’s wrong with these women?” and do not address other issues such as the undercurrent of sexism that runs through social relationships.

One also finds that the Third World Women in leadership positions who are avowed feminists are involved with men. To quote Colette Holt on this issue, “if you push the argument to its absolute limits, you'll be saying the only real feminist is a lesbian, and I don’t think these people really want to say that.”

Although relationships between women and men have been problematic, we still maintain contact with Third World men. Women contribute to the organizations and become leaders in their own rights—organizing against racism, sexism, capitalism and patriarchy.

One of the many problems facing the Third World women both at Yale and in the greater community is the number of stereotypes against which we must fight. The following piece looks at a few restricting views of Black women and their consequences.

WHAT THEY WANT US TO BE.....
Images of Black Women

Stereotypes, such as the Black matriarch, the Black mammy, and the insatiable Black whore, have been accepted by many people in this country as the individual lifestyles of Black women. These stereotypes have survived the chains of slavery, the emergence of the women’s movement, the political awareness of economic class differences. They have survived the enactment of a few laws that claim to protect the rights of women, Blacks, and underprivileged victims of injustice. What are these stereotypes? Who perpetuates them and to what ends?

The sexually active Black woman is labeled the insatiable whore. She wallows shamelessly in a sea of heterosexual promiscuity. White males tend to only cite historical incidences which verify that Black women during slavery were promiscuous. The Black woman, they have noted, was the most sexually active person on the plantation besides the white master—she is said to have slept with whites and Blacks alike. White males enjoy perpetuating this image of the Black woman in the media. This strategy makes it easier and justifies the discrediting and abuse of Black women. At the same time, white women, in comparison, are placed on pedestals.

Black women are enraged that so many males disregard the fact that the “sexual activity” displayed on the plantation was actually rape. And, even today, the physical and emotional abuse that parent this “sexual activity” has yet to be stopped. The essence of the Black woman’s rage is that she realizes that the “insatiable whore” stereotype affects her decisions regarding her sexual freedom.

The Black mammy who smiles through layers of internal and external pain, may be the oldest and most dangerous stereotype of Black women. This woman must maintain a jolly demeanor, never displaying any emotion besides love and happiness. She is infinitely religious and interprets the Bible to mean that salvation depends on one’s devotion to the superior race, for God’s image is manifested in this race: Europeans. White males picture Mammy as “fat, Black, and greasy.” Black women who adopt this role become an asset to white men because they glorify the white race. In her quest for liberation, the Black woman feels endangered by the “Mammy” stereotype because it prohibits devotion to her race and personal growth.

The Black matriarch typifies the Black woman who heads the family with silence and firm assurance. This woman acts as the breadwinner, the mother, the figure of authority and the spouse simultaneously. Because of this, Black men feel intimidated and slighted by this woman because she displays these male-identified characteristics that seem to render their services unnecessary. Black males resent the Black matriarch because she leaves him with a feeling of helplessness, inferiority, and envy in a world where white male dominance reigns. It is such “castrating bitches” that the Black men in Toni Cade’s article, “The Pill: Genocide or Liberation?” warned to “get off the pill and get on the mattress” to fight for the Black cause against white supremacy.** Many Black women adopt the role of the Black matriarch because it allows, partially, for a woman to determine her destiny. She gets to feel some sense of worth and independence in the salaried job market even if the pay is low.

Many more stereotypes of Black women exist in this male-defined society which are not included in this essay. For example, there is the sassy-single Black woman or the rough-and-tough ghetto kid or the Black “butch.” The images of these stereotypes are also evident in other cultures and ethnic groups, such as “la mujer mala” (the bad/evil woman), in Hispanic communities. However, stereotypes of women within Asian, Chicano and Puerto Rican communities are not known as well as stereotypes in the Black community. This is partially because Blacks in great numbers have been in this country for more than three hundred years; Chicanos for a little over one hundred years; Asian Americans for about one hundred years and Puerto Ricans for about thirty years. Also, there appears to be a generalized understanding in this country—that “minority” equals Black. As such, any problems or questions of race and racism in this country usually take into account solely the Black experience. And, although the manifestations of oppression are similar in sex, race and class movements, it is extremely insensitive not to understand and accept the cultural differences of minority/ethnic groups in the United States. It is important to note that the authors of these essays are in tune with the cultural differences. We have expanded the notion of Black Liberation, Puerto Rican Liberation, Asian Liberation, and Chicano Liberation to Third World Liberation without losing sight of our cultural uniqueness and yet oppressive similarities.

continued on page 36

** Black woman’s response: “Until you Black males are ready to share the responsibility of nurturing and guiding the militant individual we produce, you are unqualified to label any kind of birth at ‘genocide.’”