October 14, 1982

On Pornography

AURORA

Pornography is about death — woman’s
death. “Death is the ultimate orgasm” in
the theology of patriarchy. For “normal”
heterosexual intercourse, as in murder,
there are but two roles available to the actor:
the oppressor, the fucker and the fucked, the
assassin and the corpse.

The images of pornography are the
spectres of death. Women are strung on
meathooks, forced to fellate cocked pis-
tols, have their flesh ground to hamburger,
their mouths gagged and their breasts
bound. The faces — of the model on the
cover of Playboy, of the woman sitting in
the glass booth while a “customer” mas-
turbates at her mouth — are the silent faces
of cadavers; smiling, yet emotionless,
painted and colorless, human, yet robbed
of every human quality save for the flesh
itself.

Pornography proclaims that women
want death in its various manifestations:
women want to be chained, beaten, raped,
defecated on. The stifled scream, choked
by a metal ball jammed into the mouth, is
of ecstasy, not agony. The writhing of a
gang-raped woman is passion, not revul-
sion. One of the oldest fables in the
mythology of the obscene is that women
enjoy their own deaths, that they are wil-
ling participants on both a transactional
and an emotional level.

Male sexuality and male power are
created by and validated by this myth, for
the desires of the male have now become,
by fiat, the desires of the woman. It matters

little that she must be chained or

threatened, that she screams and struggles
— these are now the very proof that his
desires are, by supreme force of his will,
hers.

Not a Love Story, a film directed by Bon-
nie Klein, is the first film analyzing porno-
graphy from a feminist perspective. Yet the
film, though it offers a feminist analysis of
pornography, raises more questions than it
answers. It touches on dozens of issues
closely related to that of pornography —
racism, sexual slavery, the possible exis-

tence of ‘erotica’ — without carrying

“Not A Love Story”

by John Kerwin

photo by Nancy Raff, Stanford Daily

through an in-depth analysis of any of
them. And the movie refrains from expres-
sions of rage at the brutalization, exploita-
tion, and objectification of women that
Klein exposes at every turn.

To provide analysis and
for its audience, Not a Love Story is both
provocative and evocative. Unanswered
questions demand consideration more ur-
gently than erudite analysis; the images of
women presented and the arrogance of the
pornographers inspire a rage more bitter
than any that could have been captured in
the film itself. Therefore, Not a Love Story
is a feminist film not only in its content but
also in its method. The audience is allowed
to come to consciousness, to reach a
deeper or reconfirm a prior understanding
of what this society does to women as wo-
men.

The consciousness-raising aspects of
Not a Love Story work on two levels. Dur-
ing the film’s exposition of pornography as
a crime against women, Linda Lee Tracey, a
stripper assisting Ms. Klein, begins to
come to a personal understanding of the
nature of that crime. Early in the film, Ms.
Tracey felt that she enjoyed stripping and
saw no harm or exploitation in it. Six
months after the film’s completion, she
burned her costumes and began to forge a
career as an actress and a writer. For those
reaching an understanding of a feminist
analysis of pornography for the first time,
Ms. Tracey’s coming to consciousness dur-
ing the film may well parallel — and thus
underscore — their own.

Not a Love Story premiered a year ago in
Toronto but has since been banned from
commercial screening in Canada, due to
the fears that it may itself be exploited as
pornography. Its Northern California pre-
miere on September 24, a benefit for
Women Against Violence and Porno-
graphy in Media (WAVPM), was at-
tended by Bonnie Klein and by Susan Grif-
fin, author of Pornography and Silence.
Both answered questions after the screen-
ing. Not a Love Story is currently playing at
the Lumiere theater in San Francisco, and
at the Guild in Menlo Park.

Pornography: The Image and the Industry,
a panel featuring Burton Joseph, Vice Pres-
ident of the Playboy Foundation; Andrea
Dworkin, radical feminist author; Linda
Lovelace Marchiano, former forced por-
nographic film star; and Catharine A. Mac-
Kinnon, teacher, writer, lawyer, and ac-
tivist; took place at Stanford on April 2,
1982. The event, substantially produced by
undergraduate Sharon Dyer, drew such a
huge crowd that many people had to be
turned away.

Joseph spoke about pornography as an
issue of free speech or censorship. During
the heated audience discussion following
the panel, he refused to address several
questions seeking his opinion on how por-
nography depicts women and shapes cul-
tural perceptions and meanings. Mar-
chiano told of her ordeal (see her account
in Ordeal) as a forced prostitute and por-
nography model, and prisoner of the man
who forced her into marriage and the film
Deep Throat. Dworkin and MacKinnon fo-
cused on the social meaning of pornog-
raphy and their efforts to delegitimize —
rather than suppress — it.

Following is the manuscript from which
Andrea Dworkin spoke. Please read it as it
was delivered: Slowly and with feeling.

copyright © 1979 by Andrea Dworkin

There is one message basic to all kinds of
pornography from the sludge that we see

all around us, to the artsy-fartsy porno-
graphy that the intellects call erotica, to
the under-the-counter kiddie porn, to the
slick, glossy men’s “entertainment”
magazines. The one message that is carried

is that she wants it; she wants to be beaten; she wants
to be forced; she wants to be hurt. This is
the premise, the first principle, of all por-
nography. She likes it. She likes to be hit
and she likes to be hurt and she likes to be
forced.

Meanwhile, all across this country,
women and young girls are being raped
and beaten and forced and brutalized and
hurt.

The police believe they wanted it. Most
of the people around them believe they
wanted it. “And what did you do to pro-
voke him?” the battered wife is asked over
and over again when finally she dares to
ask for help or for protection. “Did you like
it?” the police ask the rape victims. “Admit
that something in you wanted it,” the
psychiatrist urges. “It was the energy you
gave out,” says the guru. Adult men claim
that their own daughters who are eight
years old or ten years old or thirteen years
old led them on.

The belief is that the female wants to be
hurt. The belief is that the female likes to
be forced. The proof that she wants it is
everywhere: the way she dresses; the way
she walks; the way she talks; the way she
sits; the way she stands; she was out after
dark; she invited a male friend into her
house; she said hello to a male neighbor;
she opened the door; she looked at a man;
a man asked her what time it was and she
told him; she sat on her father’s lap; she
asked her father a question about sex; she
got into a car with a man; she got into a car
with her best friend's father or her uncle or
her teacher; she flirted; she got married;
she had sex once with a man and said no
the next time; she is not a virgin; she talks
with men; she talks with her father; she
went to a movie alone; she took a walk
alone; she went shopping alone; she
smiled; she is home alone, asleep, the man
breaks in, and still, the question is asked,

“Did you like it? Did you leave the window
open just hoping that someone would pop
on through? Do you always sleep without
any clothes on? Did you have an orgasm?”

Her body is bruised, she is torn and hurt,
and still the question persists: Did you
provoke it? Did you like it? Is this what you
really wanted all along? Is this what you
were waiting for and hoping for and dream-
ing for? You keep saying no. Try proving
no. Those bruises? Women like to be
roughed up a bit. What did you do to lead
him on? How did you provoke him? Did
you like it?

A boyfriend or a husband or one’s pa-
rents or even sometimes a female lover will
believe that she could have fought him off
— if she had really wanted to. She must
have really wanted it — if it happened.
What was it she wanted? She wanted the
force, the hurt, the harm, the pain, the
humiliation. Why did she want it? Because
she is female and females always provoke
it, always want it, and always like it.

And how does everyone whose opinion
matters know that women want to be
forced and hurt and brutalized? Porno-
graphy says so. For centuries men have
consumed pornography in secret — yes,
the lawyers and the legislators and the doc-
tors and the artists and the writers and the
scientists and the theologians and the
philosophers. And for these same cen-
turies, women have not consumed por-
nography and women have not been
lawyers and legislators and doctors and ar-
tists and writers and scientists and theolo-
gians and philosophers.

Men believe the pornography, in which
the women always want it. Men believe the
women say no only so that men will force them and
use more and more force and more and
more brutality. To this day, men believe
the pornography and men do not believe
the women who say no.

Some people say that pornography is
only fantasy. What part of it is fantasy?
Women are beaten and raped and forced
and whipped and held captive. The vio-
lence depicted is true. The acts of violence
depicted in pornography are real acts
committed against real women and real
female children. The fantasy is that women
want to be abused.

And so we are here today to explain
calmly — to shout, to scream, to bellow, to
holler — that we women do not want it, not
today, not tomorrow, not yesterday. We
never will want it and we never have
wanted it. The prostitute does not want to
be forced and hurt. The homemaker does
not want to be forced and hurt. The lesbian
does not want to be forced and hurt. The
young girl does not want to be forced and
hurt.

And because everywhere in this country,
daily, thousands of women and young girls
are being brutalized — and this is not fan-
tasy — every day the women and the young
girls are being raped and beaten and
forced — we will never again accept any
depiction of us that has as its first principle,
its first promise, that we want to be abused,
that we enjoy being hurt, that we like being
forced.

That is why we will fight pornography
wherever we find it; and we will fight those
who justify it and those who make it and
those who buy and use it.

And make no mistake: this movement
against pornography is a movement for
speech — the speech of those who have
been silenced by sexual force, the speech
of women and young girls. And we will
never, never be silenced again.