35. “Separatism is impossible. The  
boys are everywhere and we may wish  
they weren’t but in the meantime we  
have to deal with the world we're living  

36. “Only as separatists can we  
create the revolutionary female vision  
that protects ourselves and the earth.  
With womyn, we can become con-  

49. “Working in a battered women’s  
shelter, I see the same women come  
back time and time again, and it occurs  
to me that there’s a limit to how long I  
can keep this up.”  

50. “Me and my friends have come  
up with the solution, it’s called ‘hard-  
off’, which is this drug you put on  
things and when men touch those  

Call to Rape  

I am the power  

to hurt. My body  

is to ravage yours.  

It isn’t an accident:  

I am made that way.  

nected to the spiritual, herstorical things their pricks fall off, very  
aspects of our lives that have been demoralizing. The idea is to put it on Your smile from the side makes me twitch,  
buried under patriarchy. Separatism is the money.” and the curve of your hips makes me angry  

a conscious choice to create a future  
based on life, not death.”  

37. I am not always sure of my  
politics but there is a limit to how much  
patriarchy I can handle. The issue is not  
political ideology. The issue is our lives.  
38. Men, in every society of which we  
are aware, have always dominated  
womyn. We do not know of any  
societies in which it was ever the other  
way around.  

39. Straight is to feminist as spherical  
is to cube. Love your oppressor?  

40. “I think I’ve worked in every pro-  
gressive movement in the book— labor  
organizing, nukes, anti-racist, gay  
liberation, women’s liberation, anti-war  
- and all that ever happened was that  
patriarchy, or capitalism, or the State,  
just absorbed and absorbed -  
sometimes it seemed to feed on our  
energies. Now I wake up in the morning  
thinking about nuclear holocaust and  
feeling totally helpless. I don’t have a  
clear sense any more of what to put my  
energies into. I think, I may not be alive  
in 30 years. How do I want to live in the  
meantime? Then I think, separatism,  
before all else, is an explicit attempt to  
resist absorption.”  

41. “It’s not all men, but it’s always  
men.”  

42. “I suppose I would call myself a  
separatist, but I still like my father and  
brother. There really are no other men  
in my life. I agree that separatism is the  
logical way to challenge the patriarchy,  
but I just can’t hate every single man. I  
guess I’m basically a separatist, with a  
few exceptions.”  

43. In a world that puts womyn last,  
lesbians put womyn first.  

44. "If all the men were to somehow  
disappear all of a sudden I might know  
what it would be like to breathe free on  

the streets, at night, or alone. I also  
know what it would be like not to  

live under the fear of nuclear  
holocaust.”  

45. “That shrink says I’m a man-  
hating lesbian and mentally ill because  
I was gang-raped at age 8. I’m sick of  
this psychiatry shit—I know my les-  
bianism is a healthy response to the  
real sickness—male domination over  
womyn.”  

46. We all loved our mothers first.  
47. A womon will not rape you/fuck  
you/get you pregnant.  

48. If they can put a man on the  
moon, why can’t they put all of them  
there?  

51. In the U.S. a womon is battered  
every 18 seconds.  

52. I was straight once too. I thought I  
liked it.  

53. “I am 85 years old and have  
always lived with women. My sister, the  
Girl Scouts, a short stay in a convent,  
my dearest friend. No, I’ve never made  
love with a woman (or with a man for  
that matter) and I don’t particularly  
dislike men. I guess you could call me a  
spinster.”  

54. There is no such thing as a father.  
This includes the holy one.  

55. “I just hate those fucking pricks.  
Why can’t they leave us alone and go  
screw each other?”  

56. “I’m not just separating from  
boys, I’m separating from whites, too.  
The ‘women’s movement’ has been a  
white women’s movement from what I  
can see, I need my own space where I  
am supported by women who really are  
my sisters.”  

57. We have been too long patching  
up the wounds resulting from this im-  
perialist war. But then how many of us  
ever saw it as war?  

58. I hate men.  

59. Heterosexual socializing teaches  
womyn to meet needs rather than have  
their needs met. In lesbian relation-  
ships, we begin to have our needs met,  
receive and give, establish some  
equilibrium.  

60. “It may be true that we will make  
the revolution as men and women  
together but I don’t think I can handle  
any more mixed political groups.”  

61. Loving womyn is loving ourselves.  
62. When I get sick enough and angry  
enough and tired enough to want to get  
out of this place it occurs to me that  
there is nowhere to go.  

Women have served all these centuries  
as looking-glasses possessing the magic  
and delicious power of reflecting the  
figure of man at twice its natural size.  
—Virginia Woolf (1882-1941)  

2  

enough to want very bad a hammer, to pound.  

For the beating up and scratching scars  
you ladies have given me the right.  

I grab me a fist of your womanshit  
and throw you up against the wall.  

I pull down your long hair,  

slam down your head to the ground.  
I just barely feel your wrists  

as they wriggle underneath my hands.  
Then I slash at your crowded skirt.  

In the dark it is not flesh.  

As I am on top now I am man.  

I hold tight; I crush you, fuck you.  
I am cutting you all in half.  

You are so screaming helpless  

I could break your legs, and push  
until I get you where  

you can’t get me back.  

There are so many like you,  
alone I bleed women.  

Alix Chasin  

GAIA’S GUIDE  

132 West 24th Street, New York,  

NY 10011, USA.  

GAIA’S GUIDE - 1982 is now available.  

This 8th edition of the only guide book for gay women includes over 3,500  
listings and covers all U.S.A, Canada & western Europe. (Over 800 North  
American cities.)— Plus other valid, up-to-date information is available.  

GAIA’S GUIDE -  

It costs $8.50 or $10.00 [mail order] from: NEW EARTH BOOKSTORE 2,  
West 39th Street, Kansas City, Missouri; 64111.  

(All other correspondence, bulk orders, etc. should be directed to: GAIA’S  
GUIDE, 132 West 24th Street, New York, New York; 10011)  

Pizzeria  

376 Elm St., New Haven, CT  
Tel. 777-3609  

Marlene Sansore —