17

continued from page 7

that without telling him what was really
on her mind, and she still hadn’t
gathered up the courage to do that.
What if she told him? What would he
think? What would he say?

No, it occurred to her suddenly that
wasn’t the problem. The problem was
she knew what he would say. He'd
say —he’d pull the van over to the side
of the road and look out the windshield
for a while and then he’d look at Teresa
for a while and then finally he’d look
down at the steering wheel and he
would say:

‘Well, Teresa... I guess—hm ... I
guess if it comes down to it, why, we
could just, we could just get married in
June, after we graduate and ... well,
we could do that.”

Then neither of them would say
anything, and then he would say:

“I mean it makes sense. I mean, Todd
and Laurie are doin’ it, and they don’t
even have to. No, what I mean is, we
don’t have to, of course, but it kinda
seems like the best thing to do, doesn’t
it? We love each other. I know I love
you. And we could make it. I’m a good
mechanic, Tom tells me so all the time,
and he said he’d make it worth my
while if I decided to keep workin’ with
him, and in a few years I figure I can
think about startin’ my own shop
maybe up in Alaska, and we'll buy a
house and I'll call you Tanook of the
North or something and we'll make
love in a bed not the back of my van
and we'll have a kitchen and nights
you'll wait up for me and our kids in
the TV light and won’t speak Por-
tuguese except in long-distance phone
calls: You'll be further from Rio than
ever, and the red lines leading back
there won’t make much sense anymore.
They won't look like an arrow pointing
to Moscow. They won't look like much
of anything, except maybe a broken
arm, and nights you'll wait up for our
kids and we won't make love in the
back of this van ever again.”

No. She decided she wouldn’t tell
him, not tonight. She was in love with
Eddie, he was pretty and sweet and on-
ly deserved about half of what she put
him through sometimes, but one of his
problems was he just didn’t have it in
him to fight. He couldn’t fight with her
and he couldn’t fight the inevitable.
And yes, it was inevitable that they
would get married. Abortion was out of
the question, and not just because the
Pope said it was a sin (after all, the
Church hadn’t kept her out of the back
of Eddie’s van) but because she hap-
pened to agree with him on that point.
She could put the baby up for adop-
tion, of course, but then she’d have to
walk around obviously pregnant for a
while, so that it wouldn’t be much use
trying to hide it from her parents, and
when they found out she knew, their
hearts would break and stay broken for
the rest of their days. Running away
was another option, but complicated,
and not much more appealing to her,
finally, than moving to Alaska.

No, their marriage was inevitable,
and she was going to fight it. Eddie
wouldn’t be able to help her do that.
Against the inevitable he might squirm
a little, but in the end he would em-
brace it. She was going to tell him as lit-
tle as possible. She looked at him and
smiled, and then she reached over and
stroked the back of his head.

“Hey, listen,” she said, “I’m sorry I’m
bein’ a bitch to you. I don’t know
what’s the matter. I guess, I dunno, I
must be gettin’ my period or
somethin’.”

Eddie seemed satisfied with the ex-
planation. Teresa, on the other hand,
had surprised herself with its irony and
certainly would have given it a little
‘sardonic laugh if she hadn't felt so rot-
ten and scared.

They drove out to the mall. They
picked a movie and sat through it. He
liked it, she didn’t think it was that
great. In the pizza place up the

escalator from the theater, they met
Todd and Laurie. Todd and Eddie went
to play some video games, while Laurie
and Teresa went to a record store and
looked for the best pictures of David
Lee Roth on the Van Halen album
covers. That should have done her
some good, but she still felt rotten.

When Eddie drove her home, he
stopped the van about a block before
her house and started kissing her hard.
She kissed back for a while, then she
told him she didn’t feel well, she had a
stomachache, and she probably wasn’t
going to enjoy herself much so why
didn’t they just call it a night? The part
about not enjoying herself at least was
true, and he could see that it was, so he
said, sure and dropped her off in front
of her house. And suddenly there she
was again, standing on her front lawn
looking in the picture window at her
mother, who was still waiting, still blue
in the TV light, but fast asleep in her
chair.

Teresa was back where she'd started.
She hadn’t told Eddie a thing and she
still felt rotten and scared and alone.
There was nothing to do then but go to
bed.

She had started walking towards the
house when a rustling sound to her left
stopped her. She turned and looked
and what she saw made her mouth fall
open. As the rustling turned into the
sound of a raging wind, the branches of
the elm started to thrash violently, but
it was the only tree moving at all for as
far as she could see, and she didn’t feel
even a breeze.

In the dark this was no longer a skim-
py tree. It looked thick with slick, mea-
ty bark and branches like the huge
anaconda snakes of the Amazon.

It took nearly a minute for Teresa to
recover from her surprise, but when she
finally did she remembered right away
the package that was waiting in her
room and sprinted for the back door of
the house. She let herself in quietly, tip-
toed up the stairs to her room, and
picked up the paper bag that was sit-
ting on her desk. She checked quickly:
the six-pack was there, the Benson and
Hedges, the rose, the candles, the
matchbook. Everything? Teresa looked
around. There were some dimes and
quarters scattered on top of her
bureau. She threw some of them into
the bag and then ran back down the
stairs and out into the front yard.

As she approached the elm she
could feel the air around her go from
cold and crisp to hot and dank, and
when she knelt down at the foot of the
tree she saw the bark sweating and felt
condensation dripping down on her
neck from the branches.

She assembled the offering: placed
the beer cans up against the foot of the
tree, between two roots, sprinkled
coins around, set up three candles
before the six-pack, stood the rose
upright between two of the cans. Then
she lit the candles, laid the matchbook
on top of the six-pack and the pack of
cigarettes on top of the matchbook.
She sat back on her heels and squinted
at the arrangement. It was disappoint-
ing: her memories were clear enough to
tell her that somehow this did not look
quite like any macumba she’d ever
seen, but not clear enough to tell her
how to do it just right. She shrugged her
shoulders and decided that it was prob-
ably all right anyway: even if the things
were not arranged properly, they might
still be a treat for someone used to the
usual fare of cheap cane liquor and
third-rate cigars, and the coins she
knew were worth dozens of times as
much as the Brazilian change that
usually went into these offerings.

Satisfied, uneasily, that the presents
would please whatever spirit came to
take them, Teresa concentrated on
formulating a request. She didn’t find it
easy. Her head was bursting with
thoughts, of Eddie, of her mother, of
unborn babies, of Rob and her father,
of slippery diaphragms and rice and
beans, but she couldn’t put them

together to form an articulate wish. She
closed her eyes and tried to come up
with some helpful image to wrap her
thoughts around. All she saw were red
lines, flashing and re-flashing in random
patterns on the back of her eyelids. The
lines kept getting brighter and Teresa
began to feel as if she were falling.

She opened her eyes abruptly and
realized she had begun to fall asleep.
Her eyes rested on the offering before
her. It was all wrong, one of the candles
had gone out and the rose was falling
over to one side. The air had grown
cold around her again and the elm was
no longer imposing. She hadn’t been
able to make a wish or an offering right,
and she was more scared than ever, but
more tired than scared. She got up and
went inside and up to her bed, where
she dropped and fell asleep with her
clothes on.

David Lee Roth smiling down from
on top of a coconut palm half his size,
hurling down green coconuts, plunk,
plunk, on the roof of Teresa’s igloo.
Teresa emerging from the igloo for a
family portrait, infants hanging all over
her, coconuts whizzing by. Infants cry-
ing, “Miguel!” David Lee Roth as Eddie,
or Eddie as David Lee Roth, walking
towards her smiling, bare-chested,
Teresa shooting a red arrow piercing his
heart on its way to Moscow or Alaska
or somewhere cold.

“MIGUEL!”

Teresa woke up nervous, not sure
where she was. Then she realized she
was in her room and that only made her
more nervous, because then the events
of the night before came back to her,
the fight with Rob, the ride with Eddie,
the candles. She didn’t see much hope
in any of it. She knew that today she
had no choice, she was going to have to
tell Eddie. Dread and resignation swept
over her as she got up to change her
clothes. She would put on street
clothes; since it was Saturday, go

downstairs, call Eddie, and then the

long march to the blue-lit wait for her
children to come home would begin.
That was how it was.

She was taking her pants off
distractedly, watching without paying
much attention as the blue denim of
her jeans and the white lace of her
panties slid down across her brown
skin. Suddenly everything stopped.
Something in the crotch of Teresa’s

panties had caught her eye—a tiny,

dark blot. Teresa’s heart began to
pound, bursting with guarded hope.
She couldn’t quite tell whether the
mark was fresh or just an old stain. Not
waiting to take off her half-removed
pants, she tripped and stumbled over to
her dresser as fast as she could and
grabbed a Kleenex. With the tissue she
wiped between her legs, and when she
held it out to look at, she realized that
she had wished for something beneath
the elm tree the night before and that
she was seeing it now: a bright red
streak flashing across a white surface.

“MIGUEEEEEHHHL!!!”

It was Teresa’s mother, calling for
her husband from the front yard. Teresa
pulled up her pants and wandered
serenely over to her window to look
down at her mother, who was standing
by the elm next to Teresa’s offering.
Teresa felt Saturday morning sunlight
on her skin and she didn’t have to tell
anybody anything. She saw her father
staggering out across the lawn in his
pajamas and an overcoat. He stopped
next to his wife and scratched his head
as Rob ran out to join them. Teresa
could just make out the harsh Euro-
pean accents of her father’s Portuguese
mixing with the Brazilian lilt of her
mother’s, then her mother’s voice
raised, shrill and afraid:

“MACUMBA, Miguel! macumba.”

It was macumba.

Teresa’s father bent down over the
offering and studied the things for a bit,

then he opened the pack of cigarettes,

lit one, and stood up laughing softly.
Teresa’s mother glared at him, angry

and frightened, but Teresa was glad to
see him joking like this. It meant that at
least for the time being he was happy
and not thinking about moving back to
Rio.

Teresa didn’t want to think about
maps and moves right now. She turned
around and looked at her bed. It was
covered with sunlight. She was sorry
now that she’d left the van early last
night. She wanted Eddie now, wanted
to lie naked with him on her bed, in a
spot of light with no red lines jutting
out of it to connect them to any future
or any past or any place. She looked
back out the window. Her family
looked tiny and the elm looked skimpy.
She felt young. She feared nothing. It
was macumba.

by Julian Dibbell

continued from page 12

the New Haven Shelter has only twenty
beds, its facilities are reserved for those
victims with fewest resources of their
own in terms of money, family and
friends. The Shelter also runs a 24-hour
hotline and referral service which helps
women in emergency situations to find
alternative accommodations. In addition,
battered women’s shelters offer a varie-
ty of services aimed at facilitating the
battery victim’s transition to indepen-
dence. Counseling support groups meet
regularly both within the New Haven
Shelter and in the community Women’s
Center. Shelter volunteers help
residents apply for welfare, deal with
legal matters, find permanent housing
and look for jobs. The Shelter’s Child
Advocates serve the crucial function of
working with the children, most of
whom have witnessed their mother’s
beatings or have been beaten them-
selves. Although this article focuses on
the experience of the woman, the
traumatic effects of family violence on
children cannot be overlooked. Their
needs require careful attention,
especially in light of considerable
evidence that children who have suf-
fered or witnessed battery are much
more likely to batter as adults.

Any woman admitted to the shelter
is allowed to stay for a maximum of sixty
days, by which time it is hoped that
she will have found a place to live and
a source of income. Yet even with the
help of a shelter, these objectives are
not easily met. Economic discrimina-
tion against single mothers in the form
of low wages and high child-care costs
often makes welfare their only reason-
able option, and, contrary to the
Reagan myth, welfare recipients do not
live in the lap of fraudulent luxury.
“You're living from month to month,
literally from check to check,” said
Yazmijian. “I don’t think that that’s a
reality that people are sensitive enough
to.” Discrimination aggravates the dif-
ficulties of finding affordable housing
as well. Yazmijian spoke of her frustra-
tion with one housing project which
tacitly refused to take battered women
as tenants, although its apartments
were priced within reason. “I didn’t
even realize at first that they were
discriminating,” she said, “but then it
just became so apparent to me... they
would always find some reason that it
‘wouldn’t work out,’ and finally it hit
me—they’re just not interested [in
women from the Shelter.]’

Although battered women’s shelters
first appeared in this country only nine
years ago, the surprising demand for
their services has led to the establish-
ment of over 400 shelters nationwide,
including thirteen in Connecticut. Like
all non-profit organizations, shelters
stand to lose considerable funding with
this year’s round of federal budget cuts.

continued on following page