_faised me, ¢

Fiction Contest Winner:

I am submitting this story to a feminist
magazine because I feel one of the
most insidious and destructive ways in
which sexual politics affects our lives
is in relationships between men.

Sometimes I write about handsome
young princes trapped in towers and
other handsome young princes that
come to save them. I guess those
stories are not very real. I make
believe, or lie. This story doesn’t have
too many lies, only little fibs I had to
say to make things seem even. This
story is about me, and it's about
Rafael. My teacher for the High
School Equivalency Test says write,
write, write, class we must learn to
write. She says if you can do it good,
you can make anything beautiful,
even something that is ugly. I don’t
believe her, but the thought warms
me up, know what I mean? And so
I write. Usually at night, if my arms
ain’t too tired from work. I guess it’s
better than what I used to do at night
—I mean, in the men’s rooms. Anyway,
it fills up the same kind of space in-
side me.

Before writing, but after the men’s
rooms, there was Rafael. He was
beautiful. Not just in the humpy way
that a lot of Puerto Ricans are
beautiful, but in a way maybe only I
could see. The first time I saw him
was in the men’s room of the Belmont
and Clark subway station. I'm just off
work and cruisin’. I used to do that all
the time 'cause I never felt like going
straight home. I don’t have no people,
or anyone to live with. My sane

was sixteen. I...
feeling all sorry for me. I like it this
way; I feel kind of free. A lot of young
dudes down at El Ranchero, they say
they can’t come out, least not while
their parents are alive. Come to think
of it, I guess I would have tried to
hide it from Granny too. Sometimes
people loving you kind of puts a
fence around you and you don’t stray.
Well, I didn’t have no fence and I
could cruise all night if I so pleased.
And a lot of times I did. Which brings
me back to the subway station.

I liked cruising Belmont and Clark
'cause that’s the subway a lot of
businessmen take home from work.
The Brooks Brothers, that’s what I call
them. They really get me off. I picture
them, hopping their three-piece suits
up the stairs in the suburbs, with a
briefcase in their hands. Petting the
dog on the way in. I don’t know; they
really get me off, they are so...so
United States of America. More than
a couple of them stop off in the men’s
room to see what's up. When we do it,
I close my eyes, so I don’t have to see
the pukey little stall. I imagine. Like
I'm doing it with the guy on Father
Knows Best. The Brooks Brother
closes his eyes like he’s dreaming too.
What about, I don’t know. Something

racial, I bet: I’m a big Black stud rap-
ing their insides out. But that’s okay, it’s
cool—for the time that we’re doing it
everything’s cool and me and the
Brooks Brother are warm and safe
and kind of lost. But it’s a happy kind
of lost. I felt lost like that all the time
with Rafael. But it’s taking me forever
to tell you how we met. I had just
walked into the men’s room. All the
stalls were taken but nobody was
waiting to get in one. I stooped down
on the floor to look at the shoes in the
stalls. You can tell a lot looking at
shoes. If I am in the mood for Puerto
Ricans I look for crazy colored gym

shoes, especially with bright shoe
strings. But if I’m cruising for a
Brooks Brother, I try to find

something dark and shiny, maybe pa-
tent leather. Anything else, I’m
careful about. Cowboy boots usually
mean suede trade which I don’t go
for too much. And two tones, or boat
shoes or anything else too fancy
means what I call women. I hate
women; they gross me out. They
make people hate faggots. Me and
my friends down at El Ranchero, if we
are feeling rowdy, we chase ‘em, and
smear lipstick all over their face.
Jesus, if you’re gonna walk like that,
and talk all breathy, why don’t you
just fucking go ahead and have an
operation and be a real woman?
That’s the queers that are sick. Me
and my friends are men. Anyway, I’m
on the floor and I hear a toilet flush
and before I can stand all the way up,
this beautiful Puerto Rican guy walks
out of the stall. He was wearing a
corduroy suit. Listen, ‘beautiful’ is not a
word I throw around, but I don’t know
so many big words and when I think of
Rafael, it’s the only one that does him
up proper. I don’t want to tell you

what he looked like 'cause it wasn’t so

much what he looked like but how he
made me feel. He made me feel like
this: in High, my white boy creative arts
teacher said he would die for the Mona
Lisa. Said he would up and die to save
it from a fire or something.

Rafael made me feel like I could die
for him. Just looking made me feel
that way. He was like the first time
you dig a new song on the box. The
kind of song that tells your story too.

Something connected to your insides
explodes. That is how I felt, on the
floor, Tuesday, October, during the
rush hour, in the men’s room at Bel-
mont and Clark. Like God was doing
me a favor, or something. The P.R.’s
eyes lit up when he first looked. I was
practically living in the weight room
back then and working a real tough
guy number. I was big, black, brawny,
bad as a motherfucker. But then
the dude saw me getting up from the
floor, and he looked at me like I was a
piece of shit, and then, even worse,
like he didn’t see me at all. He walked
over to the basin and washed his
hands. Only Rafael, forever Mr. Neat
and Clean, would have washed his
hands at that sink; it was so nasty
looking I was surprised the water
didn’t sting. Then the man left the
room—I didn’t know whether I
should chase after him, or what. All
I knew is I had seen something I was
supposed to have. When I dropped
out of high school, the only subject I
dug was American History. Right
before I left, we were learning about
this thing called manifest destiny,
about how the Americans felt God
wanted them to have the whole damn
continent, all the way to California. I
swear on my grandmother's grave,
that’s how I felt about Rafael. God
wanted him for me. I used to jack off
a lot thinking about guys like him.
Cross between a humpy Puerto Rican
and a Brooks Brother. He would come
and rescue me, like in one of my
handsome prince stories. Rescue me
from what I don’t know—maybe from
packing books into boxes all day
long, maybe from being a fag, even
though I don’t know if I would want
to be rescued from that. Anyway, I
always had this idea of this dream
man, and just looking at Rafael, he

came mighty close. Now that it’s
over, it sounds like something that
would happen in a corny, straight
movie, maybe the late, late show. But
I want you to understand how I felt,
and sometimes you really feel like a
movie. That good.

I left the men’s room, and went out
into the station. I didn’t really expect to
see him; Belmont and Clark is really
busy during rush hour. I wasn’t too
worried. You gotta understand, I was
really believing that manifest destiny
stuff. I would just go back to the sta-
tion the next day at the same time
and he’d be there.

I did and he was. He didn’t look too
surprised to see me, neither. I just
stared at him, did not take my eyes
off him from the time he entered the
stall till the time he came back out,
washed his hands and left. This hap-
pened every day for about a week. I
never said nothing. If it’s one thing
you can’t teach me nothing about, it’s
how to cruise a guy. You do it slow,
easy, like catching a butterfly. After
the second day, I was not worried that
he wouldn’t want me. If he didn’t, he
would not have kept coming back.
The Tuesday after the Tuesday I first
saw him, he looked at the mirror
above the sink where he washed his
hands. He saw me watching him. He
asked, still washing his hands, “What
you want?” He had a real bad accent;
he didn’t speak English so good, I
could tell right off. That was okay, ac-
cording to high school equivalency
test teach my do not speak English
so good either.

“You know what I want,” I said,
real cool. Some of the rules for
cruisin’ are kind of stupid. The more
you want it, the less you should act
like you want it. But dig it, you follow
the rules if you want the prize.

“You come with me,” he said. It
was kind of a question.

I was looking at his eyes in the mir-
ror. Some people’s eyes you can
drown in. “Yes,” I answered the ques-
tion.

We left the men’s room and walked
to a turnstile in the subway station.
He handed me a token. “Where are
we going?” I asked, like it made a dif-
ference. Frigging white boys ask that
sometime, then don’t go with you
when they hear where you live.

“I have a place. Not far.” I guess he
thought that was all I needed to
know. In English, Rafael never said
anymore than what he needed to say.
Sometimes I would be in his apart-
ment late at night and the phone
would ring. His sister in Puerto Rico.
Then, he would go on and on in long
Spanish sentences. To me, Spanish is
like a poem, everything rhyming and
music. I would feel him, and try to
guess what he was saying, but those
times, he acted like I wasn’t even in
the room.

We went North on the subway,
then walked a few blocks. He lived in
a mixed neighborhood; it wasn’t too
bad. I guess they paid him alright
wherever he wore those corduroy
suits. Finally, we turned into a
building that had a bank on the
ground floor. Lake View Savings and
Loan.

“This is where I live.” Up, up, up to
the fifth floor, into one of the brown
doors in a long hallway of brown
doors, then...

Well, I don’t want to write what we
did. Putting it in words makes it sound
dirty, or something and it wasn’t. It
was very clean.

It was October, and Rafael and I
started going together. Maybe it was
the best October I ever seen. I
thought Rafael was just like what I
always knew he was just like, even
before I met him. My humpy Brooks
Brother. My rescuer. He said I remind-
ed him of the boys he played soccer
with when he was a little niño. He never
knew a guy who looked like me could
be a fag. I don’t look like one at all
and especially around him I was
working the macho trip to the max
'cause I knew that was what he liked. I
would look at the football games on
the tube after we did it. That was
bullshit. I don’t go for sports that
much. But he got so turned on wat-
ching me. Me, sitting on the edge of
the bed in my shorts trying to act like
I was really into the game. I know we
should’ve been straight with each other
from the start. But everything was so
mellow. So sweet.

Friday nights, sometimes Saturday
nights too, I would take him down to
El Ranchero. My friends said to me
they liked him, but they would keep
their distance. I think he was too
much Brooks Brothers for them,
always with a suit coat on, and a tie.
For a while he was real stiff, couldn't
get used to guys dancin’ and making
out all around us. Then he cooled out,
and come to find out, he could dance
as good as any of us. And dancing is
one thing where me and my friends

get down. When Mario played a
salsa... man oh man, we wore out the
floor. The suede trade and the women
would sit down because they knew
that was a dance for us alone. The hot
and sweaty little room. The raunchy
music. Sirens and flashing lights. The
sounds we made to the beat: “Gittee
gee, gittee gee, gitteegeegitteegeegit-
teegee” and “boy oh boy to the bang
bang boogie to the rhythm of the
boogie to be.” And I think God made
drums for Black and P.R. faggots.
That, and Rafael was maybe all I
needed to live. Don’t you know I’ve
done poppers and angel dust and
once, when I went with a rich guy, co-
caine, but ain’t nothing comes close
to that October, Rafael high. I could
have stopped time, I swear that’s how
good he made me feel. I could have
stopped time and I should have too—
October and November and
December at El Ranchero, just stom-
pin’ to the beat of the band.

Okay, okay, okay. Well, I told you I
would be lying sometimes to make
things seem even. Maybe it was not
all that magic. 'Cause even then there
were some clues. How he would take
off his jacket and tie soon as he came
home from work, even though the
way I had it pictured, he should
always be wearing them. How I would
always have to be the one to say
something if some straights were
bothering us if we were maybe walk-
ing too close together on the street.
And some things I don’t want to say,
some in bed things that I liked, but he
didn’t. 'Cause he wanted me to be like
the dude all the time and him like the
woman. He hadn’t made the scene
long enough to know that’s not how it
works. I don’t feel whole if I’m trap-
ped into being the dude all the time.