October 14, 1982

AURORA

WCWMF Invades Scout Camp

by Flora and Fauna  
WILLITS, CA (AUR) —

At twelve noon, Thursday, the twenty-third of September 1982, the Third Annual West Coast Women’s Music Festival commenced. Women from as far away as Minnesota and Washington were arriving at the Wente Scout Camp in Willits, a small town in Mendocino County, California, to celebrate women’s music, crafts, spirit — women’s culture. As we entered camp, we were greeted by safety staff who directed us to the equipment drop-off point. From the drop-off point, we carried our gear to General Camping, one of many designated camping areas which encircled the lake. In order to provide for the individual needs of festival participants, camping areas included: Differently Abled, Clean and Sober, Chemically Free, Women of Color, Older Women, and Women and Children.

After pitching our tent, we wandered off towards Central — the main nerve center for registration and information. Thursday afternoon was easily consumed by both a formal orientation and simply adjusting to the scene — for it is truly a rare experience to interact exclusively with women in such a scenic, relaxing environment. Besides the difficult task of picking one’s activities from a crowded list, the only real order of business was to sign up for one three-hour work shift. Each woman was asked to volunteer three hours of work in one of several areas such as safety, food, information, or clean up. This participation is crucial and in keeping with the spirit of the Women’s Music Festival which encourages and relies on a strong community effort to run the event. Many women had already been on the land for several weeks, working collectively, readying the 2200-acre Wente Scout Camp and the 80-acre lake to accommodate the specific needs and interests of approximately 2500 women. Basic services such as Port-a-Janes, fire pits, and generators had to be installed. Technical crews worked long hours building the stages and light and sound systems. Collectives organized the services needed during the festival such as parking, food, safety, resources for differently abled women, and childcare as well as coordinating workshops and daily schedules. All of these women contributed much dedicated time and energy to the production of a totally private, all-woman community. Being a part of such a unified working and playing women’s community is easily half the reason for attending the festival. Many services were offered at the festival to address the needs of the women present. Some of these services (Childcare and Resources for the Differently Abled) were improved from last year, and others (Food Service and Rumour Control) were new this year, thanks to the input and guidance of women from both the Michigan and East Coast Music Festivals. These services were organized by collectives prior to the actual festival and were run by both staff and participants. Psychological and emotional support were provided twenty-four hours a day at the Al-Anon and the Emotional Solidarity tents and at the medical tent, the Womb. Shuttle service for differently abled women and older women was set up so that all events were accessible. In addition, all performances possible were signed for the hearing impaired. Rumour Control, one of the most useful ideas borrowed from the Michigan Festival, furnished a place to air and dispel rumours as they arose. Each evening, at the main stage, the day’s rumours such as “three deer broke into the kitchen and ate all the bread” were presented and the facts — “they only ate three loaves” — were revealed. This service, as well as the other mentioned, helped to create an informed, supportive community atmosphere at the festival.

Though the music is the main attraction, the production of an event such as the Women’s Music Festival — the process — is as much an element of women’s culture to be supported and celebrated as is the music. This festival is not a four-day, day-on-the-green extravaganza sponsored by some beer company. It is the product of the ever-expanding community of women connected by a desire to establish a women’s culture in a male-defined world. Realizing this event has its share of obstacles. Probably the most significant obstacle is that the Women’s Music Festival is funded almost entirely by one woman. Last year, questions were raised about the relationship between financial responsibility and decision making for the festival. Robin Tyler, a well-known lesbian comedienne, financially supports the production of the West Coast Women’s Music Festival. Last year she also had a significant role in the festival’s management. There was limited input into the decision-making process and Tyler’s degree of responsibility and authority were unclear. In particular, issues of race, class, and representation arose. A group of women of color pointed out that they did not feel adequately represented in the musical scheduling or in the festival’s production. In addition, working women expressed concerns about ticket prices and the need for two-day weekend passes to make the event more accessible to working women. Discussions during and after the festival resulted in improvements and clarification of the festival's production. This year Robin Tyler gave financial support but was not an active member of the festival’s organizational collectives. She made one brief appearance at this year’s festival, confining her comments to the need for unity within the women’s movement. Unfortunately, last year’s conflicts and their handling upset many women who decided not to return this year in protest. Low attendance was obvious and the financial loss for Robin Tyler is great. It would be helpful if West Coast women’s groups could collectively subsidize the festival but until this.

The effort to bring West Coast women the time and space to exchange and enjoy the culture we’re building is to be applauded and struggled with for bringing West Coast women the time and space to exchange and enjoy the culture we’re building. Another improvement this year was the availability of weekend passes for women unable to take off the entire four days. Hopefully, festival organizers and participants will continue to learn from each year's problems and successes and will remain committed to making this event accessible and responsive to all women.

Although the West Coast Women’s Music Festival is undoubtedly a political event, it is the music and activities which bring these women together. As expected, the music was constant and diverse. At any given time, groups might be performing at the Day Stage or just jamming together in any open space. You could hear the impromptu Mother Pluckers playing bluegrass on fiddles, washboard, guitars, mouth harp, mandolins, and bass; or the Screaming Barbies performing old 1950-60's rock and roll tunes with Alberta Jackson lending a hand or two on guitar. In addition to musical performances, there were comedic and dramatic presentations such as comedienne Kate Kasten and the Mother Tongue and Fat Lips Readers Theatres. One's daily schedule was the most difficult to arrange, with a choice between five or more workshops every hour and a half and the continuous activity at the Day Stage. Workshops ranged from “Agriculture: An Issue for the Women’s Movement,” “Female Sexuality,” “Lesbian Only Space,” and “Rural Lesbian Mothers,” to “Legal Self-Defense,” “Wilderness Adventure Fantasy/Planning” and “How to Use the Pendulum as a Psychic and Healing Tool.” Once the sun came out, our decision was further complicated; maybe we should just go canoeing or relax and eat watermelon while perusing the colorful craftworks.

Although the daily schedule was crowded, at night attention was focused on the performances at the Main Stage. Each evening three or four groups or individual musicians performed — many well-known nationally within the women’s community, others making their West Coast debut at

(continued on page 11)