New Haven Women

Working For Change:  
Beyond The Bandaid

By Diane Westerback

The existence of sexism has been documented,  
but the response often is “that’s just the way things  
are, I can’t change the whole world.” One person  
may not be able to “change the whole world”—  
however, women working together, particularly in  
New Haven, have been doing a lot to lay the  
groundwork for broader changes and have directly  
influenced their environment.

The task often seems overwhelming because the  
changes necessary to eliminate sexism must affect  
the entire structure of society. We are taught that  
“You can’t fight City Hall,” but the struggles to  
create an alternative situation in “City Hall” have  
begun. The number of women actively working for  
change in New Haven has grown from a handful ten  
years ago to over two thousand today.

The New Haven Women’s Liberation Center is  
the longest continuously operating independent  
women’s center in the country. Presently over  
twenty-five independent local grassroots feminist  
organizations are established in New Haven. In  
addition, there are branches of several national  
organizations as well as feminist businesses and an  
expanding women’s culture.

Change does not come easily or quickly. The  
theoretical ideas of the women’s movement face  
many practical obstacles in a world where power is  
mostly with men. Nonetheless, great development  
and petit aie of the ideas has taken place.

Voices challenging the status quo are dis-  
couraged, either overtly or more often since this is  
ostensibly a “free” country, by the social, cultural  
and economic structure of society. Women have  
always been overworked, leaving little time to  
evaluate or challenge their situation. The media has  
consistently misinterpreted feminists as “bra-burn-  
ing women’s libbers” or simply omitted informa-  
tion. Ideas are not only misrepresented, but images  
are created that must be countered and conveyed  
via another process. Economic support has always  
been difficult because women themselves are  
predominantly poor and people who have money  
often retain faith in the system that has rewarded  
them. In addition, almost every mechanism in the  
process of the operation of an alternative movement  
has to be evaluated and often reinvented, or  
adapted from the mainstream. This is essential if in  
challenging the existing system women are not to  
rebuild society in the same image.

The Beginnings

In New Haven, women first began meeting to  
discuss their concerns in 1968. Consciousness-  
raising groups began to meet, women concerned  
about abortion rights initiated Women vs. Conn., a  
suit in federal court challenging Connecticut’s  
anti-abortion laws. Play groups and cooperative  
childcare centers were started, Yale women formed  
the Sisterhood (now: the Yale Undergraduate  
Women’s Caucus), and other graduate and profes-  
sional women’s groups. Demonstrations were held  
supporting jailed Panther women, Mory’s was  
picketed and other demonstrations and conferences  
were held. The New Haven Women’s Liberation  
Rock and Roll Band was formed and a women’s  
radio show was started. Activity was geared, as it is  
now, towards building a feminist awareness,  
through education, outreach, and meeting the  
specific needs of women.

In September 1970, activities continued and  
meetings began to discuss the relationships between  
an organization of different groups. At this time two  
rent-free rooms in the basement of Durfee Hall  
were obtained from Yale. This was the start of the  
New Haven Women’s Center. Initially the Center  
subsisted solely of donated labor, time, materials  
and contributions which are still key components of  
many groups today. The Center provided a  
centralized place for the distribution of information,  
a place for project groups to meet and a visible  
location for women to make contact with the  
movement.

Activities continued and expanded in the new  
Center. Groups were formed to discuss issues of  
Lesbians, divorced women, older women, welfare  
women and others. Activities began around issues  
such as rape, the Vietnam War, and women in the  
Arts and the professions. Sister, a feminist  
newsletter (1971-78) was published and a women’s  
living collective started. In addition there were  
many conferences and ongoing discussions about  
overall strategies and organization.

In October 1972, Yale moved the Center to 215  
Park Street. During this time, Welfare Moms  
continued to hold demonstrations. The Conn.  
Feminist Federal Credit Union was formed (1974-6).  
In 1974 two part-time staffwomen were hired,  
supported by a monthly pledge system, sales of  
literature (including pro-se Divorce Kits), fund-  
raising events, donations and membership fees from  
the Credit Union.

A feminist-socialist group began forming in 1973  
and was active between 1974-5. A Grand Jury  
Defense committee evolved from this group. This  
became an extremely radicalizing experience as two  
women, still active in the New Haven women’s  
community, chose prison rather than testifying  
about the whereabouts of two weatherpeople, Susan  
Saks and Cathy Powers. Since this time the New  
Haven women’s community has consistently dem-  
onstrated its solidarity during recurrent FBI harass-  
ment and infiltration in relation to this case and  
other issues.

During the summer of 1976 Yale gave the Center  
three weeks notice to vacate the premises. The  
Center was not offered any new space because the  
administration felt the Center was not serving the  
Yale community exclusively enough. This is a  
presently the Women’s Space, shared by several  
women’s groups, is being threatened.

Despite anger at Yale’s actions against the Center  
it was felt that the goal of the Center is to serve all  
women, meaning that it should be integrated with  
the broader New Haven community. VISTA funding  
had recently been obtained to pay the salaries of the  
staffwomen which meant that current income could  
now be used to pay rent. The Center moved to its  
present location at 148 Orange Street.

Most of the groups mentioned previously have  
continued to expand and develop alongside new  
groups that are constantly being started. Many  
groups have become self-supporting and now  
operate their own offices and staff. These groups  
include the Battered Woman’s Shelter, Woman’s  
Health Services, MULANEH (Latin Women), Conn.  
Women’s Education and Legal Fund, Woman’s  
Employment Resource Center, Office Workers of  
New Haven, the Women’s Self-Defence Alliance,  
Woman’s Martial Arts Center, Rape Crisis, Femi-  
nist Union, Inner City Coop Farm and the Woman's  
Political Caucus.

Currently, work is being done to obtain a  
woman’s building that would house all these  
organizations and be owned and operated by the  
women’s community. Meeting spaces, childcare,  
etc. could then be shared by groups, new groups  
could be supported in their infancy, increased  
communication and efficiency would allow larger  
projects to be accomplished, and centralization  
would make the feminist community more visible  
and accessible to women.

Approaching Change

Each feminist organization is constantly undergoing  
the diversity of opinions and approaches that comes  
as new solutions are worked out. Strategies are  
based on the ideas that the more input that is  
gathered for each project the more likely its success,  
and the more levels on which a problem is attacked,  
continued on page 24.