Problem Facing

All Women: Harassment

By Linda Hoaglund

‘We'll be all alone in the office Fri-
day morning, won't we?’ he leers, ‘we
can have a repeat performance of ‘Be-
hind the Locked Door,’ huh?’ He walks
out of the room, laughing in self-satis-
faction.

On Monday, I am near delirious with
a feverish head cold. ‘I bet you caught
your cold from sleeping naked. Let’s see
whether you have a fever.’ He places
his left hand on my forehead, his right
hand on my shoulder, the quintessential
paternal pose. His hands linger long
enough to make me nauseous.

The scenario is sickeningly familiar. I
have read about similar incidents, seen
them portrayed on screen and discussed
them with other women. But this time
I was the woman. Yet I was safe in the
knowledge that his harassment would
not overstep certain bounds, though he
did make me uncomfortable and suc-
ceed in making me feel violated. At no
point, however, did I fear that he would
seriously suggest we sleep together, or
force me to, as he comes from an Asian
country where sexism is no less severe
than in the United States, but where
sexuality is so deeply repressed that
rape is both uncommon and universally
condemned. And I am a white woman in
a racist country. Besides which, my po-
sition was temporary; I had been hired
to fill in for two weeks.

Most victims of sexual harassment
are not so fortunate. Many women have
lost their jobs, or promotions they more
than deserve, as well as their sanity be-
cause of the relentless sexual attention.

Researchers agree that it is a widespread
problem. Any woman who works outside
her home stands a good chance of being
harassed, in one form or another, dur-
ing the course of her working life.

Redbook concluded their report on ques-
tionnaire responses they received with
the following statement: ‘the problem
is not epidemic; it is pandemic--an
everyday occurrence...’

Yet, the number of women who have
sought legal redress are few. In the ma-
jority of these cases, the women have
been defeated at a lower court level and
have appealed to higher courts with
more favorable results. The social and
legal factors responsible for this situa-
tion have been extensively researched
and carefully analyzed in Catharine
MacKinnon’s recent book The Sexual
Harassment of Working Women. It is a
powerful indictment of the legal sys-
tem’s complete inability to recognize,
let alone attempt to redress, the
damage wrought by sexual harassment
on its victims.

Yet long before a woman faces the ar-
ray of social and legal power structures
barring her from an adequate hearing
and possible redress, she must chal-
lenge the obstacle that is often the fier-
cest of all--herself.

The experience of sexual harassment
is degrading and painful in many ways.
It makes you feel assaulted and ex-
posed, naked and vulnerable. It forces
you to smile and be accommodating
when you want to vomit in his face or
knock him unconscious, and it serves
constantly to keep you on the defensive
--‘how will I avoid or evade the next in-
cident?’ But ultimately the pain that
endures is of a different nature. It is the
pain and rage we experience when we
recognize our own dismal position as
women in this society.

For sexual harassment exposes the
reality that men most fundamentally
conceive of women in terms of our
female sexuality. Our own self-evalua-
tion of our competence, our intelligence, 
our efficiency, all collapse and are ren-
dered irrelevant in the face of their
basic conception of women--we embody
sexuality, we are sex. We may be effi-
cient secretaries, skilled craftspeople, or
dedicated researchers, but before we
are any of these things we are female.
Everywhere women resist recognizing
our condition. Instead, we accept com-
plex webs of myths which delude us as
they comfort men. Rape happens all the
time, but it will never happen to me.
We excuse men who make obscene
jokes or suggestions by believing they
would stop if they knew how it makes
us feel. We convince ourselves that only
the reality of our condition. What woman
gains pleasure from the realization that
her body is more important than her
mind (or her feeling), that her physical
and financial well-being are contingent
on the whim she is in one way or
another dependent on? In Andrea
Dworkin’s words, ‘Many women, I
think, resist feminism because it is an
agony to be fully conscious of the brutal
misogyny which permeates culture, soci-
ety, and all personal relationships.’
(Andrea Dworkin, Our Blood, p. 78)

I speak particularly here to Yale
women, assuming you are the predomi-
nant audience of this publication. Des-
pite our differences in racial, class and
familial backgrounds and history, as
Yale women we hold one experience in
common: all of us have been told--and
to varying degrees we all believe--that
we are ‘exceptional’ and ‘unique’
women. That our entrance to and exper-
iences within this university exempt us
from the common fate of womanhood.
And we all would like to believe, I
think, that a Yale degree will immunize

A BIT OF SUNSHINE EVERY DAY!

Cones, shakes

‘til 11:30 every night

sane at College

New Haven

us from sexual harassment, domestic
brutality, rape, and all the other reali-
ties of female experience which keep
most women bound and shackled in
their ‘place.’

It is on this point that we have a per-
tinent and profound lesson to learn from
the black women who have legally con-
tested men’s right to harass women.
MacKinnon has documented that ‘black
women have brought a disproportionate
number of the sexual harassment law-
suits to date...’ (p. 53). Though there
are various factors which account for
this, perhaps the most fundamental is
racism and the historical struggle of
Black people against it. Black women’s
sexual exploitation ‘on the job’ has a
history that dates back to slavery when
Black women’s bodies legally belonged
to the white men who bought them.
Thus Black women and their families
and communities have a painful aware-
ness of sexual exploitation by white men
in any guise. Further, few black women
have been allowed the privilege of the
protective blinders afforded white wo-
men. Most women of color are from
birth made painfully aware of this coun-
try’s disdain for them. As they have ne-
ver been allowed even the illusion of the
equality that more socially privileged
women have been raised on, they tend
to have less at stake in refusing to see
the reality of their condition. In fact, the
question they must face is not whether
to see their condition for what it is, but
rather of how to survive it.

When I was being harassed, the one
person who made my experience toler-
able was the other woman who worked
not only able to support my resistance,
but she also validated my own feelings
of humiliation by revealing that she too
had been harassed by the same man.
Somehow this made the situation less
painful. I felt myself to be less a ‘per-
sonal’ victim of his individualized
sexual attentions, and more just a
woman--any woman--on whom he felt he
could vent his sexual desires. Somehow
this made the experience feel more like
the experience of street harassment,
and thus my response could take on the
full rage and indignation of a woman re-
sisting being put in her place.

It is this support and strength that we
can ultimately offer each other. In at-
tempting to deny our own femaleness to
ourselves and to each other we only in-
crease our isolation and powerlessness
as females in a male-dominated society.
But embracing our identity as women in
this society means shedding our more
attractive and powerful identities as
white, or highly educated or upper-class
women. For women who have experi-
enced an Ivy League education and the
privileges it affords, the question is
whether we are truly committed to
severing our bonds with the few forms
of power to which we have access in our
lives.

Footnotes
[1] Catharine MacKinnon’s The Sexu-
al Harassment of Working Women

ANGRY ABOUT
sexual harassment?
violence against women?
attacks on legal abortion?
racism?
nuclear power?

SO ARE WE!

JOIN US. We are the Feminist Union of New Haven—a
group of 200 women who share a belief that fun-
damental changes are required to create a society in
which women have true freedom and equality. We are a
grassroots organization, founded in 1977, and dedicated
to action and education on these issues.

MEMBERSHIP

Clip and mail to:
Feminist Union

c/o New Haven Women’s Liberation Center
148 Orange Street, New Haven, Connecticut 06510

Name
Address

City.

Phone.

I would like more information about the Feminist Union
(or call Joan Cavanagh, 436-0647)

Membership fee enclosed
Dues

income under $5000/year: $10
$5000-$10,000/year: $15

$10,000-$15,000/year: $20
Over $15,000/year: $30

Dues include a subscription to the Women’s Center newsletter.