Methodology is a general word; it’s  
used in many different ways and  
semantically it isn’t very clear. In the  
course you mentioned, I look at  
methodology from two points of view. I  
include approach or perspective, as  
well as the formal method used—what  
kinds of evidence and what kind of  
analysis. In that course we look at dif-  
ferent models: history written with  
quantitative methods, psychohistory,  
oral history, Marxist history, history  
written from cultural documents,  
history written principally from  
prescriptive sources. We try to assess  
whether any of these formal methods is  
particularly good for recording a  

human history that includes women,  
and whether it’s necessary to include or  
exclude any of them in recording  
women’s historical experience. We also  
look at the feminist methodology or  
lack of it. We ask, for instance, “Are  
women the subject? What assumptions  
does the author make about how  
women act as subjects?” —two-tiered  
sort of questions. The overall endeavor  
of the course is to devise a model for  
writing human history, not male-  
defined or male-measured history.  
Q) When you use sources that are more  
personal, is the project different from  
authoritarian history writing that  
asserts its own absolute truth? Does that  
kind of traditionally male approach  
have any place in Women’s Studies?  
A) I can answer that question for  
myself, but my comments don’t  
necessarily represent the Women’s  
Studies point of view or the historian’s  
point of view.  

People who write women’s history  
have to have a high tolerance for  
uncertainty. History is about change  
and continuity, and in women’s history  

there’s a great deal of both at the same  
time. Depending on your point of view,  
you might want to stress change or you  
might want to stress continuity; the  
same events or the same story could be  
told with several different emphases.  
Its meaning is, on balance, uncertain.  
One thing that recent investigations of  
women’s history have thoroughly got-  
ten rid of is the old, Whiggish idea that  
what we're looking for in history is pro-  
gress. The better women’s history has  
also gotten rid of the motive to decide  
whether different periods were good or  

bad for women, or better or worse for  
women than times are now. You can  
decide that for very specific groups of  
women, or very small periods of time,  
but you can’t say it overall about a  
period—that in the colonial era of  
America, for instance, life was better  
for women because they worked  
together with men on the farms. If you  
look at all levels of a society, there is  
no clear conclusion. It’s useful for us as  
human beings, and also as scholars, to  
understand that life is much more com-  
plicated than that, and so should be  
judgments about values. Seeing how  
flexible our judgments of the past are,  
and also our judgments of what has im-  
proved and what hasn’t improved, can  
make you cautious about attempting  
change—or it can make you very open  
to change.  

I don’t think it’s the sources so much  
that make one less likely to write  
authoritarian history as it is the whole  
panorama. I also don’t assume that  
scholarship that presents itself as in-  
disputable truth is particularly male.  
I'm sure some feminists would say it is;  
but I don’t think so. Certainly, speaking  

Spring 1982  

change, although not as much as I did  
long ago when I first taught.  

Realistically and circumstantially  
about scholarship today, there’s a vast  
range among male scholars: from those  
who are flexible and have some  
tolerance for uncertainty in their  
material to those who pretend that  
they’re delivering the gospel.  

If you acknowledge that scholarship  
is subjective, then you can say, “This is  
my version of the truth. I believe this,  
because it’s the most plausible way to  
put together the evidence that I’ve  
found; but it’s neither indisputable nor  
the only version.” This doesn’t go for  
questions like whether or not the  
Lusitania is really at the bottom of the  
ocean. I’m talking about more general  
phenomena.  

Q) Do you try to challenge your  
students’ values, or suggest new  
values?  

A) Certainly I do on this point of subjec-  
tivity, because I have met more than  
once among Yale students the idea that  
true scholarship is objective. That's a  
fallacy—or, more accurately, a myth,  
and a rather dangerous one. Students  
seem to confuse “objectivity” with  
“fairness.” Of course scholarship  
should be, and can be, fair.  

I suppose I would be able to answer  
the question better if I had had more  
students whose values were dissimilar  
to mine, but the students who take  
Women’s Studies courses tend to be  
feminist already; it’s a self-selected  
group. I get a very particular view of  
this school. I almost feel that I don’t  
really teach at “Yale”!  

Once in a while, some unsuspecting  
student does wander in, and has quite  
an assault on his or her point of  
view—not so much from me as from  
other students. I don’t feel that I’m  
there to assault them, but rather to of-  
fer another alternative. Maybe “alter-  
native”  

is too dichotomous; I mean, to  
look at things in a different way, or  

The Tale  

of Yasmin  

by Christina Béchmann  

This is mostly true.  

There still live an important, bald lit-  
tle man named Rauf and his wife, Bil-  
qis. He is hard of hearing and she has  
crooked toes; they have more physical  
troubles than I can remember. But they  
do not really mind, because they also  
have a number of children, whom they  
love just enough to be happy and rarely  
hurt. They were blessed with a  
daughter and a daughter and a son, a  
daughter and a daughter. The youngest  
was named Yasmin.  

The first four were promising. The  
eldest helped her mother and was  
unusually presentable and pretty. She  
studied medicine and kept a skeleton  
under her bed, to memorize a few  
bones each night. The only worries the  
next one caused her father were due to  
her being so clever that she only poked  
fun at the young men he brought home.  
She would be sarcastic about his at-  
tempts to marry her off, then return to  
her economics. The third gave his  
parents almost as many surprises as  
their firstborn, since he was of the other  
sex. He grew up to go into business in  
England, where his firm was so pleased  
with him that they sent him back to the  
university for his doctoral degree. He  
was successful and when he felt  
buoyant he even considered moving to  
America. The fourth was a roly-poly  
when she was little. Once the family  
caught her sleepwalking to the  
refrigerator. Later she studied in Man-  
chester without need to strain herself.  

Yes, each of these children got  
something done almost every day.  

Yasmin was promising, too. Yet she  
was always the baby of the  
family—and what baby need justify its  
existence with achievements? Her sibl-  

ings delighted in catching her and  
defend herself. Yasmin’s mother liked  
to have Yasmin with her, to talk to and  
send to fetch her glasses.  

From the start Yasmin’s father inter-  
preted the baby’s nods as signs that  
here was his kindred soul. He talked to  
her about religion and supernatural  
phenomena when the other children  
were too busy to stay with him and  
listen. Yasmin was never too busy. With  
an occasional nap she could sit and  
listen for hours. Otherwise, she would  
leaf through books meant for people  
older than she, or look at paintings. She  
led a sedentary life, not to say a reclin-  
ing one, and could always take advan-  
tage of anything interesting which hap-  
pened where she was. Visitors were  
impressed with the serious little girl who  
seemed to understand all they said and  
nodded in the right places. She was  
generally quiet, but when she did com-  
ment, she struck people with her wit  
which was enhanced by her almost in-  
audible voice.  

While Yasmin was on her divan, the  
doctor among her siblings married and  
had a daughter who very much remind-  
ed everyone of Yasmin: they rarely  
remembered to call the baby by its own  
name. It is true that this was a large  
family, but even they did not need  
more than one baby at a time. Yasmin  
received hints both from her near and  
dear and from the powers above. She  
would nod and mumble, “There's  
something to what you say.” But there  
were still so many little-known facts  
about the life of Whistler, so many in-  
teresting people right there. She did not  
seem to find the time to get up and do  
things.  

During the monsoon season no one  
took Yasmin’s languor too seriously,  
but on the first night when the weather  
was decent, Yasmin had a night visit.  
The angel was tall and awe-inspiring.  
Yasmin was very polite and did not  
speak until spoken to.  

“O promising but atrophying young  
female,” it began, “We have watched  
you and given you signs for guidance.  
But you heeded us not. One more  
chance will you have to use your gifts.  
If you fail, we shall have to take them  
back and put them to better use. Doubt  
not these words: there was never before  
such a lazy girl.” The angel sounded  
almost as exasperated as Yasmin’s  
school teachers. It quit the room in that  
efficient manner angels have, leaving  
Yasmin to ponder her ways. She did not  
wish to be recycled—to become 1/3 of  
a great philosopher soon to be born or  
a school of dolphins. She would do  
better. She would write a post  
card.  

In the morning it drizzled and there  
was a slight wind. Perhaps this could be  
somewhat of a monsoon, thought  
Yasmin, I’ll read in bed a little. She  
read 1/2 of eight different books that  
day. It was pleasant. Not even when  
she said her evening prayers did she  
remember that there was something  
she should have done.  

The angel was twice as tall and very  
awe-inspiring indeed that night. It said  
either “Hail,” or “Salaam aleikum,”  
gathered up Yasmin and left.  

In her place Yasmin‘s family found  
Dutch rye bread, sliced and unsliced.  
Of course they were not very happy.  
Fozia, the youngest remaining  
daughter, ate all there was. “Cannibal!”  
said her sisters.  

Nobody can make you feel inferior  
without your consent.  
—Eleanor Roosevelt (1884-1962)  

FEMINIST  

PRESS  

BOX 334, OLD WESTBURY, NEW YORK 11568  

Old Westbury, New York  

Las Mujeres: Conversations from a Hispanic Community ($5.95 paper) is a  
unique volume of oral histories taken from four generations of Hispanic  
women. This important document in American history captures the  
diverse experiences of Hispanic women in New Mexico. Edited by Nan  
Elsasser, Kyle MacKenzie, and Yvonne Tixier y Vigil.