its way into DOB’s ideology and prac-
tices. Butch-fem sexuality, which sym-
bolized a visible rebellious expression
of lesbian identity, became the target
of DOB’s call for the lesbian’s integra-
tion into society. The Ladder included
several editorials recommending that
lesbians adopt an “acceptable mode of
behavior and dress.” According to Del,

who calls herself a “sissy butch”:
We must have had millions of gab-n-
javas [discussion meetings] in which we
discussed butch-fem, ad nauseum.

While the DOB leadership criticized
the cross-dressing involved in butch-
fem, many of The Ladder’s readers
wrote letters defending their erotic
identities as “butches.” Such letters,
however, exhibit a degree of caution
and apprehension commonly internal-
ized by many lesbians. One reader
asserted that it was a “woman's right to
dress as she pleases” but added, “I con-
sider myself a mild transvestite—that
is, I wear slacks almost always on my
off work hours.”

The silence surrounding homosex-
uality in the 1950s undoubtedly fueled
the worst fears of many lesbians. In
hindsight, DOB and the rest of the
Homophile movement have been
criticized for their “collaboration” and
cooperation with psychiatrists and
other social “experts.” For many les-
bians, however, the legitimation which
enlightened and supportive “experts”
offered served a vital function. Del and
Phyllis remembered a panel discussion
they held to lesbian mothers:

P: Basically the mothers were concerned
about whether being lesbian was going
to be detrimental to their children, you
know, things have changed and these
women [heterosexual experts] came in
and said no, no it doesn’t make any dif-
ference what your sexual orientation is,
it has to do with how well you parent.
D: That’s what I mean about the profes-
sionals and the heterosexuals that really
helped. Everything you read or
everything you came in contact with
was so negative, then you find these
people who would come across with
some positive reinforcement that would
help [lesbians] to understand, “It's
okay.”

Certainly, the clearest message given
to lesbians during the 1950s was “It’s
not okay.” Psychiatrists labeled them
“sick,” suffering from “an arrested stage

of development” resulting in “psychic
masochism and injustice collection.” 
The government and the military purg-
ed hundreds of lesbians, literally
destroying many lives. The police often
raided lesbian bars, or arrested “ob-
vious” lesbians on the street. The reac-
tion to such oppression was more often
than not fearful acceptance on the part
of the lesbians. Phyllis said:
I think most lesbians and gays in those
days really didn’t know any of their
rights. And if arrested for whatever,
anything to do with being gay, basically
felt they were guilty, just simply
because they were gay. And so if they
were in a bar and it was raided and they
were charged with lewd conduct or be-
ing in a house of ill-repute, they felt that
that was true. And very few of them
challenged that—they just wanted to pay
a fine and get the hell out and not have
their name mentioned anywhere.

The external and internal forces of
oppression which affected gay people’s
lives in the 1950s shaped and limited
the policies of the early Homophile
Movement. In 1985, it is shortsighted of
us to criticize the movement in the
1950s. But, in those pioneering days,
the entire set of questions, assump-
tions, and problems was entirely dif-
ferent than it is today. At the end of my
interview, Del and Phyllis unapolo-
getically explained why the Homophile
Movement might seem conservative to
some today:

P: In the 1950s I think that what

everyone was working for was to get to

the point where you didn’t need the
organizations anymore. To the point

that being gay or lesbian is not really a

big deal, that you could ask somebody

for a date and they could say yes or no
and they wouldn’t bash your head in.

You know, all those kinds of things.

D: Yeah, I think all we were looking for

was survival. But then, they get into this

thing that, well, we were talking about
integrating into society and that’s a no-

no these days, but to me, it still is a

priority. I mean, I’m part of this society,
I’m not just a lesbian or a woman—I’m

part of this damned society, and I don’t

want to just live in a ghetto. I remember
back in 1960, there was a woman who
came to our convention and said we
should all move to Nevada because it
was sparsely populated, and then we
could have our own two U.S. senators.

P: Our own members of the House of

Representatives, and our own governor

and so forth.

THE GREENWICH
VILLAGE

Edition

Webster Hall
119 East 11th St.
10 P.M. ’til dawn

like—wear what you like—

Unconventional? Oh, to be
sure—only do be discreet!

Cynthia White, 5th Ave.

CONTINUOUS MUSIC
MIDNIGHT DIVERTISSEMENTS

D: But who the hell wants to live in just
a gay society?

P: Well—and who wants to live in
Nevada?

In the 1980s we often take for
granted what must appear amazing to
those gay people who remember the
1950s. We have progressed from a
small frightened movement with a sur-
vivalist strategy into a mass political
movement with a developed discourse.
The disturbing political and social
parallels between the 1950s and the
1980s must remind us, however, that
the gains won can always be chal-
lenged and reversed. We cannot regress
to the point where Nevada appears to
be our only option.

15th Annual

Friday, Jan. 15th

Come all ye Revelers!—Dance the night unto
dawn—come when you like, with whom you

$2.00 advance or $3.00 at the door
Ticket 4 Boxes $15.00 
STuy. 9-4674

The following are a few historical sources about lesbians in the 1950s. Unfor-
tunately, the subject remains relatively unexplored. Although D'Emilio’s work and
Del Martin and Phyllis Lyon’s book, Lesbian/Woman, cover lesbian involvement in
the Homophile Movement rather thoroughly, very little has been written about
the social and cultural aspects of lesbian life in the 1950s. Perhaps the best
resources for such information are the lesbian pulp novels, a few of which I have

mentioned here.

Bannon, Ann. Beebo Brinker, I Am A Woman, Journey to a Woman, Odd Girl Out,
Women in the Shadows, all reprinted by Naiad Press, Tallahassee, FL, 1983.
Bulkin, Elly. “An Old Dyke Tale, An Interview with Doris Lunden.” Conditions Six,
1980. D’Emilio, John. Sexual Politics, Sexual Communities. Chicago, University of
Chicago Press, 1983. Martin, Del, and Phyllis Lyon. Lesbian/Woman. New York,
Bantam Books, 1972. Nestle, Joan. “Butch-Fem: Sexual Courage in the 1950s,” in
Heresies, No. 12 (1981). Taylor, Valerie. Journey to Fulfillment, Return to Lesbos, A

World Without Men, all reprinted by Naiad Press, Tallahassee, FL, 1982.

Also important to note, Sterling Library has The Ladder (1956-1971) on

microfilm on reels 7 and 8 of the Women’s Herstory Collection.