Page 2

The celebration of Women’s History is a recent phenomenon. The
impetus behind the event, however, stems from generations of wo-
men focusing on the need to make a lasting impression on the
world to come. Our mothers have the capabilities to pass on ideas
which influence our futures. It is because our mothers represent
the living history of the feminist movement that we dedicate this
editorial to them. Our joint pursuit of these ideas ensures that the
future will feel the strength of women.

AURORA

You're Here — Thank a Woman

We stopped telling each other how to live.

My mother is confused and confined.

March 1984

“What is it? What's wrong?” She says with sudden alarm, awakened by my standing and
staring at the side of her bed. I never say anything. I stand there for awhile — maybe touch
her; eventually she opens her eyes.

“Nothing, mommy, I just had a nightmare. Can I sleep with you?” She lifts the blanket
with her arm, moving the pillow whose position I will take. I crawl into that half-circle, that
cave, created by her warm and welcoming body. She falls back to sleep easily. The quiet
warmth is usually enough to calm me. We do not need to talk.

But it was not a nightmare, mommy, I couldn't sleep. I was thinking and thinking and
scaring myself into a hot, nervous, self-hating embarrassment. I’m different, mommy. Your
arms around me remind me of other women's arms and I cannot sleep. Tonight your safety
doesn't calm me, but frightens me, because you cannot help. I have to pull away to my own
bed. You won't understand. I have to find this calm on my own. I have to accept and love
this difference on my own. Maybe one day you will accept it too.

I believe in invisible umbilical cords. The
bond between my mother and me is a primary ex-
perience of the soul—mingling key to genuine
friendship. For me, a part of growing up means
increased awareness of this sharing, this inter-
dependence, which is biology and spirit, intel-
lect and emotion. Sometimes careening,
sometimes spiraling into womanhood I see how
much there is to learn from my mother and
myself. I also dare to believe that learning is
remembering what you already know. So I look
forward to future late-night living room conversa-
tions in a sleep-hushed house. May the search

Vanessa

The little tomboy who was always faster
than the boys and did the best somersaults in the class had a teacher who let
her read stories that she had written out
loud to the younger children even though
she talked too much. Her mom who had
always worked was told that her children
would not grow up properly for they
needed her to be there when they got
home from school to open the door and to
prepare the peanut butter snacks. The
mom knew she would never open the
door with the right look on her face if she

The mom went back to school and the
Millicent for each other's gardens shine on —Betsy. I stayed home all day anticipating how she
would greet her children, and besides, she
just got off the phone with Mom. I told her that I had been trying to write about her for the collective editorial, but I just couldn’t seem to formulate
anything that satisfied me. She said — 
“What are you trying to write?” I said — 
“Well, I want to say how much I admire 
you as an artist (my mother makes in-
credible quilts, knits and does 
embroidery. Every time I wear a 
sweater that she has made it feels like 
she’s hugging me.) Marie-Louise said — 
“Write about how I live like a 
gypsy . . . when what I love is to be sta-
ble. (My father was in the Air Force, so 
we've moved a lot. Although we have a 
home in France, where she is from, we 
are there only rarely.) I like to have my
two feet on the ground,” she continued — 
“I don't even like to fly (we travel
constantly by airplane). Plus, everyone
here (in the United States) thinks I'm
“the French lady.” I don’t even feel
French — I’m Alsacian, and they don't
even know what that means. (Alsace is
a region that has been periodically
French or German throughout history,
but is presently French. The Alsacian
language and culture is neither French
nor German.) Say that what I love most is to have roots — and I'm rootless.

Marie-Louise’s words stand on their
own.

Caroline

My mother used to be a very traditional woman, assuming she would get married,
have kids, and be financially supported. Which she was. But then, when my father
died, leaving her with children aged 5, 9, and 10, she suddenly had to find a way to
support herself and three children. Through this experience of going back to school
and then finding a full-time career, my mother has developed a sense of her own in-
dependence and responsibility for her life. When I was young, and accepting of the
social roles and stereotypes that were injected into my life, my mother seemed a de-
viant. I used to interrogate her as to why she didn’t remarry. No desire, no need.
Happy and capable, independent. Now, proud and full of admiration for my mother,
I ask her a new set of questions — how she feels and current women’s issues and con-
cerns. With a truly conservative stance, she clings to the values she had before the
death of my father. But she lives as a free, independent woman, a life many of us
struggle to enact ourselves, but at this point can only activate in words.

Margaret

Special thanks to the ASSU Typesetting Shop.

Aurora is a collective of men and women from Stanford and the community working
together to provide space for the diversity of women's voices, visions, and happenings.
The collective is always open to new members interested in learning and contributing to
the collective process of our newspaper production. We need help with layout, editing,
graphics, articles, poetry, and innovation. We welcome new faces with open arms.
Look in the Daily for spring quarter meeting times or leave a message for the col-
lective members through the Women’s Center, 497-0545, P.O. Box 3709.

The daughter wondered if she ever had a
daughter how she would bring her up
properly. How different things would be,
she thought, if those people who created
all the trouble in the first place hadn't
asked mom to stay home and things like
that, and how different I would be if she
had.

The Feminist in Her

As an outsider looking in, I might see a rather traditional woman, bound to her home
and large family in a very restricted role. Forever the nurturer. Forever the caretaker.

As I began to adopt a feminist perspective on life in this world, you became for me
ever more a wonder, perhaps an anomaly. I did not know what to make of a woman
who did everything and asked for nothing. Were your selflessness and your silence a
loss of self? It pained me to think that you sacrificed everything in the name of moth-
erhood, that you might be so controlled by your circumstances. I asked at one time,
“Who are you?”

I’m gradually learning the answer to that question. You are still a wonder, but I no
longer wonder who you are or if there is a self buried behind all that selflessness. I
feel the incredible strength of your self in your gentle loving ways. I feel the power of
your self in your patience. I am comforted by the feeling that you know yourself, that
you will never compromise that self and this makes you free.

Mother, I rejoice in you and with you.