23

Red Rosa

Bettina Edelstein

I met a woman recently, a woman
of remarkable intellect and for-
midable spirit, whose pointed words
speak active conviction. She has,
however, been dead several decades;
in fact she was murdered the winter
of 1919 in Berlin, after the German

revolution for which she had struggled
many years failed.

Her name is Rosa Luxemburg.

Though I’m no sorceress, I swear
this woman ought to be brought out
from the gloom of history. I intend no
hocus-pocus here, only to dispel
some of the fog which tends to ac-
cumulate, particularly in this country,
around both women and radicals,
making them relatively obscure
figures in the annals of history.

Those who are acquainted with
Rosa Luxemburg know her as one of
the main theoreticians of the German
Social Democratic Party (SPD) and as
a leader of the German Communist
Party, which was born in 1918 from
the left opposition of the SPD. She is
also known as a founder of one of
Poland’s socialist parties, the SDKPiL
(Social Democracy of the Kingdom of
Poland and Lithuania), and as a figure
in the Russian socialist movement, a
critic as well as ally of Lenin, and a
guiding spirit of the Second Socialist
International.

Some may have heard of Luxem-
burg as a Marxist economist, whose
principal economic work, The Ac-
cumulation of Capital (1913), is by
now regarded as obsolete.

Still others may be able to place
Luxemburg in line with other Marxist
political theorists as one on the side
of revolution as opposed to reform,
one who insists that democracy is
essential to socialism and that the
party must take its direction from the
will of the masses rather than dictate
to it. Luxemburg had quite a different
sense of the socialist ideal of “dic-
tatorship of the proletariat” than did
Lenin. “The ultracentralism asked by
Lenin,” Luxemburg said, “is full of the
sterile spirit of the overseer. It is not a
positive and creative spirit."

Rosa Luxemburg herself led a
creative and forceful life; working
towards her goal, she played many
parts. She was a journalist and a pam-
phlet writer, a compelling political
speaker and a teacher with a unique
ability to spark the minds of her
students. Devoted to three socialist
movements, the Polish, German, and
Russian, she was what Wordsworth
calls “a patriot of the world” — for
her the world of working people. Rosa

Luxemburg was, in short, a profes-
sional socialist.

Born a Jew in 1870 in Zamosc,
Poland, which was then part of
Czarist Russia, Luxemburg was, at
least in the traditional sense, rootless.
This is how the Prussian prosecution
described her—in 1914 when she was
on trial for having urged resistance to
the war. Yet, while Rosa Luxemburg
belonged to no nation — she explicit-
ly rejected any form of na-
tionalism — she created a place for
herself in the international arena. Her
allegiance was to socialism, to the
struggle which she again and again
asserted would inevitably cross na-
tional bounds.

Luxemburg spent more than half of
her 49 years on no less a project than
the transformation of the world. Her
life, as it reflects her work, seems to
have been both in and out of accord

with her political ideas. On the whole,
though, it was a life that fused per-
sonal and political struggle, a life in
which the relation between events
and ideas was marked sometimes by
consistency, sometimes contradic-
tion. On the one hand there was Lux-
emburg’s sense of internationalism,
coupled with her revolutionary activi-
ty on several fronts. On the other
hand there was the conflict between
her role as a party intellectual, and
her frequently expressed conviction
that party direction ought to come
from the bottom.

Luxemburg had faith in the revolu-
tionary potential of the working class,
and she was convinced, on economic
grounds, of the eventual collapse of
capitalism. The key to social transfor-
mation is the class consciousness of
the proletariat, which emerges, accor-
ding to Luxemburg, only from strug-
gle. “In general,” she wrote in 1905,
“the tactical policy of the social
democracy is not something that may
be ‘invented.’ It is the product of a
series of great creative acts of the
often spontaneous class struggle
seeking its way forward.”

Luxemburg saw revolution as a pro-
cess developing out of the clashing
and meshing of social forces with the
growing class consciousness of the
proletariat. Her own ideas of what a
socialist ruling party should be like
emerged from the intersecting of her
theoretical work with her activities as
political organizer and radical jour-
nalist. She wrote her two basic works
on the nature of the socialist state,
“Organizational Questions of Russian
Social Democracy” (published in the
U.S. as “Leninism or Marxism”) and
“The Russian Revolution,” in direct
response to events in Russia — the
revolutions of 1905 and 1917 — and
in them criticized the imposition of
that severe centralism which the ‘free
world’ today automatically
associates with Marxism.

“Freedom only for the supporters
of the government, only for the
members of one party — however
numerous they may be — is no
freedom at all,” Luxemburg states.
“Freedom is always and exclusively
freedom for the one who thinks dif-
ferently.”

And, she notes, “it is a well-known
and indisputable fact that without a
free and untrammeled press, without
the unlimited right of association and
assemblage, the rule of the broad
mass of the people is entirely un-
thinkable.

“And the more democratic the in-
stitutions, the livelier and stronger the
pulsebeat of the political life of the
masses, the more direct and complete
is their influence... To be sure, every
democratic institution has its limits
and shortcomings... But the remedy
which Trotsky and Lenin have found,
the elimination of democracy as
such, is worse than the disease it is
supposed to cure; for it stops up the
very living source from which alone
can come the correction of all the in-
nate shortcomings of social institu-
tions. That source is the active, un-
trammeled, energetic political life of
the broadest masses of the people.”

Rosa Luxemburg favored
democratic socialism — but not of
the sort that waves its feathers from
time to time in industrialized
capitalist countries and tries to fly on
the wings of reform, directly over
capitalism into socialism, without
revolutionary class struggle. Luxem-
burg vehemently opposed what is
referred to as ‘revisionism’ (or ‘oppor-
tunism,’ ‘economism,’ ‘possibilitism,’
etc., depending on the nation, the
period, and the particular dispute). In
other words she opposed the tenden-
cy of some socialist camps to stress,
above anything else, political and
economic advances of the working
class made through parliamentary ac-
tivities and the efforts of trade
unions. The problem occurs when
social reform becomes an end in
itself, when social democracy is
limited to an attempt “to lessen, to at-
tenuate, the capitalist contradictions”
instead of being an effort to get rid of capitalism

altogether. As Luxemburg points out,
“there can be no socialist movement
without a socialist aim.”

Luxemburg did not disapprove of
social reform per se; she herself was
involved in activities to change the
condition of the working class, and in
1902 published an article calling for
the eight-hour day. However, Luxem-
burg did not want the long-term goal
of social revolution to be lost in the
agitation for immediate reform.
Moreover, the most important aspect
of getting various reforms enacted,
Luxemburg felt, was that such action
helped to educate the workers
politically. Recognizing the impor-
tance of education as a tool for social
change, Luxemburg devoted several
years to teaching economics, among
other things, at the SPD school in
Berlin.

The events of Luxemburg’s life and
the expression of her political attitudes do not always neatly coincide,
particularly with regard to feminism.
“Feminism” is a broad term that in
our time might encompass a
challenge to the gender roles upheld
by a male-dominated society on
social, political, and economic levels,
but which, in late 19th and early 20th
century Europe, tended to focus
primarily on concrete issues concern-
ing women’s suffrage and labor. Lux-
emburg, it is generally agreed, was
not a feminist. She did not specifical-
ly identify with that group of persons
known as women. She does not ap-
pear to have had any particular in-
terest in women’s culture. Very little
of her political writing is about
women. Though her friend Clara
Zetkin was editor of the SPD women’s
paper Die Gleichheit, Luxemburg
chose not to write for Zetkin, and she
was not at all involved in the women’s
department of the party. In fact, as
her biographer J. P. Nettl relates, at
the start of Luxemburg’s career in the
SPD “she indignantly refuted the of-
ficial suggestion that, like Clara
Zetkin, she might find her natural
habitat in the women’s movement.” 
For Luxemburg, a movement against
‘patriarchy’ was significant only in-
sofar as it reflected the class struggle.
It is not surprising, then, that in
1912 we find her speaking on
“Women’s Suffrage and Class Strug-
gle.” “As long as capitalism and the
wage system rule,” she told the
women who gathered in Stuttgart for
the Second Social Democratic
Women’s Rally, “only that kind of

Portrait by Craig Flanagin

work is considered productive which
produces surplus value, which
creates capitalist profit.

“From this point of view, the music-
hall dancer whose legs sweep profit
into her employer's pocket is a pro-
ductive worker, whereas all the toil of
the proletarian women and mothers
in the four walls of their homes is con-
sidered unproductive. This sounds
brutal and insane, but corresponds ex-
actly to the brutality and insanity of
our present capitalist economy. And
seeing this brutal reality clearly and
sharply is the proletarian woman’s
first task.”

Luxemburg concludes that “the
current mass struggle for women’s
political rights is only an expression
and a part of the proletariat’s general
struggle for liberation.”

We get a different view of Luxem-
burg in relation to feminism when we
look at her life’s work. Professionally,
for example, in her various stints as
editor of party newspapers (usually as
the only woman on the staff) or in her
assertiveness before the stodgy all-
male leadership of the SPD, Rosa Lux-
emburg acted without regard to her
gender. She did her work not as a
representative of the female sex, but
simply as Rosa Luxemburg. Anyone
who tried to dissuade her from
anything on account of her sex faced
her certain pique. That Luxemburg
commanded the power and prestige
within the socialist movement that
she did, at a time when conventional
mores still fettered the abilities of
most women, is an achievement she
perhaps was not aware of, but one
which we, in retrospect, can ap-
preciate. 

Rosa Luxemburg’s life shows, too,

cont. on p.29