Branford Dining Hall,

CAROLYN REED.  
She’s not just another union boss.

But that’s not all.

Political Caucus

FREE & OPEN TO THE PUBLIC

Studies at Yale Undergraduate Women’s Caucus.  
For information contact Peter Rabinowitz: 777-4343

II (29) D. Pronoun reference

referring to a singular noun; "they"  
also ungrammatical.

This poster was found with these markings outside

She’s a full-time live-in maid [on a leave of absence] organizing The Household Technicians of America.

CAROLYN REED.

@ Executive Director of the National  
Committee on Household Employment

© Secretary-Treasurer of The Household  
Technicians of America

© Chair of The New York State Women’s  
® Founder of The National Black  
Feminist Organization

© Member of The New York City Commission  
on The Status of Women

© Former Member of President Carter's  
Advisory Committee on Women

® Professional Household Technician

CAROLYN REED SPEAKS OUT: “DOING YOUR HOME WORK.”

Tuesday * Nov. 13th * 8:00 pm * Yale University  
Silliman College Common Room * 505 St [Btwn Wall & Grove]

A COMMUNITY HAPPENING. Sponsored by The Yale Political Union's Independent Party *  
Co-Sponsored by the Urban League of New Haven * New Haven N.O.W. [National Organization  
of Women] * Office of The Associate Dean of Yale College, Judith Bermar Brandenburg *  
Yale University Departments of American Studies * Afro-American Studies * Women's

English, as everyone knows, lacks a common-gender pronoun.  
“his" when the gender of the antecedent is undetermined.

is sexually non-discriminatory, but it is not.  
Remember also that "everyone" and "each" are singular?  
"Does everyone have his / not their / book?"

presented at Yale.

= the pamphlet, “Writing Prose," by S. Barney, (Yale Hunter, B. Packer, ©1975)

Never use “they" in

(with thanks to Ms. magazine)

This is part of a poster for a play recently presented at Yale.

PREPARE YOURSELF  
FOR THE FUTURE

YALE Business AND  
ECONOMIC FORUM

We must use "he" and

CHILD ABUSE continued from page 13

Connecticut has many resources for the treatment  
and prevention of child abuse. The Coordinating  
Committee for Children in Crisis ensures that these  
resources operate efficiently. Donna Pressma, the  
former head of Protective Services, obtained federal  
funds for the establishment support for families  
where abuse and neglect was suspected. The  
committee was modeled after the Comprehensive  
Emergency Service of Nashville, Tennessee, a  
pioneer project in this kind of work. According to  
Jean Adnopoz, the head of the New Haven regional  
Coordinating Committee for Children in Crisis, the  
Committee sees its role as that of fostering a  
partnership between private and public agencies  
concerned with the treatment and prevention of  
child abuse and neglect, with the objective of  
keeping families together, whenever possible, rather  
than removing children from their homes.

The Coordinating Committee for Children in  
Crisis currently sponsors four programs in New  
Haven. First, the Case Consultation Team for New  
Haven meets monthly. The team accepts referrals  
from any agency, public or private. Each team  
consists of a group of concerned professionals,  
usually including a child psychiatrist, a lawyer, the  
Director of the Department of Child and Youth  
Services office, a social worker, a pediatrician, and  
a policeman from the Youth Division. The Depart-  
ment of Children and Youth Services’ case worker is  
considered to be the prime manager of the case of  
child abuse or neglect under discussion. The  
committee does dispositional consultation: an at-  
tempt is made to bring together allied agencies  
working on a case. Thus feedback is guaranteed  
between social worker, policeman, lawyer and  
pediatrician, regardless of which agency or institu-  
tion they may be working for.

Second, the Coordinating Committee for Children  
in Crisis has implemented a parent aide program,  
where para-professionals spend time in the homes  
of several different abusive families each week.  
“These workers essentially parent the parent,” said  
Jean Adnopoz. “They make sure that the children  
get to appointments on time; but they also provide  
an emotional resource for the parents. Local mental  
health clinics have told us that we (CCCC) have  
improved the therapy that takes place in the clinic;  
because the parent-aide can spend time working  
and talking with the family, much more personal  
attention is given to these troubled families than  
could possibly result from an hour in the therapist’s  
office each week.” The parent-aide program began  
in 1978 and was originally funded by Connecticut  
Justice; fourteen aides have been funded by CETA,  
and the agency is now waiting for new CETA  
positions. Mature volunteers have also been  
successful as parent-aides. The parent-aide program  
is operated without charge to the client family.

Third, the Coordinating Committee for Children  
in Crisis sponsors a family advocate program, which  
exists separately from the parent-aide program.  
These case workers handle problems such as  
housing for families with large numbers of children,  
or hassles with utility companies. Family advocates  
take referrals from any agency, but they generally  
are not included in the Case Consultation Team  
work.

Fourth and last is an in-house team at Yale-New  
Haven Hospital which meets weekly to discuss cases  
of concern. This group also operates under the aegis  
of the Coordinating Committee for Children.  
Only when everyone in society respects and  
protects the rights of children will abuse begin to  
disappear. Education is not enough; even the most  
educated individuals have been seen in the ranks of  
abusers. Support for families must be readily  
available if abuse is to be treated and prevented.  
Connecticut’s efforts to build a community-wide  
supportive structure to stop abuse are commend-  
able. The state has recognized that the tasks of  
eradicating child abuse are too great to put on the  
shoulders of isolated case workers. The gains made  
by concerted efforts are immeasurable and provide  
a basis for an optimistic future.

(1) Steele, B.F. Working With Abusive Parents  
From a Psychiatric Point of View. National Center  
for Child Abuse and Neglect (DHEW/OHD),  
Washington, D.C., 1975.

(2) Gelles, R.J. “Child Abuse as Psychopathology:  
A Sociological Critique and Reformulation,” American  
Journal of Orthopsychiatry 43 (1973): 611-621.

(3) Gill, D.G. “Unraveling child abuse,” American  
Journal of Orthopsychiatry 45 (1975): 346-356.

(4) Moss, S.Z. “How Children Feel About Being  
Placed Away From Home,” Children 13 (1966):  
153-7.

5. Ibid.  
6. Ibid., November 20, 1968.  
7. Ibid., November 12, 1968.  
8. Ibid., November 27, 1968.  
9. Ibid., December 6, 1968.

YALE WOMEN 1968 continued from page 2

Male coeducation activists accepted this compro-  
mise. The pressure to institute a non-discriminatory  
admissions policy, which would have allowed for the  
admission of equal numbers of female and male  
students beginning with the class of 1973, largely  
disappeared. The issue of “active recruitment of  
female faculty” was barely heard again, even  
though 1700 male names had endorsed this  
principle. The male students had gotten what they  
wanted: there would be women at Yale in  
1969-1970, and each college would have “its”  
women.

More than ten years later, there seems a dramatic  
connection between the way in which women were  
admitted to Yale and the difficulties that women  
have experienced since then. Yale women have had  
to fight long and hard to get approval for a  
Women’s Studies program that still lacks adequate  
financing. Yale women have had to go to court to  
force the University to address the ugly reality of  
sexual harassment. Yale women still confront a  
faculty and administration that is overwhelmingly  
male at the top. One could go on and on...

In a disturbing way, it can all be traced back to  
1968. On November 21st of that year, the Yale Daily  
News carried a story on Elga Wasserman, newly  
appointed head of the Planning Committee on  
Coeducation. Dean Wasserman expressed concern  
about anti-feminism in the “very masculine” Yale  
environment. She stated: “Yale men are going to  
have to accept women as co-workers and class-  
mates...rather than just as dates.”

In a story about the University’s problems in developing  
financial aid funding for women students. When  
asked if women and men would be treated equally  
with regard to financial aid, Henry Chauncey, the  
then Director of Administrative Planning for Co-  
education and present Secretary of the University,  
stated: “No, they won’t. We've been saying that all  
along.” In the same vein, John O. Wilson, the  
Associate Director for Financial Aid, declared that  
Yale “has a basic commitment to the men” and  
must give male students “first

This is the history which shaped the entry of  
undergraduate women into Yale in September,  
1969. It is a history rarely recalled honestly by Yale  
administrators and Yale alumni. But it is a history  
that cannot be forgotten by those of us who are  
concerned about just treatment of women at Yale.

1. Yale Daily News, October 4, 1968.  
2. Ibid., October 4, 1968.