Justifications For Rape

by Louise Kennedy

Rape is evil.

Rape is evil because it violates the freedom, privacy and humanity of its victims. It is evil because it dehumanizes women; it strips them of all attributes save their sexual organs. Our society generally classifies such actions as "evil," and has codified its recognition of this particular evil in the laws prohibiting rape.

Laws alone, however, cannot drive away the fear of a violation as dehumanizing as rape. Society therefore has two explanations, related but separate, for the widespread incidence of rape.

The first of these justifications is quite simply stated: "She asked for it." With this statement, society explains to itself why some women are raped and others are not; it also tells women they can avoid rape by making sure they never "ask for it." This explanation makes rational sense of an irrational victimization by restricting its occurrence to a particular class of victims.

Such an explanation, of course, involves the collective creation of a symbol: the "fallen woman." The victim of rape is symbolically transformed into a promiscuous temptress, as we see when a rapist’s defense attorney attempts to show that the victim was sexually active in the past or was "provocatively" dressed at the time of the attack. The woman is blamed for being raped and is cast out from the community of "decent people" who were not.

The second justification is perhaps more complex. It suggests that impotent man, feeling threatened by powerful woman, asserts his power over her with the only weapon he has: brute force. This rationalization has grown more popular with the growth of the feminist movement, since it includes the corollary that as women become more powerful, men feel threatened and rape more women. And society finds it useful to argue that men are forced to become rapists because women are usurping their other powers; this argument explains how "good" men can commit an act as horrible as rape. Since this theodicy itself is both more complex and more generalized than the first, the symbolic processes it generates are also more difficult to define in specific terms. But the basic symbol involved here is that of the sick, or rather sickened, man. The rapist is cast as an originally decent man who has been threatened and thus driven to sick revenge by a vaguely defined, "evil" group of "Women’s Libbers." This term itself, of course, is merely another symbol, a symbol of malevolent, castrating women.

These two explanations differ most significantly in their choice of focus: the first accounts for how some women become victims, the second for how some men become victimizers. But they are significantly alike as well, in that both reverse the roles of victim and victimizer - the first making the victim a victimizer, the second casting the victimizer as victim. Both justifications also meet society’s need to explain the evil of rape, in distinct yet related ways. They succeed in placing blame, whether on a particular woman or on a group of women. The first suggests that "rape only happens to bad women;" the second, that "rape only happens because some women are bad." And both lead to the conclusion that eliminating or neutralizing certain types of women - temptresses or feminists - will wipe out rape.

Beyond providing such explanations and solutions, the two justifications produce more direct consequences. First and most obvious, they make women feel guilty for provoking this crime against themselves by either tempting or threatening men beyond endurance. More subtly, they promote a tacit acceptance of rape. By saying that rape is either the natural punishment for a woman’s sins, or the natural consequence of women’s struggle for equality, these explanations allow society to conclude that this dehumanization of women is natural, perhaps inevitable, and ultimately acceptable.

I most vehemently disagree - not only with this conclusion, but also with the rationalizations on which it is based. To say or think that rape is the fault of its victims is a dangerous delusion, of others and of oneself, which runs directly counter to several basic facts.

For example, accepting the first explanation requires accepting the notion that ninety-year-old grandmothers and six-month-old babies seduced their attackers, for both grandmothers and babies have been raped. It requires believing that women asleep in their homes tempted rapists to break down doors or climb through windows to attack them. In short, it requires, given that women of every conceivable description have been raped, believing that women tempt men beyond endurance merely by being women.

The second version of the argument is that of any victimizer, that he is the true victim. It ignores the fact that throughout history, even the most helpless women - cripples, children, slaves - have been raped. It disregards rape in societies where women are so subservient that they have never even thought of questioning, and thereby threatening, male domination. In the end, it says that women threaten men beyond endurance merely by being women.

But these logical absurdities are obvious to anyone who compares the justifications to the facts. How, then, can any rational person know the facts and yet continue to support these explanations?

The answer, I believe, is that these rationalizations are built upon a deeper rationalization, one which contradicts the accepted values of our society and must therefore be hidden by this upper layer of illogical by comforting justifications. Simply put, this deeper rationalization states that women are not human beings; that non-human beings cannot be dehumanized; that therefore rape is not a dehumanizing act.

Only with this subconscious assumption as its foundation could a society continue to explain a crime against women by blaming women. Only if women are seen as less than human can we continue to find justifications for an act that, against a human being, would be seen as an absolutely unjustifiable act.

This, then, is my explanation: not women themselves, but the second-class status which our society confers upon women, is the cause of rape. Men can justify rape only because they do not see it as a crime against human beings. Confronting the evil of rape requires first confronting the evil of treating women as less human than men. And only when our society truly and fully makes this most basic confrontation will it be able, discarding its false justifications, to confront and tear out the true roots of the evil that is rape.

THE WOMEN’S SELF-DEFENSE ALLIANCE offers low-cost classes Mondays 6:30-8:00 PM, Wednesdays 10:00-11:30 AM, and a special Mother-Daughter class (6-12 years), Wednesdays 5:30-6:30 PM.

- Specially arranged workshops, demonstrations and speaking engagements are also available. Classes are held at the United Methodist Church on the Green and at the YWCA.

Call 787-0031.