October 14, 1982

Sex and the State

AURORA

by Sharon Silverstein

There are at least six ways of criminalizing sexual relations between people in American law: 1) criminalizing certain sexual acts in which proof that the act occurred is statutorily sufficient proof of criminal behavior by at least one of the parties (oral-genital sex, anal-genital sex, and oral-anal sex fall in this category in some states) 2) prohibiting “public sex” 3) prohibiting sex for pay 4) prohibiting certain classes of people from heterosexual intercourse (minor females, blood relatives) or other sexual acts (children and youth, prisoners, members of the armed forces) 5) demanding proof that one party was an unwilling participant in the sex act (in 48 states this avenue of complaint is closed to a woman protesting the imposition of heterosexual intercourse on her by her husband) 6) criminalizing certain acts which are not seen by the state as sexual to which no party can statutorily consent (battery).

While police enforcement of these laws has varied radically corresponding to the age, race, sex, sexuality, and economic class of the parties involved in a sex act, twentieth century American courts have allowed very few words which name people’s differences to become part of legal doctrine about sex crimes. Rather there is a marked tendency for contemporary courts to limit such substantive distinctions about people involved in sexual relations to 1) people married to each other and 2) sex acts involving minors.

In many states certain sex acts are only crimes when a minor is involved (statutory rape, oral copulation, buggery, lewd and lascivious conduct, to name a few). In other states some sex acts are always considered criminal (oral copulation, buggery), but the older party is subject to stiffer penalties where sex with a minor is involved.

However, in all states there are sex acts from which youth are not protected by law except insofar as they can prove an adult-like level of force and resistance; incest is defined in all states as heterosexual intercourse between prohibited parties. Hence the fondling of a seventeen-year-old’s genitals by her step-father has been found by courts to be “consensual,” even though the plaintiff showed she had been party to such behavior since she was seven years old. Likewise the “dry-humping” of a 14-year-old by her 19-year-old neighbor or the licking of a 16-year-old’s anus by a random stranger are not crimes per se in all states. It is clear that many of the acts which minors can experience as violations are simply not as protected as those offenses which have been codified in law as sex crimes when perpetrated on adults (contact between penis and anus, penetration of the vagina by the penis, and contact between the mouth and genitals).

Yet the State fails abysmally in trying to use those sex crime laws to protect women from sexual assault and coercion. Rather, the criminal (in)justice system has an alarming history of using sex crime law and related statutes (incorrigibility, gross indecency, vagrancy, disorderly conduct, soliciting, and cross-dressing, among others) to harass, persecute, and incarcerate sexual minorities — including those youth the state claims to be protecting.

Since I do not trust the state to do good things with explicit sex-specific language in law, I recommend that the criminal justice system become increasingly sensitive to the claims of any person disadvantaged by age, race, sex, or economic situation to having been coerced into sexual relations, and that all people turn a suspicious eye on everything that men do to women in “public” and in “private,” so that for a change we can increase our understanding of sexual mutuality and non-consent from women’s point of view.

Hence: a proposal to consider the following reforms to the criminal law system. Sexual coercion and assault (i.e., everything that the victim didn’t want) should be criminalized. Mutually agreed upon sex acts should be decriminalized. The law should presume the inability of children of all ages to consent to any sort of sex with their caretakers or blood relatives; perhaps states should also agree upon an age under which no person may be said to have consented to sexual relations. Those who pay minors to have sex should be prosecuted, as should those who profit off of another's sexuality; other sex-for-pay laws should be eliminated, and community “public sex” laws should be applied to all people or abolished. Battery laws should be revised to account for the injury, which is its non-consensual nature.

In the future, Baer predicts that progressive organizers will be more careful to include varied groups. “It (the banner) had a very marked effect. We couldn't help but learn from it. These questions will be addressed in the future, but it will make things more difficult rather than easier to resolve.”

One of the banner collective’s personal achievements was the feeling of solidarity that arose in the group. “No one had more say than anyone else," said Larson, “we talked for hours and still everything got done on time. The consensus process really worked. We didn’t even have a ‘facilitator!’” Overton added, “no one felt that she was carrying more of a load than anyone else.” “No one got stepped on,” said Rader. Jelliffe summed up the process; “It was so exciting. We were doing something with women, as women, for women. The earth moved.”

WCWMF

(continued from page 9)

the festival. On Thursday night, the show was interrupted when the twenty-foot high light trellis, which surrounded the stage on three sides, collapsed (Rumours blamed the accident on a freak wind caused by Hurricane Olivia). No one was injured and the night's performances were moved to the Day Stage. By Friday evening, the diligent technical crew had repaired and reorganized the light system. The concerts returned to the Main Stage. Comedienne Carol Roberts, as one evening's M.C., kept the show moving with punchy announcements, sarcastic comments and an amusing sketch on life as a food sexual. Musical performances were led by such nationally known performers as Kay Gardner, Margie Adams and Carol McDonald. Kay Gardner, from Maine, is a fine flutist and recognized member of the women’s community. Gardner demonstrated the breadth of her abilities as a musician which ranged from imaginative improvisation with another flutist, Mojo, to accompanying Margie Adams or playing with a small classical ensemble. Margie Adams, a Bay Area songwriter and composer, played with Gardner and Liberty Mata, a percussionist from Orquestra Sabrosita, as well as performing solo piano pieces. Margie Adams managed to bring an infectious smile and unflagging enthusiasm to everything she did, drawing the audience in, inviting and even insisting upon our participation. For Carol McDonald, the festival marked a reunion with her former band, Isis. With Isis backing her, the New York rocker brought back the funk-rock they established in the 1970s.

“VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN IN THE TOP FORTY”

a slide show presentation and lecture by feminist musician

ALIX DOBKIN

(20 years in the music business) with Denslow Brown

November 3, 4:30 p.m.

Watch OATQ for location

Their repertoire even included a surprise reworking of the Rolling Stones’ “Under My Thumb” which MacDonald personally addressed to Mick Jagger. Other East Coast representatives included The Harp Band, which featured an amplified upright harp and vibraharp, and Deuce, Deuce is a jazz-fusion band led by a saxophone and trumpet. Troubled a little by the cold and temperamental instruments, Deuce nonetheless managed to produce a clean slick sound throughout their well-paced set. From Kansas City came Rosie’s Bar and Grill with lively bluegrass standards and witty originals such as “Did Jesus Have a Baby Sister?”

West Coast music groups were also represented, Orquestra Sabrosita and the Alberta Jackson Band, in particular, gave impressive performances. Orquestra Sabrosita is a dynamic salsa band. Unfortunately, this tight, enthusiastic group has no albums to date; but they are definitely worth watching for in clubs in the Bay Area. The Alberta Jackson Band ended the last night's performance. In spite of the damp, chilling cold which numbed musicians’ fingers and the audience’s spirit, this rock-blues band supported by the rhythm and blues licks of Alberta Jackson on lead guitar succeeded in getting the huddled crowd up and dancing ecstatically. Unfortunately we had to leave early on Sunday, but the last afternoon had a full schedule planned to wrap up the four-day festival and send everyone off with positive reinforcement of the value and progress of women’s culture.