20

these students; and that there is a
reason for things to be the way they are
and for people to think the way they
do—that culture dictates certain
things. We talk about this a lot, that
some things about one’s culture can be
negative and can hurt one’s growth as a
person. And those things can be changed. In this context we can cover the
rougher issues, like abortion.

Q) Has MULANEH’s approach had any
effect on other New Haven organiza-
tions that are working with Latina
women?

A) MULANEH established a precedent
in the community as an organization
that was specifically designed to look
into the needs of Latina women, and I
think it made the other agencies aware
of the fact that there is this group of
people who have special needs. I don’t
know how much they’re doing about it,
but at least they know that there are
some of us watching what they do and
how they handle the problems of
Latina women.

Q) Does MULANEH work at all with
other women’s groups in New Haven?
What possibilities do you see for Third
World women and white women to
work together?

A) MULANEH is a part of the New
Haven Womanpower Coalition, and we
have usually given presentations for

eat, without
frills, but with
satisfying basic

goodness....your
searching has ended...

open 6:30 a.m. to p.m. every day

the Feminist Union Conferences—but,
of course, we’re basically non-
functional now.

In my experience of the past five
years, it has been very hard for Third
World women and white women to
work together. We have to get people
to sit down and open up and clean out
their racist attitudes. We can do that by
understanding each other; by
understanding that we are not the
same, that we're different, but those
differences must not separate us.
Sometimes people say, “Oh, we're all
equal.” We are not all equal, and it’s
important to say, “Yes, we are different,
but I really want to learn more about
your reality.”

But there have definitely been some
positive changes in the past five years. I
find myself having more non-Latina
friends, and I see more white American
feminists establishing friendships with
Third World and black women and get-
ting to know people better. In the
Michigan Music Festival, for instance; I
didn’t go this year, but I was told that
there was a tremendous presence of
Third World and black feminists — both
in the number that attended and also in
the representation of music. Sometimes
you go to a cultural activity or a dance
and you don’t hear even one little bit of
salsa, and it gets pretty lonely! It

Claire's
Cornercopia

= Syrian Sandwiches,

Homemade Soups, Salads, Quiche,

Delicious Breads . . . and a Good ©
Feeling.

When in Branford, visit our full service
restaurant on Rt. 4, Branford Hills.

sounds like a small detail, but it’s big.
I see many more Third World and
black feminists getting together these
days, and I think the next step is to
have a more united vision with white
American feminists and, hopefully,
even with men, of how to change our
society. There has to be room for that
diversity. Right now, in the feminist
movement we are stagnated; we say
that we are going to fight back against
this and fight back against that, but it’s
time to have our own vision of what we
would like society to be.
Q) You said you’re seeing more Third
World and black feminists getting
together. Can you tell me about that?
A) MULANEH’s experience with
organizing women has been positive,
but it’s been very hard. I would like to
see grassroots women starting to move,
but most of the Third World women
that become involved are students, or
other women who do not have to cope
with the basic needs that grassroots
women have. You have to deal with
those basic needs before you can even
talk about other issues. Sometimes they
can go simultaneously—but you cannot
talk feminism to someone who
doesn’t have enough to eat. Many of
the poor people in this community are
extremely poor, and when they get a lit-
tle money they buy a ticket to Puerto
Rico and spend three weeks there, and
they come back here even more poor.
It’s that eternal need to go back.
But I do think that we’re beginning to
see the growth of involvement. Five or
six years ago I felt damn isolated,
because there was no Latina feminist
community here at all. There still isn’t a
strong one, but there is much more. At
the Take Back the Night march, for ex-
ample, there were more Latina women
this year than last year; and at the
Feminist Union conference this year
[Nov. 21] there will be a workshop on
Third World feminism, given by a black
woman who has organized Third World
and black women in Boston. These
things are starting to happen. And when
MULANEH began, that really was
wonderful. I gave a lot of energy to

that. 

Q) What is MULANEH doing now? And
what hopes do you have for its future?
A) Right now we have a little money,
mostly from personal pledges and the
Matthaei Foundation in Detroit, and
we're using it for self-defense. We
gathered a group of about ten women,
and we went to the New Haven
Women’s Self-defense Alliance and
asked them to give us a course.
MULANEH pays half of each woman’s

Valerie Russell

fee; so we're learning to protect
ourselves and we're helping the
Alliance, and I feel really good about it.
We may also start a reading group. We
never had time for real discussion
about our feminism and our visions
when we were functioning as an agen-
cy, and that was very hard for us. If the
New Haven Foundation hadn’t stopped
funding us, MULANEH would still be
active; but as it is, this is a time to
nourish ourselves, to find out where ex-
actly we are as Latina women and
where we want to go—and then start
again. What MULANEH was doing
needs to be continued, but first we
need to gather our energies. It was a lot
of work from a lot of people; I think
MULANEH is to be congratulated.

9

One out of every three families headed
by women is poor, compared to only
one of every eighteen families headed
by men. If trends continue, “the pover-
ty population will be composed solely
of women and their children by about

the year 2000.”

—from the National Advisory Council
on Economic Opportunity

--Lenore Skenazy