24  
New Haven Feminism  
CONTINUED  
from page 3  

the quicker it can be solved. This is reflected in  
the structure within each organization and in the  
variety of organizations that coexist and support one  
another.  

Most of these organizations have some kind of  
cooperative structure which encourages member/  
employee participation in decision making. There is  
a strong resistance to hierarchical patterns that  
foster the oppression of ‘lower downs’ by ‘higher-  
ups.’ These patterns of strong-weak relationships  
are parallel to, and encourage the traditionally  
unequal relationship between men and women.  

Although conditioned patterns of behavior are  
difficult to change, the feeling of self-determination  
and control over one’s own life that results when  
these patterns are altered, is an exhilarating  
experience that is rare in our present society.  
Broader participation ensures that decisions are  
understood by and responsive to the concerns of the  
people affected by them. Although this type of  
decision-making can be more time-consuming, the  
process is speeded up by maintaining an ongoing  
dialogue, allowing room for personal choices, and  
only making decisions that are necessary.  

ISSUES  

The range of issues dealt with by feminist groups,  
together are beginning to create a comprehensive  
approach to change.  

There are many groups working to ensure  
women’s safety and freedom by dealing with the  
issues of violence against women. Rape Crisis and  
the Battered Women’s Shelter provide service and  
support for women who are victims of violence. The  
Self-Defense Alliance and the Women’s Transit  
Authority (beginning Jan. 4, 1980), help women  
avert attack while increasing their freedom of  
movement. Actions such as the Take Back the Night  
March, which was attended by over 1,500 women in  
New Haven last summer, are statements that  
women are strong and have a right to walk outside  
alone at night. Other groups such as Women  
against Violence Against Women fight to eliminate  
media images that portray women as easy victims  
“asking for” attack. These images condition men to  
be attackers and women to be victims. Women in  
these images are portrayed as objects, easy victims,  
and who are in addition “appreciative” of the  
attention. For men, this can become a way to affirm  
their own self-worth.  

There are many aspects that have developed out  
of the struggle for abortion rights. The National  
Abortion Rights Action League has fought for  
pro-abortion legislation. The Reproductive Freedom  

481-3575  

task force of the Feminist Union has worked to  
promote a feminist interpretation of abortion. Their  
interpretation affirms the right of women to control  
their own bodies and lives relating this to  
sterilization abuse and other issues in women’s  
health. Other organizations such as Women’s  
Health Services help women gain access to safe  
abortions as well as contraception, pregnancy  
testing, VD testing, gynecological services, counsel-  
ing, self-help and other information. Medicaid  
abortions are provided without additional costs to  
clients, which is not done elsewhere. Supportive  
counseling is provided and services will soon be  
expanded to include a birthing clinic.  

Other groups are working on economic fronts.  
Women’s Employment Resource Center is working  
to place women in non-traditional employment and  
has successfully obtained jobs for women in the  
building trades. Because over one third of the  
women in the workforce are currently in low-paid  
clerical jobs, Office Workers of New Haven is  
working to organize and fight for the rights of these  
women. Other groups such as the Conn. Women’s  
Education and Legal Fund work on discrimination  
cases for women protecting and promoting women’s  
status.  

Traditional political support for the position of  
women is being built by the Women’s Alliance for  
Political Action. Last summer, this group compiled  
an extensive platform of women’s issues covering  
Human Services, Human Rights Employment,  
Public Safety, Civil Defense, Economics, Education,  
Housing and Culture. Their goal is to create a  
constituency of women organized as a visible voting  
block to which politicians must be responsive. A  
different approach is taken by NOW, which has  
actively been supporting passage of the ERA and  
the Conn. Women’s Political Caucus which lobbies  
on legislative issues and helps women develop the  
resources necessary to become involved in campaign  
and electoral politics.  

INTERDEPENDENCY  

All of these issues are interrelated and cannot be  
completely accomplished without the successful  
accomplishment of others. For example, the threat  
of nighttime violence limits women’s choice of  
employment. Each issue aims in a particular  
situation to increase women’s autonomy and control  
over her life. Because of the intrinsic relationship  
between issues the Feminist Union was organized in  
1977.  

The Feminist Union maintains contact and  
coordination between political groups working on  
specific issues. The Feminist Union has also been a  
forum for workshops, discussion of new issues, and  
for the initiation of new groups, many of which have  
since become independent.  

The Women’s Center provides a place for the  
intersection of the broader women’s community.  
The Center currently provides information/referral,  
a library, a drop-in center, a gallery, free  
counseling, and ongoing discussion and support  
groups for single mothers, divorced women,  
lesbians, fat women, black feminists, older women,  
and women. The Center has recently started a  
Women’s School, a bi-weekly coffeehouse and is  
co-sponsoring the formation of a speakers bureau  
with the Feminist Union. A newsletter which  
conveys information about activities and events of  
all groups is published every three weeks.  

BROADER ISSUES  

The activities of all feminist groups are based on  
a basic disagreement with sexism. However, sexism  
does not exist in a vacuum. It is related to other  
forms of oppression based on race, class, sexual  
preference, employment, ethnic background, etc.  
The stability of our socio-economic system is rooted  
in and perpetuated by these unequal relationships.  
Profits reward the exploitation of workers, minori-  
ties and the poor. Competition discourages coopera-  
tion and rewards individual accomplishment at the  
expense of others. Women’s traditionally passive-  
supportive role is necessary so that men can  
continue to function in an inhuman environment  
where there is an illogical use and distribution of  
materials.  

A non-sexist society cannot tolerate other forms  
of oppression because there can be no guarantee  
that the forces generating one type of oppression  
would never become directed towards women. A  
solution is unstable if it is only individual.  
Feminism, therefore does not ask merely for a  
better position of some women in society (the  
success of the career woman), but requires many  
changes in the basic functioning of society; the  
creation of an alternative system.  

The relationship between sexism and other forms  
of oppression means groups often become involved  
in issues that do not initially appear to be feminist  
issues. In New Haven there have been feminist  
groups working with and supporting struggles for  
worker organizations, struggles against nuclear  
power and weapons, racism and homophobia.  
Feminists have helped women organize unions as  
well as supporting women’s issues within unions  
and support for general union struggles. For  
example, the Feminist Union has actively supported  
the Olin strike and the Yale Worker’s strike.  

There is also an anti-nuke task force of the  
Feminist Union which is part of a growing women’s  

continued on page 31  

—WOMAN'S ACTIVITIES © FEMINIST-BOOKSTORE  
ISO W. MAIN ST. BRANFORD, CONN. 06405