continued from preceding page

But unlike many non-profit groups, shelters face active opposition in the legislatures. Congressmen bearing the “pro-family” banner contest that shelters are “indoctrination centers” which promote “the disintegration of the family.” Columnist Ellen Goodman summed up the logic well when she wrote, “Apparently an intact family with a broken wife is better than a broken family with an intact ex-wife.” Unfortunately, this is the attitude which seems to pervade U.S. legislatures at both the federal and the state level. Although an Office of Domestic Violence was established under Carter, it was allowed to close for lack of funds in April of 1981. Nor was Congress responsive to H.R. 2977, the Act to Prevent Domestic Violence, which, had it passed in 1980, would have appropriated 15 million dollars to combat the problem. In many states, no legislation whatsoever has been passed which addresses the issue of spouse abuse. As a result, the legal rights of the battered woman vary widely from state to state and from judge to judge. In New Haven, a group of over sixty attorneys and law students has recently been organized to provide emergency legal aid to women seeking Temporary Restraining Orders, court injunctions which bar the batterer from the home pending a formal hearing. “The reason these things [TROs] started getting popular was that women all over the country found that when they called the cops, the cops wouldn’t do anything,” said Amy Eppler, co-founder of the new TRO Project. “People started realizing that by getting the court to issue this kind of an order, then if a guy comes and beats a woman up... then [the police] will say ‘well, it’s not only an assault, it’s a violation of a court order.’” But even with a TRO, proper protection of the woman can still be a problem. Eppler told of a woman in Torrington, Ct. who is presently suing the police department for nonresponse, “She called the police and called the police and got a Restraining Order and let the police know, and they were very nonresponsive and eventually her husband came back and stabbed her three times.”

Similar lawsuits are pending elsewhere in the United States.

Often the failure of police to protect the victim of domestic violence can be traced to the lack of an explicitly defined policy for handling such situations. According to Jennifer Holme, one trainer at the Connecticut Police Academy asked trainees from around the state to go back to their respective departments to find out the correct procedure for responding to domestic violence calls. “Of the whole group, one officer could bring back a procedure,” she said. This chronic indifference reflects a perceived distinction, not only at the level of the individual officer but at the level of entire departments, between violence in the home and “real,” criminal violence. In an attempt to change the attitudes of many policemen towards wife-battery, several women’s shelters in Connecticut have voluntarily taught classes on domestic violence at local police departments. A bill now before the State Legislature would make such training mandatory for all officers. The issue, however, is sensitive; FBI crime reports show that more policemen are killed handling domestic “dispute” calls than in any other type of duty.

While battered women’s projects seek to offer the least fortunate of victims an immediate alternative to a dangerous situation, a handful of organizations have been established to treat the perpetrators of the violence. In New Haven, batterers can attend weekly counseling sessions at the YMCA given by MADV, Men Against Domestic Violence. Perhaps the only service of its kind in Connecticut, MADV was formed following the 1979 “Take Back The Night” march protesting violence against women. “What we have to do is get men who abuse their wives to admit they have a problem and to seek help. That’s the first step in getting them to stop,” said Bill Robinson, Director of the group. According to Riley McRae, a Yale Divinity Student who co-directs MADV, only about one-third of the men he counsels come to the organization voluntarily. The other two-thirds are sent either by the courts or by parole officers. Consequently, MADV staff faces the difficult task of motivating men to attend meetings regularly and to work sincerely towards controlling their violence. “A big problem is that many of the men believe they were justified in what they did. We try to show them that they have to take responsibility for their choices,” Riley said. “Our basic position is that there is no excuse for the violence,” stated another MADV counselor. “Ultimately the man is responsible for his own behavior. He can’t blame it on alcohol or drugs or a woman. He has to admit that.”

The past ten years have indeed brought an increased awareness of the issue, and small gains have been made. Yet by and large, the situation of the battered woman is still desperate. “People don’t realize that it’s against the law,” observed Jennifer Holme, coordinator for the New Haven Shelter. She feels that community education is the most effective means of addressing the problem, “To really end domestic violence, there are a lot of changes in society which have to take place in terms of men’s attitudes towards women. And given that that’s not likely to happen very easily, I think that the more visible our organization and other organizations can be and the more people become aware that this is not acceptable, the better.” To admit that violence in the home is unacceptable is to challenge the distinction between personal and political values upon which an entire social order is based. A man’s home is his castle only if society allows its jurisdiction to stop at his doorstep. Indeed it is the conception of the home as separate and unlegislatable which allows men to treat women as private property. No doubt individual psychological histories play a significant role in a full explanation of the battering phenomenon. Nonetheless, positive change can only come about in the context of a more humane society, one which chips away at the domestic walls which have sanctified male privilege for centuries.

NOTES

1. William Stacey and Anson Shupe, The Family Secret: Domestic Violence in America, p. 157, Boston: Beacon Press, 1983  
2. Center for Women Policy Studies, “Fact Sheet on Family Violence,” Washington D.C., 1982. See Murray A. Straus, Richard J. Gelles and Suzanne K. Steinmetz, Behind Closed Doors: Violence in the American Family, Garden City, New York: Anchor Press/Doubleday, 1980. Resources, as reported by Paul Bass in “A Shortage of Shelters for Abused Women,” The New York Times, September 2, 1984.  
4. Center for Women Policy Studies, “Fact Sheet on Family Violence” states with regard to the 1.8 million figure, “The researchers who conducted this survey believe that this figure substantially underrepresents the extent of violence in American families, perhaps by half.”  
5. Ibid., See 1979 FBI Uniform Crime Reports.  
6. Ibid., See Evan Stark, Ann Flitcraft, M. D., et al., “Domestic Violence and Female Suicide Attempts,” paper presented at the 107th Annual Meeting of the American Public Health Association, New York City, November 3-7, 1979.  
7. Ibid., See Evan Stark, Ann Flitcraft, and William Frazier, “Medicine and Patriarchal Violence: The Social Constitution of a ‘Private’ Event,” The International Journal of Health Services 9, 1979.  
8. Parker, et al. “Spouse Abuse in Texas: A Study of Women’s Attitudes and Experiences” cited by Jennifer Holme.  
9. Jeffrey A. Fagan, et al., “Violent Men or Violent Husbands?” in The Dark Side of Families: Current Family Violence Research, ed. Murray A. Straus, et al., Beverly Hills: Sage Publications, 1982, p. 51.  
10. Stacey, op. cit., p. 158.  
11. Laurie Wardell, et al., “Science and Violence Against Wives,” in The Dark Side of Families, p. 76.  
12. Ibid., p. 78.  
13. Stacey, op. cit., p. 162.  
14. Richard J. Gelles, Family Violence, Beverly Hills: Sage Publications, 1979, p. 109.  
15. Nicole Hollander, I’m Training to be Tall and Blond, quoted by Alison Wyrley Birch in “Battered Lives,” Connecticut, December, 1982, p. 66.  
16. Stacey, op. cit., p. 157. These quotations are attributed to Sen. Garlan Humphrey of New Hampshire and Sen. Jesse Helms of North Carolina.  
17. Ellen Goodman, “Battered Wives Need Shelter,” Fort Worth Star, Sept. 30, 1980, cited in Stacey, p. 157.  
18. FBI Uniform Crime Reports, as cited by Sgt. Northrop, Dept. of Crime Analysis, New Haven Police Department.  
19. Kathy Kemp, “Wife-Beaters Can Find Help,” New Haven Register, June 4, 1981.  

CONTRIBUTORS

Nathan Copple graduated in the Class of 1984 with a degree in English.  
Julian Dibbell is a junior in Davenport majoring in English. He spent the fall term in Brazil.  
Kelly Feeney ’83 lives in New Haven.  
Bernice Hausman is a senior in Trumbull College. Her parents live near Garret Hill, Pennsylvania, where Tony runs a hoagie shop.  
Shiho Ito, Saybrook ’85, is going (home) to Hollywood.  
Peggy Kuo is a senior in Davenport majoring in history. She spent last spring in Taiwan.  
Liz Marshall is a senior in TD.  
Robin Pfaff smokes without lighting up.  
Dorothy Rony will spend the next few months studying traditional weaving in Indonesia.  
Tammy Schapiro is a junior in Davenport, majoring in philosophy.  
Catherine Sullivan is a recent graduate of Southern Connecticut State University. She majored in journalism.  
Lisa Sullivan is a second year graduate student in Political Science from Washington, D.C.