i

36 THIRD WORLD WOMEN  
continued from page 9  

Even as we write today, other stereotypes of all  
oppressed groups emerge. We have the lazy,  
unmotivated working class largely comprised of  
Third World people. We have the New York City  
gay male community sporting battle jackets and  
Levi jeans. We have the truly feminine feminist  
woman whose mind is sharp on issues and skin is soft  
and supple, etc. These stereotypes are perpetrated  
by the media (e.g. Village Voice coverage on Gay  
Life in New York City), educational institutions  
(through writings by William Shockley, Patrick  
Moynihan). Increased activities of the K.K.K. and  
the John Birch Society reveal that these images are  
not on the decline. In the past, oppressed groups  
have worked within the framework of these  
established stereotypes. For example, women seeking  
non-traditional jobs would dress in a typically  
feminine way; people of color seeking employment  
would bow and shuffle typically Uncle Tom-ish.  

Today, we find more and more people disregarding  
stereotypical images of themselves and others. This is largely due to a realization that  
stereotypes have functioned as a control mechanism  
in this country. As well, many people are actively  
struggling to eliminate these inaccurate perceptions  
of oppressed groups. As such, Aurora is an active  
struggle.  

WHAT WE ARE.....  

As Third World women committed to feminism,  
we often find it difficult to integrate feminism into  
the various liberation struggles of Third World  
people. It is also an uphill battle to define racism as  
an issue of crucial concern to women in the “white  
feminist movement.” These difficulties stem from  
problems of definitions with respect to oppression;  
perceptions of what racism and feminism are, and  
the historical roles of Third World women. The  
liberation struggles of Third World people have  
seen their primary oppression as that of race.  
Sometimes class oppression has been included in  
the struggle. However, patriarchy has not been  
viewed as a major cause of oppression of Third  
World peoples. Sexism is thought of as something  
that women have imagined. If sexism is addressed  
at all, it is seen as an intra-group phenomenon (i.e.  
relations between Third World women and men),  
and not a cause of oppression with actual material  
manifestations. Feminism is also perceived as a  
white women’s issue. The feminist political analysis  
is thought to have no significance for Third World  
people. It is difficult for Third World men to realize  
that they do have male privilege.  

It is equally difficult to raise issues of racism  
within existing feminist movements. Racism is  

perceived as a phenomenon which only affects  

non-whites. One thinks of slavery in this country  
and the image of a Black man appears. Indian  
and Chinese peonage are neglected as well as the  

Wsslaves. And, just as the Feminist Movement is seen  

as “white” by Third World men, the various Third  

World Liberation struggles are seen as “male-  

defined” by most feminists.  

Third World women are caught in the middle. By  
virtue of our race, sex and class, we belong to no  
privileged group in this society. The task then  
becomes to define a Third World feminism. We  
must organize ourselves in a collective, non-hier-  
archical manner. We must realize that Third World  
feminism cannot be separatist and thus we must  
struggle with Third World men and white feminists;  
feminism and racism, respectively, must be their  
issue as well as ours.  

However, how do we accomplish this? How do we  
organize around the interlocking issues of race, sex  
and class? Do we channel our energies into  
convincing Third World Liberation struggles to  
embrace feminism? Feminist movements to embrace  
racial liberation struggles? Should we spend more  
energy organizing Third World women? Or ALL?  
The answers must come from Third World women  
because, as the Combahee River Collective empha-  
tically states: “We realize that the only people who  
care enough about us to work consistently for our  
liberation is us.”  

As women of color in a white capitalist patriarchy,  
our day-to-day existence typifies the contradictions  
inherent in American society. We are THE point  
at which several oppressions converge: as non-  
whites, we face oppression; as women, our biology  
and sexuality are controlled and exploited; as working  
class people, our labor and achievements are  
devalued. Together, these factors are determinants  
of our social class as Third World women.  

Non-white women are at or near the bottom of  
every economic index led by white men, non-white  
men and white women. Those jobs available  
traditionally to us are both low-status and low-  
paying, making both un- and underemployment  
serious obstacles to our survival. Although non-  
white women are in some white collar  
professions, clerical, nursing and teaching, these  
professions are open to an educated few.  

As poor women, we are often victims of a health  
care system which can be described as both punitive  
and neglectful in its treatment of us. Sterilization  
abuse is a classic example:  

..20% of married Black and Chicana women  
and as many as 25% of Native American women  
have been sterilized. Puerto Rico is perhaps the  
most striking example of the dangers of sterilization  

use.  

“The Family Planning Association has legally  
sterilized (over) 100,000 men and women...Today  
over one-third of the female population of Puerto  
Rico between the ages of 20 and 49 have been  
sterilized.”  

Despite such obstacles, non-white women have  
had a historical legacy of resistance to oppression,  
of struggle for independence, fighting on all fronts  
for our rights as women and for the liberation of our  
people as a whole.  

At Yale, the Council of Third World Women has  
an explicit understanding of these facts, and it is  
our purpose to promote a greater understanding and  
communication among all Third World women, to  
alleviate any inter-racial barriers that may exist  
among ourselves, to educate ourselves in regard to  
the social injustices that exist against women of  
Third World backgrounds. The Council of Third  
World Women meets every Sunday at 4:00 p.m.,  
Hendrie Hall, Room 303. Contact Lydia Perez for  
more information (777-5062).  

WHAT WE ARE MAKING HAPPEN.....  

I was missin somethin  

somethin so important  

somethin promised  

a layin on of hands  

fingers near my forehead  

strong  

cool  

movin  

makin me whole  

sense  

pure  

all the gods comin into me  

layin me open to myself  

I was missin somethin  

somethin promised  

somethin free...  

a layin on of hands  

not a man  

layin on  

not my mama/holding me tight/sayin  
I’m always gonna be her girl  

not a layin on of a bosom & womb  
a layin on of hands  

the holiness of myself released.....  
& I found god in myself  

& I loved her/I loved her fiercely.  

Ntozake Shange  

In identifying as Third World women we have  
found the “layin on of pens.” We have found that  

* past ties  
seeded by men as unproductive and “typical of  
women” have now been turned into our mechanism  
for accomplishment and consciousness raising. We  
as Third World women do not have to pound our  
fists to make our point. We will just state it clearly  
and firmly. We as Third World women do not aspire  
to be non-white men, to be white women or to be  
white men! We will not allow anyone to set our  
goals for us for this will only serve to perpetuate  
our oppression.  

We are strong, vital women who are no longer  
going to stand “behind our men.” We, as politically  
conscious and progressive women do not preach any  
role reversal which will place the males behind us  
either, because this will only perpetuate the patri-  
archal and hierarchical value system which exists  
now and is divisive. Therefore, we, as Third World  
women have decided that we will stand on equal  
ground with all our people, female and male, gay  
and straight.  

As women-identified women, those of us who  
seek our own destinies attempt to execute them in  
the absence of male support--our bonding and self-  
actualization is often viewed as a threatening  
development. As women sharing close bonds  
emotionally, politically, physically--whether hetero-  
or homosexual--we find ourselves labeled as the  
enemy by non-white and white men alike.  

Est. 1947  
Home  

of  
Utrecht Products  

We are the leaders of today. We have a clear  
direction and a positive destiny which is that of the  
liberation of Third World people. Through our work  
at Yale and in the Council of Third World Women,  
we feel victorious in our accomplishments thus far  
and we will spread our victory to the rest of our  
community in our struggle against racism and  
sexism!  

NEW HAVEN FEMINISM  

continued from page 31  

Funding for women's services (or any human  
service) is not provided by our economic system, so  
groups must depend on governmental appropria-  
tions, private foundations, contributions, volunteers  
and a growing feminist awareness.  

The creation of an alternative has to go beyond  
the economic and political and must affect all  
aspects of life. This has led to the development of  
women’s culture. Women’s culture presents positive  
images of women that are a reaction and alternative  
to the sexist images and assumptions with which  
we are constantly bombarded (everywhere) in our  
daily life. In the past few years there has been a  
surge of women’s music, feminist fiction,  

Although feminist culture is in its infancy, it  
complements and reflects the political activity to  
which it is related. Women’s culture provides  
relaxation and entertainment that plays a crucial  
role in re-energizing women to continue their uphill  
struggle, as well as providing yet another avenue  
from which to introduce feminism. The Theatre of  
Light and Shadow’s work over the last three years is  
an excellent example of this.  

All these different aspects; political activity,  
education, service, and women’s culture together  
begin to create a complete environment within  
which women can be supported and organizations  
can become self-sustaining. They provide many  
different avenues of approach to the women’s  
movement and allow many different levels of  
involvement and commitment. Together, these  
different aspects provide opportunities to integrate  
political ideas with a personal lifestyle. This  
balanced lifestyle makes it possible to sustain the  
ongoing commitment to political work which is  
necessary to bring about long-range change. All of  
these activities build feelings of sisterhood between  
women and feasible practical alternatives, which  
together are bringing about continuing change in  
our society.