How We Began Our Autumn,  
and other unorganized  
thoughts for women under the  
influence of dual oppressions:  
An editorial directive  

1981: Anzaldua and Moraga let loose This Bridge Called My Back shat-  
tering the myth of our invisibility. The voices of radical women of color,  
so many deep and varied tones, rise and blend harmoniously. The call  
goes beyond fragmented social reform—We demand a “social recall.”  
Our voices call for the construction of a new society and the formation of  
a more inclusive ideology to envision it, yet we do not identify with ex-  
isting radical networks established by white feminists. It is inevitable that  
we, women of color, Third World women in the diaspora, minority  
women in the U.S., or whatever you choose to call us, form autonomous  
movements to address our needs—our different cultural, and often class  
and sexual orientations.  

This progression should not be viewed as a breach in the women’s com-  
munity, for one thing that the seventies has taught us is that feminism is  
not an absolute. In fact it must function as an “umbrella movement” in  
order to serve the huge community it claims to represent.  

Women of color, now that our voices are soaring, and our will to form  
a self-determined movement has been made known, we must not fall vic-  
tim to the pitfalls our white sisters have faced.  

We have no choice but to continue the physical/material struggle, for it  
affects all members of our communities. Without certain electoral  
safeguards and physical freedoms, our radical visions are not possible.  
Yes Virginia/Cixous, there is life outside of the room of one’s own/text!  

The fight for sexual freedom must be embraced. If we do not sanction  
all sexual options we will alienate many of our sisters, or rather, they will  
alienate us.  

The reclaiming process has begun. Our history and literature must be  
retrieved from the caverns of oppression. In order for them to flourish we  
must be active figures in their focus as well as creation (see interview with  
Hazel Carby). Let us, in the words of Paule Marshall (one of the black  
women writers soon to invade this campus with ideas and inspiration,)  
practice an “art of a high order,” by making our creativity evident in all  
forms of life, rather than falling into the trap of high art. Our blackness  

and our woman-ness must enable our lives (see Raymond). For our poetry,  

our timing, will always be our transcendence, but our laughter: the full  
bodied stuff that history, homes, and not homes are made of. This must  
be power.  

Lisa Jones  

our thanks to:  

Laura Bienen  

Melissa Binder  

Judith Brandenberg  

Dana Chasin  

David Cole  

Ann-Marie De Graffenreidt  
Carol Files  

Pam Hays  

Jennie Livingston  

Gloria and Al Needleman  
David Oliver  

Hugh Thomas  

Heinrich von Staden  
Philippa Whitcomb  

Lisa and Fido  

Since advertising revenues cover only a  
small part of our costs, we rely on con-  
tributions from readers who would like  
to see this magazine continue to  
publish. Currently we are heavily in  
debt, and would appreciate any dona-  
tion concerned readers are able to  
make. Checks may be made out to  
Aurora and should be mailed to 2575  
Yale Station, New Haven, Connecticut  
06520. Submissions to the magazine  
may also be sent to this address.  

Thanks to all our advertisers for their  

continual support  

The views and opinions expressed in  
Aurora’s articles do not necessarily  
reflect the views of the editorial  

board.  

Let our advertisers know  

you appreciate their  

support for Aurora  

_ Lewis and Doonesbury by Ruth Santer