_Early in the spring semester, the Yale  
Women’s Athletic Organization held a  
meeting to decide whether to co-  
sponsor a talk by a lesbian athlete for  
the upcoming Gay Lesbian Awareness  
Days. The turnout for the meeting was  
high, and the debate was emotional  
and long. The organization voted to en-  
dorse the speaker, much to the relief of  
its lesbian members. But the issue of  
lesbians in sports at Yale is hardly con-  
cluded. In fact, the YWAO meeting just  
opened it up for many of us. Missy,  
Yvonne, Annemarie and I were inspired  
by the meeting and decided to write  
about our experiences and thoughts as  
lesbian athletes. The following is the  
result of our talking and self-reflection.  

The showers. A fine place to begin a  
discussion of lesbianism in athletics  
because the showers represent a cer-  
tain apex of the tension between  
straight and gay women athletes. A  
freshwoman athlete, walking to her  
Yale locker room for the first time in-  
quired if there were “open showers” (as  
opposed to those with “privacy” parti-  
tions.) Told that there were, she replied  
(in the presence of at least two gay  
teammates) that open showers made  
her “feel like a wicked lezzie.” It is fair-  
ly clear to me that such a statement  
arises out of fear: the fear that if you  
don’t define your sexuality publicly,  
somebody will do it for you. In a sense,  
this is a legitimate fear—for both gay  
and straight women athletes. The  
straight women athlete, when con-  
fronted with the issue of lesbianism  
among her teammates often responds  
out of the feeling that she has been  
wronged by a system of arbitrary label-  
ing, which has branded all women  
athletes with the letter “L” for lesbian.  
Yet lesbian athletes are also wronged  
by this labeling process. Women  
athletes, regardless of their sexual  
preference, have always struggled  
against the fact that they are con-  
sidered by the general public to be  
women first, athletes second. A com-  
mon bond between women athletes is  
that they wish to be recognized as  

athletes first, when they are competing  
in an athletic contest. That much  
became clear at the YWAO meeting  
several weeks ago. The problem is only  
further agitated when a woman athlete  
finds herself being recognized as a les-  
bian first and an athlete second. Even  
women who define themselves as les-  
bian are short-changed by this process.  

Yet changing the society in which  
women must live, work, and play sports  
is not, quite obviously, a simple task.  
While efforts must continue in the  
direction of changing the community  
at large’s opinion of women athletes,  
perhaps it is more important that we  
begin by changing women athletes’ opi-  
nions of other women athletes. There is  
without question heterosexism and  
homophobia in women’s athletics. The  
reasons for this (of which I have cited  
one) are complex. The end result of this  
heterosexism is a difficult social en-  
vironment for the lesbian athlete. I say  
social environment because participa-  
tion on an athletic team is social in-  
teraction. Teammates work together,  
play hard together, shower together,  
eat together, party together, share hotel  
rooms with each other, and, most of all,  
do a lot of talking together.  

There are those who would argue  
that a woman will not think about her  
teammate’s sexuality in deciding  
whether or not to pass her the ball, and  
thus heterosexism does not affect the  
interactions between players. I would  
argue that heterosexism may or may  
not come onto the field of play, but  
regardless of that fact, it does affect  
the interactions between players. There  
are many situations in which gay and  
straight factions of a team draw up  
separate camps—your sexuality may  
govern not just who you party with, but  
also who you warm up, run, stretch out  
or talk with before or during a game or  
practice. Heterosexist comments can  
cause hostility on both sides, and again  
divisiveness becomes a problem on the  
team. In most cases, a lesbian (that is if  
she is not a rugby player) will feel un-  
comfortable at best about wearing a  
pink triangle during GLAD week or rais-  
ing an objection to a heterosexist com-  
ment.  

I do not wish to single out straight,  
heterosexist women athletes as the  
cause for this intolerant environment.  

Heterosexism in Sport —  

Both gay and straight women con-  
tribute to it. This is because both gay  
and straight women feel a necessity to  
find support among teammates to help  
mitigate the effects of the heterosexist  
community at large. Straight women  
feel the need to proclaim their  
heterosexuality to those who think that  
“they’re all a bunch of dykes,” often at  
the expense of the feelings of their gay  
teammates. By the same token, gay  
women seek to diffuse hurtful com-  
ments by either withdrawing among on-  
ly gay teammates or by labeling the  
woman who made the comment “la-  
tent.” This kind of labeling only serves  
to further alienate the straight athletes.  
What can be done about this situa-  
tion? A woman at the YWAO meeting  
suggested that it would be best if we  
could all just be “tolerant of our dif-  
ferentness.” Unfortunately, tolerance  
does not come easily. Also, the word  

“tolerance” itself implies that one  

group possesses the privilege of  
tolerating another. Lesbian athletes  
want more than tolerance (although  
that would be a nice place to start). Les-  
bian athletes want acceptance in real  
terms—as athletes, as women, and  
finally, as women who love women.  

Yvonne Zylan  

My freshwoman year, a close friend  
and a teammate of mine approached  
me, very upset by her fear that our  
coach might be a lesbian. Although I  
knew the answer from other contexts,  
I wasn’t sure how to respond. I asked  
my friend whether knowledge of the  
coach’s sexual preference would  
change her perception of the team’s  
situation. She replied that if she knew  
the coach were a lesbian, she would  
question the validity of some of the  
coach's decisions about starting line-  
ups and team positions. She also felt  
that she would not have a similar  
judgment of a male coach, despite  
the fact that demographics alone  
would have made a heterosexual  
coach/player relationship far more  
likely.  

I ended up not telling this friend, in  
fact denying what I knew to be true,  
because I felt that to be honest would  
do more damage to the team than ly-  
ing would do to my own sense of what  
was right. This incident sums up what  
I have felt is one of the toughest prob-  
lems of being a lesbian on an athletic  
team—the continual issue of how  
honest I can be as a member of a  
team.  

Sometimes it seems like being  
straight is perceived as part of having  
team spirit. Heterosexual locker room  
talk is encouraged; often the attitude  
seems to be that if you don’t want to  
participate, keep it to yourself. Two  
years ago, that is exactly what two  
friends of mine and I did. On a team  
trip, the three of us would escape on  
our own from time to time because  
putting up with the straight banter was  
such an energy drain. I needed an at-  
mosphere in which I did not have to  
feel dishonest. Although I got along  
well with practically everyone on the  
team, I felt that my attitude was in the  
process of evolving away from the  
team attitude, and as a result I felt  
isolated in my perceptions and  
assumptions.  

Since then I have come to realize  
that a teammate’s telling me I can do  
whatever I want as long as I keep it to  
myself is not tolerance at all, but  
another form of oppression. I deal  
with heterosexuality all the time—on  
TV, in classes, among friends and  
teammates. If I keep a part of myself  
hidden from others, they may never  
accept the validity of my choice of a  
different lifestyle.  

How much to tell is still a problem.  
Regardless of my ideals to the con-  
trary, people are still upset by and  
afraid of homosexuality. These feel-  
ings can really affect the way a team  
works together. I guess I’m trying to  
say that honesty is the ideal, but I still  
find myself second-guessing people’s  
reactions.  

Annemarie Eileraas