Samia Halaby Speaks

and you learn to externalize what’s in-
side you, your own personal voice.
The differences between people
become more important than what
we share in common. They say it is
possible for ideas to be cooked pure-
ly in the brain, whereas I say no, the
brain is incapable of cooking an idea
independently of what it sees in the
world. All our ideas are reflections
and illusions of the natural world,
they don’t come from a sublime abili-
ty or from above or a spirit. I think
there’s a great deal of theology in
graduate reviews. Very seldom do

they invite people to pinpoint what in
the outside world brought that pain-
ting on.
Q - But that is important for you.
S - Yes, and the other idea in painting
that I think is important is beauty.
One of my students told me “You and
Judy Pfaff (former sculpture pro-
fessor -Ed.) are the only people who
use ‘beautiful’ when discussing pain-
tings.” I tried to think about it the
other day. In common usage people
use the word beautiful perfectly all
the time. Everything that seems to be a
just right solution for practical pro-
blems, or things that are moral or
ethical, we find beautiful. And that’s
what I think paintings are, when we
have this act of recognition, that’s
what’s beautiful. We recognize
something and we feel that the
language is healthy and right. The
other difference between those who
believe in the spirit and those who
don’t is that I believe that what’s im-
portant is the way in which we are in-
telligent people and can see the
same things and make them work for
us. We can do this because when we
see a yellow wall with a crack in it we
believe it exists. I refuse to say that
there is a whole wall around the in-
dividual and that the senses are just
experiences and that there aren’t real
things out there. In a way they’re
idealists in that sense, they believe
Mondrian’s ideas came out of his
head.

I don’t think anything comes out of
anyone’s head. The world is real and
what we see is real and we can trust
this. When you accept that idea, it
becomes a wonderful liberating thing.
For abstract or illusionistic painting,
to look at tables and chairs and
rooms, and realize that there are
things out there that are so wonder-
ful, that can feed your painting. There
are problems of seeing that are so big
and so in reach in this time of history.
You can make your paintings so rich
by using all that information and solv-
ing problems. It’s tremendously
liberating and exciting, it really im-
proves our work very quickly. You
stop going inside yourself and sear-
ching for what doesn’t exist...Let me
use this painting as an example. I call
it ‘Broadway below Chambers’. Ex-
periencing walking down Broadway
below Chambers is one of the things
that influenced it.

As you walk down the street, in the
way you see, and the angles at which
you look up at buildings, you ex-
perience things which are not like a
simple rectilinear Renaissance
perspective. You are confronted with
the bulkiness and great height of the
buildings in a way that one perspec-
tive could not show you. Sometimes
you see views of things that are not
rectilinear - the way you see the
chunks of sky between the buildings,
for instance. You see things in the air,
lights flashing or birds or garbage or

trucks moving. Your eyes focus on the
yellow piece of garbage on the road
that might be a bright artificial color,
then you look up and see a yellow
truck going by or a yellow sign up in a
building. The way you focus your
eyes in such a situation to protect
yourself from fast-moving traffic, the
ways you walk on a sidewalk, how
you cross the street, or the strategy
you use to focus your eyes to com-
prehend a plane or a helicopter flying
overhead - all these strategies of see-
ing I try to equate in the painting with
certain marks of dark which then
carry your eye back and forth across
the surface of the painting. These
strategies of seeing are unique to us
today. This is a language we are form-
ing to comprehend and understand
space: the way in which it is unlike,
say, things seen 100 years ago is simp-
ly that 100 years ago people didn’t
have that kind of environment to
cope with, and the strategies that
they had to use to see were much
simpler. They didn’t have to cope
with a car going 60 miles per hour,
they didn’t have an airplane, they
didn’t have electricity; it was in-
conceivable for them to even think of
developing strategies for comprehen-
ding flashing lights because they had
never seen those. They didn’t have to
cope with sounds the way you’d hear
them walking down the street today.
So all of those are very much ex-
periences of today...

But I would never say to disregard
history. What was so magnificent
about Leonardo and the avant-garde

of his day, was that they taught their
time how to avail of the technology
of their time. They did things that
were so daring, like opening a
cadaver to see what the muscles are
like. That’s a very advanced thing, but
it’s not like we should go and open up
a cadaver to be like Leonardo. That’s
a cruel joke on history. At the same
time, though, we must understand
what he did, how he was in his own
time, the solutions he found. We
should go to Renaissance perspective
and look at the artists who evolved
those ideas. The idea of seeing the
world from one point of view with
one eye stationary is no longer
enough for us, but it’s valuable and
we won’t forget it. Renaissance
perspective is still in my paintings,
but I have to find a space that is more
intricate and more complex. You have
to find the language.

The other thing that’s very impor-
tant in painting is the act of recogni-
tion. In my paintings I’m looking at
the world and the space that is now
and I’m trying to have my eyes as
open as possible to what's out there
-the latest technology. I’m thirsty to
see all that, and understand it as well
as I can. I try to find a language for it
and I paint about it then at one point
I recognize that I have caught
something and I stop. And some
come and experience that same act of
recognition because they understand
the language I used somehow, and
they say, “yes, this is right”, because
they’ve seen that out there. This is
how we test it against reality.
Sometimes we’re very dumb; we don’t
know how to explain, as artists, what
we mean by “it works” but that’s
what I think it means, that we have
shared recognizing that this painting
is about things that are out there. It’s
amazing how sure we are about it
when we see a painting that we like.
We're sure about the fact that it

Photo: Barclay Smith

works or doesn’t.

Q - What do you think is the damage
that’s done by having so few women
on the faculty?

S - Well, they say role model, OK,
what that means is that young people
want to see a potential solution for
their own future - they say, Samia did
it that way, Inge’s doing it that way,
Winifred’s doing it that way, I’m go-
ing to do it even better, or at least I
know it can be done that way. So this
idea that there’s a role model out
there has its value - even if there are
bad ones and good ones all mixed in,
at least you can see avenues of how
it’s done, and you don’t feel left out
of education. It’s vital that the
women who are hired be assertive
women, and not women who are obe-
dient, because that’s really depress-
ing to young students, to come and
say, is that what will happen to me, is
that what I’ll have to do when I’m
teaching, or if I continue to be a
painter?

Also, I think this is very important - I
think young women, and women in
general, are potentially the most
radical members of society because
they've been brought up in certain
ways where they are not self-
indulgent; depending on the family,
and how lucky you are. I know many
men are brought up the same way as
well - but women do things around
the house, where often boys are ex-
cused.

Also, by having been in a relatively
enslaved position compared to young
men in your school and your family or
wherever women are more likely to
empathize with injustice and persecu-
tion - more likely, but it’s not a rule:
men brought up in certain ways feel it
too - you see a black man or woman
being persecuted and you feel with
them, because you've felt the same
things.
Q - Do you think there is a special
female vision in art? Some people say
that women have to create a whole
new language in painting, that up till
now painting has been the language
of men...or do you think that that’s
impossible and that women have to
accept what’s come down by tradi-
tion?

S - I have to get back to several
things under the question. I don’t
think there is a woman’s vision com-
pared to a man’s vision - I think
women are potentially more radical,
and we have to accomplish things by
moving history into the future, so to
speak. If it happens that more women
are in the leadership positions
because we're potentially more
radical in moving society one step in-
to its future, logically, it won’t be a
language that women made.

There has been great art done by
women, but not a great quantity of it.
That is because the women have been
enslaved, and have not been in the
position to do that economically.
Now we have a better position so
more women are making art. In fact if

you pick up the present issue of ‘Art-
Women artists are taking over New
York’.

This is important - we must always
be careful not to allow those who are
in power to separate us into women
versus men, versus the black move-
ment, versus this minority versus
some other. Each individual should
claim the whole history of art, no
matter what its national background,
as their heritage - it’s all yours, and
you have a responsibility for all of it,
because modern technology makes it
possible to learn all of it.

There’s no difference between our
minds, male and female. If there are
minor differences, it’ll be fun to
cooperate, and see what those are,
but I don’t think we know the dif-
ference. We haven’t had the oppor-
tunity - we’ve been brought up dif-
ferently. When we are all brought up
in the same way, and all have the
same liberties, we’re going to find the
only difference between us is our sex,
biologically. The way we think, the
way we comprehend things, our
desire to be free, our desire to express
ideas, these are all the same.

The other question you asked me
about is self-expression. Self-
expression certainly has a place in our
considerations. We want people to
feel free to express their opinion, to
assert what they think, and what they
recognize. But self-expression is not
the thing, if you look at history, that
was the most significant in the
greatest inventions of the human
race. It's not that Einstein told us how
he feels personally, it’s just that he
had the clarity of mind to be able to
perceive certain things that were
there to be perceived.

Q - Why do you say in your statement
that the people here feel threatened

cont. on p.8