amy rossborough - in memoriam

This piece was spoken at the memorial service for  
Amy Rossborough on September 23, 1979, at  
Dwight Chapel, New Haven, CT.

I’m Beth Auman and Amy and I were roommates  
and best friends. I would like to address the  
following words to Amy herself in order to indulge a  
silly fantasy I have that she will hear them.

Amy, those words “best friends” seem so empty  
and inadequate when I think about what we shared  
in the short, short span of two years. I remember  
the first time I really ever spoke to you. You were  
sitting in the entryway, waiting for the police to  
unlock your room because you had left your keys  
inside. I had a friendly urge and stopped to tell you  
about the time I locked my keys in my car with the  
motor running.

I remember running track together - running  
around in the Bowl one soggy day pretending we  
were football players.

I remember us wandering about the uncanny  
number of things we had in common. We must have  
had some mysterious link in a distant former life, or  
maybe we were Siamese twins separated at birth. I  
was almost named Amy when I was born;  
people did and still do mix up our names. We also  
shared attractions to certain men, which was  
confusing at times, but it would have been  
unthinkable for any mere mortal to have come  
between us.

I remember wild craziness, silly times. The  
obscene dancing that you taught me that became  
our schtick at parties. Our songs: one called  
“Boogie ‘til You Puke” by Root Boy Slim and the  
Sex Change Band, and two others that we had our  
own special versions of - “Isn’t She Lovely?” by  
Stevie Wonder, which we sang as, “Aren’t We  
Lovely?” and “Dancing Cheek to Cheek” which we  
changed to “Farting Cheek to Cheek.”

Seriousness, too. Almost every day we had intense  
discussions about men, women, sexuality and power  
and struggled to come to conclusions.

And we also shared our struggles to resist dining  
hall delicacies and ice cream cannolis, and our  
addiction to croutons. And I remember those  
incredible birthday cakes that you used to get for  
me.

I also remember how you used to break things a  
lot and misplace my things, which would irritate me  
extremely at the time.

I remember seeing the Wizard of Oz together and  
not being able to enjoy it because of the political  
implications we saw in it.

I remember waking every morning to the infernal  
sound of your buzzer alarm and dragging myself out  
of bed to do my exercises while you were already up  
and exercising vigorously.

I remember you correcting my posture all the  
time: “Beth, your butt is sticking out,” and  
grabbing hold of my hip bones and forcing me into  
line.

Oh, I also remember the rough spots, especially  
the period of non-communication that we went  
through last fall. As you wrote to me later - “We  
swished through a lot of mud, and our feelings got  
caked at times. But sludge is made for splashing  
and sharing it can make us strong.” And, yes, it  
made us very strong.

Then there was Playboy - pickets and graffiti and  
the frustration of trying to argue with and enlighten  
people.

I remember going to the Prom together for two  
years like two old maids or ugly ducklings and  
working as coat-check girls, observing the couples  
in their ritual finery and putting up signs  
advertising hard drugs and raw sex when business  
was slow.

I remember bringing you violets when I went  
running on gorgeous spring days and you were  
injured.

I gave you a branch of oh so sweet lilac on our  
last day together this past spring and had to remind  
you to take it with you when you left.

Oh, I remember your yellow rain boots, your green  
raincoat and your blue down jacket. I remember  
your ancient bathrobe, your shower cap.

I remember how one could read your every  
emotion in your face.

I remember how you would not let me lie to  
myself, how you questioned me as you questioned  
yourself.

But most indelible in my memory, Amy, is the  
way you loved me through mud and sludge, when I  
hurt you stupidly, when I took you for granted,  
when we could not or would not understand each  
other - I never felt your love waver.

Amy, I hear you telling me not to get mired in  
mourning, but to build on what I gained from  
our friendship and use it with and for other people.

And that is what I desire most - that everyone who  
knew Amy will hear her say to them. I hope that all  
of you who hold little pieces of Amy in your hearts  
will incorporate those precious bits into your lives to  
counteract a little, in the only way we possibly can,  
the unfathomable loss that her death has been.

I will close the service with these words of Amy’s  
written last year.

“Let’s question the single-mindedness of purpose  
enslaved to twin gods of reason and success.  
We struggle so frantically towards the future  
that we forget to share each other.  
We pursue the abstract, the ideal, the future  
and gone is the moment when we could love one  
another.”

Amy Rossborough, Ezra Stiles ‘81, was killed in  
an automobile accident this past September 6 while  
driving north from her summer job in Georgia.

Perhaps the only positive result of this tragedy,  
and our loss, has been that many of us who knew  
Amy were abruptly checked in our headlong rush  
toward selfish goals and were forced to reconsider  
our directions together. Amy was a committed  
feminist. She spent much of her time, energy and  
thought pursuing the interests of women. Beyond  
the sudden realization that life is precious as well as  
precarious, and beyond our rage at the injustice of  
the death of one who deserved to live, our process  
since her death has produced an effort to further  
her work by making it more explicitly a part of our  
own.

Concretely, we are organizing a speaker series on  
women’s issues in her honor. Women’s concerns  
are often ignored, distorted or belittled. We want to  
bring to Yale speakers from as many different areas  
as possible. In her life, and now  
in her death, Amy pushed us to see the unity of all  
women and the complacency and self-absorption  
that we are often guilty of in unconsciously  
accepting our privilege as Yale women.

We need your suggestions, connections, and  
money. We are becoming a non-profit corporation;  
donations are provisionally tax-deductible pending  
approval. You can contact me at (203) 562-4994, or Dean Judith Brandenburg, Associate  
Dean of Yale College.

You can’t always just not want me -  
princess

It’s like that devil who tempts them to climb up cliffsides  
and they would do more; they  
would do anything.  
When they can’t, when they fall she  
says to blame it on the weather  
but we blame it on ourselves and  
we dive into the snow with no gloves on  
to prove our love.

Maia Ettinger

Students, like soggy cereal flakes  
wedged in the stadium for the big Milk Bowl:  
The Big Spoon on Table Touches-Down.  
Rows of bubbling costumed flakes cheer--  
Grasping the Spoon’s edge they strain  
to be eaten.  
Smooth and shining, he thoughtfully scorns the soggy,  
cornering the crispy.

Jennie Livingston -