IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Rules:
1. Fix obvious OCR errors (like '0' instead of 'O', '1' instead of 'l')
2. Preserve the original line breaks and text blocks.
3. Preserve the original meaning and historical context.
4. Do not add any additional text.
5. Do not delete any text.
6. Process EVERY line - do not skip any content.

Corrected text:

cept. Traditional societal roles will always hover over
any relationship between a woman and a man,
no matter how liberated the particular individuals
who are involved. These roles are so pervasive
throughout the societal environment that it is impos-
sible to remain psychologically unaffected by them,
even when they may have been rejected on an intel-
lectual level. There is a very real and very human
tendency to fall back into habitual patterns of beha-
vior--especially when all the old social cues are still
present--in spite of any willed intentions to the con-
trary. Some feminists perceive this regression as
absolutely inevitable within the contemporary con-
text of a heterosexual relationship. Although it
cannot completely eliminate the danger of role
playing, lesbianism certainly increases the odds
against it: since the dichotomy of sexual opposites

no longer exists, there is no longer any foundation

for the pattern of dominance-submission. Lesbianism
simply makes it easier to achieve a genuine equality
of power in a love relationship.

It should be clear that this second argument for
lesbianism--one that advocates it as a self-contained,

woman-identified lifestyle, rather than as one expres-
sion of an open-ended sexuality--is based on political
expedience. Lesbianism is used as a practical method
for eliminating the sexual dichotomy, but it accom-
plishes this aim only by excluding one term of the
male-female duality rather than by changing the
underlying psychological structure which remains
false in and of itself. In this sense, lesbianism constitu-
tes the response of a woman who is still trapped by
sexism. As explained by the Radicalesbians:

It should first be understood that lesbia-

nism, like male homosexuality, is a

category of behavior possible only in a

sexist society characterized by rigid sex

roles and dominated by male supremacy...

In a society in which men do not oppress

women, and sexual expression is allowed

to follow feelings, the categories of

homosexuality and heterosexuality

would disappear. (6)

The genuine elimination of sex roles cannot logically
generate any rigid sexual orientation, either lesbian
or straight, but rather it must lead to an open-ended
bisexuality. Even Firestone--who refers to homo-
sexuals as “the extreme casualties” of the family
system--foresees a return to the original Freudian
condition of *

lesbianism, it is now possible to retu

purpose of this paper and critique the absolute pri-
macy which feminist analysis attributes to considera-
tions of power. There is an implicit assumption be-
hind the argument for lesbianism: the entire validity
of an emotional relationship can be measured by the
extent to which it achieves an equal balance of
power. In fact, any human involvement must be
justifiable in terms of its power content; if it cannot
be guaranteed to meet the feminist criterion of com-
plete equality, then it must be sacrificed for the sake
of political integrity. This is the ultimate meaning of
the claim that “the personal is political.”

But an important question must be asked: does
this kind of sacrifice present a genuine conflict of
priorities--in which case it implies a need to re-eval-
uate the conceptual structures behind feminism and
the primacy of political analysis in the personal realm;
or is it only a false conflict arising from the tenacity
of socially conditioned sexism? Neither case can
stand alone and still command complete conviction;
each argument leads to an untenable position if the

other perspective is consistently ignored. The first

argument opens the door to a complete rebuttal of
feminism and raises the spectre of a backlash rever-
sion to sexism. On the other hand, the second inter-
pretation demands an uncompromising exercise of
willpower in order to assert reason over emotion; if
the gap between logic and feeling is sufficiently large,
then this demand constitutes a ridiculous--even

egregious perversity.”
__.——Having set forth the various arguments. ci i
m to the Choa

dangerous--denial of human complexity. Such un-
sophisticated willpower (a kind of intellectual brute
force) is not necessarily a quality which feminists
should choose to cultivate. It has the potential to
generate frightening intolerance and a disrespect for
the dignity of the individual person.

The dilemma which arises when the personal meets
the political is not simply the product of a mistakenly
over-zealous feminism. The single-mindedness of
radical analysis evolves very naturally from the idea
of power. Power is defined as the “ability to do some-
thing or to act upon a person or thing... the posses-
sion of control or command over others.”(14) It
inherently implies a relationship of inequality. This
fact takes on enormous importance in the context
of traditional liberal theory, which has always regar-
ded equality as its first priority; in so far as it poses a
threat to equality, power now becomes a central
ideological--as well as practical--issue. Thus, power
derives its own primacy from the cultural significance
that is attached to equality.

The problem with any analysis which recognizes
power as the single most important factor in an
interpersonal relationship, is that it tends to recognize
only this one aspect of the situation. Moreover, it
does not exclude the other perspectives out of a
simple disenchantment in them or a careless ina-
ttention to complexity; instead it actively discredits
them. Again, this fact rests in the original conceptual
attributes of power rather than in any misuse of the
idea. According to Lord Acton’s axiom, “All power
corrupts.” This means that only when full equality
has been achieved can the other aspects of a rela-
tionship--such as affection--come into their own as
things of real value. The validity of the affection is
contingent upon the power structure within which it
exists; if the latter is unbalanced then the affection is
totally corrupt, and in its falseness it can be disregarded
as a meaningful aspect of the relationship. This
justifies the incompleteness of a political analysis
even when this incompleteness does violence to the
reality of subjective experience. The resulting descrip-
tion may be intuitively inadequate while at the same
time it must be accepted as rationally correct.

Thus the attempt to humanize radical analysis
seems hopeless since the narrowness of its perspec-
tive is logically defensible. At this stage, it may be
helpful to examine another political ideal--that of
personal liberty--to see how an analogous conflict
has been resolved in this case. All political theories

have recognized that drawing out this ideal to its

logical conclusion would lead to an extreme, one which would destroy the political
community by granting any and all demands based
on individual prerogative. In this example, the prob-
lem is recognized as one of competing priorities
which must be brought together in some kind of
sensible compromise. Drawing an analogy between
equality and liberty, it becomes important to under-
stand what it is that may constitute a competing
priority against considerations of power.

There are two such competing priorities: the need
for psychological stability and the need to live unself-
consciously. The first issue is intimately bound up in
the whole notion of role playing. Originally this
model was developed as a completely neutral desc-
ription of how human beings function. It becomes
political only when the roles become restrictive. The
point here is that not all role playing is automatically
bad. We spontaneously create roles for ourselves in

our dealings with other people, and to some ex-
tent we rely on the familiarity of these patterns in
order to preserve our sanity. Contrary to the feminist
statement that “All role playing is sick,” (15) some
role playing may be very healthy...

The role playing model of the human psyche poses
a direct challenge to the primacy of power. It openly
acknowledges that any stable role association tends
to generate a pattern of dominance and to some ex-
tent it accepts this fact as being unalterable. For
example, even in the most well-intentioned friend-

WHAT ARE YOUR LEGAL RIGHTS?

HAVE YOU BEEN DISCRIMINATED AGAINST,
HARASSED, DENIED DISABILITY BENEFITS FOR
PREGNANCY, DENIED MEDICAL BENEFITS?

CWEALF's attorneys can handle your litigation, CWEALF’S
staff can answer your questions and make referrals to

other agencies or attorneys to handle specific problems.

614 Orange St.
New Haven 06511
865-0188

MS ee Giles tia ee

SU ABI R SS t 2

57 Pratt St. Rm. 410
Hartford 06103
247-6090

ship, it is almost impossible to develop an equal
relationship because it is so improbable that every
aspect of the attachment will be felt with the same
strength by each party. Yet the psychologist, unlike
the feminist, will not automatically advocate a total
withdrawal from every ‘tainted’ relationship. Even if it
fails to meet the ideal standards of equality, this does
not invalidate every other aspect of the relationship.
In other words, corrupt affection may, under some
circumstances, be better than no affection. Because
it was developed in a context where sanity is valued,
the role playing model is able to take the absolute
need for human contact just as seriously as the needs
regarding the quality of that contact. In this way it is
able to provide a basis for compromise: It recognizes
a sliding scale of priorities: at some points the evils
of inequality outweigh those of isolation and vice
versa, but between these two lines there is a wide range
of acceptable compromise. In contrast, feminism--
with its rigorous critique of power--accepts the validi-
ty of only one point on this scale: that of precise
equality.

The second priority that competes with equality is
the need to live unself-consciously. Simone de
Beauvoir expresses this concern in her discussion of
lesbianism:

..there is no way in which they (lesbians)

can live naturally in their situation: being

natural implies being unself-conscious,

not picturing one’s acts to oneself; but

the attitude of other people constantly

directs the lesbian’s attention upon her-

self. (9)
For a feminist (whether lesbian or not), it is not so
much the attitude of other people which poses a
danger as it is the self-induced awareness that results
from making the personal into the political. This
requires that every thought and action be subjected
to a critique in terms of power. Essentially we become
spectators of ourselves, and much spontaneous
creativity is lost. This loss of creativity is tied to the
loss of roles since it is the familiarity of these role
patterns that allows a person to lose his/her self-
consciousness. In providing the experience of secu-
rity, these roles free us of the fears that prevent us
going beyond ourselves.

It should be clear that the two concerns which
challenge the primacy of power both represent the
same basic need to avoid acute alienation. If equality
is granted unqualified importance it can be used to

discredit almost any human relationship. The resul-

other people is matched by an

equal degree of self-estrangement that is derived

from the analysis of the personal as the political.
What all of this means is that in a very real sense,
feminism demands a willingness to become fright-
eningly alienated.

But there is a very good justification for this aliena-
tion. Without it, feminism would stagnate and lose all
incentive for activism. The original purpose of con-
sciousness raising was to generate a new self-aware-
ness; too much respect for the stabilizing function of
role playing results in a very benign perspective on
sexism (as exemplified by Elizabeth Janeway). Again
we find ourselves on a sliding scale of priorities
which make it impossible to establish absolute stan-
dards. We must accept that feminism does not create
a conflict of priorities; at the two extremes the alter-
natives are insanity or oppression. The only answer is
compromise. If she has explored the full complexities
of the issues, every woman has the right to demand
that her own personal solutions to the conflict be
respected by other feminists.

While it is true that there are political
implications to everything a woman qua
woman experiences, it is not therefore
true that a woman's life is the political
property of the women’s movement. (10)