At the bottom of much radical political thinking lies  
one basic pattern of intellectual analysis: namely, a  
process of making explicit the previously unacknow-  
ledged power content of a certain set of human  
relationships (whether defined by economic roles or  
racial and sexual characteristics) regardless of their  
institutionalized political status. The objective of re-  
making these relationships as ones of equality is then  
given a moral primacy which provides the impetus  
for a practical program of radical change. Feminist  
argument shows this same internal progression. Its  
basic intellectual insight can be summarized by that  
well-known phrase “the personal is political.” As a  
framework for analysis, this concept has unequivocal  
strength and validity; it has yielded new descriptions  
of society, ones which have clearly had genuine sig-  
nificance when measured against the real experi-  
ences of many women.  

However, when combined with the moral impera-  
tive for equality, the meaning of this statement  
changes. It must now be understood as claiming  
that “the personal is exclusively political”—i.e., that  
questions of political integrity take priority over all  
other aspects of one’s personhood. In moving from  
an analysis of the present to a directive for the future  
the role of this concept—that the personal is political—  
alters radically and in a way that cannot be taken as  
just a shift in emphasis. That which was an original  
insight of great truth has now become a principle of  
action which is rationally correct and defensible, but  
which, in terms of humanistic values, is tremendously  
problematic. This essay will examine and evaluate  
the logical necessity of the new meaning.  

In order to make such an evaluation, it is necessary  
to consider the history and precise significance of the  
original statement. One of the earlier pieces of writing  
in which the concept of power is explicitly used as a  
principle of analysis is Kate Millett’s Sexual Politics.  
In fact, she characterizes her objective as “an attempt  
to prove that sex is a status category with political  
implications.” {1} Millett is very careful to give a pre-  

cise explanation of the connection between sexuality,  
power and politics:  
“In introducing the term sexual politics,  
sexes be viewed in a political light at all?” The answer depends on how  
one defines politics... the term politics  
shall refer to power structured relation-  
ships, arrangements whereby one group  
of persons is controlled by another...  
the essence of power is politics.” (2)  
Having linked power with politics through this defi-  
nition, she proceeds to close the triangle by docu-  
menting the power dynamics of the sexual relation-  
ship with a mass of cultural and literary evidence.  
Millett’s self-conscious justification is important  
because it is found so rarely among other feminist  
writers who usually accept the implicit assumptions  
of their vocabulary as self-evident truths.  

The implications of a power-oriented perspective  
make themselves felt through several different  
aspects of feminism. In the first place, when it is  
applied to sociological data this perspective provides  
the foundation for a class consciousness between  
women. The concept of power provides a context  
within which numerical statistics take on meaning  
as evidence of institutionalized oppression rather  
than benign neglect; when the structure of society is  
objectively described as a function of the sex charac-  
teristic, patterns of discrimination emerge in such a  
concrete form that the reality of sexism cannot be  
ignored. In so far as the statistics define a recogni-  
zable form of inequality, they also define an institu-  
tionalization of power that has political significance.  
The statistics lose their value-neutrality, and in so  
doing they open up a whole range of private experi-  
ence—virtually any event or condition that is suffi-  
ciently well defined to accommodate statistical pre-  
sentation—to political analysis. The classic example in  
which this method of feminist reasoning transforms  
an isolated event into a political issue is  
rape. The numerical frequency of this crime means  
that the exercise of power inherent in the act itself  
cannot be dismissed as the pathology of the  
particular individuals involved: rape has social signifi-  
cance as an effective method of controlling.  
The same can be said of the historical  
female infanticide.  
These isolated examples of feminist analysis do  
in themselves lead to a comprehensive political  
theory of feminism; instead, their value lies in the  
fact that they achieve a basic feminist consciousness  
raising... In Millett's words, we have proved to our-  
selves that “sex is a status category with political  
implications.”  

HELENA BRETT-SMITH  

Dedicated to Meg Starr and Judy Genova  

However, the power-oriented method of analysis  
can be used to move well beyond this basic level of  
consciousness raising. When it is applied in a compre-  
hensive fashion to the established institutions (institu-  
tions in the strict sense) of society, it can be made to  
yield a formal political theory. Shulamith Firestone  
accomplishes precisely this goal by examining the  
power dynamics of familial relationships. As her  
starting point she assumes that the following condi-  
tions constitute historical fact: the different reproduc-  
tive roles of the sexes inevitably lead to unequal  
power distribution within the nuclear family. She  
argues that from this material reality, an all-encom-  
passing power psychology—one based on “the  
pattern of dominance submission” (3)—has develo-  
ped...  
Her particular response to the sexual imbalance of  
power is to propose the elimination both of natural  
reproduction and of the family structure that accom-  
panies it.  

The question of power enters feminist thought in  
yet a third different way when it is combined with the  
psychological theory of role playing. As in Firestone,  
a comprehensive theory of feminism results, but the  
sequential development of the argument more  
closely resembles that in the consciousness raising  
process. Again, it is the recognition of a consistent  
inequality in power that transforms what was initially  
a value-neutral concept of sex role differentiation into  
the political ideology of sexism. In itself, role theory  
regards the male-female distinction as nothing more  
than a source of convenient categories for arbitrarily  
dividing both the social activities and the psychologi-  
cal characteristics of human beings. As a method of  
structuring society, role playing, even in this benign  
form, is subject to attack from political reformers: in  
the first place, it presumes a dualistic perspective  
which is never intellectually justified and which  
may be philosophically improper in spite of its persis-  
tent recurrence in Western thought; secondly, the  
concept of a role as a set pattern of behavior inher-  
ently stands in conflict with the ideals of complete  
freedom and individuality. Moreover, when these  
roles cannot even be selected according to personal  
preference, but are imposed through social  
pressure, this dignity is a function of the inability to make choices. In addition,  
feminism adds the recognition that the allocation of  
sex roles is accompanied by an analogous distri-  
bution of power. In fact, it claims that the essential  
content of these roles is the isolation of power within  
an exclusively male sphere of activity. Thus the sepa-  
ration of sex roles must now be viewed as an actively  
sexist ideology (in the specific sense of being prefer-  
ential to one sex). In response to this analysis, femi-  
nism calls for the direct elimination of the sex-role  
structure through a self-conscious process of re-edu-  
cation; since sexist values and attitudes have been  
learned, it is completely logical to conclude that they  
can be unlearned by willfully effecting a change in  
behavior.  

Although the concept of power is central both to  
Firestone’s theory and to the sex role analysis, it is  
used very differently in each case. This difference  
reflects the more basic fact that the original assump-  
tions which lie behind each theory are not the same;  
as a natural consequence they each advocate a  
rather different program for putting feminism into  
practice. Firestone uses a functional definition of  
power as the concrete oppression of women. In this  
sense, she reduces the concept to its purely factual  
content: the distribution of material power. Certainly  
she does recognize the existence of the sexist ment-  
ality—an intellectual conglomerate of values, psycho-  
logical attitudes, and social roles—but she regards this  
as a secondary symptom having no life of its own.  
Being dependent on the material conditions from  
which it arises, it will naturally disappear when these  
are eradicated. The sex role theory perceives the  
relationship between mind and reality in precisely the  
reverse order of causality. It defines sexism as a  
completely artificial and irrational construct of the  
human mind. This theory does not recognize any  
logical or factual necessity for the imbalance of power  
between the sexes; instead, sexism is a conceptual  
viewpoint which has imposed an arbitrary value  
system onto the biological categories of male and  
female.  

Basic to the position of radical feminism  
is the concept that biology is not destiny  
and that male and female roles are  
social constructs that serve to ensure  
the perpetuation of sexism. These notions have another  
consequence in the sense that  
the practice of a feminist lifestyle. In this matter, it is  
the sex role theory that becomes overwhelmingly  
important—and is the motivating force behind the  
popular feminist movement—because its method of  
coping with sexism has much more immediate and  
practical applicability. Firestone follows the tradition  
of political theorists in that she calls for changes in  
objective social conditions (e.g., the facts of reproduc-  
tion) and in the institutionalized structure of society  
(e.g., the family). The problem with this scheme is that  
it remains too theoretical; such changes can only be  
very partially effected through personal decisions  
and actions. It would require a radical metamorpho-  
sis of society in order to live in good faith as a prac-  
ticing feminist. Since the elimination of sexism as a  
psychosexual phenomenon can only follow after a  
re-ordering of material conditions, the prospect for  
personal liberation is poor.  

The origin of the sex role theory in psychology gives  
it a very practical significance. If sexism is the product  
of a certain way of thinking, then the possibility for  
meaningful change is brought within the reach of  
each individual. The first step is consciousness  
raising; once the oppressiveness of sexism has been  
recognized, the intellectual attitude tends to self-  
destruct and a demand for material change becomes  
spontaneous. The task quickly becomes one of  
bringing habits, behavior, and emotion into confor-  
mity with intellectual ideals—of establishing some kind  
of internal consistency between thought and action.  
The presumption is that once the enemy is known,  
it can be defeated by an exercise in willpower. The  
one danger that can undermine the process of self-  
liberation is the failure to recognize the insidious per-  
vasiveness of sexism. This is the failure of an only  
partially raised consciousness.  

The solution to this problem is two-fold: first, the  
feminist mode of analysis must be granted an absolu-  
tely universal applicability; secondly, in each particu-  
lar case, the argument from power must be followed  
through to the farthest extreme of its logical conclu-  
sion. Together, these statements mean the issue  
of power takes primacy over all others. The impli-  
cations of such a policy only emerge when it is reali-  
zed in a concrete form through specific examples. In  
attempting to understand and evaluate these impli-  
cations, the argument for lesbianism as the only true  
feminist lifestyle will be used as a case study.  

For many feminists there has always  
been a logical, theoretical connection  
between the elimination of sex roles and  
the possibility of loving other women. (5)  

The logic behind the connection is by no means  
obscure. Human sexuality has traditionally been  
regarded as a function (a) of reproduction and (b) of  
the masculine-feminine dichotomy. The first concept  
has already been eliminated from the general context  
of contemporary thought, since personal pleasure  
and self-fulfillment are now widely recognized as  
sufficient grounds for sexual activity. The second  
concept rests on an amorphous set of assumptions  
which is quite mythic in character: in general, that  
the natural mode of pairing is one between oppo-  
sites—it is only by bringing together unlike qualities  
that one achieves an organic whole—and more speci-  
fically, that sexual attraction rests on the mysterious  
lure of the unknown as posed by a member of the  
opposite sex. Now, having acknowledged that  
masculinity and femininity are false notions of human  
identity, the second argument for heterosexuality  
loses its mythic power. Once the artificial sex roles  
have been stripped away, there is no longer any  
criterion for identifying heterosexuality as the arche-  
typal expression of the erotic instincts. All human  
beings are identical with respect to any characteristic  
that might be relevant to a sexual relationship: the  
only relevant physical characteristic is clearly univer-  
sal in that both sets of sex organs are subject to erotic  
stimulation; and the rejection of sex roles means  
that the psychological characteristics upon which  
affection rests are also undifferentiated. Given this  
universality of relevant characteristics, it is only logical  
that homosexuality should be granted a status equal  
to that of heterosexuality.  

Thus far, it has been shown only that the elimination  
of sex roles does lead to a recognition of the open-  
endedness of human sexuality. However, radical  
feminists are often willing to make the dogmatic  
assertion that lesbianism is the necessary outcome of  
a genuine feminism. The argument supporting this  
position is quite logical (in the sense of reasonable)  
although it rests on practical expedience rather than  
strictly theoretical considerations. Lesbianism can be  
advocated as the most effective—though still not fool-  
proof—method of guaranteeing that one’s habits,  
behavior and emotions are in conformity with the  
intellectual ideals of feminism. Having recognized the  
insidious strength of the sex role system, liberated  
heterosexuality becomes a virtually unrealizable con-