Reaganomics?

Patricia Buck Wolf

The women and children dependent
on welfare payments for their survival
are the subject of much ill-informed
discussion today. One common myth,
for example, holds that most of such
women are black and have many il-
legitimate children. In reality, the ma-
jority of women on welfare are white. It
is about one such white welfare mother
and her family that I write.

Mary Barnes, 43, lives in the Hill sec-
tion of New Haven. In terms of
concentric-zone theory, the Hill is in
Zone Two, the area of dilapidated
housing just outside the central
business district. The Hill, once known
as “Gallows Hill,” is socially and to
some extent spatially isolated from the
rest of New Haven. Since the eight-
eenth century it has usually been con-
sidered among the worst areas in New
Haven.

Mary has lived in the Hill all her life,
born into a lower working-class Irish
family on Congress Avenue in the days
before the neighborhood became
predominantly black and Hispanic.
Mary is a widow. Her husband died
before he had worked long enough to
make his family eligible for Social
Security benefits. After her husband’s
death Mary supported herself and her

children by working as a barmaid until
severe respiratory difficulties forced
her to seek state aid to survive. Mary
has three children: James, 18, who
recently dropped out of school in his
third month in the tenth grade; Greg,
17, who recently came home after eigh-
teen months in a home for the mentally
and emotionally disturbed; and Lucy,
just turned 13, and beginning to suffer
sexual harassment at school.

Mary’s income from the Connecticut
flat grant welfare system is $364 a
month. From this amount she must pay
$175 in rent for four heated rooms and
a large unheated attic that serves as the
boys’ bedroom in a decaying two-
family house. She must also pay for gas
and electricity. The first floor of the
Barnes’ house is occupied by two Puer-
to Rican women and the three children

of one of the women. This family is also
dependent on welfare.

The downstairs neighbors are Mary’s
most immediate worry at the present
time. This family had all utilities shut
off for nonpayment and now uses
candles for cooking and heating. A fire
clearly could break out at any time.
Children supported by welfare pay-
ments are supposed to be removed to
foster care when a dangerous situation

such as this fire hazard exists. However,
the Department of Children and Youth
Services rarely takes decisive action un-
til after a death occurs.

Mary hopes for the day when her
health will improve enough for her to
seek employment again. Though as the
years pass, her condition deteriorates.
She refuses to become depressed by
the harsh hand life has dealt her. When
her illnesses permit, she seeks to better
conditions for others with troubles. She
is a telephone volunteer for a chari-
table organization that gives food to
people in emergency situations. She is
president of the Hill Welfare Moms.
She is a board member of Christian
Community Action, a group that pro-
vides emergency housing, welfare ad-
vocacy, and generally tries to better the
lot of those living in the Hill.

Mary’s life is a constant struggle for
the basic necessities, therefore she at-
tempts anything that offers hope for
bettering her existence and that of her
children. She maintains a garden and
rabbit hutch in her back yard to add
vegetables and meat to the family diet.
She made payments over a four-year
period so that she could obtain a
freezer in order to buy in bulk at sales
and freeze vegetables when they are in
season. She says she tries all the tricks
ever invented by housewives, but that
she still cannot exist on the flat welfare
grant, which is fixed at the 1971 poverty
level, disregarding the great inflation
since that time.

Mary knows she will have to do
something about her eldest son. He was
kept back for two years because of ill-
nesses, and the school board never
supplied a homebound teacher to keep
him abreast of his studies. With James
out of high school, Mary's welfare
check will be reduced by $70 a month.
Life will become even more of a strug-
gle. Mary hopes that James will at least
be able to obtain one of the CETA jobs
for youth in his situation.

Two years ago Mary’s youngest son’s
emotional problems became so severe
that he had to be institutionalized out-
side of New Haven. With Greg in the
hospital, Mary's monthly check was cut
by the portion allotted to him. As a con-
sequence, the Barneses were unable to
pay for their gas for cooking and hot
water. The welfare department was
supposed to send money for the family
to visit Greg, but the money never arriv-
ed. Greg was very upset by the lack of
visits, which were part of his therapy.
After Greg was released from the
hospital, he was enrolled by the
Department of Vocational Rehabilita-
tion in a program to train him in auto
mechanics. He is now beginning to feel
and act a lot better.

Mary also worries about what to do
about her daughter. Lucy does not yet
have an interest in boys, but the males at
her school are very interested in her.
She has recently been complaining
about the sexual advances made to her
in the halls at school and on the school
grounds. The principal of Lucy’s school
is a weak administrator with little con-
trol over the student body, and Lucy’s
complaints about being sexually
harassed have not brought about any
action aimed at ending the situation.
Mary would like to take Lucy out of
this particular school before she
becomes pregnant. With Medicaid no
longer paying for abortions, the Hill
now abounds with young girls with big
bellies, including some as young as ten
years old.

One of the enduring problems of
slum living is that children become sex-
ually active quite young, usually before
they are exposed to any intelligent birth
control advice. With abortion no longer
available for the poor, early pregnan-
cies usually result in premature infant
delivery or the responsibilities of
motherhood being thrust on a girl
scarcely past childhood herself.

A baby is stabbed to death on Con-
gress Avenue. Mary receives phone
calls about funeral arrangements and
possibly flowers. It was a welfare child,
and no funeral parlor is willing to han-
dle arrangements for the $200 that the
state allows for such burials. In the Hill
life is cheap, and no one outside the
Hill really seems to care.

Delinquency, truancy, alcoholism,
mental illness, suicide, and a host of
other social problems abound in the
Hill. The Hill lacks community order,
cooperative values, unity, and
discipline. Neglected by the wider
society, those in the Hill feel powerless
and become demoralized.

Existence on welfare is a never-
ending grind just to meet basic needs.
Diets are inadequate and/or imbalanc-
ed. Everything is in short supply. Spirits
are crushed by the indifference of
authority, the oppressive conditions of
housing and neighborhoods, and the
violence that fills the schools. Children
grow old too quickly—or never grow
up. Escape seems a vain dream. Life
revolves from one welfare check day to
the next and from one tragic occur-
rence to the next. The future is as bleak
as the present. How can this vicious cir-
cle be broken?