4

RESEARCH: “WOMEN AT WORK”

Behind every product, there is a process of creation. “Women at Work,” a collage of visual and verbal information, a history of women in the paid labor force in New Haven, reveals that process to the viewer more than a painting or novel does.

Researching the exhibit was an engrossing experience. It took us deep into the Yale Library stacks, flipping through dusty books for pictures and quotations. In the collection of the New Haven Colony Historical Society and Yale’s Manuscripts and Archives department, we poured over primary materials—diaries, letters, photographs, records, minutes of ladies’ clubs. And we talked with people in the New Haven community who shared their personal recollections or the results of their research.

A word about the format: the exhibit consists of fourteen panels of red poster board, adhered to thin sheets of foam core. Illustrations and text are dry mounted and keyed by number to citations for the sources. This is not a very slick display, but it has certain advantages. Primarily, it’s cheap. Most of the material was photocopied and the mounting was done at home on our ironing boards. It is easy to store and display, requiring no special equipment or expertise (as a slide show or video would). This makes the exhibit accessible to women’s groups, schools, libraries and to audiences not reached by the products of more scholarly research.

The exhibit is arranged chronologically, from colonial times to the present, to emphasize the contributions women have made at every stage of the region’s economic growth. Women viewing the display sense themselves part of an unfinished story.

We dug through old local newspapers and clipping files in the New Haven Public Library, looking for write-ups of strikes, profiles of women workers and advertisements. Barbra had recently seen Union Maids, a documentary film of the incredibly exciting stories of women labor activists in Chicago during the 1930s, and she hoped to find equally inspiring tales of Connecticut women. That was not to be. We learned that New Haven was the sweat shop capital of the state, that most women workers were heavily concentrated in the garment trades and that union activity was not terribly militant, among either men or women. While the emphasis of the exhibit is on New Haven, we drew extensively from the history of other parts of Connecticut, New England and New York.

Overhauls from $5.00 to $12.50

76 WALL STREET

FRIDAYS 2:30 -- 5:30 p.m.

NO

P.O. Box 1804 New Haven, Ct. 06507

Bicycles repaired by New Haven youth and Yale volunteers Used bicycles from $15.00 to $30.00 RECYCLE YOUR CYCLE!

NUKES

New Haven Clamshell Alliance is a non-sexist, decentralized group of people working against nuclear power.

We meet on Wednesday at 7:30 p.m., Dwight Hall, 2nd floor

by Barbra Apfelbaum Sue Searer Janice Hansel

To unearth, sort, and tell the story of New Haven’s working women was a profoundly political process of many levels: the context in which it was developed—to be shown at a conference on Women in the Paid Labor Force, sponsored by the New Haven Feminist Union; the way in which it was produced—collectively, by the three of us, who shared the work at every stage, with no hierarchical division of labor; the content itself—aimed at rediscovering the stories of women hidden from history; and the way in which it was used—to make historical information easily accessible to a lot of people, outside the exclusivist environment of a museum or a private university.

“But is it art?” Writing this article for a magazine devoted to art, politics and feminism, we feel compelled to ask ourselves that question. Certainly, we all brought our creative and intellectual powers into play in compiling the exhibit, from thinking up new places to dig for information to designing the layout. Sue contends, however, that the exhibit is not “art” in any pure sense: it lacks the unifying vision of the artist, and it does not present a compelling aesthetic interpretation of the facts it reveals. It is, rather, a synthesis. Its cut-and-paste assemblage of text, photographs, drawings, music and objects is designed to convey the richness and diversity of women’s history.

Barbra finds the question somewhat beside the point. For her, its very value lies in its documentary and anti-individualist nature. Janice thinks that the nature of “art” is too big a question to be addressed here. For her, the essential characteristic of the exhibit, and of producing it, was its participatory nature. She feels that by working together to create it we not only derived strength from the women it documents, but were able to share some of what we found with other women. “Women at Work” was conceived and executed as a feminist project and as such combines personal expression and political statement; it’s very hard for us to say where one ends and the other begins, for they intermingle. We asked each other how working on this exhibit about working women changed the way we see ourselves in relation to our own work: Here are our answers:

Sue: A child of the fifties, I had thought of my generation of “career women” as a new phenomenon. In fact, women have always worked, and not just for the money. I learned that the girls who left the family farms in the early 1800s to labor in the mills were seeking adventure and independence just as earnestly as the college graduate of today who spurns the role of suburban housewife.

Barbra: I already knew a fair amount about the history of working women in this country, so that held no surprises for me. This was a new and wonderful experience for me for other reasons. Having been in academia for years and years, I had always done research alone. Hours, days, years of library work always resulted in some work that was read by a few professors, a handful of scholars. This project too entailed months of research. But the actual creation of the exhibit was a shared effort. And the most gratifying part has been people’s positive response to the exhibit, the knowledge that we have created something we can in turn share so easily with so many others.

Janice: My interest in work stems primarily from a year and a half of reading through and sorting out interviews and other materials documenting the lack of good human relations between managers and male workers. So much of what I learned about the way our society treats male factory workers can be applied to women, but in a more exaggerated way. In this exhibit, we have tried to show that women not only helped to build this nation for the past 350 years, but have brought to their jobs an amazing diversity of talents which remain undocumented in history texts. As we continue to dig into the past, we can more reasonably hope for a good future.

4761 Yale Station New Haven 06520

A BIT OF SUNSHINE EVERYDAY!

Danny-Yo

Soft frozen yogurt cones, shakes

Homemade Soups

open ‘til 11 every night 562-3888

1000 Chapel St. at College New Haven