March 1984

AURORA

page 7

“Keeping the Spirit Alive”

An Interview with Margie Adam

by Robin Einzig

I was recently fortunate enough to be
granted a personal interview with Margie
Adam, a nationally-known pianist/singer/
songwriter. She has been a major force in
the development of women’s music, both
as an art form and as an industry. Her
beautiful music blends the sounds of pop,
jazz, and classical into her own unique,
almost hypnotic sound. This article
covers her general background, as well as
some fascinating up-to-date information
on what and how Margie is doing. Enjoy!

Margie Adam’s first exposure to the
piano was when she was a very small
child. Her mother was a piano teacher and
a pianist. Margie says, “As soon as I was
tall enough to crawl up on the piano
bench, I was up there. Never banging, al-
ways that little delicate movement, like I
would see her do.” At age 5, after about
two years of picking out notes on the
piano, her mother decided it was time for
her to start lessons. Margie credits her
mom with being “smart enough to not try
to teach me herself.” Margie’s piano les-
sons went well. She studied classical
music, although she listened to show
tunes by Cole Porter and George Gershwin
in the evenings with her father.

At the age of 13 or 14, Margie became
more interested in playing popular music,
and asked her piano teacher for a chance
to learn “Porgy and Bess.” The music of
George Gershwin entranced her. She says,
“He took the classical triad and added an-
other note which changed the color of it,
made it somehow darker, more interest-
ing, more melancholy.” When her instruc-
tor informed her that she was only to play
the Chopin and Bach that she’d been
playing, she snuck out the Porgy and Bess
music along with her classical homework,
and “never went back.” “I still owe her
that Porgy and Bess folio,” Margie recalls,
smiling.

Soon, Margie found herself bored and
unchallenged by the music she bought in
music stores, so she began adding a note
here and there and changing the arrange-
ments. She worked out such elaborate and
different arrangements, that soon the
tunes became unrecognizable as the
original songs had been written. From this

point on, the progression was natural: “It
became clear that the distance between my
arranging and taking the leap over to
writing my own music was so small, all I
had to do was step — which I did.” And
Margie Adam was writing her own songs
at last.

Margie composed pieces for piano for
about ten years before she became actively
involved in lyric-writing. She gives much
of her music composed during this period
the title “unintentional” piano music.
Margie explains: “You're sitting at the
piano and suddenly there’s something
there that comes through your hands, out
of nowhere, and now it's a song. I didn’t
have any control over that. Once in a
while, my muse would just shake me
loose, and an instrumental piece would
just come out, without my permission. It
would just be there.”

Margie’s realization and conscious deci-
sion to devote more time to composing
came after she wrote an early piano piece
entitled “After the Drought.” She told me
how this song came into being: “It had
been two years since I'd written a song. I'd
been involved with a person who felt
threatened by the fact that I played piano,
and so I quit playing. It totally wrecked
me. At the end of two years, I went back to
the piano and what came out was this an-
guished, beautiful, delicate, simple piece
of music; the weeping of my muse. I made
a decision at that point that I would never
let that happen again.” From that point
on, things began to fall into place, and
Margie started realizing that she was un-
comfortable doing anything but composing
and playing her music, and decided it
was time to “take responsibility for this
thing which was clearly the center of my
being.” Margie Adam quit her job as a
teacher, moved to the country and began
writing what she calls “on purpose”
music.

An event that really seems to stand out
in Margie’s memory of getting started in
songwriting and “women’s music” is the
First National Women’s Music Festival,
held in Champaign/Urbana, Illinois in the
early 1970s. Margie was intrigued, and
sent a tape to the organizers. She was put
on the program for Friday evening. Also
signed up for the festival were Meg Chris-
tian, Cris Williamson, Vicki Randle,
Woody Simmons, Kay Gardner, and many
others now well known among listeners of
women’s music. This was the first time all
these people had gotten together, and they
quickly found that they had all developed
a similar style of music independently of
each other. Margie says, “It was amazing!
It was like watching yourself over and
over again!”

It was also at this Women’s Music Fes-
tival that Margie heard Meg Christian sing
“Song to my Mama.” Margie says that
hearing that song for the first time was
stunning. Not only had she never heard
anyone sing about the mother/daughter re-
lationship like that, but also, “It was cer-
tainly a song I could’ve written. And
would've written, except that she'd writ-
ten it.” She relates that it was
“excruciating” to hear because it was the
truth, and truth is not an aspect that is
highly valued in traditional pop music.
Many times throughout the festival
weekend, Margie found herself moved to
tears over the highly emotional content of
the songs being performed. She had found
where she belonged. Margie went home
right after the festival and wrote her well-
known song “Sweet Friend of Mine.” The
words very accurately reflect her feelings
and reactions from that enlightening
weekend:

Sweet friend of mine, it took so long to
find you

All the growing pains behind you, right up
till now

Sweet friend of mine, it took so long to see
you

All the things you did to free you, right up
till now

The sun's gonna shine, and the music will
flow

Sweet, sweet friend of mine...

Letting others define us kept us apart

Now that we are together, let us begin

Demanding the things that give us the
wings:

To fly...to fly...to fly.

Margie’s first album came out on her
own record label, Pleiades Records, in
1976. Entitled Songwriter, it contained
Margie Adam classics like “Sweet Friend
of Mine,” “After the Drought,” “Beautiful
Soul,” and “Best Friend (the Unicorn
Song)” (later recorded by Peter, Paul &
Mary). Margie Adam was now an integral
part of women’s music, as an industry,
and as an outlet for performing.

Performing her own music, rather than
writing for other musicians, was not some-
thing that came quickly or easily to
Margie. It took a conscious decision that
she didn’t have to model herself after
other performers. She articulates it in this
way: “I made a decision that I could per-
form in my own image, rather than in
someone else's definition of a performer. I
recognized that I was willing to take re-
sponsibility for the fact that my music
moved people to change and that I could
be ‘on purpose’ about that, and offer
people some information, some direction,
and some hope.”

Margie’s albums to date include Naked
Keys, a collection of solo piano pieces, We
Shall Go Forth, a live album recorded in
San Francisco in 1982, and her latest, Here
Is a Love Song, the first album in which
Margie performs with a wide variety of
musicians, bringing the new sounds of
trumpets, saxophones, and many other in-
struments to her unique style.

The following is a collection of Margie’s
comments about some pertinent issues:
Women’s Music, her relationship with her
audience, her feelings about the feminist
movement at present, and her plans for the
near future.

On Women’s Music:

I think women’s music functions beyond entertainment. It’s “on purpose” music.

On Her Audience:

For the past 11 years, I’ve noticed that my willingness to tell the truth about how I
feel and what I think has affected some people in a way that's changed some of their
lives, which they then have gone about passing on to other people.

I think one of the things that is distinctive about women’s music is that there is an
amazing diversity of subject matter. Pop music today is still focused on individual
relationships between two people, and there are some pretty old-fashioned values. Wo-
men’s music has as one of its great values the fact that we talk about everything! We
sing about anything!

The music that I am inspired by is music that I can take unto myself and allow it to
heal me. Women’s music is full of those; it’s not by chance. It’s no accident; that’s one
of the things women have to offer. This tremendous nurturing quality. Not mothering—
nurturing. Not someone else’s definition of what nurturing means — our definition.
Empowering, strong, healing.

Part of how movements fail is that they don’t avail themselves to a kind of spirit that
allows them to hang on for the long run. That’s really the value of women's music
and women's culture in general, that it’s inspiring and encouraging.

I feel very strongly about my music. When it's not moving me the way it’s moving me
now, I won't be here. Audiences get that. They not only respect it; they are drawn
into it individually. I think that’s what we all want for ourselves; to be ourselves.

The individual members of the audience start to bond with each other, and when that
gets going, the sense of community that’s built is so empowering, and so filled with
hope and possibility, it’s enough to change people's hearts. So it involves my wil-
lingness to be exposed, and also, always to be making it very clear that I’m absolutely
in control on the stage. They don’t have to worry about me. No matter how intensely
involved I am in a particular song, I communicate that I know what I am doing up
there. Don’t worry about me. I won't burst into tears, even though a song is making
YOU cry. I will hold you in my hands while I’m singing the song. I will take care of
you, you don’t have to worry.

cont'd on pg. 11