38

continued

But traditionally, the male establishment has said: Women are not the underdog. They’re just biologically different. (As if you couldn’t be both.) Or else they’ve said (and acted, which is worse): Okay, true, but so what? That’s the way it is. Or,

I've heard it already. And lately they are saying,

She used to be the underdog but since feminism, she’s not anymore. They say, See? There’s a whole industry of women’s books.

But if you examine the facts you see that it is simply not so. As Tillie Olsen documents in Silences in page after page of statistics, women writers are still small minorities in course lists, anthologies, textbooks, libraries, publishers’ lists. By these criteria, the overall figure for fiction writers of achievement is still one woman out of twelve. When you think that the language is equally available to all of us, it’s an appalling figure. And when you look at who controls the media, who sits on editorial boards, who hands out grants, who teaches literature courses in colleges, it is understandable, but no less appalling.

In the same way, it is widely believed that women’s economic situation has improved since the advent of feminism, but the truth is, the gap between average male and female income has increased over the past decade, not diminished. And by other indicators too, the position of women over the past decade has hardly, as is often claimed, been turned around. The prospects for passage of the ERA are dimmer than they were some years ago; the gains of the early seventies in reproductive freedom, job equality, and affirmative action are being cut back. And even the new and widespread awareness of sexism and misogyny is far less secure than people imagine. High school students I know now are astonishingly similar in attitude to those I grew up with. When very young women read my Memoirs of an Ex-Prom Queen they often tell me still, that’s the story of my life. For many people Women’s Lib, as it’s too often called, is considered boring, passé. People do not want to be tainted by the new stigma attached to women in the form of Women’s Lib any more than they did by the old one. How could it be otherwise when the power relations in the society have not changed?

To return to the woman writer. What does she face? From the moment the girl child begins to read and write she becomes aware of what kinds of writing are considered great, what minor; and what kinds of experience are considered significant, what trivial. Few women writers are studied, anthologized, revered; those few who are, are considered exceptions. Our literary heritage is not studied. From the beginning, the female learns that there is a contradiction between what she knows from the depths of her experience to be true and what is accepted as important by the critical audiences who judge and control her. Resolving that contradiction between her experience and what is valued as literature is one of the major problems the woman writer faces. It’s the same in the world, of course. Women’s work so-called - the work of mothers and children, school teachers, librarians, secretaries, nurses, lady writers, housewives - all are subject to that same devaluing by the critical establishment.

Beyond the lack of a visible female literary tradition, there is the problem of the male voice in literature - the role of the male “I” of so many novels, even now, after a decade of feminism. When we read literature written by men it is assumed that we will identify with the protagonist whose experience is supposedly universal. Although men are fewer than half the human race, the male voice is considered universal. Why? Princeton critic and novelist Lila Karp suggests why. The male critic can generally identify with the male hero's subjective experience, even if not with the character’s behavior, but not with the female hero’s. If the fictional male hero is alienated from society, the critic can see this as a critique of society. This is the major Western tradition in fiction: the hero pitted against society. But if the female protagonist experiences alienation (as she almost invariably does) she is often seen not as a critic of society but as a neurotic, a whiner, one who has failed to adjust. She is accused of self-pity. Another woman’s novel. Think of the reception given the novels of Sylvia Plath, Jean Rhys, Christina Stead - frequently the heroines are seen as neurotic, self-pitying victims, the novels the wailings or ragings of victims, not as the critiques they are. However, the alienated male hero, Kafka’s K, for instance, who is the victim of society par excellence, the ultimate underdog, is seen not as neurotic. His is one sane voice in a mad society. This is because, as Karp observes, the male critic can identify with the subjective experience of the male heroes but not that of the female heroes, whose alienation has to do with men.

It is argued that with art, gender should make no difference. As a New York Times critic put it “a common humanity unites all men and the critic’s imaginative sympathy makes up for any deficiency in his experience.” Perhaps that is true of some readers and critics, but what if the critic brings to the work not “imaginative sympathy,” but instead hostility? Then the argument is in bad faith.

How can a woman writer resolve the painful contradiction between what she knows and feels from her experience, and what is deemed acceptable as literature? Traditionally, she has not written, or has been a closet writer, or has succumbed to self-hatred and tried to ape male writers, adopting their values, even sometimes becoming a woman-hater herself. Now, however, increasingly, with the protection of feminist insight and community, she may be able to ignore the sneer, knowing that there are many people who understand her predicament and reject the assumptions that have always hindered her. I think that is why we are now seeing a great outpouring of women’s writing and a new vitality in women’s literature.

But although the woman writer is now in a better position than ever before to ignore the sneer she must not fool herself into thinking that it is gone or going, for then once again she may be tempted to distort her vision in order to escape that sneer. A few years ago I heard Doris Lessing say, “to actually say what you know to be true is the hardest thing there is.” The pressures on a writer to distort her vision in order to escape censure or to please the powerful, whether men or women, established or otherwise, in order to be heard and taken seriously, are among the greatest threats to the artist. In this, undue optimism is as dangerous as pessimism. Few changes are irrevocable. That other huge movement for women’s equality at the beginning of this century, which had millions of ardent supporters, a movement as large as ours which, after several generations of struggle, culminated in gaining the vote for women, was so thoroughly undermined and forgotten in the forties and fifties that the sneer was most virulent then. The new wave of feminists felt they were starting from scratch. And if that great forgetting could occur once, it could certainly occur again.

Indeed, one of the passionate motives behind my own work, as it may be behind the work of many artists, is to prevent such a forgetting. My hope is to preserve something precious before it is forgotten; to capture in words, to bear witness to the changes we are going through now, so they cannot be denied or forgotten; to show the way it is now, “to capture the outer world in words,” as Simone de Beauvoir says is the artist’s task: To render deep-felt feelings and experiences into words so that they may be remembered and felt again.

For myself, one of the great experiences of my life is to have lived through the enormous changes in women’s lives that have taken place over the past two decades. As a novelist, I feel immensely privileged to have, as women have seldom had before, a whole community of feminists who provide a supportive intellectual atmosphere, a new relation to literary traditions and language, a body of helpful and serious criticism, journals which publish and respect women writers, and an audience passionately engaged in the same critical and essentially subversive reexamination of our world - a community of co-delvers, co-questioners, co-workers, co-writers. I feel especially lucky to have available to me now a great subject matter which lies at the heart of my artistic vision and without which I might never have found the courage to write. And the subject matter that has chosen me (for, as Flaubert said, “One does not choose one’s subject matter, one submits to it”) is the change in consciousness itself that women have undergone during my life as embodied in the characters of my fiction.

In Memoirs of an Ex-Prom Queen, I tried to show the problem - to show through the story of one middle-class, midwestern, midcentury American woman what it feels like to be born into a culture where woman is raised to serve men. In Burning Questions, I have tried to show a way out, the way many women have taken. I tried to recreate what it was like to become part of this great movement for freedom. The movement itself acts as one of the characters in Burning Questions.

Another “woman’s novel”? Like all women’s works mine can be called that - by those who are not really interested in the particularity and diversity of women’s lives. But the stories I have told have not, I think, been told before. Ten years ago this subject did not even exist, nor would I, ten years ago, have had the courage to withstand the debilitating sneer.

I would like to end by reading a few lines which I think express very well the purpose of the artist whose vision is of human freedom, an essentially political vision. They were written by Alice Walker, the black poet and novelist, and come from her novel of the Civil Rights Movement, Meridian.

Speaking of the artist, she says: “I am not to belong to the future. I am to be left listening to the old music, beside the highway...Perhaps it will be my part to walk behind the real revolutionaries - those who know they must spill blood in order to help the poor and the black...And when they stop to wash off the blood...I will come forward and sing from memory songs they will need once more to hear. For it is the song of the people, transformed by the experiences of each generation, that holds them together, and if any part of it is lost the people suffer and are without soul.”

These fine Harper & Row paperback books on women:

Beauquart, Single Women: Alone and Together

Daly, Gyn/Ecology

De Beauvoir, Memoirs of a Dutiful Daughter

Griffin, Woman and Nature

Washbourn, Becoming Women

are available at:

bookhaven

Open daily 9-6:30
Thursday until 9
Sunday 12-6

290 York Street
787-2848