Your Gaze Hits the

by Robin Pfaff

Barbara Kruger is a New York artist
who is “making it.” She is being shown
in many museums and galleries in the
United States and Europe including the
Whitney Museum of American Art and
the Guggenheim Museum. She even
has a piece in the Chase Manhattan
Bank collection. Besides flourishing in
these traditional routes of exposure in
the art world, her work travels in more
popular media in the form of billboards
and postcards.

Her success is curious in light of
some of her artistic goals and political
convictions. Kruger chooses to work
within the mainstream rather than
creating alternatives at the margins.
She appropriates mass media images
rather than seeking alternative imagery
as Judy Chicago does. Yet Kruger’s
work is purposefully confrontational
and threatening to mainstream ideas.
Her stated intention is to challenge and
subvert the images she appropriates.

She seeks “to ruin certain representa-
tions.” She succeeds in several ways.
Her large black and white photographs
in bright red lacquer frames are mon-
tages of mass media studio shots and
brief phrases. The terse aggressive
photos challenge viewers to consider
and reconsider what she presents. They
feel bold, immediate, and compelling.
One work in particular, her untitled
1982 sixty by forty inch photo with the
phrase “Your gaze hits the side of my
face,” raises several issues she ad-
dresses in many of her other works.

The first characteristic of the photo
that makes it immediately engaging or
confrontational is Kruger’s use of the
words “your” and “my.” Her typically
forthright statement prevents viewers
from easily separating themselves from
the work. Kruger makes it hard to avoid
identification with either the “you” or
the “me/we.” Her works since 1981 all
contain these personal references that
encourage, invite, even impel or incite
viewers to be more actively involved in
some dialogue with the photograph.
“Our loss is your gain,” “Your money
talks,” “We won't play nature to your
culture”; these are not neutral ideas to
be quietly swallowed or ignored.

However, the phrases are not simple
directives either; they provoke with
complexity as well as firmness. Again,
one of the first questions concerns the
personal pronouns: whose gaze hits
whose face? Is the “you” any viewer? Is
the “me” simply the image of the bust
of the woman that Kruger has found
and photographed? Occasional works
such as the photograph with the
phrase, “You construct intricate rituals
which allow you to touch the skin of
other men,” leave no doubt that “you”
are a man. Most of her works are more
subtle about their references. Still,
women act out the first person and
men the second person, as in “Your
gaze ...”? Kruger identifies herself
primarily as “a woman and as an
artist.” Her first person actors generally
reflect that position, but the class,
gender, and race of the pronouns still
remain ambiguous enough to prompt
initial speculation from the viewer.

Kruger’s ambiguity also suggests a
challenge to the idea of a monocular
universal truth. The photographs invite
multiple perspectives and interpreta-
tions. The phrases, images, and their
juxtaposition are open enough to en-
courage dialogue; they seem to seek
discourse and participation rather than
universal truth. They almost force ques-
tioning. In her essay “No Progress in
Pleasure” Kruger states, “I am wary of
the phallic seriousness of certain
theories, of their confidence of
knowledge ... I want to speak and
hear outlandish questions and com-
ments.”

Ambiguity, the possibility for double,
triple, infinite entendre, is central to
Kruger’s characteristic humor. The
uncertainty can also be disturbing; the
fierceness, the depth, and the in-
evitable reference to political/cultural/
economic power imbalances may be
sobering. “Your gaze hits the side of my
face” automatically raises the issue of
battering. But still a first reaction is a
laugh. Like a political cartoonist, Bar-
bara Kruger is very funny and very
serious. Though wary of seriousness
about specific “truth” or “political cor-
rectness,” Kruger is quite serious about
speaking to a large audience and hear-
ing a response, about getting attention
and participation. What is black and
white and red all over? A photograph in
a red lacquer frame. The red may signal
danger or radicalism or celebration; no
matter what you choose, the red calls
attention and evokes powerful associa-
tions.

What is black and white and read all
over? A newspaper. Another way
Kruger solicits attention and dialogue is
by using mass media and advertising
techniques. Her previous experience as
a graphic designer for Conde Nast and
her much more self-consciously
graphic pieces of the late 1970s parent
the concise image and phrase of “Your
gaze ...”. Clean, high contrast images
with sparse words rivet attention. The
work is immediately visually and
legibly accessible as an advertisement
must be for a fast consumer society.
The photograph is predisposed towards
mass distribution; it becomes a suc-
cessful postcard, flyer, poster with no
cropping or simplifying. People can
read and see a Barbara Kruger
photograph all over, as easily in the
street as in a museum. She, however,
does not intend to anesthetize or brain-
wash her audience; she hopes instead
to prod her audience, to convince it to
reconsider what it sees.

One as aware as Kruger is of media
images and radical politics cannot use
the word “gaze” lightly. She selects her
images and her words carefully for
nuances of humor and implication.
Gaze has been investigated extensively
by philosophers such as Foucault and
recently by feminist and film theorists.
In this theory of the gaze, the
hegemonic group looks at the
marginalized group. Vision is a one-way
activity with controlling lookers as the
subjects of the verb and controlled
looked-at as the objects of the verb.
The gaze is power and the dominant
group has a monopoly on the perspec-
tive of vision. For example, Laura
Mulvey summarizes, “The determining
male gaze projects its phantasy on to
the female figure.” Kruger alludes to a
long tradition of oppression when she
says, “Your gaze hits the side of my
face.”

A photograph is the embodiment of
a gaze, an “image made palpable.”