PEELS} | Toward the Subversion of Gender Roles

by Nancy Lee Kathan

The Theatre of Light and Shadow is
an innovative women’s theatre com-
pany based in New Haven. TLS
members work and perform throughout
Connecticut on a volunteer basis, and
they are dedicated to theatre as both
art and communication, and to
feminism as a lifestyle. Founded in
1977 and incorporated in 1980, TLS
presents dramatic works written by, for,
and about women, and has received
community support and nationwide
recognition for its contributions to
quality feminist theatre.

TLS seeks to educate the public
about the contributions of women to
the dramatic arts by producing and per-
forming often undiscovered works by
female playwrights. To this end, TLS
has applied for a grant from the Con-
necticut Humanities Council to hold a
major seminar series on WOMEN IN
THEATRE in February and March 1982.
The role of women in theatre will be ex-
plored, from the ancient Greek classics
through modern feminist theatre, and
major women professionals in theatre
have been invited to speak. This series
will be the first of its kind in the coun-
try and will be co-sponsored with Alber-
tus Magnus College. Throughout the
planned series, TLS will perform scenes
to illustrate the issues being discussed.

TLS has also put together an evening
of short pieces entitled “A Theatre of
Light and Shadow Showcase,” which,
among other goals, aims to re-discover
Mae West in a feminist context. This
presentation is available for perfor-
mance in the winter and spring and is
being toured throughout Connecticut.
For more information about TLS or this
piece in particular, call (203) 865-6141
(weekdays, 11 AM to 6 PM) or write:
TLS, P.O. Box 2010, New Haven, CT
06521.

oe

How idiotic civilization is! Why be
given a body if you have to keep it shut
up in a case like a rare, rare fiddle?
—Katherine Mansfield (1888-1923)

59 Broadway
562-2508-
(upstairs from Audio Den)

by Maia Ettinger

Our society's furious hatred of
homosexuals seems a personal type of
hostility, a fear of the unknown, a rejec-
tion of difference. Liberal thinkers ad-
vocate the protection of privacy and
civil rights of homosexuals, equating
them with ‘other oppressed minorities.
Many gay liberationists themselves
take this stance, attempting to per-
suade the general public of their
harmlessness and their legitimate place
in the world. This approach completely
ignores the true nature of homosexuality,
which homophobic society ac-
curately senses. Homophobia, or the
hatred of homosexuality, is not irra-
tional, though its logic is often un-
conscious and its outward manifesta-
tions narrow-minded and personal.
Homophobia is not personal, it is
political, because homosexuality poses
a massive threat to existing social struc-
tures, a threat of potentially revolu-
tionary dimensions. While of course
those engaged in the struggle for civil
rights for gays cannot possibly admit
this to the courts and the public, those
on the radical left, examining the issues
of sex, class, and race can no longer af-
ford to dismiss the radical potential of
homosexuality in politics.

This article will attempt to point out
some of the connections between the
existing power structures of our society
and the antagonistic presence of the
“out” homosexual. Marxist-feminist
theory has extensively examined the
role of women in capitalism, and due
to limitations of time and space I will
begin with certain assumptions:
capitalism relies on women to
reproduce the labor force, insures
women’s economic dependence on
men, and through the ideological and
material perpetuation of women’s op-
pression, guarantees women’s political
and social powerlessness, providing
men with a relative superiority and
means of domination which keeps
men’s energies directed away from
rebellion against the exploitative
capitalist state.

Feminism and homosexuality are
linked because homophobia is the
result of sexism. Sexism is not merely
male chauvinism, but rather a system
of gender classification; it is a hierar-
chical institution which has for cen-
turies placed men in a powerful, active
role, and women in a subjugated,
passive position.

Unlike traditional businesses,
Rhymes is organized as a collective
in which worker/members maintain
complete control of their work
environment.

And for those of you not swayed
by political rhetoric, let me point out
that we’re also the cheapest place
in town.

In its own interest, the patriarchy has
divided all human characteristics ac-
cording to two biological factors which
in today’s world are only significant
because of their place at the core of
the dominant ideology. First, men are
physically stronger than women, but
while, as Mill points out, all progressive
trends insist that might does not equal
right, and while modern technology has
made the ability to wrestle with gorillas
and carry blocks of cement on one’s
back decidedly obsolete advantages,
man’s superior physical strength still
maintains its stance as a critical
legitimization of patriarchal rule.
Women are not less strong, but weak.
Their weakness is compounded, accor-
ding to traditional notions, by the fact
that they bear children. This biological
act, which in itself takes nine months,
and thanks to birth control need only
occur out of choice, has been
designated women’s primary function,
the second being the satisfying of
men’s aggressive sexual urges.

Men, it is said, are aggressive, while
women are passive. Further along the
strong/weak dichotomy, men are in-
tellectual and women emotional. Men
are authorities, women are helpmates.
Men are forceful and violent. They
pride themselves on this masculine
trait. While men are encouraged to ex-
press these allegedly innate aggressive
drives professionally, intellectually,
and sexually, women, playing
predominantly female roles even when
introduced into the labor force, are
considered naturally passive and in-
tellectually inferior. Thus, their proper
domain is the emotional and intuitive,
and their expected function social and
sexual subservience to men, who
operate in the public sphere.

These definitions of masculine and
feminine behavior, persistent in
Western thought and culture since its
birth, have rigidly fixed the opposing
sides of the male-female antagonism.
To illustrate the nature and potential
resolution of gender antagonism, I will
outline a model parallel to Marx’s on
the opposition of wealth and pro-
letariat.

Like private property preserving
itself through the class antagonism,
men are compelled to preserve their
own existence and thus must sustain
and control the existence of women,
upon whose reproductive labor they
depend. The control they exercise
depends on both boys and girls ac-
cepting the opposing sex roles ascribed to
them. “What is now called the nature
of women is an eminently artificial
thing—the result of forced repression
in some directions, unnatural stimula-
tion in others,” says John Stuart Mill,
neglecting that the same holds true for
the nature of men. Men and women
both, like wealth and proletariat,
“represent one and the same human
self-alienation.” But the former, as
Marx says of wealth, “experience the
alienation as a sign of their own power,
and possess in it the appearance of a
human existence. The latter, however,
feel destroyed in this alienation, seeing
in it their own impotence and the reali-
ty of an inhuman existence.”

As women realized “the reality of an
inhuman existence,” they rebelled. As
Adrienne Rich points out in her article
“Compulsory Heterosexuality and Les-
bian Existence,” “a feminism of
action...has constantly reemerged in
every culture and in every period.”
Rich correctly identifies the basic ex-
pression of male domination as the in-
stitution of heterosexuality, through
which men have possessed and con-
trolled women’s reproductive func-
tions. She points to a history of
women’s behavior which “constituted,
given the limits of the counterforce ex-
erted in a given time and place, radical
rebellion.” Bands of women called
Beguines in the 12th and 15th centuries
chose a life “independent both of mar-
riage and conventional restrictions,”
living and working together until
dispersed by the Church. Likewise,
groups of women in China resisted mar-
riage: “communities of women who
refused marriage or who if married
often refused to consummate their
marriages and soon left their
husbands.” She cites as further ex-
amples of rebellion “the refusal of
some women to produce children, aid-
ed at great risk by other women; the
refusal to produce a higher standard of
living for men,” and suggests that
“female antiphallic sexuality, which, as
Andrea Dworkin notes has been ‘legen-
dary,’ which, defined as ‘frigidity’ and
‘puritanism’ has actually been a form
of subversion of male power—an inef-
fectual rebellion, but...rebellion none
the less.” Rich identifies lesbianism,
whether or not explicitly sexual in
nature, as a crucial aspect of women’s
struggle against men’s domination.

Since the rise of the women’s
movements in the nineteenth century,
women have organized and mobilized
in demands for equal rights. But like
the inadequacy of reforms within
capitalism, which pacify and coopt
various subgroups of the proletariat
without resolving the class struggle, the
minor gains of various liberal women’s
movements have in no way resolved
the male-female opposition. To con-
tinue the analogy of women and the
proletariat, if women are to destroy the
male-female antagonism, as it is in their
interest to do, they must abolish
themselves and their opposite. Not
abolish men and women, of course, for
Marx sought not the elimination of
human beings, but rather abolish all
present notions of what is masculine
and what is feminine. Biological
designations must be stripped of all
traditional character implications, and
gender roles replaced with one stan-
dard of balanced human behavior, men

continued on page 12

Experience the Difference

Mon.-Sat. by Appointment only
562-6494

54 Whitney Ave., New Haven

prop. Marian Colburn