March 1984

Stories of Women and Peace

Stanford students and community members have the opportunity to work on several oral history projects sponsored by SCIRE (Student Center for Innovation in Research and Education). One is a long-term project involving interviews with local women peace activists. Judy Adams, co-director of SCIRE and the oral history project with the local branch of the Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom, talks about the project:

“WILPF is the oldest international women’s peace organization and is a non-governmental organization in the U.N. It grew out of women’s involvement in the abolitionist and women’s suffrage movements; women learned how to organize and turned their energies to working for world peace — not only the absence of war, but also for equality between men and women, economic opportunity, a clean environment, and the factors of ‘domestic security’ and adequate social planning that are our true national defense. Two of its founders, Jane Addams and Emily Green Balch, were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for their work.” The project so far has interviewed 20 Palo Alto WILPF members. Transcripts and tapes are in the University Archives and Archives of Recorded Sound so that students and other researchers can use them as primary sources. The interviews focused on how the women developed their political consciousness, what were the challenges and difficulties of their involvement, who were their role models, what were their dreams, and what is their assessment of the accomplishments of the peace movement. The interviews included older members of the branch for their sense of history and continuity.

Students at San Jose State University, enrolled in Adams Women’s Studies Class, “Women, War and Peace,” are conducting interviews with the San Jose branch. The project will expand further during '84-85 to include interviews with women in the East Bay, San Francisco, and Santa Cruz branches of WILPF. “Oral History is a growing field,” notes Adams, “and our project is in the forefront. Oral histories are an exciting part of historical research and get at information that is often undocumented in traditional historical research.

Adams hopes to involve more people in the interviews and in a new oral history project being organized by SCIRE with charter members of the Stanford YWCA, active on campus from the 20’s to the early 80’s. She is also chairperson of the newly formed advisory board for the Stanford Oral History Project. Supervised by University archivist Roxanne Nilan, SOHP is conducting interviews with faculty emeriti and retired staff. Adams notes: “We are excited about the upcoming Stanford Centennial as time to provide a focus for the Stanford oral histories and builds interest. Roxanne and I plan to teach an '85 course through SWOPSI which will focus on Stanford history during the 1960’s and 70's, using interviews as the class ‘action project’. What is especially exciting about oral history interviews is the interaction between interviewer and narrator. It gives a vital sense of the past as a living presence, and brings home with special clarity that history is not just dates and major events, but the struggles and grassroots organizing of the ‘average’ person.”

The WILPF project discovered that these “average” women, who were modest about their work, accomplished more than modest ends. During the Vietnam War period, for example, they staffed draft registration tables and provided informational pickets at local induction centers. For every day for 2½ years, WILPF members held a vigil at Union Square in San Francisco. One woman participated in Quaker silent vigils for peace at the Stanford Shopping Center with her 90-year-old father. She was also well known around Stanford for her three-wheeled bicycle, Pegasus, plastered with bumper stickers for peace and disarmament. Another woman, involved in the Spanish Civil War with her husband, the commander of the U.S. Abraham Lincoln Brigade, supported the war as an attempt to stop the fascists before Hitler gained the strength to roll over Europe, but she was appalled by the shelling of civilians. The experience brought her to work for the rest of her life for the end of oppression and organizing for peace after her daughter asked about the bombing of Hiroshima; she had seen a book of photographs of the victims and asked her mother what she was doing to stop it all. In some cases, their first step was organizing a world affairs committee in the PTA, or a peace committee at their church. For others, the first step was to be part of a demonstration for peace. One WILPF member, picketing with a sign that simply said “think before you register” outside an induction center, was approached by a man who launched into a furious attack on her position, ending by denouncing her as a vicious bitch. Another woman’s husband, a Stanford professor, was arrested for protesting the Vietnam War. She tried to explain the arrest to her daughter. “He was arrested for disturbing the peace.” Her daughter said, “but Daddy wasn’t disturbing the peace, he was disturbing the war.”

The President of the WILPF Palo Alto branch during the 60’s, Ann Peabody Brown, held her first board meeting in jail with other WILPF members. A U.N. internship, named in her honor, has had two Stanford women working at the U.N. and

cont’d on pg. 9

Spring quarter courses of particular interest (see catalog for complete course offerings and registration information):

SWOP 167 — Conspiracy of Silence: The Trauma of Incest

SWOP 171 — Women’s Legal Issues

SWOP 173 — Feminism & Spirituality

SWOP 174 — Self-Defense for Women

SWOP 175 — Black Women’s Literature

If you have an idea for a course to teach in Fall, come in and talk to the staff at 590-A Old Union, 497-4305.

Lesbianism: An Ad Hoc Seminar

Conservatively we are 10% of the population, potentially thousands strong. We are everywhere. But, we don’t hold our class meetings in Kresge. We talk about why our sisters can’t support us. Is it because we are out, because we are political? It is obvious — not every lesbian is a feminist and not every feminist is a lesbian.

Radical feminists discuss misogyny in Flashdance, and racism in 48 Hrs. Racism and misogyny in every minute of our existence. We hear constantly “bitter humorless dyke.” I am hissed at, spit at, and degraded. “The lord will break you like he did Paul.” I don’t want any part of such a hateful world. Bullet holes in the door of my home. This is the fear that traps women at night. Campus is patrolled by cops and frat boys — they both harass women and attack dykes. Out for a late night walk in the faculty ghetto, I am stopped, grilled. “What are you doing here?” “Why are you on the streets this late?” “Are you soliciting?” I am not explaining. Freedom is risky.

Arm in arm with my lover, heads turn. “All you need is a good fuck,” “Why do gays have to be so blatant?” Counting heterosexual couples at the coffeehouse is endless and boring. They kiss and hug, things we do precariously in public. I hear: “She must be a dyke no woman who talks like that can be straight,” “she looks like a dyke,” “You can't be a lesbian you look too feminine.”

Now let’s get the name straight. We are all homosexuals. Gays are men, lesbians and dykes are women. Let’s get the experience straight. I've been beaten, I've been mugged, I've been raped. Cops have harassed/arrested me. Men have mugged me. Men have raped me, and the women who are silent.

Every Monday for hours we create a space to share our feelings. Reprieved from our isolation, in Santa Cruz, San Francisco, Stanford, and Palo Alto. Conversations last all night, from the women's center, to dinner at the 7 Seas restaurant, to the kitchen at Phi Psi. “I feel like I am reborn.” “The juices within me are rejuvenated.” “I pound my fists on the table to the chorus of yes you are sane.”

Conservatively we are 2000 strong. We are everywhere. But we don't hold our class meetings in Kresge.