| AURORA Interviews

Holly

by Beth Cohen

@ What do our history books tell us about
§ women from the past, and on which con-
% temporary women does the limelight
2 shine? Since our attitudes are influenced
% by our history books, the lack of historical
R perspective on women and other
% ‘minorities’ perpetuates sexism, racism,
% and class insensitivity. Since what is con-
% temporary will soon be history, we had
® better get a move on making the women
% we want remembered visible so that the
¥ next generation will be saved the grief of
® having to make the same mistakes that we
5 have made because of misinformation.

% Holly Near, a woman musician, co-
g owner of Redwood Records and a lesbian
® feminist, came to Stanford Memorial
¥ Auditorium on Feb. 10 and used her voice
9 to teach her audience about women’s cul-

y ture in two basic ways. First, as a strong
® woman singer who avoids becoming
% either vulnerable or ‘one of the boys’,
8 Holly is proving how rugged and in-
p dividualistic women are. Then by putting
4 women who are usually invisible into the
g limelight she is clearing ground for our
contemporaries to stand on and glorifying
4 women from our past. When she sings
% about women who have been inspiring,
y and women who need our society's sup-
% port, she is coloring in ghosts so that when
g today is gone they will be remembered in
® history.
k _Holly’s own history includes an appear-
g ance on “The Partridge Family.” Ap-
® parently she played the part of a “homely,
R chubby” girl who lost an election for the
¥ school presidency to David Cassidy and
hb then went weeping with joy to Mrs.
¥ Partridge because all the attention had
Q gotten her a date with a very popular boy.
® People who see this re-run can’t believe
¥ it's Holly Near and when they ask her
? what on earth she was doing, she answers,
4 “What on earth were you doing watching
¥ ‘The Partridge Family’?”

Holly’s acting career brought to her a
§ leading role in the Broadway production
% of “Hair.” This was during the build-up of
% the Vietnam War and Holly was invited to
® join Jane Fonda and Donald Sutherland on
% the “Free the Army” show which enter-
% tained American G.I.s in the Philippines,
» Okinawa, and Japan. It was this experience
% that drastically changed her life goals.
¥ She became involved with the lives of
» G.I.s in the Indochina Peace Campaign
k who were working toward peace and
against racism. In our interview she said,

Near

“They were mostly working-class poor
men. They didn’t have lawyers, they
didn’t have school deferments, they didn’t
have all that fancy stuff. They got drafted
and were being used as cannon fodder.
“At some point a lot of them said, ‘This
war is not being fought for democracy; it’s
being fought for oil companies. They want
this rich piece of property over here called
Vietnam and I’m not going to die for it.’”
Holly began doing international work
with this movement whose individuals’
lives weren’t visible in the popular media,
and she wanted to sing their plights into
people’s consciousnesses. She took the
ideas which were normally considered
radical and turned them into poetry.
Holly never made an actual decision to
initiate a recording career, but when she
came back from the FTA show, she had a
lot of requests for copies of her songs. “‘I

Marvin Jackson

%
%

wanted to record them, but it wasn’t really 4
music that the major companies were in- }
terested in. So I formed a label, not really ¥
to build a record company; I just wanted to?
make a record.’ Redwood Records, her
women-owned and operated label, has ¥
been growing and branching out like the §

sturdy tree after which it is named.

Today she is committed to her political ¥
activism, opposing such issues as nuclear %
power and proliferation, and supporting %
such issues as increased access to the arts ¥
for the disabled. She lifts her support from ¢
rhetoric to reality by including a sign lan- §
guage interpreter at her concerts. Her les- ¥
bian feminism incorporates fighting rac- ¢
ism and sexism, preventing nuclear
holocaust, dealing with children and edu- ¥
cation and the environment, and with all ¢
of the oppressions that affect the women %

we all live with and love.

An hour and a half before the show ¢
began I was backstage with Holly and the %
women with whom she works at Redwood
Records. Her friends moved excitedly ¢
from the room in which Holly and I inter- Y
viewed to the one next door with the food ¥
and the beer and wine, and Holly glowed ¢
as she expressed her views with enough %

wit to avoid preaching.

FSSSSSSOOSS

Since Aurora will be coming out during
Women's History Week, I'd like to start out
with a focus on women’s history and cul-¥
ture. As I listen to your music, I notice that¢
you write about women who seem un-%
recognized by many of our popular artists ¥
and perhaps much of our society. Why do }

AURORA

you think that these people have been
invisible?

People who are not in the limelight, or
who are not among the ‘beautiful
people’, for example women, people of
color, the poor, the disabled, children, and
the old, tend to buy into the notion that we
are not one of the ‘beautiful people’. We
are invisible unless we make ourselves
visible, unless we think of ourselves as
having importance. A lot of history exists
in the diaries of women who have thought
that their lives were important enough to
write down, and a lot of that culture was
destroyed because after it was written, it
became embarrassing to these women, or
their mothers burned their diaries because
they thought that they didn’t matter.

By writing about women who others
leave out, do you have a sense of yourself
as a historian?

I hope that’s what the songs can do.
Music that comes out of any particular
time or movement, such as that of the Civil
Rights Movement or the Labor Movement
or the Irish Revolution is a way that we
can find out what was going on. All kinds
of people make music; people will just

March 1984

make up songs. They're not the songs that %
get recorded in big arrangements or anyth- ¥
ing like that, but many cultural historians ¢
go around with tape recorders and get the %
songs from people rocking on their front %
porches in the Appalachian Mountains, ¢
for example. If we get those songs, then we %
get a part of what they were thinking §
about and what their lives were like. $
Music that is traditional now was once %
contemporary, so someday what we write ¥
about will be history. I love documenting ¢
people’s lives, and I can’t stand the idea of ¥
people thinking their lives aren't worth %
anything.
You said that the people and the situa- %
tions that you honor in your music aren't $
what the major companies are interested a
in. Even though you have your own label, ¥
do you ever feel the demand of the music ¢
industry? Pressure to produce ‘hit’ $
music? Any thoughts about videos? 1
Acting is a great form of communication
and I wish I had the time and money to do %
everything — videos cost a lot to make. ¥
But I don’t think that we feel the tempta- ¢
tion to go out into the music industry. It’s %

cont’d on pg. 12 Y

Nothing Short of A Perfect Night .. .

by Suzy Shimek

People meandered down the aisles of
Memorial Auditorium, scanning the audi-
ence instead of their tickets, waving,
smiling, and stopping to talk.

The crowd that came to hear folksinger
Holly Near on Feb. 10 was missing some
of the people usually present at campus
events. Men of college age were notably
absent; in fact, men in general were under-
represented, outnumbered by the women
arriving in pairs and groups.

As I walked down the aisle, two color-
fully dressed women holding hands vir-
tually skipped past me, one towing the
other along behind her. Another young
woman walked up the aisle, grasping the
hand of a petite striking woman on one
side, and the hand of a wide-eyed little
boy on the other. A few rows in front of
me, two women laughed together, their
arms looped comfortably around each
other.

Minutes before the concert began, a for-
mally attired couple in their sixties took
their seats, the husband looking about
with a bewildered, humorless expression.
The couple, who would have fit in per-
fectly with the plush red seats and the
majestic surroundings of Memorial
Auditorium on many other occasions,
tonight seemed a bit out of place.

The lights dimmed and three women
strode onto stage: singer, songwriter Holly
Near, her pianist/accompanist Nina Gol-
din, and sign-language artist Susan
Freundlich.

Although the piano remained un-
touched for the first song of the evening,
Near did not sing alone. As Near’s
exposed unaided voice wove through the
audience, the lithe dark woman at Near’s
side sang the words and transmitted emo-
tions with her silent fluid movements.
Freundlich’s untiring dance continued
unbroken through the entire performance.

Near’s songs throughout the evening
protested repression in all forms. Her first
song, “Mountain Song/Kentucky Woman”
contained the words “You can’t just take
my dreams away without me fighting.”
Near followed with a song about the un-
derground railway that helped American
slaves escape to freedom and then with
many songs for peace.

Near stressed the need for unity among
the different groups for change — the
feminists, peace activists, the environ-

mentalists — and quoted a friend saying,
“We all came over in different ships, but
we're all in the same boat now.”

But any hints of preaching were absent,
the evening instead punctuated by Near’s
humor, openness, and sincerity. Near tells
the audience in a wondering tone,
“Everywhere I go in the world people ask
me why, in this country where people
have free vote, Ronald Reagan is Presi-
dent.” Near is completely open and natu-
ral about her own background, joking at
one point, “The hardest part about
‘coming out’ (as a lesbian) wasn’t telling
my parents, it was deciding what clothes
to wear.”

As the concert proceeds I notice people
starting to hold hands. The professional-
looking woman on my right has taken the
hand of the man next to her, and the two
couples of women behind me have also
reached out for one another.

The unity seems to carry over into the
singing, the audience responding in uni-
son when asked by Near to hum along to a
song called “Listen to the Voices.” The
tones of the giant harmonic choir vibrate
the auditorium, the higher choir of wo-
men’s voices blending with the soft
deeper tones of the men’s.

The song faded away quietly as the
lights dimmed. For the first time during
the concert, not a single clap echoed in the
auditorium at the close of a song, the audi-
ence sitting quietly, mesmerized by the
sound of so many voices.

Near ended the silence with a “thank
you,” saying, “If a group of strangers can
sing like that we can change the world. I
do believe.”

During the standing ovation at the end
of Near’s planned set, the formally-
dressed older couple is on their feet, clap-
ping with the rest of the audience.

For the second encore, the audience, un-
solicited, starts to sing along on the first
verse, “We are a gentle angry people, and
we are singing, singing for our lives.” The
volume does not abate as Near asks the
entire audience to sing together the verse,
“We are a gay and lesbian people and we
are singing ...” regardless of current
beliefs or affinities, joking “that way if
your professor or student is sitting next to
you, you don’t need to worry...”

Near left the stage urging people to take
action verbally, politically, any way they
could saying, “You are never insig-
nificant. You make a difference.”