Stanford

AURORA

Community

October 14, 1982

[ER SEES NOR ERC CSR SS RS OS

Following a series of reported rapes on campus last November, believed to be by the same man, the Stanford community gathered in White Plaza to confront the issue of rape. It’s very difficult to describe the intensity of that day. Those of us there felt personally addressed and individually challenged to support each other in our collective resistance. The rally’s atmosphere mirrored the ominous clouds and quiet eeriness of the weather; it seemed that the natural world recognized the significance of our act of speaking out about rape. We really could, as Catharine MacKinnon said, “hear the pitchforks rumbling in the background.”

Aurora prints these two talks from the Speak-Out as part of ongoing work against rape.

Undergraduates Trinidad Tonies and Stephanie Poggi jointly delivered the following.

‘We'd like to give you some practical suggestions for making this place safer for women, a practical solution to rape. To quote Emma Goldman, ‘A practical scheme is defined as either one already in existence or a scheme that could be carried out under the existing conditions; but it is exactly the existing conditions that one objects to, and any scheme that could accept these conditions is wrong and foolish. The true criterion of the practical, therefore, is not whether the scheme can keep alive the wrong and foolish; rather it is whether the scheme has vitality enough to leave the stagnant waters of the old, and build, as well as sustain, new life.’ The only practical solution to rape is to change the way we treat each other. There are, of course, some specific things you can do.

For women: You can carry mace. You can take one of the self-defense classes that are available here, a class in assertiveness training, or you can call the SURE escort service or friends to accompany you when you don’t feel safe. You're not safe — so don’t feel safe. Be aware of the people around you and don’t think it’s paranoia to cross the street and run if you feel threatened, whether overtly or intuitively.

For men: Be sensitive to how you are perceived by a woman when you are by yourself. Don't walk alone, especially at night. Walk with a woman or women friends. When you are alone, give space to the women you encounter.

But these are half-measures at best, and they won't save you. One out of every three women is raped in her lifetime. One-half reported rapes occur in the home, and are not inter-racial. You can’t plan for it not to happen. When we talk about a rapist and rape, we're not talking about a ‘kook,’ and we're not talking about a bizarre phenomenon. When we are shocked at a rape in broad daylight or a rape in a frequented part of campus, we ignore the fact that the rape is not deviant behavior. We can’t pretend that it doesn’t happen all the time or that it has nothing to do with us or people that we know.

There's nothing surprising about a rape at 11 a.m. Most rapes don’t fit the stereotype of the masked stranger who jumps out at midnight. Women are raped and beaten by their husbands, their boyfriends, their fathers. Everything from women’s enforced economic inequality to sexist jokes and pornographic cartoons in the Daily to the way a man looks us over when we walk down the street tells us that we are women, and therefore rapable.

Forcible rape is the most frequently committed violent crime in America today. Rape is terrorism, a threat that denies us access to libraries, computer terminals, and sneers. We receive very different educations at Stanford, and that’s not by chance. The disparity in our educations here reflects the disparity between female and male experience in the world.

Not only is violent rape part of every woman's everyday experience, but women are systematically subject to violence of all kinds. Obviously there is a difference between violent rape by a stranger and common interaction between women and men, but that difference is often one of degree. Why do rape victims have to prove not just that they said no, that we didn’t want it, but that we showed extreme resistance, that we screamed and kicked enough? Why, if not because some force and some resistance are presumed and sanctioned between supposedly consenting adults. No one asks a robbery victim to prove resistance.

So we come back to practical solutions. The only practical solution is to do what you're doing now: to think about how we allow violence and how we perpetuate violence every single day, and how we're going to change that. There are many people working with the Rape Education Project, with SURE escort service, the Women’s Center, SWOPSI, the Bridge, the Women’s Self-Defense Collective, the Office of Student Activities, as well as with groups in the community like the Rape Crisis Hot-Line and the Mid-Peninsula Support Network for battered women. Each of us can make a difference by working with one of these groups, and by refusing to tolerate the existing conditions. That is, by refusing to tolerate rape in jokes and in gestures, as well as in the Quad at midnight. To paraphrase a song you heard earlier (Fight Back): If this is home, let's make it safe.”

oo

The following is a transcript of the talk given by Catharine A. MacKinnon, visiting professor in the Stanford Law School last year. In speaking with MacKinnon later, she indicated that it was not prepared before the Speak-Out, but rather was, “inspired by the seriousness of the women and men who were there.” Delivered quietly, yet powerful in its directness, her speech was, as she put it, “to them (the audience),” and entirely, “of the moment,” qualities which can be conveyed only incompletely on the printed page.

When the wind blows I hear the pitchforks rumbling in the background over this PA system.

I want to speak to you about rape as a problem of sexism, a problem of the inequality between women and men. We are not at this point in time in the midst of an epidemic of rape. We are in the midst of a short flurry of rape reporting and rape publicity. I think it behooves us to ask why these rapes are being reported and in particular why they are being publicized the way they are. If for every reported rape there is between two and ten (at a conservative estimate) unreported rapes, it is extremely important to ask not only why the ones that are reported are, but why the ones that are not reported are not.

I think women report rapes when we feel that we will be heard. These rapes, as they have been reported, are the kinds of rapes then that women think will be believed when we report them. To me, they have two qualities: (1) they are by a stranger, and (2) they are by a black man. Together they create the male archetype of rape. When the newspaper says that these rapes are unusual, they are right in a way. They are right because rapes by strangers are the least common kinds of rape that women experience. And at least to the extent that these are interracial, those are also the least common rapes that women experience. Most rapes are by a man of the woman's race and are by someone the woman knows; either her boyfriend, her father, her husband, her boss, an acquaintance or a date.

In considering the element of racism in the particular publicity and the nerve that this rape reporting seems to hit, I think it is important to raise to you what I have been told. That is, that two of the victims of this current rapist are women of color. I think that the non-reporting of this aspect, although it may be an attempt to preserve confidentiality in some way, also plays into the racist image that what rape is about is black men defiling our white womanhood. Because the invisibility of women of color is such, that if you do not say that a woman is colored, it is assumed that her race is nonexistent — therefore, oddly, white. It’s also important for us to be aware that women of color (this is specifically a statistic about black women) are raped ten to twelve times more often than white women.

Of the reasons women don't report rape, I would just like to list for you the most common. These are what women who do not report rape say about why they don’t report it. The most common is fear of retaliation. By retaliation they usually have in mind that the rapist will come back after them, which he often says he will when he rapes you. That their boyfriends or their husbands will beat them or reject them. For very young women or even older women we are often afraid that our parents will kick us out of the house. Particularly, women who have been victims of incest are afraid of police, hospitals and the legal system. Women believe that not only will we not be believed by the police, not only will doctors treat us in degrading ways, but that when we go to court, the incident will not be seen in any way from our point of view. It is unfortunate that these fears have, on the whole, proved accurate. It is not an invention of women’s imaginations that we are going to be treated poorly. I'm hoping that responsible officials at Stanford are taking notice of the interest and of the anger that women express now to realize that they are only seeing the tip of the iceberg and that they are part of the reason why.

Women who do not report rape also say that we want to forget about it; that we feel embarrassed and humiliated by it and that just talking to someone else adds to that sense of exposure, the sense of utter loss of privacy. The very thing that we lost when we were raped, we feel added to by complaining about the rape. I think that says something about the feeling of the receptiveness of the context we think we're in when we try to talk about it. Our protest and resistance is instead turned into a continuation of the violation. Women also blame ourselves. We have, I think therefore, even a stronger fear of being blamed by other people.

In what I've said so far, I've had in mind an entire range of rape experiences. I call it rape whenever a woman has sex and feels violated. You might think that's too broad. I'm not talking about sending you all, particularly the men, to jail for doing such things. I'm talking about attempting to change the nature of the relations between women and men by asking ourselves, as women, “did you feel violated?” To me, it is part of the culture that makes women not report rape that our sense of our violation is not what the definition of rape is based on. That’s why I want to speak on our sense of violation.

I think it’s fairly common, and is increasingly known to be common, for men to seek sexual access to women in ways that we find coercive and unwanted. On those occasions, the amount and kind of force is only a matter of degree. The problem is that rapes do not tend to be reported or prosecuted or sanctioned based on the degree of force, but rather on how intimate she is with the person who did it. Why women most think that we won't be believed in reporting the most common rapes, that is, rapes by people we know. As a result of this, I agree with what people have been saying, that rape is everyone's problem and women's problem in the same way.

To men, I want to say: have you ever had sex with a woman when she didn’t want it? Were you and are you really careful to find out? Is it enough that you say to yourself, “I don't know?" Are you really afraid that nothing will happen between you and a woman if you don’t make it happen? Are you afraid of our rage today? That we will turn it against you? Is there perhaps a reason for your fear? I think that you need to remember that we love you. And that as a result of that it’s very unclear to us why you are so urgent. It’s unclear to us why you are so pressured in seeking sexual access to us. We want you not to denigrate us if we refuse. We want you to support us, to listen to us and to back off a little. And we also want you to realize that supporting us is not taking over either our injury or our pleasure.

What do you really want? And do you feel that you have the conditions under which you can ask yourself that question? If you feel that you are going to be raped when you say no, how do you know that you really want it when you say yes? Do you feel responsible for men’s sexual feelings about you? What about them for yours? I also want to say that for women we need self-protection; we do not need more paranoia. The Stanford Police tell us, “A little fear is a good thing right now.” I think we do not need more fear. We want to make fear unnecessary.

The only thing that I know on an individual basis that begins to address this is something that we have access to here. And that is real training in self-defense. Martial arts is not just physical preparation for a one-time shot or a quick fix or a bag of tricks. It is a spiritual, integrated way of relating to one’s body as one’s own, with which one acts, lives and does things. Not something that exists only for carrying your head about in the world or to be looked at by other people. Self-defense, if it’s done right, can begin to give us back a sense that we have a self worth defending.

I have spoken with you about what holds women back from reporting rape in the context of what I think rape is. The only way for us to have this episode not just blow over, as they have for centuries, is to use this occasion seriously to interrogate and to change our lives — and to support all sisters who resist.

The Rape Education Project continues this work against rape with discussions of the “Working Against Rape” videotape, distribution of the recently updated “Working Against Rape” booklets, advocacy of women’s self-defense awareness and skills, and work with Stanford United for Rape Education (SURE). Please join us; for information call REP and the Women's Center at 497-0545.