December, 1983

| Please Kiss Me If You Feel Inspired

| (Random notes from a lesbian to all
+ women.)

' The theme of Please Kiss Me Passion-
! ately If You Feel Inspired is addressed
' to all women and one woman in par-
‘ticular. Which brings up another
! qualification, I am monogamous so
! please kiss me only one woman at a
| time. My hazel eyes are covered with
t shallow tears; sad I know. In some
! very good times I’ve not been lonely.
\(This is not one of those good times)

by Robin Einzig

Margie Adam’s newest release,
Here Is A Love Song, brings a new, in-
novative style to her recordings. At
first, as a devoted listener of her ear-
lier music, I wasn’t sure I liked the
changes. I have always found a kind of
nostalgic pleasure in the “folk” style
of much women’s music, and the
content of Songwriter (her first album)

someone new. There is a recognition
of the value of love for love’s sake,
and the risks taken in any relation-
ship:

We knew we risked losing each
other

By taking freedom as a lover

But we share the joy of our forev-

‘but there are always consolations, I ! fits ; : tej ers

' ' its into that genre. Margie Adam’s in- iat
; : : ; ther through what

I am growing, papers get done, as do } incredible gift of making a piano come aie ere s

the laundry and the sheets.) The time
I have shared with lovers has been too
short and far too infrequent. With
women all around me I wonder why I
feel those times are so far away. I have
endeavored to kiss all of my lovers,
! but my first; and I thank the Goddess
' for her every day. I have found at
! Stanford that we share the experience
' of being women but we do not share
! ourselves. (Together in all but every-
‘thing.) We have misplaced our love
' that heals and inspires. It’s shared by
' babies, mothers, and lesbians. I was
! just thinking we would never have
! misplaced it if we were never
‘socialized out of our touchy/feely
! stages. We'll just have to learn it all
‘ over again. Granted learning it all over
‘ again can be fun. I just wish we could
‘leave the clothes and the emotional
'pain behind. Back to being lonely. I
' feel lonely with women who wrap
! their arms around me, but who can’t
wkiss me. I feel lonely with women who
tsleep with women but who are not
1 out for lesbians. Last but certainly not
tleast I don’t feel lonely with some
‘women who sleep with men because
' they don’t let that come between us.
1 The women I love are in my heart and
imy mind they never leave. So here’s
{ my soul warm and constant.

| Please kiss me and I'll take you there.
Prisalga Demonic

to life, however, outshines all other
aspects of her recordings, and has
brought this album a magic of its own.

With the aid of a considerable
amount of accompaniment, Margie
Adam's music has moved from the
folk-song style of earlier works to a
more contemporary image. With Jean
Fineberg on saxophone and Ellen
Seeling on trumpet and flugelhorn,
listeners may actually find their im-
aginations setting them down in a
1940’s nightclub, listening to the
piano player and her band through a
hazy room. 

The songs entitled “Time I Spent
With You” and “The Time Has Come”
both invoked in me that 40's type of
atmosphere. The saxophone parts are
stunning, easily the best sax I have
heard since Billy Joel’s “New York

State of Mind” (a saxophone classic).
Margie Adam has captured the feel-
ing, in these songs, of not being able
to get someone out of your mind. In
a aaa li eit
“The time I spent with you
Stuns me through and through”

This elation at meeting someone and
having their presence permeate your
life is carried throughout the entire
album.

Here Is a Love Song deals with the
entire spectrum of relationships,
exploring both the despair of losing a
lover, and the utter joy of finding

“How Many Ways” is a touch-

CROW WINTER LECTURES
“Women, Health and Food”

January 18 “The Pursuit of Self-Control and the Distrust of Pleasure: 
Cultural Aspects of Preoccupations with Eating and Weight”
MARGARET MACKENZIE, Medical Anthropologist, Social Re-
search Group, School of Public Health, University of California,
Berkeley:

“Women and Alcohol”

STEPHANIE BROWN, Director, Alcohol Clinic, Stanford Uni-
versity School of Medicine

“Lest We Forget: Skid Row Women in Los Angeles”

tion. It deals with the recognizable
“We'll stay friends” aspect of a
break-up. We truly believe we can do
‘it, and our confidence soars, only to
crash to the ground when we see our
lover with someone new. But inevita-
bly, the realization must come that life
goes on. I think Margie’s lyrics sum it
up best:

“How many ways can I lose you?
How many times must I cry?
Letting it in — letting you go
Leaving the sorrow behind.”

On the more positive side of the
coin, the awkwardness and nervous-
ness of starting over come to life in
“Cool Around You” (“I would do
anything if I could be cool around
you”) and “Undone” (“. . .unwrapped,
unglued, under the sweetest im-
pression of you”) Both of these cuts
are upbeat and less in the traditional
folk style of Margie’s music. “Un-
done” involves considerable bass and

January 25

February 1

velopment Corporation, Los Angeles

“Nutrition and Pregnancy”
BARBARA ABRAMS, RD, MPH, Lecturer and Clinical Nut-

February 8

tive Sciences, University of California, San Francisco
“Women’s Work and Children’s Nutritional Status in the Third
World”

PATRICIA L. ENGLE, Child Development and Home Economics, 
California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo
“Cultural Pressures to be Thin: Food-Related Disorders”
JOHN BACHMAN, Ph.D., Behavioral Medicine Clinic, Depart-
ment of Psychiatry, Stanford University School of Medicine

WEDNESDAY at NOON in AN AUDITORIUM

February 15

February 22

page 7

Record Review: Margie Adam

synthesizer parts, startling the listener
with a sound that’s different from the
rest of the album.

The last song of the album is the
title cut. In “Here Is a Love Song,” we
at last hear more clearly the piano that
I believe is Margie Adam's strongest
suit. Listeners disappointed by the
lack of piano solos on this record will
at least get a good helping of Margie’s
wonderful talent in this touching
melody.

The magic of Margie Adam’s music

7

Linda Koolish

ing look at a hauntingly familiar situa- and the overwhelming messages she

sends to her listeners are ever-present
in this latest release. As I said, if you
are a devotee of her early recordings,
it may take a little getting used to —
but give it some time and you'll find
yourself once again caught up in the
sparkling web of music that Margie
weaves. With its timeless messages, I
know that Here Is A Love Song will be-
come an oft-played classic in your
collection of women’s music.

Other Margie Adam albums include:

Songwriter: Her first album and a
classic of women’s music.

Naked Keys: A collection of piano
solos—overwhelmingly beautiful!

We Shall Go Forth: A live album re-
corded in S.F. It will make you feel,
through its inspirational songs, that
you are in the theater yourself!

(All are available at Plowshare Books
on University Ave.)