Battering at Yale: The Real World is  
Alive and Well and Perpetuated  

Betsy Shrader  

As a counselor and advocate for the  
New Haven Project for Battered  
Women, I am often asked to speak to  
various groups about the problem of  
domestic abuse. Last term another  
NHPBW worker and I spoke to a  
political philosophy class at Yale, in an  
effort to bring concrete examples of  
physical and emotional disembodiment  
of women to the theoretical structure  
of the course. Considering the audience  
and my own experiences as an  
undergraduate, we spoke at length  
about instances of abuse within the  
Yale community. The NHPBW hotline  
receives calls from many different  
women, including Yale graduate and  
undergraduate students, students’  
wives, students’ girlfriends, and pro-  
fessors’ wives.  

Even after acknowledging that bat-  
tering crosses all class, age, and racial  
barriers, this group was surprised,  
perhaps shocked, that the number of  
incidences of domestic violence at Yale  
was so high. Yet when we asked how  
many members of this group had been  
victims of domestic abuse, or were  
close to someone who had been a vic-  
tim, half the members of the class rais-  
ed their hands.  

Physical violence “by their husbands  
sometime during their marriage. This  
figure excludes women who are abused  
by their boyfriends, ex-husbands,  
fathers or other male relatives. FBI  
statisticians estimate that a woman is  
battered every 18 seconds in the United  
States, a figure they acknowledge is  
underrepresentative. Recent efforts to  
bring this problem out into the open  
reveal that physical violence between  
people intimately involved with one  
another is endemic within our society.  

The reaction which does disturb me  
is the fact that the individuals in the  
class, half of whom were intimately ac-  
quainted with instances of physical  
abuse, still believed that the Yale com-  
munity was somehow apart from this  
problem. There is a prevalent attitude  
within the Yale community, among  
politically active and apathetic  
members alike, that Yale is separate  
from “the Real World.” It is a conve-  
nient, unrealistic and destructive  
assumption. It is a rationalization for  
the politically apathetic to remain in  
their Ivory Tower, uncaring or unaf-  
fected by the social problems and  
events without. It is a justification for  
the politically active to organize in the  
broader community, only to return at  
the end of the day to the safe, insulated,  
cocoon of Yale.  

Because we are striving for the  
egalitarian goal of higher learning, we  
assume we are immune to the effects  
of social problems. Many of us come to  
Yale assuming that until we receive our  
degrees, or take a job outside  
academia, we will not be required to  
face oppression, injustice, or inequali-  
ty, except in measured doses, on our  
own terms, and only if we choose to do  
so.  

Attachment to the Yale community  
does not guarantee an existence free  
from the taint of “social ills.” The lack  
of awareness concerning domestic  
abuse reveals something important  
about the structure of Yale. We work  
particularly hard to maintain the  
mythology of Yale’s immunity, and we  
seem to be quite successful.  

I used to believe that my work at the  
battered women’s shelter made me par-  
ticularly sensitive to, and gave me a  
distorted impression of, the problem of  
domestic abuse. Casual acquaintances  
share a cup of coffee and light conver-  
sation. However, they soon begin to  
talk about their more serious problem  
of violence. Often these conversations  
take place a few days before vacation  
breaks. The terrifying prospect of retur-  
ning home, where you watch your  
father beat your mother, is especially  
disturbing after living in the relative  
tranquility of Yale. The confrontation  
of the two realities leads victims of  
family violence to seek someone out  
for a listening ear, a little advice, a little  
reassurance.  

After four years of Yale College and  
four years of answering crisis calls at  
the shelter, I think the problem of  
domestic violence is far more pervasive  
than we care to admit. My question,  
“Do you know anyone at Yale who is a  
victim of abuse?” usually elicits a  
negative response. However, in discuss-  
ing the problem further, most people  
have a close friend, or have been  
themselves, involved in a battering  
relationship.  

Part of the problem is recognizing  
the existence of abuse. Joan, a Yale  
undergraduate, said, “I didn’t even  
realize I was a battered woman until I  
began working at a battered women’s  
shelter in Massachusetts. My father  
beat me from the age of 14 until I left  
home at 17. I didn’t question the  
violence at the time, I didn’t feel vic-  
timized. He'd rationalize it by saying  
that I drove him to it, that I deserved it,  
that it was for my own good. It was a  
revelation to me, while I was talking  
with the women at the shelter, that I  
was really in the same position as bat-  
tered women residents. I had always  
said that the violence wasn’t as bad if  
it’s your own father.”  

“I want to make it clear: not all bat-  
terers are men, women do it, too,” said  
Valerie, a Yale junior. “My mother beat  
me when I was a child. She is a very  
bright, energetic woman and wanted a  
lot of things in life. But then she got  
married and I came along and changed  
all that. She’s led a very restricted life.  
I was always the one who got beaten, my  
younger sister didn’t get hit nearly as  
often. When I was growing up, violence  
was a constant thing on my mind. I us-  
ed to hate to have my hair washed  
because it was so painful—she would  
tug and pull at it so hard. My mother  
was also sexually aggressive towards  
me. If I pulled away from her she'd say,  
‘You don’t want to love me, you won't  
learn how to love. You'll never be close  
to men and you'll never get married.’  
Most of the abuse happened when my  
father wasn’t around, although he’d  
stop it if he saw it.  

“When I was a child and an adoles-  
cent, it just never clicked that I was  
abused. I realized if I broached the sub-  
ject with friends, people would  
withdraw from me. People don’t  
understand the irrationality of  
domestic violence.”  

It is difficult enough to admit being  
the victim of violence. Shame, fear,  
isolation, and a desire to forget act as  
deterrents to someone who wants to  
open up and discuss this personal pro-  
blem. At Yale, the problem is com-  
pounded by the fact that as students  
our natures are not present in the classroom, our home lives are not present in the dormitories. We begin with a clean slate and have  
the power to reveal our past to  
whomever we choose.  

A Yale woman’s reasons for staying  
with an abusive man are difficult to  
understand. She has no marriage ties, is  
not economically dependent upon him,  
is intelligent, rational, and has a good  
future ahead of her. Sam, a Yale senior  
and a freshman counselor, was confus-  
ed when a friend of his revealed that  
her boyfriend beat her up and forced  
her to have sexual intercourse. “I  
couldn’t understand why she put up  
with that, why she stayed with him.”  
Kathy was incredulous when a friend  
began telling the violent details of her  
past relationship with a Yale student. “I  
wasn’t sure whether to believe her or  
not. I asked myself, ‘Is she telling the  
truth?’ but I realized later that she  
couldn't be making up this kind of  
thing. It was really upsetting.”  

Sam didn’t know how to deal with  
the situation, so he decided to ignore it.  
Kathy “felt inadequate” and didn’t  
know how to help her friend. These are  
the kind of reactions that battered  
women, including Yale women, fear  
when they decide to talk about their  
problem. The fear contributes to their  
silence, the silence creates an isolation,  
and the isolation reinforces the guilt of  
being a victim of physical abuse.  

“I was afraid to talk about the batter-  
ing,” said Sharon, an undergraduate  
who has been involved in two relation-  
ships with boyfriends who beat her up.  
“I thought that people wouldn’t believe  
me, or think that I wasn’t over it, or  
think that I’m not emotionally stable. It  
is difficult to seek support because I  
fear people will think something is  
wrong with me, even though I know  
that the violence is their (e.g. the bat-  
terers’) fault.”  

Blaming the victim is a common  
reaction when people are confronted  
by instances of violence. This is true  
both within Yale and the larger com-  
munity. Confidantes may use this reac-  
tion to justify their reluctance to  
become involved with a battered  
woman’s problems. “My boyfriend  
began beating me up in the college  
courtyard. It was about 1:00 a.m., but  
still, there were a lot of people awake  
and a lot of people heard it. No one  
came out to help me. I know people  
heard us because they were talking  
about it in the dining hall the next day.”  

Another reason why friends turn  
away from a battered woman in crisis is  
that they are afraid to face the violence  
in their own lives. “Eventually, people  
supported me and respected me  
because I had the courage to recognize  
the abuse for what it was... I think they  
lack the courage to recognize abuse,  
that they are more inclined to write it  
off as ‘a bad relationship.’ For instance,  
when you're involved with someone  
who rapes you, you are more likely to  
write it off as passion, which is a trap  
we shouldn't fall into.”  

Friends may be the primary, but they  
are by no means the only support  
mechanism available to Yale women to  
deal with the problem. There are —  
to handle the needs of  
abuse. They include freshman  
counselors, floating counselors,  
student-to-student counseling, campus  
clergypersons, Yale police, deans, ad-  
ministrators, and the Executive Com-  
mittee, and function to cope with the  
personal, emotional, legal, and  
academic needs of the victim.  

However, battered women at Yale  
do not seem to be using these  
resources. Of all the representatives of  
on-campus counseling services I spoke  
with, only one, a floating counselor,  
had had a client who was a victim of  
domestic abuse. Lauren Mattleman,  
the director of student-to-student  
counseling, said, “I would not rule out  
that that (i.e. battering) has not been an  
issue in the past— however, no one has  
come to student-to-student counseling  
recently with this problem. The fact  
that it’s not reported has no bearing on  
whether it exists.”  

Chief Capiello of the Yale Police also  
said that recently they had received no  
complaints of abuse on campus. “It  
may have happened in the past, but  
usually if we go around to their rooms  
they settle down. If there’s still a pro-  
blem, we might say, ‘We'll have to ar-  
rest you both.’ That usually quiets them  
down.” Capiello surmises the reason  
they receive so few calls is that  
“perhaps the students are not going to  
Yale agencies, perhaps they are going  
to outside agencies” such as the New  
Haven police or the New Haven Project  
for Battered Women.  

Sharon corroborates Capiello’s  
hypothesis. “It never occurred to me to  
go to the Yale police when my first  
boyfriend beat me up and broke my  
nose. I was living off campus and I  
didn’t think that I had access to any  
Yale support agencies. Also, my first  
boyfriend was not a student at Yale, so  
I didn’t think I could call Yale police.”