An Interview

With Alix Kates Shulman

by Nancy Brown, Jennifer Wriggins, and Alix Kates Shulman

This interview with Alix Kates Shulman was compiled from three conversations, two of which centered on writing, and one of which concerned politics.

In the fall of 1979, Alix Kates Shulman taught a Saybrook College seminar entitled ‘Form and Meaning in Fiction.’ Shulman, the author of novels Memoirs of an Ex-Prom Queen, Burning Questions, and numerous articles, talked with Aurora about the course, about her experiences as a writer, about women and writing, and about recent and future changes in the situation of women.

It may be heartening for would-be writers to learn that Alix Shulman did not begin writing until she had young children. However, a dilemma faces the woman who wants both to write or have any kind of career, and to raise children, according to Alix. “Women have had complete responsibility for bringing up children—except financial responsibility. Now they’re getting that responsibility, too.”

She continued, “Because of the changes over, say, the last ten years, it is now acceptable for women to choose to have a career in addition to, or instead of, raising a family. But since we don’t yet have the conditions or opportunities that would make the choice a truly free or fair, many women are experiencing the choice as a burden. Women, to a much greater degree than men, are penalized for their choices and have to make sacrifices which men aren’t expected to make. For example, women who choose to have children lose freedom, and women who choose not to have children are stigmatized.”

When asked what ‘conditions’ would make a woman’s decision to have children and/or a career a genuine choice, Alix replied, “There must be free universal childcare. Men must be equally responsible for raising children. Women must have sexual and reproductive freedom, including access to contraceptives and abortion, and an end to sterilization abuse. Also, women must be economically independent, and the economy must be set up to provide more flexible work schedules and maternity care.”

Alix spoke about the role of feminism in her life and its relationship to her writing:

“When I first started writing, I had doubts about the value of my subject matter. I had been raised in a literary tradition which excluded women. I was torn, knowing that what I knew well enough to write about was not considered acceptable as serious fiction. But then I became involved in the feminist movement in New York. I was lucky. The movement gave me an audience which did not see my subject matter as frivolous. Then, of course, there was the flowering of a women’s literary culture. There were magazines, and journals, and readings, and poetry. It was very exciting.” Alix is still active in feminist groups in New York City.

In those beginning days, the writings of Grace Paley and Tillie Olsen had the biggest impact on Alix Shulman: “They wrote movingly about the experiences of housewives and mothers. Reading them was a revelation for me. Before that, the few women I had read were nineteenth-century women. The contemporaries I read were almost all men. They had little to do with my world.”

Was she saying that the women writers of the nineteenth century had little in common with current women writers? “No, I think there are many ties between the writings of those women and women’s writings today. But as a young reader, well...the ties were not so apparent. The style of writing was so different.”

Paley and Olsen were the first. Alix mentioned other writers who influenced her. “Svevo. He has an ironical world view which appealed to me. And then, Beckett. As a stylist, he expanded the possibilities of fiction. Writers like Svevo and Beckett influenced my conception of writing. But, without Paley and Olsen, I would probably never have had the nerve to write.”

Many experiences lie between starting to write and publishing a book. Alix talked about some of the thoughts and feelings involved in writing a novel. When asked for whom she wrote her novels, she said: “I imagine women reading them. I am pleased when men read them, but also surprised. It’s interesting—when women read Memoirs of an Ex-Prom Queen or Burning Questions, they tell me that they ‘identify’ with the character. Men, on the other hand, tell me my books are ‘revealing.’”

She elaborated, “When Memoirs of an Ex-Prom Queen was first published, a lot of men commented about what I did with menstruation in the book. I used it as a minor theme. At the time it had been a subject infrequently written about. It surprised them.”

Alix continued to discuss the concept of audience. “Most writers have a small group of ideal readers—with whom you carry on dialogue. I never expected to be widely read. So, you see, it astonished me when Memoirs of an Ex-Prom Queen came out and I received hundreds of letters. Women would write me letters and say, ‘You told the story of my life.’ They were personal, intense letters. It was thrilling for me to be able to touch people in that way.”

The need of writers for support was a recurrent theme in Alix’s conversation. “I think it’s important to have a supportive atmosphere in order to get the best out of writers. Censorship is the enemy. Many people I have talked with have complained of taking writing courses and never writing again.”

Was the course geared toward women? “Oh yes. Women’s work has not been taken seriously. Their world, their experience, has been seen as trivial. But the course was not exclusively for women; there were a few men. In New York, I have taught a number of writing courses for women. At the New School, and at NYU.”

“In the Yale seminar, we did not discuss questions of feminism or how women’s experiences differ from men’s. The writing spoke for itself. At the very beginning we read Virginia Woolf’s ‘A Room of One’s Own,’ a marvelous essay on the problems facing women writers, and that set a lot of it out on the table. But after that we concentrated on the technical: How do you make the prose effective? About half of the class time was spent reading aloud. I wanted the students to learn how to offer constructive criticism to one another, how to look at their own work.”

Throughout the conversation, Alix had spoken about the difference between the contents of men’s and women’s writing. Did the two differ in form, as well?

“Many people would like to say that there are distinctive women’s forms. I don’t agree. I think the difference in women’s and men’s literature comes out of the differences in the experience of men and women. But women don’t have distinctive literary forms because women haven’t had their own distinctive literary tradition, although they have, of course, written for centuries. The literary forms that are called ‘women’s forms,’ such as diaries, don’t function as a literary tradition because they are private. And women’s literature, as Elaine Showalter showed in A Literature of Her Own, hasn’t functioned as a literary tradition because it hasn’t been taught. So it must be rediscovered by each generation.”

Yet, in any given work, the content influences the form. Alix said, “I called the course ‘Form and Meaning in Fiction.’ I don’t think you can separate the two. Sometimes it is useful to separate them in teaching; but, in the work, you can’t. A teacher mustn’t tamper with what a writer wants to say—that comes from the writer’s experience, vision, and unconscious. But formal aspects of writing are susceptible to improvement. In literature courses, we concentrate on narrative context, formal organization. There’s a difference between the way a reader reads and the way a writer reads.”

But Alix Kates Shulman is not only a teacher, and not only a writer. She is an outspoken activist, who is passionately committed to change in society—“I think that it is wonderful, and necessary, that women’s experience is receiving serious literary treatment, as the legitimate experience that it is. But, this is not enough. Women’s possibilities for experience must be broadened; by major social, political, and economic changes, by a transformation of our society.”

When asked whether she thought her writing could play any part in these changes, Alix replied firmly, “Oh yes, I think writing can have an important effect on consciousness. Art can do miraculous things. But change in consciousness is only a beginning.”

Feminist Union

Anti-Nuclear Task Force

Join Us!

Women Working Against Nuclear Weapons And Nuclear Power,

For The Future Of Life On Earth

Days - 436-0647

Evenings - 777-5243