28

Women In Academia

Or

A Yale

New Haven In A Heartless World | Women’s

By Barbara C. Smith

After nearly a decade of affirmative
action, the world of academics remains
overwhelmingly male. Although women
have become numerous in the class-
room, relatively few of us stand at the
lecture podium. Moreover, women on
the faculty often remain in the bottom
ranks of the profession, teaching part
time, or on short-term contracts, very
rarely with tenure. One result is that a
woman grad student, while she may
have numerous women colleagues, will
have few or no women mentors.
Entering grad school, a woman can
generally count on taking courses with
male professors, studying under a male
dissertation advisor, and working on
topics deemed significant by male
senior faculty.

That said, the question remains how
this experience differs from that of
women entering law, business or,
indeed, a thousand other careers. These
sorts of imbalances - of numbers and
power - are not peculiar to the academic
world. Alone they cannot fully explain
the peculiar sorts of barriers, frustra-
tions, or even the opportunities that
women in academics encounter.

One of the keys to this experience, I
think, is that, despite the numbers, in
some respects the university resembles
not man’s world, but woman’s. That
world, in popular image and in the real
lives of many, has centered around the
home, a place which in turn has been
defined over and against the world
outside it. The division of modern life
into two spheres - the separation of
‘the home’ and “the world,” -
developed in the nineteenth century, as
men’s work increasingly became located
outside the household. Men, who left

home every day for factory, shop or
office entered a realm dominated by the
competition, impersonality and brutality
of capitalist society. But if such values
ruled outside, yet other, finer values
might find expression and protection in
the home. Ideally, the family might
serve as a refuge from the hostile
outside, a place of nurturance, warmth,
sustaining human relationships - in the
words of Christopher Lasch, a Haven in
a Heartless World. Moreover, in the
home might develop alternative, ‘femi-
nine’ sets of priorities and ideas. From
their implicitly critical standpoint in the
home, women might recognize the
emptiness and brutality of much that
passes in man’s world as accomplish-

We welcome new members.

THE NEW HAVEN

LESBIAN AND GAY

HISTORY PROJECT

is a group of Lesbians and Gay Men committed to documenting the

history of our people in the New Haven area.

We encourage you to share old diaries, scrapbooks, photographs
and other memorabilia, and to contact us if we can interview you or if
you know an older Lesbian or Gay Man who can tell us of her or his
experience (confidentiality guaranteed of course).

For more information contact us weekday evenings at 436-8945,
or write us at Box 2031 Yale Station, New Haven, CT 06520.

ment and importance.

It is in this sense of standing separate
from and critical of the impersonal
marketplace values of modern society
that the ideal of the university resem-
bles the ideal of the home. For in some
ways the academy too seems a refuge,
an ‘ivory tower,’ dedicated to such
humanistic goals as disinterested in-
quiry and the desire to impart know-
ledge to others. Moreover, the work
that takes place within the university
also resembles woman’s work: teaching,
of course, but also scholarship. Surely
there is nothing particularly ‘manly’
about the figures of the dry, bookish
don or the absent-minded professor;
neither fits comfortably into the ‘real’
world outside.

Now the absent-minded professor
may be a caricature, and selfless
dedication to scholarship an ideal, but
the academy’s commitment to humane
values and critical distance seems worth
examining very seriously. It seems to
me that commitment has a great deal to
do with why many of us - female and
male - choose academic careers. Dis-
satisfied, ill at ease with many of the
values outside, we turn to the university
as a humane alternative. Yet while I
believe that dissatisfaction is altogether
the appropriate response to have when
faced with the choices and constraints
that modern society presents, I am not
very convinced that we should feel any
differently toward the university. To
expect the academic world to serve as a
refuge, to seek its protection, is to
forget the lessons which women have
learned in the home.

Two of those lessons are particularly
important. The first is that the outside
world has a way of infiltrating even
those havens touted as most secure. If
ever a refuge for men, for women the
home has served as a prison as well, a
place from which power, inequality,
brutality have hardly been absent. Similarly, the wider society's patterns

of gender, race, and class attitudes
profoundly inform the ‘knowledge’
offered in the university, as well as the
standards of objectivity and significance
that shape the scholarship that takes
place here.

Second, if the university is not so
different, neither is it so distant. Like
the home, the academy does not escape
a role supporting the system which
seems ‘outside.’ The ivory tower’s
myriad and intimate connections to
industry, government, and the military
profoundly compromise its claim to
critical distance. Like the impersonal
world outside, the personal world of the
academy is political.

None of this is to suggest, however,
that we abandon the search for alterna-
tives to the values which dominate
American society. It is to argue that we
recognize that the search does not end
here - or, rather, that instead of
searching we need to start creating. For
the university does not offer the
possibility of critical distance; it re-
quires, especially from feminists, critical
involvement. We should enter the
university fully armed with the know-
ledge that it does not provide a haven
from responsibilities and struggle. In-
stead it represents a very real part of
the world which we need to transform.

Sweaters, Pants,

Shirts, Dresses Etc.

Hours
82 Whitney Ave.
Open 10:30 AM
Corner of Trumbull St.
Mon-Fri till 6 PM
777-0435
Saturday till 5 PM

Center

The University is moving five wo-
men’s organizations out of their present
meeting and office space in Hendrie
Hall so that the School of Music can
move in. Members of these organiza-
tions - the Yale Undergraduate Wo-
men’s Caucus, the Council of Third
World Women, the Yale Women’s
Forum, the Center for Independent
Study and Yalesbians - have gotten
together with each other and members
of the Yale administration with the
purpose of ensuring that an adequate
new space for these groups is found.

Many other Yale women’s groups
have shown interest in having a part in
such a center, needing office and/or
meeting space or just centrally-located
bulletin board space. The Medical
School Women’s Caucus, the Epidemi-
ology and Public Health Women’s
Caucus, the Yale University Women’s
Organization and Aurora are among the
additional groups which need and are
working for a centrally located Women’s
Center which would house all. Equally
important, the Center will be a place
where all women are welcome.

Anyone interested in more informa-
tion call Lee Collins at 432-3091 to find
out about the Women’s Space/Women’s
Center Task Force.