18

For Men Against Sexism: A Review

MARK HANSEN

It is a long and boring story how a
book published by the American Com-
munist Party called For Men Against
Sexism fell into my hands for the pur-
poses of review. If my own politics (and
with them my character) were a little
more radical, I would feel more worthy
of sharing my reaction to it. Unfortunately, each session we (the book and I)
have together leaves me feeling a little
more bourgeois than I would like. Clearly the “men against sexism” for whom
the book is intended and the men
against sexism with whom I include my-
self are not the same. (The situation re-
sembles those occasions on which I have
tried to deal with Playboy, a magazine
intended for “men” used in a sense such
that I don’t really qualify.)

Yet I suppose that it’s not all bad for
one to read and have opinions about
books intended for very different peo-
ple. And I think there are many others
who, like me, are both politically moder-
ate and deeply sympathetic to the
Women’s movement. Perhaps they may
be interested in a like-minded view of
their more exotic, and maybe even more
anti-sexist comrades of the radical left.

For Men Against Sexism is a book of
readings which, according to editor Jon
Snodgrass, might serve as the raw
material for the unification of radical
feminism and Marxism. In the jargon of
dialecticians, these doctrines differ in
the root contradictions which they main-
tain lie at the basis of the ills of our
society. Radical feminists consider patri-
archy, the systematic oppression of
women by men, to be the basic prob-
lem, whereas some Marxists consider the
capitalist mode of production to be prior
to patriarchy, and in fact to be the
cause of it.

The Marxist position, then, is that all
forms of oppression, sexual, racial, or
otherwise, originate in capitalism. Radi-
cal feminists replace capitalism with pa-
triarchy. Snodgrass believes that these
positions can be reconciled by consider-
ing two different modes of oppression:
ideological (patriarchy) and economic
(capitalism). This division admits the
primordial nature of patriarchy and in-
vites the reinterpretation of other kinds
of oppression to include both patriarchy
and capitalism. Several essays at the
end of the book discuss gay, racial, and
class oppression with this in mind.

Fortunately for the non-theoretical
reader, such theoretical concerns have
their more tangible side. A conception
of sexism which places its genesis so far
back in our development must also con-
sider its abolition to require extraordin-
ary and profound change in ourselves as
men and women and in our society.
Social revolutionaries often play this
game: the more profound one can make
the problem, the deeper the change re-
quired for its solution. This similarity
with old line radicalism ends with the
rejection of the idea that this change
need only be economic.

The difference is well articulated in
Mitchell Wandachild’s “Complacency in
the Face of Patriarchy,” a spirited and
aggressive defense of radical feminism
from the charge that it distracts the
radical left from the more fundamental
issue of class. Such a view, he asserts,
fails to recognize that radical feminism
offers a differing interpretation of the
problems of our society. Viewed in
terms of conventional Marxist analysis,
women’s issues do take on a tangential
character, and feminist demands for at-
tention to them do seem self-centered
and overstated. But it is just this
analysis which radical feminists chal-
lenge. Within their analysis, issues such
as rape, pornography, abortion, and the
ERA become altogether central. Thus,
“to have any credibility as radicals,
men must begin establishing serious
commitments to feminist programs,
rather than presuming to suggest there
is a ‘basic’ problem which makes femin-
ism a ‘secondary’ concern or a deflec-
tion from the real necessary struggle.”

By responding to old line radicals in
this way, radical feminists implicitly
make them part of the problem. In tri-
archy, 

spine which derives from their
own participation in it. Wandachild sees
the masculine tendencies of the left as
contributing to its past ineffectiveness.
Robin Morgan calls this the “ejacula-
tory nature” of left wing politics: “con-
frontation substituted for commitment,
not because of class but because radical
men were indeed more a part of the
problem than they were of the solu-
tion.” Yet the re-orientation which
radical feminists advocate in no way
represents a de-radicalization: “With
the passing away of patriarchy...a
revolution will have been accomplished
to supplant the incomplete or partial al-
terations in the economic base of society
with a more radical conception of mater-
ial change than any man has yet ima-
gined.”

Bicycles repaired by New Haven youth and Yale volunteers

Overhauls from $5.00 to $12.50

Used bicycles from $15.00 to $30.00

RECYCLE YOUR CYCLE!

76 WALL STREET
FRIDAYS 2:30 -- 5:30 p.m.

NEW HAVEN
SATURDAYS 9:30 -- 12:30

The radical feminist perspective not
only challenges the radical left’s concep-
tion of politics, it also contradicts a view
of sexism which appeals to anti-sexist
men of many political persuasions. Ac-
cording to this view, men and women
can be viewed as victims of a “system”
which oppresses both, albeit in different
ways. The recent “discovery” of this
oppression by the Women’s Movement
opens the way for the liberation of men
and women. Such thinking has led to
the Men’s Liberation movement.

From the viewpoint of For Men
Against Sexism, such a response to sex-
ism on the part of males is at best mis-
focused and at worst insidious, and an
entire section of the book is devoted to
essays criticizing Men’s Liberation. The
most articulate of these is entitled
“Men” and written by The New
Women’s Survival Handbook co-editors
Kirsten Grimstad and Susan Renie. Al-
though they acknowledge that patriar-
chy is damaging to men, they worry
that Men’s Liberation “can so easily
shift the dealing with the side effects of
being oppressors rather than with the
disease itself.” It is wonderful for men
to learn to cry and show their feelings
in other ways, to be sensitive, and to
develop intimate relationships with one
another. Yet none of these has any di-
rect connection with the abolition of pa-
triarchy. Thus “Men’s Liberation” is
exactly that. It has little to do with free-
ing women, but much to do with
increasing the well-being and furthering
of the self-interest of men.”

Such criticisms of Men’s Liberation
are among the most interesting parts of
the book. I have always felt a bit clever
in my approach to women’s issues, for I
have considered it to be based upon a
certain enlightened self-interest. This in
turn manifests an outlook upon the

it is hardly surprising that those who re-
ject capitalism also reject Men’s Libera-
tion. Their approach puts men in a
much more difficult position, able to
make real strivings toward a non-sexist
society “only at the cost of immense
personal sacrifice and the total divest-
ment of male privilege.”

This is rather disturbing, for I doubt
whether I or many of the other men
whom I consider to be anti-sexist are
really willing to make “immense per-
sonal sacrifices” for the Women’s
Movement. One wonders if history has
a precedent for such mass selflessness.
Again the effect of politics is apparent.
Political moderates are willing to sacri-
fice some, and perhaps a great deal, to
create a society which is more just. I
can, however, conceive of sacrifices
which I consider to be too great. For
some, this makes me a conservative, a
maintainer of the status quo, an
“enemy of the people.”

This is not so uncomfortable in the
traditional “share the wealth” issues,
primarily because it is easy for me to
separate myself from those whose inter-
ests in such matters would oppose
mine. “They” would be black (for ex-
ample), and I white; “they” would live
on one side of town, and I on the other.

But if “they” are female, and I am
male? Such a situation seems very dif-
ferent. I don’t know what I’d do if
someone asked me to quit my job with a
company with sexist employment poli-
cies, or give up watching football be-
cause of its grossly sexist character. I
might dispute the legitimacy of the re-
quest, but this would be more out of
self-interest than conviction. No matter
what I did, I’d feel pretty uneasy. When
a man is confronted with the Women’s
Movement, hostility is the most natural
reaction he can have. This is especially
true in radical feminist theory: there
must be some very good reason why we
have been oppressing women all of
these years. Men who react sympatheti-
cally are making things more complicat-
ed both for themselves and for women.
How long such an attitude can be main-
tained, how much sacrifice it can
endure, this only time can tell.

Similarly troubling are some of the
articles which describe what men
against sexism are doing to implement
their beliefs. Much attention is given to
various forms of introspection, self-
searching for sexist tendencies which,
encouraged and nurtured from birth,
are assumed to penetrate the depths of
our being. In “The Socialized Penis,”
Jack Litewka tells of how this socializa-
tion process might account for his
failure to achieve erection during sexual
intercourse on three different occasions.
In “Love-making With Myself” mastur-
bation is discussed as a means of break-
ing down oppressive male sexual atti-
tudes. Another article discusses male
consciousness raising, advising caution
that it not deteriorate into Men’s Liber-
ation, but with generally positive expec-
tations for its ability to evoke an aware-
ness of sexist tendencies.

All of this self-analysis is certainly an
important part of any man’s contribu-
tion to the Women’s Movement. But ex-
actly where it leads, what is accepted as
“human” and what is rejected as patri-
archal, is much more controversial. The
general attitude expressed in For Men
Against Sexism is that the only given,
the only tendency to be accepted as un-
assailable, is that of men to have a
penis. Everything else, the male or-
gasm, the male erection, heterosexuality,
homosexuality, bisexuality, the de-
sire to reproduce, is a patriarchal trait
arising from patriarchal conditioning.

I know of no basis upon which to re-
fute this view. As a matter of personal
choice, however, I prefer not to submit
to this understanding of what the Women’s Movement is about. Maybe there is no place
for me in a liberated society, and future
years will reveal the narrowness of my
present vision.

Or perhaps the men against sexism of
the radical left are trying to radicalize
feminist issues so that they become
their own property. Are they perhaps
willing to sacrifice their sexuality and
their future children toward this end
(greater sacrifices have been made for
extreme political causes!)? People, at
least most people, are sensitive about
their sexuality. They are vulnerable to
attacks upon it, because it is not some-
thing they are used to defending.
People who deal with their sexuality in
unconventional ways have a pretty easy
time making those who don’t feel
threatened. Is this the idea?

I suppose that I am lashing out. Any-
how, motives aren’t really the point.
What is significant is that there are a
lot of men out here who deeply wish
that their good feelings for the Wo-
men’s Movement are compatible with
stiff cocks.

It is important to realize that men can
contribute to this movement in much
more tangible ways than have so far
been mentioned. There is a short and
touching article by a gay man concern-
ing his experience doing childcare for
feminists. Several selections discuss the
unique influence men can exert in such
areas as the discouraging and punishing
of rape. The picketing of a Playboy club
is another possibility which is men-
tioned:

And as the men of the radical left
solemnly discuss the sexism of having
erections and having children, those of
us who don’t question these, or even
our desire to put our cocks into
women’s vaginas, can perhaps secure a
place of our own in the anti-sexist
movement.

Who, after all, are those
“men” more likely to listen to?