Sexual Harassment  
continued from page 20  

against students (the Board is made up  
of two students, two faculty, two ad-  
ministrators and one person with  
counseling experience). At first glance,  
these numbers seem fair, but it is  
necessary to consider the special  
nature of a sexual harassment com-  
plaint. In a situation in which students  
are accusing faculty, faculty may feel  
pressure to stick together — while ad-  
ministrators have a vested interest in  
resolving complaints quietly, to protect  
the university. Four out of the seven  
Board members, therefore, may be  
predisposed against the complainant.  

Another deficiency in Yale’s pro-  
cedure — the absence of any provision  
for the collection and publication of  
statistics — reflects the University’s con-  
cern over public opinion. While  
publication of these data would help  
the student community, they would  
also hurt the university's media image,  
which could in turn hurt alumni con-  
tributions. For this reason, Fran  
Schumer, in an article in the New York  
Times Magazine about sex bias at Har-  
vard, called the linking of Harvard and  
sex discrimination in headlines “the  
kind of publicity that university  
presidents have nightmares over.”  

The most serious problem which  
Morris identifies in her letter is the  
limitation of the Board’s powers. The  
Board is empowered to redress a stu-  
dent grievance only if the student and  
the accused both agree on the same  
restitution. Otherwise, the Board  
recommends a course of action to the  
Dean. The Dean can accept this recom-  
mendation or reject it with a letter of  
explanation. The student cannot ap-  
peal the Dean’s decision. As already  
mentioned, the punishment of the of-  
fender is completely in the hands of the  
Dean who will probably have closer  
links to the accused than to the com-  
plainant. Thus, Donna Morris critically  
and correctly concludes: in Yale’s  

grievance procedure “all power and  
discretion rests with the Deans or Pro-  
vost.”  

There are other problems with Yale’s  
policy, but this article is not meant to  
be a comprehensive critique of Yale’s,  
or any other school’s, sexual harass-  
ment grievance procedure. Such an at-  
tempt requires exhaustive research  
which I have not done, and legal savvy  
which I do not possess. My intention  
has been only to demonstrate that no  
matter how good Yale’s procedure is,  
(comparatively speaking) it is far from  
perfect.  

It is clear that federal regulations are  
not being used to improve grievance  
procedures beyond a certain point. The  
evaluation that Donna Morris wrote  
and sent to the OCR did not deter it  
from delivering a verdict of compli-  
ance. On the contrary, the OCR is now  

promoting Yale’s procedure as a model —  
for other universities. This is not a  
reason to sit back and congratulate  
ourselves, especially since Yale’s policy  
has so many problems. Rather, it is all  
the more reason to re-examine and  
revise our procedure. Yale claims not  
to accept less than excellence from its  
students or its faculty. Why should it  
accept less than that from a  
Grievance Procedure which affects the  
quality of its education?  

2  

‘James Baldwin once commented that  
to be black and conscious in America  
was to be a continual state of rage. I  
would paraphrase him: to be female and  
conscious anywhere on this planet is to be  
in a continual state of rage.’’ --Robin  
Morgan, ‘‘International Feminism,’’  

Going Too Far (Vintage Books, 1978).  

— Ernestine Abel  

Katrin  

from The Dreams of the (Female) Fox  
by Angelika Mechtal  

Deutsche Verlags - Anstalt.  
Stuttgart, 1976  

translated by Anne Herrmann  

I have borne his children. I have  
learned to submit. I have tried to see  
him as I saw that my mother had seen  
her husband. I have learned to wash  
diapers, to comfort children and to  
keep order.  

I once learned Mathematics and  
Latin, Physics and French. I was an  
average student. I have let myself be  
caressed and beaten. I have struck  
back; have learned that he is more than  
a match for me.  

I have watched my body as it  
swelled. I have survived the births; have  
told myself that is why you are a  
woman. I have persuaded myself that I  
want to be happy. I have sent him to  
work and cooked the meals.  

I have seen his fear as I lay in fever  
and his impatience when the baby  
cried.  

I let him send my mother away,  
because she dried the diapers on the  
stove in the one-room apartment and  
placed the milk on the windowsill. I  
learned that he was allowed to say  
what he thought: What will people  
think of us? I have understood nothing.  
I have grown accustomed to things.  

I have inquired about his irritations.  
I have listened to him; have greeted his  
boss, entertained his colleagues.  

I have let myself be instructed by his  
mother. I was friendly to her. From her I  
learned how he was used to doing  
things and what he liked best to eat. I  
adjusted to his ways. I let myself be  
told how she raised her children. I have  
taught my children to say please and  
thank you, to curtsey or to nicely shake  
hands with a servant, and to sing  
carols.  

For her son, I have been afraid. I  
have tried to be understanding and  
to be indulgent. I have looked for the  
mistakes in myself. I had always hoped  
that he would also be my big brother.  
But I have never mentioned it to him.  

I have told him that I love him. I  
have learned tenderness; have pro-  
tected the children from his rage; have  
learned that he is allowed to be angry. I  
would find an explanation. I have not  
despaired. I have told myself that I am  
happy. I was happy when he buried me  
in his arms, when he was friendly. I was  
able to comfort him, to give him  
courage. I wanted a gentle man. I have  
cried in closed rooms. I have given  
myself courage. I have seen how my  
hands have become like the hands of  
my mother; have told myself that the  
daily defeats are nothing compared to  
my affection for him. I did not ask  
myself anything.  

We have survived the beginning. I  
have learned to live with his fears. I  
have woken him up when he cries at  
night in his dreams, have said to him: It  
is me. I have had him tell me his  
dreams. I have listened. I have learned  
also to be his sister. I have let myself be  
told that I exude an aura of  
motherliness. I have thought to myself,  
you need to be warm and soft like a  
maternal beast. You need to be a cave.  
I have loved our children. Refuge, I  
have thought. I have wanted to sur-  
render, but I have not been able to. I  
have felt guilty.  

I imagined that it would pass, that  
we would get older and calmer. I have  
learned that I can no longer change a  
man. I have not kept to my lesson.  

I have learned to forget Latin and the  
higher Mathematics.  

I gave him courage when he was laid  
off. I have learned to organize moves,  
arrange apartments and to manage  
with the money there was. I have sur-  
vived the illnesses of our children. I  
have had dreams.  

I have swallowed pills against  
headaches, pills against insomnia; I  
have had backaches treated and  
anemia. I have been a sleepwalker.  

I have learned to quarrel; have  
engaged in trench warfare. I have re-  
fused; I have not spoken a word to him.  
I have been angry when he got angry. I  
have wished that the children would  
grow up quickly.  

I have capitulated, have cut open my  
arteries, but I did not want to die. I  
allowed him to bandage my arm; to in-  
vent an accident for the family doctor.  
I had hoped that someone would ask.  

I asked myself.  

We have survived. I have wished him  
success at his job. I have fought for two  
places in the kindergarten; bribed the  
head nurse with gifts. I have taken the  
Pill. I have told myself: You can no  
longer be afraid. I have warded off my  
feelings; I have drawn the line. I have  
no longer let anyone hurt me.  

I have learned to type and stake  

I have brought money home. At Christmas  
I survived a nervous breakdown.  

I have worked part-time because of  
the children.  

We have been able to afford a vaca-  
tion and acquisitions. We have made  
progress. I have not looked at the time.  
I have said: A ninety-hour week will not  
kill me.  

I have not given up my hopes, I have  
scattered them.  

We have built a house; have sent the  
children to college. We joined the  
parents’ association. We have gotten  
involved in issues which concern us.  
We have avoided indulging in the past.  
I have found a way; have learned to  
deal with his temper. I have not gone  
under. I have learned Latin and  
Mathematics, as the children were  
learning it.  

continued on page 22  

“ It really works!”  
“Music from Cutlers always  
makes me feel better” —  

CUTLER'S  

33 Broadway - New Haven  
Conn’s Complete Record & Tape Center  
“Give the gift of music, the  
one gift that keeps on giving”  

THE ALTERNATIVE FOOD SUPERMARKET  

COME IN FOR FREE TWO WEEK TRIAL MEMBERSHIP  

320 WHALLEY AVE.