IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

~ ” Active Agents in Our Own History.

uN

Maria M. Perez

Hazel Carby is a faculty member of

the Afro-American Studies Department
at Yale. In the fall semester of 1981 she
taught ‘Black Women and Their Fic-
tions,” a course which exposed many
people (students & faculty) to a wealth
of literature by black women in Africa
and the Diaspora. The course was also
an initiative insofar as it approached the
field of literature with a different set of
assumptions and questions. During the
past year Hazel has provided an unending
resource for the black
undergraduate community through her
willingness to share her knowledge and
insight. In addition to her assistance as
an academic advisor and organizer,
Hazel’s guidance and friendship will be
truly missed when she leaves Yale next
year.
M: What are some of the issues or ques-
tions that are not addressed by the
fields of Women’s Studies and Afro-
American Studies?
H: Neither Afro-American Studies here
nor in Britain have found it necessary
to take on board questions of gender
when dealing with issues of race. To
some extent race and gender have been
viewed as exclusive questions. For ex-
ample: Recently I went to a conference
on race and class in Hartford, and when
a woman stood up and asked ‘What
about gender?,’ the response from the
all-male panel was, ‘We can’t take on
questions that deal with white women’s
oppression; we can’t take on all aspects
of oppression.’ What's interesting is
that it’s exactly at this point that black
women become invisible.

Black women are also invisible in
Women’s Studies, where the primary
focus of study has been the construc-
tion of gender roles. The question that
has not been posed in this field of study
is, are there different modes of gender
construction, i.e., does the considera-
tion of race determine that sexuality is
constituted in ‘different ways? The com-
mon approach to rectifying this neglect
by Women’s Studies and Afro-
American Studies is to conclude that
black women have been absent from
history, so what must be done is insert
them. I think that the issue is more
complex than that. What’s important is
not just that black women have been
absent, but you actually have to look
at the ways in which black women have
been present. In Afro-American Studies
or Black Studies in Britain, reconstruc-
ting black history is conceived as being
the creation of the black person as an
active subject in his own history. The
problem is that in practical terms, it has
been his history.

In Women’s Studies, the assumption
is implicitly that women are white,
because the concept of race has not
been actively posed as a fundamental
source of difference. Most standard
Women’s Studies works apply to the
reality of white women’s experience
not to that of black women. You can’t
insert black women into a field of study
which has already been constructed to
exclude them as active agents in their
own history. The point is to assess how
Women’s Studies as a discipline can be
fundamentally reconstituted to include
the concerns of black women.

What must be clarified in Women’s
Studies is the actual definition of the
field. The study of women—which

“-women? Women’s Studies; because of

what it focused on must have a history
of racism. Women’s Studies has to take
into account the historically oppressive
relation between white women and
black women.

Contemporary feminism asks, Why
aren’t the majority of black women ac-
tive in the feminist movement? This
means that many white women have
not come to terms with their own
racism and cannot understand why
some black women will ally with black
men to combat racism. Black women
have to fight racism at the same time
they are fighting sexism within their
own communities. Historically, this
has been the case. In essence, Women’s
Studies has a lot of work to do, before
it becomes cognizant of our history.
M: What are the issues being raised by
black feminist scholarship?
H: Contemporary black feminists are
concerned with what the politics of
feminism are. They are examining the
possibilities of an autonomous political
structure, i.e., developing an
autonomous black women’s move-
ment, rather than working within the
mainstream white feminist and white
women’s liberation movement in order
to transform these organizations.
Whichever choice, the personal posi-
tion taken by a black woman should
not be separated from her historical
position.

The way that black feminists today
are working through notions of dif-
ference is by reexamining history. In re-

question of history is examined, even if
the focus is on contemporary issues.
Both Angela Davis in Women, Race and
Class and Bell Hooks in Ain’t I a
Woman explore relations between
black and white women in the aboli-
tionist and suffrage movements. They
are exploring such issues to understand
why racism has destroyed relations,
historically, between black and white
women. To understand why the dif-
ferences exist now, you can’t deny the
influence of certain historical factors.
M: What are some of the issues that
contemporary black women are writing
about? Are there prevalent themes
throughout their writings?
H: In the writings of black women there
are essentially three issues that are pre-
sent in their lives and difficult to
separate: race, class and gender.
There is also a fourth question which in-
volves the assumption of a norm of
heterosexuality. It is interesting that
black feminist criticism presently has
the issue of heterosexuality as much
under question as the other three
issues.
M: How do you feel that literary critics
and historians have dealt with the
issues of sexuality? Has black feminist
criticism introduced new methods of
approaching writings by black women?
H: Many literary critics and historians,
who are predominantly male, do not
feel that the constitution of sexuality is
something to be questioned. It is an
underlying assumption in their work.
From the literary standpoint, we can
see that work done on male slave nar-
ratives never questions the constitution
of male sexuality. From a historical
point of view, the fact that black males
as slaves, and then as free men, were
trying to claim manhood and prove
their humanity by doing so, is a com-
mon observation. What actually con-
stitutes that manhood is not under
question.

If you polarize these approaches

criticism, you see that the latter has
been centrally concerned with the con-
stitution of sexuality and questioning
ideologies that embrace racism. It is
difficult to turn to black male literary
critics or black male historians at Yale,
for example, and say, you should take
on board questions of gender, even if
you're writing about men. They seem to
think that questions of gender only ap-
ply to women, and that you ask them in
relation to women’s writings. Black
feminist scholarship is accused of being
academically inferior because it is con-
cerned with questions of sexuality.

M: I understand you have just com-
pleted a book. What are some of the issues it
covers?

H: The book will be out in September
of this year. The title is, The Empire
Strikes Back: Race and Racism, Britain
in the 1970s. I am one of the co-
authors. A group of us have been work-
ing together for the past four years. The
book discusses recent history, although
it contains numerous historical
passages that explore racism and im-
perialism during slavery, colonial and
neo-colonial periods. The book focuses
on racism in Britain during the last
twenty years. The sections which I
wrote are on the racist educational
system in Britain, ‘Schooling in
Babylon’, and on black feminism,
“White Women Listen: Black Feminism
and the Boundaries of Sisterhood,”
which is specifically addressed to the
mainstream white women’s liberation
movement in Britain. The political
stance taken in the book upholds the
necessity of forming autonomous black
organizations.

As black women, many of us who
were involved in the women’s libera-
tion movement in the late 60s, found a
reluctance on the part of the white
women’s movement to examine ques-
tions of racism, which related to the
general denial in Britain of the memory
of colonialism. We found that it was

Portrait by Craig Flanagin

the with contemporary black feminist — much stronger and more effective to

speak to mainstream white feminists,
from a position of autonomy... The
organization we formed is called
OWAAD, Organization of Women of
Asian and African Descent. OWAAD is
an umbrella organization for many
local black community groups, and
does not exist without the support of
black women from the local com-
munities. It is a community-based
organization whose purpose is to
organize national conferences, publish
a newsletter and generally to organize
on a national level, movements that
may be happening in one community
or another.

The book is a collective project, not
just a collection of chapters written by
different individuals. All of us have
worked on every aspect of the book.
This joint effort has allowed me to
learn a lot from other people involved
in the project.
M: What disciplines are the other
authors involved in?

H: Economics, sociology, literature,
politics—we were at Birmingham
University together, working at the
Center for Contemporary Cultural
Studies, which is interdisciplinary.
M: What is your background in Britain?
What are some of the reasons you
selected your field? What were some of
your inspirations for unearthing black
women’s history?

H: I was born in Britain in 1948, even
though many people refuse to believe
that. A popular phrase in Britain is that
they ask you where you were born and
if you respond, London, they'll say yes,
but before that. This is because in Bri-
tain they like to feel that their black
population is a temporary one; that
they have the possibility of
repatriating us somewhere else. My
father arrived there from Jamaica
because of the war. He joined the
Royal Air Force.

Like most black women in America, I
grew up not knowing anything about