longed struggle that took nearly twenty  
years to develop, mature, and ulti-  
mately overthrow the Somoza dictator-  
ship. Secondly, the Nicaraguan Revolu-  
tion was an overwhelmingly popular in-  
surrection, much more so than the  
Cuban.  

From its start, the Nicaraguan  
Revolution thoroughly incorporated  
women, both politically and militarily.  
The Frente Sandinista de Liberación Na-  
cional (FSLN) has made women’s eman-  
cipation one of its programmatic points  
ever since it was founded in 1961. After  
the FSLN victory, this political commit-  
ment to women and to women’s rights  
was reaffirmed.  

Militarily, women played a crucial  
role in the FSLN struggle. Women  
represented 30% of all combatants.  
The final offensive was headed by  
Mónica Baltodano, whose six sisters  
and two brothers were also participants  
in the revolutionary struggle. In the  

crucial battle of León, four of seven  

comandantes were women.  

Most of the women who joined the  
armed struggle in Cuba were young  
middle-class intellectuals, but in  
Nicaragua these women were poor;  
most of them were housewives and  
mothers. A possible explanation for the  
high degree of Nicaraguan women’s in-  
volvement in the armed struggle is the  
fact that over 50% of Nicaraguan  
women are heads of household in  
homes with no male power figure.  

The Association of Women Confron-  
ting the National Problem (ANM-  
PRONAC) was formed in 1977, two  
years before the final revolutionary vic-  
tory. In contrast, the Cuban women’s  
group (FMC) did not form until one year  
after the revolution had succeeded.  
Although AMPRONAC was founded by  
“concerned” middle- and upper-class  
women, its membership gradually in-  
cluded more and more poor women.  
AMPRONAC officially denounced  
women’s suffering under Somoza and  
called for an end to all discriminatory  
laws against women, as well as demand-  
ing equal pay for equal work and an  
end to the commercialization of  
women. AMPRONAC grew increasingly  
militant, eventually declaring support  
for and working closely with the FSLN.  

After the victory of the FSLN, AM-  
PRONAC became the Association of  
Nicaraguan Women-Amanda Luisa  
Espinoza (AMNLAE). AMNLAE con-  
tinued and expanded on the programs  
initiated by AMPRONAC. It currently  
seeks to increase women’s participa-  
tion in politics, placing special em-  
phasis on rural women.  

AMPRONAC and AMNLAE have  
been instrumental in winning expanded  
programs and legislation which favor  
Nicaraguan women, at a pace even  
more rapid than that of the Cuban  
FMC. AMPRONAC has carried out peti-  

tion drives, hunger strikes, organized  
medical clinics, Sandinista Block Com-  
mittees, and human rights and educa-  
tional programs.  

AMNLAE, with a membership of  
25,000 only one year after the revolu-  
tion, has played an active part in  
Nicaragua’s remarkable literacy cam-  
paign, set up health and childcare  
centers, and carried out political  
education. AMNLAE aims to eliminate  
prostitution and domestic servitude,  
and to revise the Legal Code to remove  
discrimination against women.  

Nicaraguan women now comprise  
50% of the nation’s police force and  
head two of five FSLN Secretariats.  
Women are also active in the San-  
dinista Committees of Defense (CDS),  
the Farmers Association (ATC), the San-  
dinista Workers Union (CST), the San-  
dinista Youth, and the Army itself.  
Although Nicaraguan women still face  
many problems, the progress they have  
made as a result of the revolution is  
striking.  

The revolutionary struggle in El  
Salvador is developing in ways very  
similar to that of Nicaragua, especially  
concerning women. Not only do  
women make up 40% of the armed  
forces (Frente Farabundo Martí para la  
Liberación Nacional, FMLN), but they  
also make up 40% of the Revolu-  
tionary Council, which is the leadership  
body of the political-military organiza-  
tion. Furthermore, a woman, Ana María  
Guadalupe Martínez, “holds the se-  
cond highest post in the top leadership  
body of the Farabundo Martí People’s  
Liberation Forces (PLP).”  

Women’s rights and women’s eman-  
cipation in Latin America have been  
linked to the level of women’s par-  
ticipation in the leadership and  
mobilization of guerrilla movements,  
and to the presence of revolutionary  
women’s organizations such as the  

FMC and AMNLAE. Moreover, the  

mode of revolutionary struggle, be it  
popular insurrection or revolutionary  
elite, has had a direct bearing not only  
on the attainment of women’s rights  
and emancipation, but on the very  
degree of success that a particular  

revolutionary movement realizes.  

FOOTNOTES:  

1. Margaret Randall, Cuban Women Now: Toronto:  
Women’s Press, 1974 p. 24.  

2. Jane Jaquette, “Women in Revolutionary  
Movements in Latin America,” in the Journal of  
Marriage and the Family, May 1973, p. 348.  
Randall, p. 32.  

3. Norma Stoltz Chinchilla, “Mobilizing Women:  
Revolution in the Revolution,” in Latin American  
Perspectives, 1977, p. 84.  

4. Jaquette, pp. 346.  

5. Randall, p. 15.  

6. Prensa Latina, March-April, 1980.  

Foundry Music  

Company  

MUSIC OF ALL PUBLISHERS  
BOOKS ON MUSIC — GIFTS  

102 Audubon Street, New Haven  
776-3650  

To Tadeusz Borowski (b. 1922-d. 1951)  

I have learned a lot from lines  
mostly to stay far from them.  

You watching with feminine sensibilities were  
unable to follow line in sleep or some wakeful  
reprieve offered you  

in this modern scape of feigned solidarity.  

I have dreamt lines waving  

waving thousand fold shorn  

from the heads of beautiful women  
flossing the teeth of boys on the front line  

lines men.  

Watching feminine sensibilities  
sisters ridden twisted cold stirruped  

new line born,  
You had dreamt women’s parts hereclitian flames  
Curved toward fetal empathy in sweaty sleep  

in wake of memories  
lines straightened you.  

Lisa Kennedy  

UNISEX HAIRCUTTING—  
PERMANENT WAVING —  
HAIR COLORING —  

9 Whitney Avenue  
New Haven, Connecticut  
203-767-3871