Marisa in Mexico

These poems are based on the letters of Maryse Holder, a French
woman, who went to Mexico to “experience life” and was knifed in an
alley by a lover. Her letters are published in Give Sorrow Words (in-
troduction by Kate Millet).

1. Marisa despairs of love

Marisa spent two weeks in the town Zi-
huatenango, eighty miles north-west

of Acapulco, searching for good sex,

true love, the perfect body, or, at least

some man who’d do more than just buy her three
dollar drinks at the bar. Her letters confessed
disgust with skinny, half-Indian Mex

boys who shouted filthy words in the street.

“I look good now, but I won’t much longer.

I lost five pounds, swim each day, have a tan,
but what I need’s a total body lift.

I only want men who're ten years younger.
Maybe I should bleach my hair again.

No man would have me, even as a gift.”

2. Edith’s reply

You send me long letters from Mexico

sunburned passion in empty swimming pools
with Jorge, a sullen young mestizo.

One night, at knifepoint, he steals all your jewels,
calls you puta, whore, ugly, fat, too old,

chasing the native boys who screw for cash.

You write from the bar's artificial cold

and drink tequila with lime, knock the ash

off your cigarette and say you’re lonely,

can’t stand nights with no one there, want to sleep
your way around this tourist colony

but Canadian dykes give you the creeps.

“Edith darling, I can’t live long like this.

No woman should have to beg for a kiss.”

3. Mexico City street smarts

Marisa knew that a woman alone

in Mexico was subject to abuse.

Age wasn’t a factor. She could be crone

or nymphet; she still couldn’t shop or cruise

the beach without some man raising a fuss.

In the sunny land of macho, it seemed

that all skirts were fair game. Once, on a bus,

a man had called her “fea,” said he had dreamed
of her face, followed her back to her room
and tried to force his way up past the clerk:

This violence stirred her, brought warmth to her womb,
till she learned “fea” means “ugly.” “That jerk,”
she wrote Edith, “that little worm, that turd,
thought he could have me with only a word.”

4. Further correspondence

“Sex with men, how do you say, somehow lacks
a sense of the personal.” Mexico

didn’t seem to have done her much good.
When I saw her in New York, she was tan,
seemed fit, already had plans to go back.

Once having been there, she was in the know,

thought she’d be able to handle it, could

take care of her old problems. Those men

who she threw off lightly, early on,

came back to obsess her, stalking her dreams.
“I think M. was the sole one to love me.

The others only wanted sex, it seems.

They thought they could set their wants above me.
If I needed something, they were long gone.”

Joanna Wissinger

-- Valerie Russell --

“Katrin”

continued from page 21

I have not given up convincing
myself of my happiness. I have been
stubborn. I have kept it to myself. 
I have raised our daughter for protest.

I have learned to be alone.

Yesterday I saw my daughter accom-
panied by a young man. I told him
about it. I told him: She is more like
you than like me. I have asked myself
whether that gives us a chance.

Angelika Mechtal came to Yale at the
end of September to read from her
works. In a discussion which followed,
she mentioned her efforts to free herself
from the male literary tradition by
recognizing the source of women’s
writings in association, rather than in
reflection. She considers literature an
existential, not an intellectual problem.
In contrast to a literature founded on
the representation of the author’s in-
tellect through linguistic virtuosity, she
emphasizes the communicative func-
tion of language, its endeavor to incite
the reader's imagination.

Anne Herrmann is a graduate student in
Comparative Literature, currently
teaching in the German and Women’s
Studies Departments. The title of her
dissertation is “Towards a Female

Dialogic: Virginia Woolf and Christa

Wolf.

“If we begin to piece together all of
the instances of violence — the rapes,
the assaults, the cripplings, the killings,
the mass slaughters; if we read their
novels, poems, political and philosophical
tracts and see that they think of us
today what the Inquisitors thought of us
yesterday; if we realize that historically
gynocide is not some mistake, some
accidental excess, some dreadful fluke,
but is instead the logical consequence of
what they believe to be our god-given or
biological natures; then we must finally
understand that under patriarchy gyno-
cide is the ongoing reality of life lived by
women. And then we must look to each
other — for the courage to bear it and
for the courage to change it.” --Andrea
Dworkin, “Remembering the Witches,”
in Our Blood (Harper & Row, 1976).

COPYRIGHTS

"We Are"; © Jewish
Spectator Fall 1976
--p. 21

Quotation from Going
Too Far; © Robin Morgan
1977
--p. 21

Katrin; © Angelika Mechtal
(Deutsch Verlags-
Anstalt) 1976
--p. 21

Quotation from Our
Blood; © Andrea Dworkin
1976
--p. 22

ICE
CREAM
FACTORY

All ice cream made on the premises.

Noon-11 PM Sun-Thurs
Noon-Midnight Fri-Sat

196 College Street
562-0461