This is not a love story, for the flames  
divide us. Staring into fire, we are  
watching wood combust, and nothing  
more. We do not find each other's eyes  
across the flames, or even study hands.  
A while before, our hands were black  
with dirt, criss-crossed with tiny lines of  
blood. Swollen from the cold. We  
washed the dirt away and wrapped the  
cuts in gauze. Who dared imagine ice  
so sharp, or raining black debris. The  
hardest thing that I have ever done.  

We watch the fire closely: even now,  
tired though we are, there is no atone-  
ment for the forest-killer. If flames  
should leap this ring of rocks ... We  
would smother it, of course. And if we  
couldn't? We would get more help,  
more tools, more men. And then? It  
would go out, eventually. That would  
be all.  

(It would not be all. The forest would  
soon return. Fireweed would come and  
re-establish soil, and alder would soon  
follow. Biologists could chart the plant  
succession for thirty years or more.)  

To murder that which you most love,  
even if by accident ... and yet, we  
nearly died today. Do these flames  
divide us?  

The noodles have begun to boil; we  
will drain them in a sump. Minimum-  
impact casserole. While Gary lifts the  
cook-pot, I will roll a rock. Our grey-  
white noodle water fills the loamy,  
angled hole. The color of the lake.  
Soon the water is absorbed, so thirsty is  
this duff. Tomorrow, a bear will come  
and roll this rock again. She will eat the  
noodle pieces and the grubs that gather  
there. The bear will find the holes we  
crapped in, too, for there’s meat in  
fecal matter. She is like an over-friendly  
dog, always sniffing at the best-dressed  
crotch.  

Sometimes I think Gary is like a bear.  

Staring Into Fire  

“The reason that it’s white,” he’d ex-  
plained before the climb, “is it’s full of  
glacial silt.” The water looked as thick  
as cream. It hurt to put my hand in it.  
The glacier met this milky lake to form  
the other shore, and dirty ash-black  
icebergs bobbed beneath its face.  
Above rose Mt. St. John.  

“I've heard that milk is good for  
you,” he’d urged. “Let's get in and  
swim.” I told him he was showing off,  
and that I’d let him drown when he got  
cold. He just shrugged and stripped.  
When he dove into the lake, his body  
vanished for a while.  
When Gary clowns like this he  
angers me. Soon his head broke  
through the surface. “All right,” it  
called, “this feels OK. I'll bet I’ve got a  
ten on the Scrotum Shrinkage Scale.”  
He tried to back-float so that I could  
see, but buoyancy would not allow  
it—he just kept rolling over. Twenty  
seconds passed, then he got out.  

“Already I was feeling weak,” he said  
as he dried off. “The temperature might  
be under zero. When so much is  
suspended you depress the freezing  
point.” A liquid lake at least as cold as  
ice. Who dared imagine this, or what  
there was to come.  

This is not a love story. When Gary  
speaks to me there is little emotion in  
his voice. “It’s as though we're both still  
up there,” he says slowly. “Still at that  
last crevasse. I was so sure; I was sure it  
was all over but the crying.”  

All over for whom, I want to ask him.  
For you, my friend, or me? You know I  
do not climb as well as you. Somehow,  
I feel cheated, although we’re both  
alive. I want to tell him so, but am not  
sure how I can. I stay silent, starting  
work on a white sauce.  

From his side of the fire he con-  
tinues. “For a while I just tried to stay  
calm,” he says. “We've been in tight  
spots before, right, and we always got  
out of them OK.”  

I nod my head and dump the excess  
roux into the now-drained sump. The  
color of the lake. I will find it all my  
life. The hardest thing I’ve ever done, or  
ever had to do. Seven hours. Five hun-  
dred meters. Approximately ten pitch-  
es, if we'd had a rope. Stupid.  

Ten years ago we signed a pact in  
blood. That isn’t true; there wasn’t any  
blood. We didn’t even really write it  
down. But we were oh so solemn. “If I,  
Gary Crowell, ever burn this forest  
down ....” Neither of us made the  
other do it; it was a thing we'd deeply  
felt alone. Discussion only sealed our  
quiet compact.  

Perhaps we should have written it in  
blood, for then we would have started  
asking questions. Would we really take  
our lives for forty murdered trees? Or  
two hundred? Even twenty thousand?  
These are the sorts of things one quan-  
tifies, like eyes or limbs in life insurance  
talk. Certain things, though, cannot be  
summed up. Certain vortices of life,  
purlings of great price.  

We are both staring at my hands  
now. With all this gauze around them,  
they look those of a burn victim. Before  
they were so black, and when they  
stirred the tiny cracks of red appeared.  

There was no pain in scrambling up  
the ridge of Mt. St. John. But crawling  
down along the glacier's lip we found  
we had no options.  

“This is what I thought,” says Gary,  
poking at the fire. “If I lose it—well,  
there isn’t much to think about then, is  
there. If the tumble down the glacier  
couldn’t kill me, then the water in the  
lake surely would have. But if you were  
to fall...”  

I have thought this through as well.  
The odds were ripe for me; one hand  
was all but useless. Would Gary just  
keep climbing, going two or four or six  
hours with a body down below? What if  
it's alive? Is retrieval worth the risk?  

Wouldn't it be easier, after all, to simp-  
ly go and join it. All over but the crying.  
I squeeze a curl of margarine from its  
tube, pinch it, watch it fall into the  
heating roux. And Gary continues.  

“If you fall, things get quite complex.  
Morally. Legally. Decisions I would  
rather not have to face. Faces I would  
rather not have to face. God, I thought  
more about your parents up there than  
I did about mine.”  

“I know,” I say out loud. “That’s ex-  
actly what I thought while we were up  
there. My family, friends, the  
future—all those dumb little reasons to  
live were made ever smaller when I  
realized that if I fell, you’d be the one  
who’d get hurt.” Scary how similar we  
are. Why do you poke so, Mr. Bear? You  
root up corpses I’d rather leave in-  
terred.  

But Gary only nods. “The guilt that  
kept us going, or some aversion to it.  
You know, I’m surprised that you’re  
alive.”  

To throw roux into his face. To hit  
him, burn this forest to the ground. Yet  
Gary is not smug across the wall of  
flame; God, he smiles. And this I am  
forced to acknowledge.  

“I don’t know what kept me going,”  
is all that I can say. And I want to say,  
“Don’t think I did it just for you.”  

Now our roux is thickening nicely.  
The sun is nearly down, The best white  
sauce that I have ever made. I look for  
pine to flavor it, but the boughs are far  
away. Why are we camping in a  
boulderfield? O Mr. Snuffle-upagus,  
how you can confuse me. All these  
rocks which we must overturn. Even  
now, one’s poking in my boot, and  
when we sleep tonight there'll be ten  
beneath the tent. The forest is a thou-  
sand feet below, and we are on the tun-  
dra. Now I cannot watch the fire or ar-  
range the ring of rocks. I can only stare  
at him, beyond the wall of flame, and  
imagine what it is we’re burning.  

by Nathan Copple