Where Does Yale Stand  
On Sexual Harassment?  

by Jill Katz  

In 1979 a Yale graduate student filed  
a complaint with the federal Office of  
Civil Rights (OCR), alleging that Yale’s  
Sexual Harassment Grievance Pro-  
cedure was inadequate. In 1981 the  
OCR, having completed its investiga-  
tion, ruled that Yale’s procedure was  
adequate and therefore in compliance  
with Title IX regulations.  
This judgment by the OCR leaves  
several questions unanswered: What  
does it mean to have an “adequate”  
procedure, in the eyes of the govern-  
ment? Does this mean that Yale’s  
Grievance Procedure is really ade-  
quate? Is it merely adequate? Or is it  
good? And finally, is it enough to pro-  
vide an adequate procedure—or even  
a good one—if there could be a better?  

In order to understand the federal  
definition of an adequate grievance  
procedure, it is necessary to begin with  
Title IX of the Education Amendments  
of 1972. Title IX identifies sexual  
harassment as a type of sex discrimina-  
tion in which the victim is subjected to  
harassment “not because of personal  
characteristics, but because of  
membership in a (specific gender  
group)” (Crocker & Simon, Sexual  
Harassment in Education). This amend-  
ment requires any educational program  
which receives federal funding “to  
adopt and publish grievance pro-  
cedures providing for prompt and  
equitable resolution of student and  
employee complaints alleging (sex  
discrimination)” (CFR 34 ss 106.8 b). If  
there is any reason to believe that such  
procedures are inadequate, the OCR  
must conduct an investigation and  
determine whether or not the university  
is in compliance with federal regula-  

a GUESS which are not sexually...  
discriminatory.  

No clear criteria exist, however, for  
determining the adequacy of such pro-  
cedures, since the OCR provides no  
guidelines and has not yet formulated a  
model grievance procedure of its own.  
In other words: at this time a clear  
definition of adequacy does not exist.  
For this reason, sexual harassment  
grievance procedures vary greatly from  
one school to another. Ex-legal worker  
Phyllis Crocker generously provided me  
with grievance procedures from ten  
large universities. Although it is im-  
possible to reprint all ten in an article  
this size, I will try to present the range  
in complexity and sensitivity that I  
found, and to assess where Yale’s pro-  
cedure stands among them. It is impor-  
tant to remember that many of these  
procedures are still in the early stages  
of development. As students use them,  
their deficiencies will no doubt become  
apparent and—with the help of respon-  
sive administrators—corrected.  

Of those I looked at, Michigan State  

SAVE *100  

HERMES 808 Small Computers  
SUPER SILENT “*TE”  
TOUCH & GO PAPER INSERTION  
EXTRA CHARACTER SELECTION  

Coupon Special  

NOW limited time $825  

Kaden Office Supply  

248 Park St. New Haven 777-7306  

Valerie Russell  

University and MIT have the least sen-  
sitive and developed grievance pro-  
cedures. At MSU, a grievance board for  
sexual harassment does not exist. As a  
last resort, incidences of sexual harass-  
ment can be channeled through an  
unspecified MSU grievance procedure.  
Before that, however, students are ad-  
vised (in a student brochure with the  
revealing title: “What Students Can Do  
About Sex Discrimination”) to confront  
the offender directly and in writing.  
This approach may, of course, be com-  
pletely inappropriate, as in the case of  
attempted rape. Moreover, by placing  
all the responsibility on the student, the  
directions in the pamphlet ignore the  
university's responsibility to provide  
the student with an atmosphere free of  
harassment. The brochure even goes so  
far as to suggest that students “enroll in  

MIT, likewise, lacks a grievance  
board and encourages students to  
resolve their problems directly with the  
offending superior. If resolution cannot  
be thus achieved, their policy advises  
that:  

..students should either seek  
assistance within their department or  
school or avail themselves of the  
assistance of the Office of the Dean for  
Student Affairs or the Office of the  
Dean of the Graduate School. Students  
may also choose to bring the problem to  
the attention of one of the two Special  
Assistants to the President.  

Again, the responsibility for seeking  
redress is placed upon the victim; the  
responsibility of the university to pre-  
vent and redress grievances is ignored.  
It should be noted here that the ex-  
istence of a sexual harassment  
grievance board, which is empowered  
to hear student complaints and to  
recommend or enforce sanctions  

Introductory Offer  
Now thru December  

Rated No. 1 by Buyers Laboratory over all other  
Foreign & Domestic Machines in its Class  

against offenders, is a deterrent to sex-  
ual harassment. Failure to maintain  
such a body, therefore, can be seen as a  
failure to prevent discriminatory and  
offensive behavior.  

Brown’s grievance procedure is only  
slightly better. In a one-page docu-  
ment, the President manages to define  
and denounce sexual harassment and  
also describe the university's policy:  

The President will annually designate  
four persons who will be available to  
hear students’ complaints of sexually of-  
fensive behavior on the part of faculty  
or administrators. These persons will  
counsel and advise the students con-  
cerned and will, if deemed necessary,  
refer faculty cases to the Provost and  
Dean of the Faculty and administrative  
cases to the appropriate Vice-President.  

Although a separate Sexual Harass-  
ment Board exists at Brown, its  
powers, procedures, and limitations  
are not defined. The absence of these  
details naturally belies the Board’s  
power to punish offenders or redress  
student complaints. A similar lack of  
specificity characterizes the policy  
statements at the University of Wiscon-  
sin and at Stanford.  

The procedure at the University of  
Minnesota belongs on the other side of  
the continuum, among the procedures  
which are better developed and more  
sensitive to the issues involved in sex-  
ual harassment. The University of Min-  
nesota statement is particularly  
noteworthy for its strict attitude toward  
offending faculty. It is the only pro-  
cedure out of those I read (including  
Yale’s) which requires a written response  
from the accused. Failure to comply  
with this requirement, the policy states,  
“shall be deemed a breach of academic  
responsibility requiring notice of such  
failure to respond to be given to the  
Academic Vice President by this Of-  
fice.” While the University of Santa  

continued on page 16  

M 0) Afternoon  

Announcing... 15  

the Feminist  
Film Society!  

by Nancy Lee Kathan  

The Feminist Film Society at Yale Law  
School was formed as a showcase for  
films that present a full spectrum of  
female experience, in order to combat  
the media’s familiar bland stereotyping  
of women.  

The films in the fall semester series  
centered around the themes of female  
rites of passage, the pressure to be  
beautiful, the economics of being  
female, and the urge for revolution.  
These themes were treated in  
documentaries about women in the  
world, fictional films that feature  
women as decision-making pro-  
tagonists, films which deal articulately  
with the sex-stereotyping of women,  
and films directed by women. 47% of  
the Society’s fall films were directed by  
women, as opposed to 6% of the Yale  
Law School Film Society’s fall series.  

Most of the fall series films  
presented women in public life: as  
welders and shipyard workers during  
WWII (in Rosie the Riveter), as struggl-  
ing young artists (in Girlfriends), as  
animal behaviorists (Jane Goodall and  
The Lions), and as prostitutes (in Game  
and Ain’t Nobody's Business). The  
ideological fabric of the series, in an at-  
tempt to present as broad a view as  
possible of women’s endeavors, allow-  
ed the dilemmas of a revolutionary  
(Angela Davis) to coexist with the  
dilemmas of a gold digger (fictional  
Lorelei Lee, played by Marilyn Monroe  
in Gentlemen Prefer Blondes).  

This spring, the focus of the series  
shifts to private life: romance and sex-  
roles, the mother-daughter relationship,  
beauty, and aging will be among the  
themes presented.  

Among the treats of the spring series  
are two exquisite short films by film  
pioneer Maya Deren, who is known as  
“the mother of us all” by experimental  
film makers: At Land (Feb. 19) and  
films featuring strong women:  
Christina (with Greta Garbo, March 12),  
a Katherine Hepburn double-bill of  
Christopher Strong and Sylvia Scarlett  
(March 26), a Rosalind Russell comedy  
about office-workers (Take a Letter,  
Darling, with Fred MacMurray as  
Russell's secretary, March 19), and A  
Woman’s Face (a wonderful early Joan  
Crawford piece, April 30). Several of  
the features focus on the interactions  
among women: Cries and Whispers  
(Bergman, Feb. 19), The Bitter Tears of  
Petra von Kant (Fassbinder, Feb. 26),  
and Three Women (Altman, March 5),  
as do the screening favorites Hester  
Street (Jan. 22) and Julia (Feb. 12).  

The films will be screened on Friday  
evenings at the Law School  
Auditorium, 127 Wall Street. For more  
information, call 865-6141 (weekdays).  

Q  

‘Frank Cavaliere Hair Design’  
shear artistry  
Family of hair cutters  
624-9400