DR Ririclk

Fear Behind the Curtain  
(a drawing by Paul Klee)

He must have painted at night

in a room lit only by one white bulb

for the pen strokes crawl out of darkness.  
A square of yellow parchment

defined by only

a disembodied doorway,

half an oval in a void

and the black ink outline of a window

in which hangs the curtain

behind which stands Fear.

He must have painted in dreams  
pulling back the curtain to find  
Fear, the red body of a woman  
and the large green mask

of the tribal dance.  

A woman, hovering in the dark,  
at the back of his room

at the back of the cave

drawn with the burnt end

of a stick pulled flaming from the fire  
and colored flame-red, leaf-green  
with earth found near the river  
where animals drink.

Judy Wurtzel

mR REST RS RT SE

The Feminist Union Anti-Nuclear Task Force believes that women  
can and must act together now, to demand nuclear disarmament, to  
resist escalating national war preparations and to close down all  
nuclear power plants.

The Task Force meets twice a month at  
the New Haven Women's Center,

614 Orange Street. Women

with energy and

commitment are needed

to help with all aspects

of our work. For more

information, please call:

Joan Cavanagh at 776-4098

FEMINIST UNION  
ANTI-NUCLEAR  
TASK FORCE

Gender Roles  
continued from page 13

To discuss the concept of a same-sex  
oriented challenge to the heterosexual  
norm, a term is needed which, unlike  
bisexuality, implies more than a  
liberalization of present sexual  
behavior. I propose the term homosexualism  
to specify the political opposition  
to the dominant heterosexual  
ideology. As a companion to radical  
feminism, homosexualism would  
challenge all notions of male superiority  
and of gender-differentiated realms  
of existence.

Without an incorporation of  
homosexualism, present-day radical  
feminist theory runs the risk of  
perpetuating the historical male-female  
antagonism. If we neglect the creation  
of a fluid sexual base for all human beings,  
important gains for some women  
will be accomplished, but we will still  
be living in a phallocentric world, and  
women will still be negatively defined.

Homosexualism does not, however,  
mean an end to heterosexual relations.  
In the Communist Manifesto, Marx proclaims:  
“Communism deprives no man  
of the power to appropriate the products  
of society; all it does is to deprive  
him of the power to subjugate the labor  
of others by means of such appropriation.”  
To paraphrase: “Homosexualism  
deprives no person of the right to  
heterosexual relations; all it does is to  
deprive him/her of the claim to power  
or assumption of powerlessness corresponding  
to his/her sexual role.”  
Homosexualism will ultimately allow  
individuals to engage in relationships  
with people of either sex, people no  
longer constricted by their respective  
gender, but freely able to express their  
self-defined nature and needs.

Homosexualism must mobilize gay  
men and lesbians to come out and live  
as self-respecting and assertive individuals.  
Most radical feminists reject  
gay men as men first, still able to oppress,  
economically privileged, and in  
some cases overtly misogynous. Some  
gay men have been deluded into the  
conviction that alignment with the  
patriarchy will save them from oppression,  
but clearly, until sexism is abolished,  
the pansies, fairies and commie fags  
will continue to lose their jobs,  
their friends, their families, and their  
lives. Male homosexuals can be  
mobilized in their own self-interest, and  
work with lesbian and radical feminists  
to destroy the institution of heterosexuality.

As a first step, the battle for equal  
rights for homosexuals, which has been  
fought since the 1860s, must finally be  
won. But one crucial aspect of the  
traditional approach to gay rights must  
change for homosexualism to effectively  
alter the present conditions of  
gender antagonism. The early homosexual  
rights movement never attempted  
to incorporate homosexuality into  
society. As a separate group, homosexuals  
were manipulated by ostensibly  
tolerant political interests, first encouraged  
to come out, later condemned,  
jailed and slaughtered. The extension  
of laws to include equal rights for  
gays is a superficial and temporary  
solution, subject always to a dangerous  
reversal.

Socialist radical feminists and  
homosexuals must seek an irreversible  
transformation which would integrate  
homosexuality into standard social  
behavior and end the dominance of the  
intrinsically sexist institution of  
heterosexuality. The advancement of  
homosexualism together with radical  
feminism could ultimately lead to the  
elimination of masculinity and  
femininity. The false, destructive and  
unequal divisions between the sexes,  
which perpetuate women’s oppression,  
would be abolished. Only then would  
the male-female antagonism cease to  
prevent the creation of a cooperative,  
nonviolent, egalitarian state.

To have one’s individuality completely  
ignored is like being pushed quite out  
of life. Like being blown out as one  
blows out a light.

—Evelyn Scott (1893-1963), American  
writer

FREE Pregnancy Tests  
¢ Test and Procedure some

¢ Professional Counseling  
¢ Early Detection Blood Test: $15

Summit is Connecticut's largest licensed  
abortion center, complete with modern  
hospital facilities and on-premises laboratory.  
Since 1975, our staff of over 30  
professionals have created an atmosphere  
of quality care.

OKO SUMMIT WOMEN'S CENTER

nyMooNeS 333-1822