It was a tree, no doubt about that,  
but was it the right kind for macumba?  
Teresa didn’t remember ever having  
seen an elm in Brazil on any of the  
family’s Christmas reunions. Often  
when she had come across the little  
black-magic clusters of candles and of-  
ferings at night, they’d been at the base  
of a tree, sometimes a coconut palm,  
but usually some stout, smooth-barked  
thing with lots of fat, oily dark-green  
leaves. Compared with these tropical  
memories, the elm seemed a skimpy  
thing to Teresa. She felt unprotected  
beneath its network of skinny, bare  
branches.  

The air, cold for Oregon winter, bit  
into her and was especially cruel to the  
knees left exposed by the skirt of her  
school uniform. The sky was big, emp-  
ty, and menacing, and Teresa imagined  
that if a cardinal’s long arm came flying  
through that sky from Rome to  
Portland in a red-sleeved stripe to point  
accusingly at her womb, the skimpy  
elm would be powerless to stop it. Her  
father had been a boxer, and taught her  
to fear anything with long arms, so she  
feared the Church. But the fear of God  
and the Pope was nothing compared to  
what she felt at the thought of having  
to talk to Eddie later on and tell him  
what she thought had happened. That  
was why suddenly she was tempted by  
her father’s idea of selling everything  
and moving back to Brazil. She knew  
the Church would find her there, too  
(and with this thought she saw the hand  
at the end of the cardinal’s red arm  
swing a compass arc from Portland to  
Rio), but at least Eddie would be so far  
away she wouldn’t have to tell him  
anything ever if she didn’t want to. It  
was a comforting thought.  

The problem was she didn’t have  
much faith in her father’s will to carry  
out his idea, and of course she knew  
she couldn’t count on much sympathy  
from the Church. She would have to  
turn to some other source for a solu-  
tion. This skimpy elm might have to do.  

Cold and nervous, she began to  
shiver, and headed in towards her  
house, leaving the tree to wait in the  
front yard.  

Teresa had at least as many names as  
she'd lived places on the map spread  
out before her, and with a red grease-  
pencil and a ruler she was tracing lines  
from name to name,  

Macumba  

The first line started in Rio de  
Janeiro, where she’d been christened  
Teresa Luciana de Andrade e Ribeiro  
while her mother smiled on, thinking  
only “Teresa,” with Brazilian love for  
Brazilian baby in Brazil, as she would  
for the next three years. From there the  
line went to the farm in northern Por-  
tugal where her father’s sisters had  
adored her dark skin and christened her  
“Terezinha,” tiny terror of the  
vineyards. A little later she joined her  
mother and father again in Swansea,  
Massachusetts, and though she once  
gave a bloody nose to a fellow  
kindergartener who told her she  
couldn’t even say her own name right,  
she eventually got used to the tight,  
hissing American pronunciation of  
Teresa, a sound entirely different from  
the one her mother called her home  
with. Then Terri was her name among  
playmates in Ottawa, and now in  
Portland Terri was still what she made  
the kids at high school call her.  

Only Eddie was allowed to call her  
what he wanted, because she was in  
love with Eddie and she liked to hear  
him call her stupid things like Treat,  
and Trinket, and Tureen. She gave a  
violent shrug. She hadn’t wanted the  
lines to lead her back to thinking about  
Eddie and she looked up quickly at an  
AC/DC poster on her wall to give  
herself something else to think about.  

She thought about electric guitars for a  
while, then looked back at the map.  
The red lines made a sort of angle  
whose rays shot out from Portugal to  
Portland and to Rio de Janeiro. Or they  
made a kind of arrow that pointed  
through Europe to—to where? To  
Moscow, in the heart of Soviet Russia.  
Teresa thought about that. There the air  
would be colder than anything and life  
would be hard because it’s hard for  
Communists, but at least she wouldn’t  
be here and she wouldn't have to talk  
to Eddie later on and she would have a  
different name like Trishka, or Tatiana,  
or Tsarina.  

Someone tapped on the door of her  
room. It was her mother and Teresa  
could have dinner now, if she wanted.  

At dinner there was only Teresa, her  
little brother Rob, and her mother. Her  
father was down at the gas station,  
working a double shift. Business hadn't  
been so good lately and he’d had to let  
go of some of the help and fill in  
himself. For once she sort of missed  
him. Usually all his talk about moving  
back to Rio just annoyed her, but now  
she wished he were here threatening to  
take them all to the airport that very  

“WOW, THEY GOT IT!”  

Fork Rock Brves  
JAZZ CLASSICAL  
Women’s Music and More!  

Specializing in New, Used, and  
Collectable Records. ‘If we  
don’t have it, we'll get it.’  
{Mon-Sat 10-6 Thurs-Fri 10-9. Sun-12-5  
59 BROADWAY  
NEW HAVEN, CT 06511  

203-562-2508  

evening. It made her nervous to im-  
agine him sitting in his office down at  
the station counting wads of money  
and deciding to stick it out after all.  
She ate her rice and black beans slowly.  
Rob was eating even more slowly. Their  
mother was lifting up food nimbly and  
rattling on in Portuguese about a game  
show she’d seen on TV that day. Sud-  
denly Rob threw down his fork,  

“Wa, I swear to God I’m so sick of this  
garbage. You sit around watchin’ TV all  
day it’s no wonder you can’t think of  
anything else to cook for us except this  
rice an’ beans crap an’ I’m just sick and  
tired of it, it’s crap, an’ I ain’t gonna eat  
it anymore. No way. It stinks.”  

Rob was in junior high school.  
Sometimes he had trouble understand-  
ing that other people besides him had  
any feelings. Right now he had his arms  
defiantly folded and his mother was  
dead-still, her eyes filling up with tears.  
Teresa couldn’t stand it.  

“Robbie,” she said, “shut up and  
eat.”  

“Oh yeah? Wanna make me?”  

This was too much.  

“Yeah, as a matter of fact I do,” she  
said, and gave him a hard, sharp rap on  
the back of the head that made it his  
turn now to get all teary-eyed and  
cowed.  

“Now,” she repeated: “Shut up and  
eat.” He ate. She watched him hard.  
He’d been growing. He could have hit  
back and gotten away with it. Just the  
other day she’d seen him draw tears  
and blood from a boy bigger than her,  

just playing pick-up football in the  

front yard. The only thing that kept him  
eating his dinner right now was fear  
born of years of lost fights. Soon he  
would notice a corresponding fear  
growing in his sister, though, and then  
he would stop losing fights.  

She couldn’t bear the thought of  
such an injustice. Right now she hated  
him. She knew it was a sin to hate him  
and hated him, him and his Oregon-  
born contempt for their mother’s  
Brazilian love, a love scarcely differen-  
tiable in Teresa’s mind from the rice  
and beans they ate every night. Com-  
passion for the suffering of that woman  
was giving Teresa back her appetite.  
She began to eat quickly while fixing a  
fierce stare on her brother. When she  
turned to reach for a second helping,  
though, a calendar on the wall behind  
her mother’s head entered her field of  
vision and she lost her appetite again,  
reminded of all the anxious, white days  
that were her diary pages stretching  
back to the last of the little red circles  
she used to keep track of her period.  

She had poured herself a half-serving  
of the soupy beans and normally would  
have thickened them then with rice,  
but instead she slumped back in her  
chair and pushed her plate away.  

“Ma, I’m sorry,” she said, “I'm just  
not hungry all of a sudden. Is that OK?”  

Their mother didn’t look up but nod-  
ded her head, and Teresa began clear-  
ing her place. Rob threw down his fork  
again.  

“Waaa, that’s no fair. If she can leave  
without finishing so can I. I’m goin’  
over to Ralph Blincow’s and see his  
new Atari.”  

Rob moved to get up and leave, and  
Teresa advanced on him threateningly,  
but just as she was about to grab him  
and throw him back into his seat, their  
mother let out a martyr’s sigh that  
stopped her short. Her hands dropped  
to her sides and she took a step back.  
She couldn’t remember anyway how  
she had hated Rob so much just a few  
minutes before. That calendar had  
brought other, bigger worries back to  
pester her.  

“All right,” she said, “let him go, I  
don’t care.”  

Teresa went upstairs to change. Ed-  
die would be by in about forty-five  
minutes. Rob ran out the front door,  
headed for Ralph Blincow’s. Teresa’s  
mother started taking dishes into the  
kitchen.  

When the van pulled up out front  
and honked its horn, Teresa and her  
mother were watching television.  
Teresa heard the horn but didn’t move.  
Her hands got all sweaty and her heart  
pounded so hard in her throat she  
almost couldn’t breathe. The van honk-  
ed again. Through the picture window  
she could see it sitting there.  

“Isn't that Eddie?” her mother asked  
without taking her eyes off the screen.  

“Yeah,” Teresa answered. “I guess it  
is.” She picked up her jacket and  
started moving towards the door. “Um,  
OK, I'll see you later, Ma.”  

“OK. You have fun, you two.”  

“Yeah.” Teresa was out the front  
door, past the elm, and reaching for the  
door of Eddie’s van. Before she opened  
it she glanced back at the picture win-  
dow. It framed her mother, blue and  
warm in the TV light, waiting for her  
children and her husband to come  
home, and Teresa realized she had  
forgotten to kiss her goodnight. She  
would have liked to have gone back  
and sat down and kissed her and waited  
with her all night, but Eddie honked  
again.  

“C'mon, Ree-ree, let’s go.”  

She climbed in and gave Eddie a kiss.  
They started driving. He put on a Van  
Halen tape and they didn’t say  
anything for a while. Then he looked  
over at her and said: “So. What took  
you so long gettin’ out to the car, Te-  
ree-tard?”  

He had this big smile on his face.  
That was a new name, Te-ree-tard. He  
had just made it up, and normally she  
would have applauded his invention  
with a little mock-derisive laugh and  
maybe by calling him back something  
like “Ugly” or “Wet-your-beddie” or  
just plain “Dickface,” but she didn’t  
feel like playing tonight. She just  
answered him, sounding sort of an-  
noyed:  

“Oh, I was just brushin’ my teeth, Ed-  
die. That’s why I didn’t come runnin’  
right out as soon as you honked.”  

“Well, man, what were you brushin’  
‘em with? Steel wool? You don’t need to  
get ‘em that clean for chrissakes.” Eddie  
was joking, trying to pretend he hadn’t  
felt the coldness in her reply. “I was sit-  
tin’ out there forever just about freezin’  
my ass off waitin’ for you to show up  
and warm my cockles or whatever.”  

As he said the last few words the car  
halted at a stoplight and he looked at  
Teresa with a smile and gave her  
nearest knee a squeeze. His hand re-  
mained on her knee. She didn’t touch it.  
It just lay there delicately, being told  
nothing. Eddie looked over at her  
again, now not with the smile but with  
an eyebrow raised, perplexed. Teresa  
returned a blank stare. Eddie went on  
asking with his eyes and then it looked  
like his lower lip was starting to quiver  
and finally he just let out a sigh and put  
his hand back on the steering wheel as  
the light turned green.  

She felt terrible. She might have said  
almost anything and broken the ten-  
sion, but there was only one thing to  
talk about, and she just couldn’t talk  
about it. She looked at him and he was  
so confused—and good-looking that all  
she wanted was to let him know she  
wasn’t mad at him. But she couldn’t do