A Lesbian Voice Discovered

We Too Are Drifting by Gale Wilhelm.  
Tallahassee, FL: Naiad Press, 1984, 117  
pp., $6.95 paper.

What did it mean to be a lesbian in  
America in the 1930s? There are only a  
limited number of first-hand accounts  
which are accessible and available to  
give people a clue. One such account,  
Gale Wilhelm’s 1935 novel We Too Are  
Drifting, had been unavailable for more  
than twenty years until it was recently  
reprinted by the Naiad Press. Its reap-  
pearance gives us cause for celebration  
because another piece can be placed in  
the complex and frustrating jigsaw puz-  
zle of lesbian/gay history. We can also  
be happy because the novel's style and  
language are on a par with the best fic-  
tion of its decade.

Not much is known about Gale  
Wilhelm. According to Barbara Grier, in  
the book’s introduction, Wilhelm was  
born in Oregon in 1908 and lived most  
of her life—at least until the 1950s—in  
the West and the Midwest. We Too Are  
Drifting was her first published novel,  
and she published five more during the  
next ten years, two of which also focused  
largely on lesbian characters. She  
had a woman lover, Helen Hope  
Rudolph Page, with whom she shared a  
home for almost twenty years. For  
several years, the two maintained a  
working and social relationship with  
Carl Sandburg. After Page’s death in the  
mid-1950s, then, Wilhelm seems to  
have disappeared. Today, she cannot  
be tracked down, and the Naiad Press  
has been unable to determine whether  
or not she is still alive.

The irony of discovering the past  
through the words of a person whose  
present remains unknown is not an un-  
common occurrence in encounters with  
lesbian/gay literature. For more than  
twenty years, lesbians were discovering  
themselves and their communities in  
old, ragged, highly coveted copies of  
lesbian pulp novels—unaware of who  
Ann Bannon or Valerie Taylor were or  
of what their actual visions consisted.  
Then, when the Naiad Press reprinted  
Bannon’s Beebo Brinker series and  
Taylor's Erika Frohmann novels, impor-  
tant (and entertaining) documents of  
our lesbian/gay heritage became widely  
available to a new generation—and we  
were allowed to hear the current voices  
of these foremothers of gay liberation  
and lesbian-feminism. Bannon, a col-  
lege professor, came out of the closet  
and gave interviews to lesbian/gay and  
feminist publications, and is currently  
working on a novel which will continue  
the series after a silence of more than  
two decades. Taylor, who has been ac-  
tive in the women’s and gay movements  
from their earliest days, has received  
the recognition she deserves for her  
place in furthering the fair and realistic  
portrayal of gay people in literature.  
She recently published a novel about  
lesbians over sixty entitled Prism. One  
hopes that by autumn of this  
year—when the Naiad Press will  
republish Gale Wilhelm’s second novel,  
Torchlight to Valhalla—the mystery  
surrounding Wilhelm will lift and we  
might learn more about who she was  
and is.

For now, we are left only with vague  
biographical guideposts and a  
remarkably good first novel. The prose  

is smooth—a dense concentration of  
glassy images with a highly-polished  
hardness about them. Wilhelm’s words  
radiate beauty and strength; her tone is  
delicate, but never fragile. Though  
praised by her (mainstream) critics for  
understatement, Wilhelm was uncom-  
promising in her portrayal of the intensi-  
ty of lesbian love:  
Jan said, "Good-bye, Victoria," and stood  
with her back against the parapet and  
Victoria smiled and walked quickly  
away, with the beautiful ease, the swift  
beautiful rhythm like music. Jan stood  
with her back hard against the parapet  
and the music got farther and fainter and  
then it was gone. She looked up and  
stood looking up and she felt the wind  
sharply now and she heard the thunder  
of wheels and feet and voices below her.  
That was another world. She dropped her  
cigarette and put her foot on it and  
walked slowly back along the viaduct.

The wind is always sharp throughout  
the novel, cutting through the illusions  
of love and forcing open the windows  
of society. Jan is an artist—a strong  
woman we envision much like Janette  
Foster’s portrait of Wilhelm herself,  
“shingled and tailored.” We see her  
moving from a hopeless and painful af-  
fair with Madeleine, who is married, in-  
to the arms of Jennifer, a young single  
woman who admires Jan’s work. Jen-  
nifer, however, has strong ties to her  
family and to a suitor named Dan.  
Near the novel’s end, Jan muses:

Dan and Jan. She hadn’t thought of  
that before. It would be a simple thing to  
confuse the names on the tip of your  
tongue and say one when you meant the  
other?

Jan confronts a dilemma still pres-  
ent in our community—the need to  
reconcile love with a culture whose  
prohibitions constantly threaten to  
destabilize it. Her handling of the en-  
suing problems remains relevant to-  
day, despite a social context lacking  
the support systems now taken for  
granted by lesbians and gay males.  
With neither personalized solutions  
nor unreal rhetoric, Jan achieves a  
remarkable consciousness of her strug-  
gle and oppression outside the institu-  
tion of heterosexuality. It’s the 1930s,  
of course, so the thoughts and words  
are different from what we might ex-  
pect today—but the feelings, the quiet  
rage, reach us as if they were being felt  
at the moment. 

What the novel has to say about the  
artist and her/his process is significant.  
The distinctions between solitude,  
loneliness, and alienation blur and  

then are clarified again and again. We  

see Jan creating not only to fill the  
emptiness of life, but also to express a  
fullness, a dynamic love for women  
that is within her. The role of the artist,  
however, is neither romanticized nor  
rarefied. It is the material aspects of  
creation—the tools, the labor, the  
bruises—which Wilhelm describes and  
subtly transforms into a powerful  
statement on the artificial limitations  
imposed on those who love and/or  
create.

A particularly interesting part of the  
novel is the deep and moving relation-  
ship between Jan and another artist, a  
heterosexual male named Kletkin. The  

two learn from each other—about art,  
love, life—in ways we rarely find les-  
bians and straight males relating to  
each other in literature. It’s obvious  
that only a privileged few of us interact  
with at least some straight people who  
are significant in our lives. Our  
literature and our written history,  
though, give us few if any insights into  
these affiliations. With the exception  
of some books by Jane Rule, Virginia  
Woolf, May Sarton, and a handful of  
other writers, we almost never en-  
counter positive and meaningful social  
relationships between straights and  
gays in literature—despite the fact  
that most of our lives do contain such  
relationships. If Wilhelm’s book finds a  
readership among writers, we have  
some reason to hope that this void  
will begin to be filled.

Of course, sparse as they may be in  
our literature, heterosexuals have  
undeniably silenced lesbians and gays  
in substantially more serious ways  
than have been true of the reverse.  
Although this first novel received what  
can be termed favorable reviews,  
critics’ qualifications demonstrated  
the deep and ingrained homophobia of  
the literary establishment. In The New  
York Times Book Review of August 18,  
1935, Stuart Young wrote of Wilhelm:  

"[T]his author has given a skittish subject  
about as much dignity as it can hope for  
in normal society... [We] get over the  
instinctive barriers erected by the  
unpleasant substance [read: lesbianism]  
of the material and salute the sheer ar-  
tistry of the writing."

As much as Wilhelm’s style partially  
excused her “unpleasant” subject for  
Young, he saw in the book no  
“awareness of larger human impulses  
and values.” As the gay historian  

Pam Dick  

Jonathan Katz has remarked of this  
review, it presented “a criticism often  
leveled against Jewish, Black, and  
other literatures focusing on a minority  
experience.” The “larger” world, the  
“universal,” as we all know is white/  
male/ Christian/ heterosexual/  
capitalist/middle—and upper-middle  
class. What in the world can one learn  
from a story about a person who  
possesses almost none of these traits?  
Quite a bit, of course.

I hope that this novel finds its way  
into women’s studies courses and the  
new evolving canons of women’s and  
gay literature. Like Woolf, Djuna  
Barnes, and Amy Lowell, Wilhelm  
discarded many conventions of her  
genre, and pushed the limits of form in-  
to unusual and distinctive places. But,  
along with these others, she faced the  
constraints of a heterosexist society  
which worked to silence her lesbian  
voice. We are left always with an in-  
satiable hunger for knowing who and  
what these women and their art could  

have been, if only... Still, we are  
nourished by their imaginative crafti-  
ness, by the codes which they  

developed to express what was both  
forbidden and beautiful. Of the four,  
Wilhelm’s code is by far the most ac-  
cessible and readily grasped, her im-  
ages the most direct. Her novel can  
give us all an important and thoughtful  
view into the lesbian/gay past and pres-  
ent.

NOTES  
1. Gale Wilhelm, We Too Are Drifting,  
Tallahassee, FL: Naiad Press, 1984, p.72 Original  
edition, Random House, 1935.  
2. Wilhelm, p.17.  
3. This book review was reprinted in Jonathan  
Katz, ed. Gay & Lesbian Almanac, New York,  
Harper & Row, 1983 pp.507-8.  
4. Katz, p.507.  

Paul Massi Cameli  

Pam Dick