A History And Review Of

Yale Feminist Magazines
1969-79

By Pamela Biel

Aurora’s 1979 spring issue has on its cover, along
with a picture of an elegant top-hatted Aurore
Dupin (George Sand) the words “a feminist literary
magazine.” It also notes that the magazine is free.
Both of these facts are fairly interesting in light of
past feminist writing at Yale. Yale feminism has
had a necessarily short history. Women first arrived
at Yale as undergraduates in 1969, although there
had been women graduate students, wives, secre-
taries, and teachers for far longer than ten years.
What is interesting about the notation that Aurora
is a feminist literary magazine is that it is the
second such publication in ten years. Doubtless
women have been literate, if not literary, at Yale to
a far greater degree than this small amount of
published feminist writing would indicate. Women
have been writing for the Yale Daily News and the
Yale Literary Magazine for the past ten years, but
only twice in this entire time have women joined
together under the heading “feminists” to publish a
magazine, with a literary focus.

There have been feminist publications since 1969;
three booklets on women’s experiences at Yale and
many leaflets on various issues have been distribu-
ted. Two of these booklets were published in 1969,
one in 1976; all three with the purpose of informing
and warning women of what was in store for them
at Yale. All these publications have been free,
which could help to explain the dearth of feminist
publications at Yale. The majority of the funding for
Yale Break, Yale-New Haven-Women, Womens-
words and the Freshwomen’s Booklet of ’75-’76 had
to come from sources other than the University. The
Yale Undergraduate Women’s Caucus, New Haven
Women’s Liberation and private funding have
supported these publications. Yale’s Office of the
Education of Women helped support Womenswords
and helps fund Aurora but most of the costs for
both journals were raised by the editors.

All of the women’s ‘al

what it is about being a woman as a special and
unique being. Womenswords, the first literary
magazine of a feminist nature at Yale, was published
in 1976. Volume one, number one contained poems,
prose, and several essays. As is true of all the
women’s publications at Yale, the politics of this
journal were radical. Two brief essays on the
subject of feminism and socialism by Lee Martin-
dale and Merri Kane and an essay by Nancy
Kempner Davis called, “For the Faith and Against
the Rules” are the substance of the politics in this
issue. Both articles on socialism emphasize the
importance of maintaining feminism aside from and
besides socialism. Lee Martindale writes particularly
about the effects of social and economic forces on
women. She writes:

“Feminism is based upon the principle that the
subordinate position of women is not a result of
biological and psychological inferiority, but of a
social system which confines women to a second
class role and warps their consciousness in
accordance with it. In modern society, that social
system is capitalism, and the liberation of women as
women...depends on that system’s abolition.”

Kane speaks of the differences in our culture
between male culture, associated with reason, and
female culture, which is associated with emotion.
She explains how these differences ensure male
domination, since rationality is associated with
production and power. “Feminism,” she writes,
must “fight against the economic oppression of
women under capitalism and against the cultural
oppression of women under the hegemony of male
values.”

Feminism is seen by both writers as, in Kane’s
words, working “to transform a divided, oppressive
culture into a unified, human socialist culture.”
Both women are distressed at the backsliding of
such feminist issues in the legislature as legalization
of abortion rights and the failure to ratify the ERA.
The poetry and prose centers on experiences of
women of all ages. Most is personal, original and
witty. The feeling that is predominant in the
creative writing is a joy in being a woman.

Yale Break conveys a very different feeling. This
was “A newspaper for and by women” and Volume
One, Number One came out on December 11, 1969.
The writers were women at Yale, generally
secretaries, clerks, one professor and one woman
who described herself as: “a working wife at Yale.”
The common denominator of these women, aside
from the obvious—that they all worked for
Yale—was that these women were angry. They were
indignant because of their low paid jobs, the
obvious discrimination in hiring and the grief of
being a woman in a male-dominated system.

An article in Yale Break entitled, “Bow Down To
The Kingman, Dear” describes the barriers placed
between women in our society, and how they are
intensified at Yale. One article describes the
problems of being a secretary at the Law School. All
of the articles take the attitude of wanting to expose
other people to the indignity and unfairness in their
lives. They attempt to show how women at Yale
were being used and misused, turned over the
knees and under the thumbs of the administrator,
faculty and almost every man at Yale. Part of the
reason that Yale Break was published is that there
was an attempt to unionize the non-faculty staff at
Yale to ensure better wages, fairer hiring and
general improvement conditions, a goal which
has not yet been reached. The Yale Non Faculty
Action Committee (YNFAC) was partially responsi-
ble for Yale Break. This magazine is one of the few
examples of published writing by women at Yale
who are neither faculty nor students.

As an alternative orientation to the first freshman class of
women, it warns the freshwomen just how Yale will
treat them, which is more as bodies than as minds,
better as dates, worse as classmates. It details the
positions of YNFAC, which includes demands for
childcare, as well as higher wages and a uniform
promotion system. Several articles protest Yale’s
disregard for the New Haven community, specifi-
cally in its plans for the Mellon Center (now the
British Art Center) and its support for construction
of the Oak Street Turnpike Connector, both of which
leveled previously thriving communities, the au-
thors say. The booklet also discloses the links with
business, government and finance of members of
the Yale Corporation. Topics such as Yale’s attitude
towards blacks in the area of the University are
explored in lucid and informative prose.

Yale-New Haven-Women alone among feminist
newspapers so far published, links the New Haven
and Yale communities. It serves as an important
example for future publishing efforts, since femi-
nism should deal with the concerns of women
beyond the University.

Equally important to women at Yale is the
Freshwomen’s Booklet distributed to all freshwomen
in Autumn 1975. Like both the publications
mentioned above, this booklet emphasizes the role
of all races of women both within and without the
ivy-covered walls of Yale. Along with practical
listings of medical, legal and academic services for
women, this booklet contains articles on being a
feminist, being Christian, being black, Asian,
married, gay, and just plain being at Yale. The
booklet is brief and its attitude is optimistic.
Perhaps the most telling article in the booklet is by
Ann Olivarious and Nancy Wallace called “After the
Honeymoon.” It describes the subtle discrimination
against women at Yale. It is forthright and closes
with these sentences:

“Yale plays a liberal role as a forum for the
advancement of knowledge on constant
questioning of the heritage. This liberal initiative
represents the vitality of the institution and its
purpose as an intellectual community. Yale’s
fulfillment of her own potential dictates confronting
the questions raised by the presence of women—
something Yale has only just begun.”

The booklet was organized by the Yale Under-
graduate Women’s Caucus which noted, inside of
the front cover that “This booklet is not an official
publication of Yale University.”

Aurora, which appeared last spring, is the latest
effort of a feminist era at Yale. It contained
both literary and political articles. Along with many
poems and drawings, often lacking in some of the
other magazines, Aurora contained one research
article, a critique of radical feminist analysis, and
an editorial comment which described the purposes
of the magazine. Aurora began as a special issue of
Zirkus dedicated to feminist literature. Unlike some
of the other publications, there is very little work by
minority women and the political essays center on
issues in the women’s movement rather than in the
New Haven community or at Yale. The difference
between Aurora and many of the other magazines is
that this is its second issue, while others never
made it past the first. Whether this is evidence of a
better organizational system and canny business
manager, a greater determination on the part of
feminists at Yale today, or a stronger feeling of
sisterhood and solidarity is hard to say. It is
important that after a three-year lull preceded by a
seven-year lull, feminist literature appears to be
here to stay. I personally find this a very
important development, which are best discussed in feminist
publications. The irrevocable link between feminism
and other radical movements has become clear.
Feminist magazines are precisely the place to air
political issues, especially radical ones. Right now
there is no place for these views to emerge. A
separately funded feminist magazine could be a
forum for such politics.

A feminist magazine could also be a forum, as
feminist magazines have been in the past, to
describe specific complaints against the male
establishment. The excellent New Haven magazine
Sister unfortunately ceased publication last year. It
is important that all interested people be informed
of events. Since the treatment by the established
magazines is generally less than thorough, a
feminist magazine would be integral in the
distribution of such information.

Further, a feminist magazine, especially a
feminist literary magazine can publish poetry and
prose different from other literature. It is dangerous
to try to classify women’s writing apart from other
writing, but the voice of women has been long
silenced and so has altered from its original tenor.
The oppressed speak in a different timbre than do
the oppressors. Perhaps this writing is threatening
or upsetting to established magazines, or perhaps
women simply feel protected by women’s journals;
either way, feminist writing is markedly different
from other writing done by women or men.

Lesbianism is another issue which feminist
magazines handle, that the established presses
seem unable or unwilling to. Or perhaps it is the
outlook of the magazines which we like to consider
more open and accepting. Either way the problems
and the joys of being gay, at Yale, and anywhere,
express themselves in different creative ways than
other issues. Since most magazines display reluc-
tance to print when confronted with writing that
centers on a gay relationship or describes a
homosexual situation, a feminist magazine is a
necessity for a true representation of art.

Clearly Yale needs a good feminist magazine with
some lasting power. The indignation of Yale Break
and Yale-New Haven-Women should be modified,
but the essential core of concern towards and about
all victims of the system both in New Haven and at
Yale should remain. The diverse backgrounds of the
contributors to Yale Break and to the Yale
Undergraduate Women’s Caucus booklet are needed
to give full expression to the experience of all
women at Yale. The joy of being female embodied
in Womenswords and the creative spirit are also
needed in any literary magazine, be it Aurora or
The New Yorker. But what is mostly needed is the
determination to remain active and publishing, to
help women understand themselves, the system in
which they live and perhaps even Yale.