EDITORIAL

Aurore Dupin, better known as George Sand, remains to this day  
the most prolific woman writer of all time, outstripping virtually all  
other writers with her prodigious output of novels, travel-notes,  
articles, essays and political manifestos. Born into a culture that  
accepted a woman only as a wife and mother, she took on a man’s  
name and clothing in order to live the life that suited her talents.  

Today we no longer need to hide behind assumed names, we no  
longer need to become George Eliot or Daniel Stern or Currer Bell.  
We are free to deny the capitulation of false naming; we recapture  
the ancient rite, the incantation that is true naming:  

To recite one’s own body, to recite the body of the  
other, is to recite the words of which the book is made  
up. The fascination for writing the never previously  
written and the fascination for the unattained body  
proceed from the same desire. The desire to bring  
the real body violently to life in the words of the book  
(everything that is written exists), the desire to do  
violence by writing to the language which I can enter  
only by force.  

Le Corps Lesbian, Author’s Note  

Monique Wittig  

(trans. David Le Vay)  

In reclaiming Amantine-Aurore Lucile Dupin (still listed in the  
libraries under her ex-husband’s name), we reclaim a bit of our  
heritage, we deny the power of a history that denies our very exis-  
tence, that ignores our labor, that renames us when we will not be  
silent. And we claim the hope of that name. Aurora: sunrise, the  
beginning of song, the voice calling out to the dawn.  

When I am coming alive, I know I am coming alive.  
Beyond God the Father  
Mary Daly  

When we first conceived the idea of doing a special issue of Zirdus,  
an issue dedicated to feminist art, I had all of the fine hopes that  
inspire every such venture; I envisioned redefining both feminism  
and art, uncovering brilliant, unknown artists and creating a com-  
prehensive, professional journal. Now, months later, so many dead-  
lines broken, so much still to be done; those initial aspirations seem  

quite distant; my guiding light is the desire to be done, to have the  

COMMENT:  

As a would-be writer and a compulsive reader, I am fascinated by  
language and the way in which it is used by women. I am unclear as to  
how my being a woman affects my perception and production of  
language, but I believe that the process of studying this problem is  
important to my life and my art. I was interested in seeing the work  
done by women who were conscious of this question, who were not  
looking for the success determined by Western, male aesthetics, but  
who were looking for their own authentic voice, who approached art  
with the tools provided by feminist analyses of society and art.  

Looking at the material as a whole, it is hard for me to classify it,  
group it in any one category. I was told that much of the work seems  
“confessional” and though I would be tempted to deny that allega-  
tion, I would rather question the value judgement it implies. I  
would not call these works confessions (the stereotype of the queru-  
lous ‘lady-poet’ looms large), but declarations from a world so long  
denied, a vision so long repressed. Many of these women speak to  
me, woman to woman, and I am grateful to them for the world they  
create, the energy they express.  

Much of the energy that has gone into this magazine has come  
from women who are proud to call themselves Lesbians. The Lesbian  
voice, so long silenced (Radcliffe Hall’s Well of Loneliness; still in  
the restricted, ‘pornography’ classification in the Yale library), is a  
part of our history, our culture. In dedicating ourselves to women,  
gay or straight, we must affirm our power, our voices.  
Unfortunately, this collection contains almost no work by Third  
World women. Though there were some attempts to contact groups  
that might have been interested, response was minimal; a problem  
inherent in the nature of the magazine itself and in the academic  
setting it grew out of. Although no publication can represent every-  
one, I would hope that future attempts will present a broader cross-  
section. (Visual arts, dance, etc., are other obvious oversights).  

The work I have done on this magazine has been exhilarating,  
frustrating and most of all educational. It has brought me into  
contact with wonderful, strong, articulate women and it has taught  
me skills I never would have expected to acquire. Most important,  
it has shown me how necessary this sort of publication is to the  
New Haven community. This magazine is only a beginning, but if it  
sparks any interest, delight, anger or consternation, it will have  
served its purpose. My only hope is that it will inspire others to  

criticize, to examine and, most importantly, to go us one better.  

We couldn’t have done it without each other. My thanks to Meg and  
Doug for the original idea and continuing support, to all of the  
people who showed up for meetings, offered ideas and work,  
put up posters, argued, etc., and to Jenny for being there.  

Cat Nilan  

AND: WOMEN MUST DANCE  

(for Marge Piercy, a reply to “Councils”)  

And women must dance,  

we who begin and end all song.  

We must plant, and harvest our own feelings.  
We must cry out in unison, “This is my body,  
This is my drum!”  

We must praise Amazons, and Lesbians, and Virgins!  
Raise up new Mothers and Sisters; women are all one...  

The women must move on  

The women must move on--to Dance;  

hysteria stalks like a cold red eye, weights like broken  
bricks inside, girdles like a self constricting vice--  

the women must move on to Dance.  

The women must forget in Dance,  

the lies that raped them of their souls.  

Must enfold their bodies like the rarest bouquet that  
blossoms despite artifice and lace. They must confess:  

“I gave, I smothered, I threw my dreams away.”  

Must recollect them, stretch them, spread them, claim them,  
name them... then women must forget in Dance.  

Women must unburden us in Dance.  

Must unwind the seethings in our souls;  

unleash the savagery and hungers, and the ravages of old.  
We must shout and shake like raging whores!  

Must unearth our bastards and our pure...  

The women must collapse and rise... and some consent to  

sacrifice. Women must cry in unison--  
“This is my body! This is my drum!”  

Norma Blacke-Bragg  

At seventeen  

she read Beowulf  
and imagined herself  
the warrior;  

but no one  

had told her  

the story of  
a: Wealhtheow.  

When had she  
recognized  
her mother?  

She could write  
her own epic now...  

of suppressed anger,  
of a persistent humor,  
of tears  
clamors to escape.  
and touching  
of women’s struggles.  
And somehow  
she must  
lend it shape.  
She does not write:  
A woman.  
For most would deem  
her thoughts too narrow;  
her tenderness,  
sentimental;  
her anger,  
“a cause,”  
of soldiers and swords  
though hers is  
a different armor now.  

At night,  

she dreams of women.  

Nancy Brown