We are a collective of nine women who put out AIAW. What  
the paper is and how it changes is a reflection of what the nine of  
us are, collectively and individually, how we change and what is  
affecting us. We never had any set, easily verbalized purpose  
for the paper nor did we have any particular audience in mind.  
We are all in the women's movement so, in a sense, we write  
a movement paper because we write about ourselves and our  
concerns. We feel that communication is important to the women's  
movement at all levels.  

We realize that much of what we write is not introductory  
material to recruit new women, but we question the concept that  
everything should be an introduction for women not yet active in  
the movement. We write from where we are. None of us are  
newly active and our concerns and struggles change and progress  
with our involvement. We think it is important to write about and  
analyze our struggles at the place we are now; to communicate  
this to all women who read AIAW, as well as making things clearer  
to ourselves.  

Our lifestyles affect what each of us brings to the group.  
Three of us live with men, four of us are members of the first  
women's living collective in Iowa City and we meet and have our  
office in that collective. Obviously, we are affected greatly by  
the living collective and their problems. The rest of us live with  
women. Most of us are gay.  

By the time we put out our first issue there was already a  
Gay Women's Cell in Iowa City and some members of AIAW  
belonged to it, so when we began our paper we were already deal-  
ing with lesbianism. No one had to "come out" within the paper  
collective. The struggle of dealing with that part of our lives in  
our collective of some straight, some gay, some confused, some  
celibate, etc. has really been important to all of us.  

Economic class backgrounds and our present economic sit-  
uations greatly affect how we work together and what we write  
about. The tensions of the present economic situation  
in this country are hitting most of us pretty hard. Some of us  
have some advantages, education, middle class backgrounds,  
money—most of us do not.  

What we do collectively to put out the paper is time consum-  
ing and fairly disciplined. We meet at least twice a week, often  
late into the night. We all attend the meetings. Missing one is  
a big deal and means you are angry, freaked out, sick or some-  
thing like that. We all show up to put the paper together the week  
before it comes out, generally three or four nights of work. The  
shit work has not been very collective, mostly falling on one mem-  
ber or two at times, and this has been difficult for us to deal with,  
causing some resentment. We talk a lot among ourselves about  
subjects we deal with in the paper and about other things impor-  
tant to us. For some of us—most of us—AIAW collective is  
our priority, our project, support, and consciousness-raising  
group.  

We get an enormous amount of mail and are strongly affected  
by reading other papers and articles that women not publishing a  
paper probably don't see. It is exciting to get a good, new paper  
or publication and we want to share those with other women.  
When crises happen elsewhere—as when It Ain't Me Babe (paper  
published in Berkeley) stopped—it affects us.  

But we are also influenced by what is happening here. All  
of us are a part of a loosely organized women's community. We  
have parties often, we gather at the living collective. Often the  
struggles we have are internal ones—ones that go on within  
either our collective or within that women's community. We  
are constantly dealing with the problems of gay women, personal  
relationships, women living together, etc. Our community is  
of prime importance to most of us. It is less clear just how we  
are affected by Iowa City or how we as women affect it.  

Iowa City is a university town surrounded by farmland.  
The population of Iowa City is 50,000. 20,000 of those are stu-  
dents. We are not crowded together, or hassled in the same way  
as those living in urban areas. Nor are there as many non-  
women's Movement activities or groups to relate to. The nine  
of us are strong separatists and none of us relate much to other  
struggles in this town although there aren't many anyway.  

Some of us have steady jobs, some of us have more time.  
It has been isolating to be a collective whose work isn't  
something that other women have to relate to in terms of support.  
We occasionally request that articles be written, we request  
that people subscribe or buy issues but we don't need steady vo-  
lunteers like a daycare group needs or women to show up in  
large numbers for a public action. We often decide how to relate  
to other women's projects or groups as a collective and more  
often than not we don't relate heavily because of the time and  
energy putting out the paper takes or because we are critical of  
the project. We are pretty dedicated to self-criticism and ideo-  
logical struggle. We rarely respond to events or projects with  
unquestioned enthusiasm. We analyze, criticize, and debate  
what is being done, how and why.  

Many of us individually have put in lots of time on other  
things like volunteering at the daycare center, but we don't have  
the time to become heavily involved in the meetings or planning  
of those projects. It is very hard to achieve group cohesiveness.  
We have been able to do this and others, seeing that, are generally—  
terrified. Dealing with one of us is really dealing with one plus  
eight.  

Within our own female community we are seen as heavies,  
disciplined, etc. In a way, we are fairly isolated because of the  
political opinions we hold (anti-capitalist and separatist) and this  
has really affected the paper. We have reprinted things that we  
think are important and we know would never be reprinted in  
"movement papers" or in many women's papers that are aimed  
primarily at women not already involved in the movement. Most  
of the things we have reprinted we think are really important to  
read and re-read. Many say what we would say, so rather than  
duplicate we have run some things published elsewhere to make  
our point.  

Still, we write most of what is in our paper and publishing  
every three weeks makes time scarce for most of us. We know  
sometimes that what we write does not really explain itself—  
like what experiences have prompted us to write what we're  
writing. We are explaining who we are because of criticisms we  
have received from readers, our own doubts about the worth of  
what we are doing, perhaps a desire to justify ourselves, perhaps  
to sort out for our own benefit the reasons behind what we do,  
what our paper is.  

We generally look at AIAW as a whole from the first issue  
we put out till the present and all that entails; changes in our  
opinions, scope of subjects dealt with, etc. We know that our  
perspective of what we do is not always the same as our readers  
who read one issue at a time and have no way of knowing every-  
thing in our heads, what's really affecting us, etc. We know  
that our paper is not an end in itself, that things change and we  
all grow.  

Right now putting out the paper is a struggle. Sustaining  
a project that entails so much time and work, including so much  
shit work, is wearing on all of us. We are all tired from a busy  
year, and many of us are going through real hard times: finan-  
cially, with our living situations, or our personal relationships.  

We've seen other papers split apart by tensions that seem  
no greater than those we live with. We've seen few papers sus-  
tained that are doing what we are trying to do: to report our own  
internal struggles and thoughts. We have not been open for any  
woman to come and work on the paper and thereby become in-  
volved in the women's movement. Too many one-time-only  
papers add up to the same burst of enthusiasm and never grow  
to anything else. We have all done speaking, organizing, and  
worked on other projects—but for us the newspaper has been a  
special kind of space.