Getting it Together

History and direction of the femi-
nist movement was the basis for panels
and workshops at the Southern Female
Liberation Meeting at Mt. Beulah, Mis-
sissippi, May 8, 9, 10.

Approximately 300 women attended
the conference, sponsored by the
Southern Female Rights Union. Twenty-
four hour day care was volunteered by
several men.

We left Iowa City with great expec-
tations, neither of us ever having
been in the South before. Our 28-hour
bus ride went surprisingly fast, as we
spent time getting to know each other
and sharing love as only sisters do.

Mt. Beulah, just outside Edwards,
is a plantation-like cluster of build-
ings financed by Carpetbaggers to pre-
pare ex-slaves for their economic ex-
ploitation.

We arrived weary, but were soon af-
fected by the contagious anticipation
of the next two days. The literature
table, set up throughout the confer-
ence, kept our interest for some time.
Hilary Langhorst sang after we'd re-
tired.

Beginning with breakfast Saturday
we sampled real southern food. Grits,
cornbread, black-eyed peas and fried
chicken tasted better to us there, pre-
pared by experienced female cooks.

Saturday was full of informative
talks that kept us taking notes. Eve-
lyn Reed, Socialist Workers' Party
scholar, and Virginia Collins, from
Republic of New Africa, spoke on the
hidden history of women.

Evelyn Reed traced the history of
the family as we know it today. Basic-
ally her speech demonstrated through
scientific Marxist analysis the econo-
mic and social exploitative nature of
the marriage institution.

Virginia Collins, with a charisma-
tic aura, spoke on women's oppression
from a black perspective. She empha-
sized the importance of taking some-
one's complete frame of reference into
consideration when speaking to them.
She recognized the problems of black
women as more class than skin problems.
She also feels that because of black
men's intense desire to mimic white
men, black women are more oppressed
than their white sisters.

our ad policy

The Woman as Consumer is one of the
most evil of the sexual stereotypes
laid upon women. Most advertisements
play upon this stereotype, reinforc-
ing it at the same time. The old cry
of "Buy, Buy, Buy" must be replaced by
advertisements that limit themselves to a
simple statement of what is offered
to the public. We join other women's
liberation publications in accepting
only non-exploitative advertisements.

Ads are limited to a maximum length
of 2". Each ad costs $5.00 each time
it is run. All advertisements must be
paid for in advance. We reserve the
right to reject any ad.

ads

THE FEMALE STATE
(We Choose Personhood)
Issue #4 of
A Journal of Liberation

#1 Untitled
#2 No More Fun And Games

$1.00
$1.00
$1.00
$1.00

#3 No More Fun And Games

#4 The Female State
Female Liberation, 371 Somerville Ave

Somerville, Massachusetts, 02143

After dinner we heard brief synop-
ses of the workshops for the after-
noon, Martha Atkins spoke on earlier
feminist movements and expressed hope
that today's movement could learn
from the past mistakes.

Joreen traced the history of wo-
men's roles in western society from
an economist's viewpoint. Hilary
Langhorst described roots of female
oppression in the structure of Chris-
tianity and its ideology.

Virginia Collins expanded on her
earlier talk, re-emphasizing the frame
of reference idea, and how teachers
can learn from people they're teach-
ing.

Roxanne Dunbar spoke on the myth
of southern womanhood and its effect
on our southern movement. She explain-
ed how material power differences
keep white and black women from work-
ing together.

Saturday evening we heard a panel
discussion on how to build the female
liberation movement. Roxanne spoke of
her efforts at mass education. Judith
Brown explained how Gainesville, Fla.
women use consciousness-raising to
formulate all theories and actions.
Linda Seese told of her experiences
living in a women's collective.

Dana Densmore, Boston, talked about
each of us doing what's comfortable:
finding the best way of expressing
what we feel. Virginia spoke on organ-
izing women in terms of their own
situation. Joreen expanded this idea,
suggesting we try to reach women with
similar backgrounds before trying to
overcome class differences.

A discussion of the pros and cons
of hetero- or homogeneous groups, and
problems in developing class consci-
ousness ensued. “Softskin" was shown
after the discussion.

We thought it ironic that around
church time on Mother's Day the sis-
ters gathered for a new kind of move-
ment service: worship of physical
fitness for self-defense. Sisters
from Boston demonstrated Tae Kwon Do,

a Korean form of karate.
After dinner Roxanne commented on

the topics to be covered in the after-
noon workshops. She expressed her
views on the different kinds of oppres-

sion poor women have and child care as
a need of middle-class women. She re-
lated the problem of elitism to middle-
class women who can't accept leader-
ship from those who may know more a-
bout certain aspects of our movement.
She expressed fear of being co-opted by
abortion reform, especially in its po-
tential lethalness against those the
government would like to eliminate.

Trying to learn as much as we could
we attended several workshops. In the
homosexuality one we discussed the
very un-stereotyped lesbian relation-
ships that are beginning to evolve out
of the movement. We also discussed the
fear "straight" sisters often feel to-
ward lesbians, and the advantage of
forming separate gay groups within WL.

In the workshop on divisions among
women, Judith Brown endorsed conscious-
ness-raising as a project conducive to
sisterhood and well worth the struggle
to draw general conclusions from per-
sonal, isolated experiences.

Two elitism, democracy and leader-
ship workshops were combined with one
on the needs of poor women. During the
discussion a disagreement arose on the
importance of elitism in the feminist
movement. The way the conference was
set up and the fact that a few women
led the workshops was criticized. The
disagreement ended when some women
left the meeting. A discussion follow-
ed on the validity of each woman's ex-
perience and the need to listen and
criticize our ideas carefully.

Virginia dealt with questions of
feminist politics. Hilary expounded on
her year-long effort to develop a pro-
gram of community-controlled public
childcare centers. Tae Kwon Do
students related women's physical weak-
ness to sexism. Martha Atkins explored
the need to redefine our concepts of
sexuality and love to help retain our
necessary autonomous women's movement.

From speaking with southern women,
we began to see what different obsta-
cles these women face in organizing
their sisters. Christianity is one of
the biggest barriers because of its
strong basis and history in their cul-
ture. Also, chivalry is not dead,
but a stifling, condescending, pro-
tective attitude most southern males
still champion.

By the end of the afternoon almost
everyone had left for home. Those of
us remaining were feeling good toward
each other and hated to leave. On the
steps of the eating hall those of us
who didn't participate witnessed a
massacre of long locks and the emer-
gence of new, proud, practical, heal-
thy-looking short-haired women. We
laughed a lot, shared a lot and soon
left for home with a renewed vigor
and collective strength with our sis-
ters across the nation.

Lori and Abba

Aint I?