IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

SOME CRITICISM-

The following four articles are a re-
sult of much of our thinking concerning
the new Women's Center which has opened on
the University of Iowa campus. Many of us

energies of mostly white, middle class

women, many of whom are university-related--
seems to limit that scope of possibilities
to meeting the needs of white middle class

with these issues within the Women's Move-
ment where we see class, race, and sex
bias. We believe the Women's Movement
must be self-critical as it goes along.

in the AIAW collective have become involved
in the workshops and ongoing projects at
the Women's Center, but it is a schizo-
phrenic involvement for several reasons.
On the one hand, the Women's Center can be
seen as very important because it is the
single focal point for Women's Liberation
related activity around. A new Women's
Center implies enormous possibilities for
meeting needs of women on all levels. On
the other hand, the givens of this Women's
Center -- that it is a University-owned
house, it is located on the University
campus, and is involving at this stage the

women,

Women's Center.

Even if material needs of poor
women are attempted to be met by service
projects through the Women's Center (such
as referral for free abortions, a free
store, a job referral bureau, even a pro-
vision for Welfare liaison information) it
is probable that the women who actually
will benefit by such projects will by and
large be middle class.

Nevertheless, we and many other women
have been trying to struggle within the
We see these articles as
part of that struggle.
priorities have always been to try to deal

We want to make several things clear
about the purpose and nature of these
articles. They are directed at ourselves
and all women who have and may participate
in the Women's Center, not at specific
groups or individuals. Because of our ex-
periences with the Women's Center so far
we have had to ground these articles in
those experiences; but we have attempted
to analyze the meaning of these experiences
on a broader scope. Furthermore, we
believe it is possible that the issues
here will relate to the struggles of other

One of our first 25
Women's Liberation and Women's Center

During a recent lesbian consciousness workshop at the
new Women's Center in Iowa City, we discussed the pros
and cons of a gay action: a room takeover within the
Women's Center. Some gay women feel the need for a
room for gay women exclusively, others feel such a room
is unnecessary except for planned gay meetings.

To reform and compromise within the existing social
system, the liberal argument, has a questionable effect
on women who are trying to reject society's brainwash-
ing and develop new standards of relating. It is ques-
tionable when liberals help obtain part of a demand by
asking for it and getting it because of the power of
the liberal within the establishment. It is question-
able when the liberal compromises ideological positions
for the sake of good relations with the establishment.
It is questionable when the liberal argument, presently
socially accepted, demoralizes women who do not work
within the establishment, and women who do not have the
option to work within the establishment.

The liberal position values individualism. If you
can make it on your own, fight your own causes, you're
to be respected.

The argument of whether or not the gay women should
demand a room for themselves becomes more complex when
you consider that the argument was amongst gay women
with one group in favor of demanding a room and one
group opposed to demanding it or thought we had no
right to a room all the time. In this context conser-
vatism or liberalism becomes more understandable be-
cause of the ways oppressed groups are taught to think
of themselves, efface themselves, and undercut their
own importance. Oppressors (those who hold the power)
need to teach women not to demand things and to minimize
their needs. This tends to make some oppressed people
satisfied with token gains, accommodation, compromise,
because we have been taught to not expect more. Even
though we can understand the origin of liberal thinking,
this does not make it a correct way of thinking.

One reason we are writing this article is because
we believe there are correct and incorrect ways of
thinking. For instance, class chauvinist, racist, and
sexist ways of thinking are incorrect in that they
are unfair to many people. In this article, the liberal
voice speaks from a position that has not been adequately
thought out. Our responses, we believe to be more
rigorous and more correct.

LIBERAL VOICE:

There is no reason why just because you're (we're?)
lesbians, you should have the priority or right to a
room 24 hours a day when abortion counseling, abortion
referral, and the library and lounge relate to most women.
The majority of women don't need this room.

The way the room assignments should be decided
is to count how many women need a library or abortion
counseling room and how many need a room for gay women.
Then room assignments should be made so that the great-
est number of women benefit from the rooms.

THE ANSWER TO THAT IS:

This position completely ignores the rights of the
minority. It is the tyranny of the majority. There is
no magical quality about majority that makes it more
truthful, right, or the better way to live. Those con-
siderations aren't determined by number. The number of
people who have a need should not be pitted against the
number of people who have another need and the group with
the most people in it be determined to have the most need.
This way of doing things says nothing of the need of the
individuals in the groups and completely ignores the
needs of the individuals in the smaller group, just
because they are in the smaller group. If this were the

Page 8 Vol. II

way of doing things, the needs of minorities would
never be considered.

Instead, all needs, when stated, should be considered
valid. If Third World women who relate to the Women's
Center come in and say that they need a room within the
Women's Center, then it's not for white women to rule on
that need because we don't have similar experience.

LIBERAL VOICE:

If gay women want a place for themselves why don't
they demand that the university give them a house, or
chip in and rent a place?

THE ANSWER TO THAT IS:

The Women's Center, if it is for all women, is also
for gay women. The women who asked the university for
the house that is now the Women's Center are working
within the system to bring about reform. They have the
privilege to be in the system that many women don't
have. They can compromise on demands made because they
find individual solutions to meet their needs. They
can suggest renting a house for gay women because they
have money to do that.

The liberal argument of fighting for your own cause
(in this case a place for gay women) is, again, ignor-
ing the women with no rights to make demands on insti-
tutions. It is the obligation of women who work within
the system to make demands for women with no such op-
tion.

"Riding on the coattails" of women who refuse to give
up their power and privileges is not lazy, or unfair.
Women who have the privilege of being listened to have
an obligation to use it. Individualistic solutions
don't work for women who have no individual rights.
That sort of thinking keeps poor women, Third World
women, and gay women voiceless.

When these women say they have a need that isn't be-
ing met, it is absolutely the responsibility of women
who have power to help meet those needs to do so, indiv-
idualistic bullshit aside.

LIBERAL VOICE:

Don't get excited. I'm listening, but I disagree with
what you're saying. (The liberal position also values
objectivity. By remaining rational and in control at
all times, the liberal can always recall and use a
theory learned from a book.)

THE ANSWER TO THAT IS:

Emotion is constantly pounced on in women's libera-
tion meetings, a sign of instability, not to be listened
to until stated calmly. Liberal shit! Women react with
frustration, anguish, shouts, and moans when they are not
listened to, misunderstood, and told they aren't feel-
ing what they say they're feeling. Their feelings are
valid, not to be negated by any objectivity, or made
to seem ridiculous.

Women have various experiences, obviously, depending
on their lifestyles. For a woman who is getting a
middle-class, privileged education to have the audacity
to define the form (speak calmly, quietly--i.e., ladylike)
of expression women in other lifestyles use is anti-
everything women getting together means. It is impos-
ing a privileged (not necessarily desirable) standard
on other women.

LIBERAL VOICE:
I don't plan to relate to this room because there are

too many dangers of having my career ruined by some
other university women seeing me here, also the univer-