1

one is for fun." With such training it is not surprising that a
major in Vietnam is quoted as saying "Don’t let the news media
fool you. These kids are maybe 18 or 19 - but they are beautiful
killers - just beautiful."

What is routine conduct at home is routine conduct abroad.
The acts of male domination and violence are the cornerstones of society in
the United States. Here in the states we are torn with conflicts
of race, class and sex. When we transport these conflicts over-
seas they show up in the army, in the highest echelons of the Thieu
government, and in the destruction of culture in Saigon. AND UN-
DERPINNING IT ALL IS THE ASSUMPTION OF AMERICA'S ABSOLUTE RIGHT
TO RULE WHERE AMERICA WILL.

The passion with which we perpetuate this war: war crimes no
longer war crimes but genocide; violence promoted to contain a war
we have no hope of winning.

How else to explain this but by understanding the phenomena of
male, sexual violence in Western culture. Germany in 1944 and 1945
was without hope of winning the war but nonetheless went on
building bigger ovens and crueler technologies to destroy with.

It cannot be stated too strongly that: THE CRIMES OF VIOLENCE
WE HAVE BEEN SHOCKED BY IN VIETNAM CAN ONLY HAVE BEEN CREATED AT
HOME IN THE U.S. in a country which trains young men from birth
“to connect violence with sex. Ann Froines has written that the
popular culture - magazines, movies, books - in South Vietnam now
promotes a model soldier stripped of all human values or political
understanding. He never talks about Vietnam in patriotic terms.

He kills to survive, then seeks pleasure afterwards through sex.
An integral part of this culture is the glorification of American
"Natural instincts": sex, violence and the desire for money.

In a revolutionary society violence and domination are not what
holds life together. In China or North Vietnam the whole society
is being geared to create human values based on love and sharing --
not based on greed and violence.

On May 8th Nixon announced he had mined 7 harbors in North Vietnam
risking confrontations with the Soviet Union and China to preserve
"American honor."

I.F. Stone said last week there is a possibility Nixon would
finally use nuclear weapons to blow Vietnam to bits rather than be

a
Zs
aE
3a,
I used to be bitter
for being a woman

for being gay
and for being fat;

for being women

for being women

Acts -

‘cause I was exploited:

Then I thought of American black women
who are also exploited:

for being gay, sometimes

and for being fat, sometimes

and for being black;

And I thought of Southeast Asian women
who are also being exploited:

for being gay, if they are

for being fat, if they are

for being peasants - by the Americans

for being illiterate - by the Americans;
And I remembered more and more oppressed
women to add to the list,

I realized that as a white American woman
When the revolution starts I'll get killed
--But I'm not bitter about that.

August | 8 LAF2_

caught with his pants down at the Moscow summit conference: Geno-
cide of a whole people in order to save male face. THIS IS THE
HEIGHT OF WAR INSANITY.

We are faced with an imperative. Without a feminist analysis we
will never confront some of the deepest motivations behind the
waging of aggressive wars.

The same men and power structure who victimize women are en-
gaged in the act of raping Vietnam, raping Black people, and the
very earth we live upon. Rape is a classic act of domination where
the emotions of hatred, contempt, and the desire to break or vio-
late personality takes place. This breaking of the personality
characterizes modern life itself. No simple reforms can eliminate
rape.

As the symbolic expression of the white male hierarchy, RAPE
IS THE ULTIMATE ACT OF OUR CIVILIZATION, one which, Valerie
Solanis warns, “is in danger of humping itself to death."

This speech was written by Lesbian Feminists

Hollibaugh, von Bretzel, Crichton, Lindbloom

This speech was given on May 6th at a large anti-war rally in
Boston.

All publicity prior to the rally listed an all-male roster of
speakers. Women were contacted at the last minute and were then
met with blatant sexism. A crowd-pleasing rock concert mentality
was more than reluctant to put woman speakers on the platform. We
were not announced until after many people had left and then only
because women in the audience shouted for a woman speaker.

"The subject of feminism is very ordinary; it's the
question of male domination that makes everybody angry."

Pace 5~