Leila Khaled, now being held in England, and six  
other Palestinian commandos held in West Germany and  
Switzerland will be freed. The governments holding the  
guerillas made this announcement Sept. 29, after six  
Americans, the last of the hundreds of hostages seized  
in the commando hijackings, were freed in Amman.  

Leila has been held in England since her unsuccessful  
attempt to hijack an El Al 707 jet on Sept. 6. Her  
male companion was killed during the attempt.  

Leila was in charge of another successful hijacking  
in August, 1969, when she ripped off a TWA Boeing jet  
flying from Rome. She and her assistant blew up the  
plane in Damascus, Syria. Leila later gave the follow-  
ing full account of the hijacking to author and jour-  
nalist G.H. Jansen, former editor of Middle East Forum.  

Isn't it something awful that I could see my home  
town again only when I hijacked a plane? But there it  
was - Haifa - away on the left just past the pilot's  
head as I sat behind him looking out of the cockpit  
windows. As we came down to 12,000 feet for the ap-  
proach to Lydda airport the whole lovely coast of my  
country, occupied Palestine, which some people call  
"Israel," came into sight.  

It was a fine, clear day, but I had little time to  
enjoy the view because we were approaching the most  
exciting and dangerous point of our adventure. Although  
the pilot had so far done everything I told him, would  
he, somehow, land the plane at Lydda? Or would the Is-  
raelis be able to force us to land?  

It had all begun two days earlier in Rome. This was  
my first visit to Europe and Rome is a wonderful city.  

I was very tired when I arrived and slept for ten hours  
solid.  

Then the evening before the flight I walked through  
the city from the Borghese Gardens to the Fountain of  
Trevi. Of course, I threw the traditional coins in the  
fountain which means, I hope, that I'll see Rome again;  
but will the Italians let me in next time?  

There was a woman singer in a cafe near the fountain  
and I just sat and listened for two hours. The only  
other things I did were to buy myself a bottle of French  
perfume and to confirm my booking for the flight next  
day to Athens at the TWA office.  

I couldn't eat dinner that night and it was three in  
the morning before I could get to sleep and when I  
awoke I had no appetite for breakfast either. I was  
hungry, but I'm accustomed to hunger because of my com-  
mando training and also because, when I was young,  
there were times when there wasn't very much food at  
home.  

In the morning - this was the 29th August - I had to  
do some shopping at a very chic shop on the Via Veneto.  
I bought some very big sunglasses, a leather shoulder  
bag and a large-brimmed hat which alone cost 15,000  
lira. Wickedly expensive I know, but this was all part  
of the uniform - I had to look like someone who usually  
travelled first-class.  

Back at the hotel I got dressed. I'm not very inter-  
ested in clothes but it seemed a waste of money to have  
things burnt when we blew up the plane after landing  
so I put as little as possible into my suitcase. I put  
two dresses in my handbag and wore two trouser suits,  
one on top of the other. The lower one, with psyche-  
delic flowers, was borrowed and I wanted to return it;  
the top one was in very smart white cotton, sleeveless,  
and I wore sandals.  

Because Flight 840 was late we had to wait an extra  
half hour in the lounge. I spotted the young man who  
was the other member of the "Che Guevara" commando  
unit. I didn't know him and had only seen his picture.  
Apart from a secret sign of recognition we took no  
notice of each other.  

This extra wait was an anxious time and two other  
things upset me before we got on the plane. I noticed  
an American lady with four young children who seemed  
very happy and excited about their trip. I then real-  
ised, with a shock, that something dreadful could  
happen to them if anything went wrong. I love children  
and I wanted to tell the lady not to travel on this  
flight. But when I thought of some of our Palestinian  
children, who had nothing in life, I felt a bit stronger.  

The second incident was in the bus going out to the  
plane. A man sat next to me and asked me where I was  
from, and I let him believe I was from Bolivia. Then  
he told me that he was a Greek returning to Athens  
after spending 15 years in Chicago and that his widowed  
mother would be waiting at the airport.  

This was another shock. I felt it particularly be-  
cause we Palestinians know what it is to be away from  
one's country and I too had a widowed mother waiting  
for me at home. He went on talking but I didn't hear  
the rest of what he said.  

My friend and I were in first-class because that  
section is nearer the cockpit. But there were only five  
first-class passengers in all, so that the cabin crew  
fussed over us a great deal, which was exactly what we  
did not want. Not long after take-off, the two of us  
seated ourselves in the front row nearest the cabin  
door. We both refused drinks before lunch - I don't  
drink anyway - and then we both refused lunch, because  
we didn't want to have trays on our laps hemming us in.  
But when the stewardess exclaimed at this, and so as  
not to be conspicuous, I ordered coffee and my friend  
a beer. He also asked for a pill to suggest that he was  
feeling ill.  

We didn't get rid of the cabin crew that easily.  
Instead of lunch they brought us a huge trolley laden  
with fruits and cakes and, to our dismay, parked it in  
front of us to help ourselves, completely blocking the  
way to the cabin door.  

We had been ordered to take over the plane 30 min-  
utes to an hour after take-off since the Rome-Athens  
flight takes only 90 minutes, and we were approaching  
the deadline. We didn't want to ask the hostesses to  
remove the trolley because that could have appeared  
suspicious. Finally, after what seemed an age, she  
took it away and another passenger, who had been using  
the lounge seat right next to the cabin door also  
moved away.  

The way was clear and we could get into the cabin  
without having to frighten anyone - that's the one  
thing we wanted to avoid: frightened people can do  
foolish things.  

I asked for a blanket and the hostess tucked it in  
around me. My friend gave me a strange look, wondering  
whether I was becoming afraid. To reassure him I took  
out my toilet case and combed my hair. Then I looked  
at my watch and showed him five fingers signalling  
that in five minutes we would go into action - I was  
in charge of the operation. Underneath the blanket -  
and this was why I wanted it - I took a pistol out of  
my shoulder bag and tucked it into the top of my pants  
and then a grenade and took out the safety pin.  

Just as everything was ready, one of the hostesses  
carrying a tray came out of the cabin door; it opened  
outwards and she held it open with her elbow. We took  
this chance. My friend, holding his pistol and gre-  
nade, brushed across the front of the hostess and  
through the door. When the hostess saw the weapons  
she screamed, "Oh no," and threw her tray down - that  
was the only violence we had in the plane during the  
whole journey.  

As we went towards the cockpit my friend called  
out, "Don't move. Now you have to listen to the orders  
of the new captain." While he was speaking he heard  
the captain saying into his radio: "Two armed men have  
come into the cabin. This is a hijacking."  

My part in the actual takeover was to stand facing  
down the plane to control the passengers with my pis-  
tol and grenade. But when I stood up with the grenade  
in my hand and reached for my pistol, I felt the pis-  
tol slipping down my leg inside my trousers. I hadn't  
eaten for a day, and the waistband was loose.  

It was such an anti-climax that I laughed. Instead  
of brandishing a pistol there was I bending over with  
my back to the passengers and fumbling for my weapon  
up the leg of my trousers, of two trousers actually.  
The captain swivelled round in his seat to see the new  
captain but all he could see of him was the top of a  
large, white, lady's hat.  

Having retrieved the wretched pistol I put it into  
my pocket, never to take it out again - too scary  
and too much like Hollywood.  

You can't imagine the look of total astonishment  
on the face of the captain when I went into the cock-  
pit and announced, "I'm the new captain." Poor man,  
what did he see? - me, in my sleeveless suit, floppy  
hat and sandals. "I'm the new captain," I said, "take  
this as a souvenir - it is the safety pin from this  
grenade" and held it under his nose. "It's a free hand  
grenade now. If you don't listen to my orders, I'll  
use it and the plane and everyone in it will be blown  
up."  

"What do you want?" the pilot asked. "Proceed di-  
rectly to Lydda airport." "To Lydda?" the co-pilot  
queried, "aren't we going to Athens?" "You understand  
English," I said to him.  

We sat down in the two seats just behind the pilot.  
The grenade was in my left hand and it stayed there  
every minute until we landed. My friend put his away  
but he kept his pistol out.  

I asked the captain to give me his wireless headset  
and he was so flustered that he tried to put it on over  
my hat. "Excuse my hat," I said and pushed it back. I  
had had a ribbon specially sewn on so that I could hang  
it round my neck: I very much wanted to save that hat,  
too.  

I tried to raise Rome airport but there was no an-  
swer. I then turned to the flight engineer and asked,  
“How many fuel hours of flight do you have?" I knew  
the answer because I had read this off the fuel gauge.  
I was sure he would tell me a lie and he did: "Two  
hours," he said. "Liar. I know you have three and a  
half hours. It's there on the fuel gauge. Why did you  
lie to me? The next time I ask you anything and you  
lie to me, I'll break your neck."  

"Why are you so angry?" the captain asked. "Because  
I don't like liars," I replied. I wasn't really angry.  
I wanted to scare them a little so that they would  
take orders. The flight engineer said not a word for  
the rest of the flight.  

THE TIME WAS NOW ABOUT 15.20 HOURS.  

The dials and switches and lights in a plane's  
cockpit may seem bewildering but we had been thorough-  
ly trained and I knew what the dials meant. I had a  
thorough knowledge of the Boeing 707.  

Having put the crew in its place the next thing was  
to speak to the passengers on the intercom. Our mes-  
sage was this:  

Ladies and Gentlemen,  

Your attention please. Kindly fasten your seat-  

belts.  

This is your new Captain speaking.  

The Che Guevara Commando Unit of the Popular  

Front for the Liberation of Palestine which has  

taken over command of this TWA flight demands  

that all passengers on board should adhere to  

the following instructions:  

1. Remain seated and keep calm.  

2. For your own safety, place your hands behind  

your head.  

3. Make no move which would endanger the lives  

of other passengers on the plane.  

4. We will consider all your demands within the  

safe limits of our plan.  

Ladies and Gentlemen, among you is a pas-  
senger responsible for the death and misery  

of a number of Palestinian men, women and  

children, on behalf of whom we are carrying out  

this operation to bring this assassin before a  

revolutionary Palestinian court.  

The rest of you will be honorable guests of  

the heroic Palestinian Arab people in a hospit-  

able, friendly country. Everyone of you regard-  

less of religion or nationality is guaranteed  

the freedom to go wherever he pleases as soon  

as the plane is safely landed.  

Ladies and Gentlemen, our destination is a  
friendly country, and friendly people will re-  
ceive you.  

Thank you for your cooperation. We wish you  
a happy journey.  

The person we were after was General Rabin (the  
former Israeli Chief of Staff) whom we knew had been  
booked on that flight. But he seemed to have changed  
plans at the last minute. I suppose prominent Israelis  
find it safer to travel on airlines other than El Al  
nowadays. Then I broadcast our message to the world:  

The Popular Front for the Liberation of Pal-  
estine informs you that its Che Guevara Commando  
Unit is now in complete control of the Boeing  
plane belonging to Trans World Airlines, Flight  
No. 840, on its way from Rome to Lydda airport  
in the occupied Palestinian Arab territory.  

Captain Shadia Abu-Ghazali, who has taken  
over command of this plane, and her colleagues  
request all those concerned to use the follow-  
ing call sign in their communication with the  
aircraft: POPULAR FRONT - FREE ARAB PALESTINE.  

And let it be clear that unless the above-  

mentioned sign is used in communicating with  

the plane, we will not care to respond.  

Thank you.  

Shadia Abu-Ghazali was my code name. The original  
Shadia was a girl resistance fighter in PFLP. She was  
killed in October, 1968, at the age of 21.  

After this I handed over our new route map to the  
captain. We did not follow the usual air traffic lane  
over Athens and Nicosia. Instead we went straight  
down the Greek coast, then southeast over Heraklion  
in Crete and eastward to Lydda. Not a very interest-  
ing flight because it was almost all over the sea at  
33,000 feet.  

When the captain went on to the new course I no-  
ticed that he kept on turning to port so as to go  
south-westward. He may have been trying to take it up  
to the American Wheelus airbase near Tripoli in Libya.  
But I was watching the compass and ordered him back  
on course. After that I told him exactly when to turn  
and on to what bearing number on the compass.  

After 15 minutes my friend reminded me that the  
passengers still had their hands above their heads.  
I looked into the cabin and so they did. I apologized  
for inconveniencing them and asked the hostess to  
serve them with whatever they wanted to eat and drink,  
champagne if they wanted it. Otherwise, throughout  
the flight we had no contact with the passengers or  
cabin crew.  

We tried hard to get on friendly terms with the  
three crew members but had no luck. We asked them if  
they wanted anything to eat or drink but they refused.  
We offered them our cigarettes but they refused those  
too. They didn't ask a single question about us. From  
time to time the captain would turn round, look at me  
and shake his head unbelievingly. The only human con-  
tact was when the co-pilot, like a child in school,  
asked if he could go to the toilet.  

The pilot kept glancing at the grenade in my left  
hand, so finally to reassure him, I put my arm across  
his back and tapped him on the left shoulder with the  
grenade: "Listen I'm accustomed to this thing. Don't  
be afraid." A little later I scratched my head with  
the grenade to show him just how familiar with it I  
was, but I doubt whether he was reassured.  

15.55 HOURS. COMPASS BEARING 140 DEGREES.  

There were long, uneventful periods during this  
eventful flight that were punctuated only by the  
messages I broadcast to the countries we flew past  
or over - Italy, Greece, the UAR, Lebanon and Syria.  
These messages explained what we had done and appealed  
for support "for the just struggle of the Palestinian  
people," and ended with the words, "Down with  
imperialism and Zionism. We will win." The co-pilot  
looked at me angrily every time I mentioned America.  

I also spoke, spontaneously, to the passengers  
over the intercom to explain our struggle. "We have  
hijacked this plane because we want to cut the roots  
that feed Israel. Don't go to Israel because there  
is resistance on land and en route: tell this to your  
friends. We want to go back to our country and we can  
live with the Jews because we lived with them before."  
We tried to explain things to the crew but they were  
an unreceptive audience.  

16.10 HOURS. COMPASS BEARING 112 DEGREES.  

The exchange of messages I had with Cairo airport  
in Arabic, were amusing. They were flabbergasted when  
a woman's voice told them what had happened and where  
we were going. I first had to tell them that I  
wouldn't respond till they used our own call sign.  
Then, the breathless response came from Cairo some-  
thing like this: "You Popular you Front you Free you  
Arab you Palestine! Why are you going to Israel?" And  
I replied, "Yes, we are going to Israel, to liberate  
it."  

TOOK FOR FURTHER ADVENTURE OF LEILA KHALED IN OUR NEXT  
ISSUE. LONG LIVE LEILA! CLNs)  

October