IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Taking Care of our OWN = Artificial Respiration

Artificial respiration is a method of getting air in and out of
a person's lungs until she can breathe on her own. Most people can
live only about six minutes after they stop breathing. Artificial
respiration must begin as soon as possible after natural breathing
stops. It must also be used when natural breathing is so irregu-
lar or shallow that it is ineffective.

Breathing may stop as a result of gas or drug poisoning, elec-
tric shock, choking, drowning, suffocation, injuries to the head
or neck, poliomyelitis, or convulsions.

The mouth-to-mouth (or mouth-to-nose) method of artificial
respiration is the simplest and most effective. The back-pressure
arm lift method is the second most desirable. It should be used
only when injuries to the head or face prevent the use of mouth-
to-mouth (or mouth-to-nose).

Here is how you do mouth-to-mouth (or mouth-to-nose):

1. Place the person who has stopped breathing on her back. If
there is another person with you they should call an ambulance
or rescue squad immediately. If you are alone you should begin
artificial respiration immediately.

2. Before starting any type of artificial respiration be sure
the mouth and throat are clear of mucus and foreign objects. You
may turn the patient's head to the side and use your fingers. You
may cover your fingers with a piece of cloth to help remove mucus
and slippery objects.

The patient may vomit during the application of artificial
respiration. This is something they don't tell you in most life-
saving courses. She may vomit soon after you begin artificial
respiration or especially in the case of drowning she may vomit
after she begins to breathe on her own. You should be ready for
this anytime. When it occurs you should turn the patient on her
side immediately so that she doesn't choke, clear out her mouth
when she is finished vomiting. Resume application of artificial
respiration immediately. Don't worry about a little excess vomit
on the patient's face, every minute counts.

3. Tip the head back so that her chin points upward and lift
her lower jaw from beneath and behind so that it juts out. This
moves the base of the tongue away from the back of the throat,
so it does not block the passage of air to the lungs. You will
have to hold the jaw in place by cupping your hand under her chin.
It helps to keep the head in the correct position if you place
something like a folded jacket or towel or similar thing under the
back of the neck in addition to holding her head in position.

4. You can blow into a person's lungs through either her mouth
or nose. Open your mouth wide and place it tightly over the per-
son's mouth. Air can be blown through an unconscious person's
teeth even though they are clenched. Pinch her nostrils shut. Or
close her mouth and place your mouth over her nose. This should
be used when an obstruction is in the mouth that can't be re-
moved or when there is a severe mouth injury that prevents proper
contact. At this point the procedure for application of artifi-
cial respiration to children changes. The difference between ap-
plication to adults and children is very important to the life of
the child. This procedure is explained elsewhere on this page.

5. Blow into the mouth or nose, continuing to hold the uncon-
scious person's lower jaw so that it juts out to keep the air
passage open.

6. Remove your mouth from the patient's, turn your head to the
side and listen for the outflow of air returning from the lungs.
If you hear it you will know that an exchange of air has occurred.
You may also watch for the rising and falling movement of the
chest. If the sound is only slightly audible or the movement of
the chest is slight you may not be exhaling enough air into the
patient's lungs.

7. You should continue and repeat the process. Blow into her
mouth or nose about 12 times a minute. An adult at rest breathes
about 18 times a minute, taking in about a pint of air with each
breath. Don't blow too hard, but listen for the sound of the air
leaving the lungs and watch for the rising and falling of the
chest. For an adult inhale more than usual before exhaling into
the patient's lungs. Although there is not as much oxygen in the
air you exhale as in that you inhale there is enough to be very
helpful to someone who is unable to breathe on her own.

8. If you are not getting an exchange of air, turn the patient
on her side and strike her sharply between the shoulder blades.
This should help dislodge any object in the air passages. Place
the patient on her back again. Check the position of the head
and jaw and check the mouth to make sure there is no foreign
matter in it.

Normal breathing may start up again after 15 minutes of artifi-
cial respiration. But if it doesn't you should continue the pro-
cedure until you are positive life is gone. It is very tiring to
apply artificial respiration; you should alternate with other
people if possible. This helps to maintain a continuous adequate
flow of air to the unconscious person's lungs.

Cases of electric shock, and drug or carbon monoxide poisoning
may require artificial respiration for long periods.

One of the first signs of restored breathing may be a sigh.
Breathing may be irregular at first. Artificial respiration should
be continued until regular breathing occurs.

When normal breathing resumes the person usually recovers rapid-
ly. You should check carefully for other injuries. If there are
none she should rest for several hours and then she may return to
normal activities. If you suspect other injuries exist, the
patient should be taken to a hospital.

The procedure for children is the same except for two very
important points. The first is that your mouth should be placed
over both the mouth and nose, unless it is not possible because
of injury to either the mouth or nose. The second is very impor-
tant. The lung capacity of a child is of course not as great as
that of an adult. You should blow into a child's mouth less vi-
gorously than you would an adult's, using shallow breaths about
20 times a minute. If you blow too vigorously there is danger of
bursting the child's lungs. Listen for the sound of an exchange
of air and watch for the rising and falling movement of the chest.
In order to be able to use this procedure successfully to help
out sisters it is very important to practice it many times on a
dummy or another sister.

Clear the mouth and
throat of mucus and foreign
objects.

Tip the head back
and lift her lower
jaw from beneath
and behind so the
jaw juts out.

Open the patient's
mouth wide and
pinch her nostrils
shut.

Blow into the patient's
mouth, continuing to
hold the lower jaw so
that it juts out to keep
the air passage open.

Turn your head to the
side and listen for the
outflow of air returning
from the lungs.
If you hear it
you will know
an exchange
of air has occurred.
If not you should
check for obstructions
again.