MOTHER RIGHT:

a new feminist theory

by Jane Alpert

Jane Alpert has been underground since 1970, just before her trial for conspiracy to bomb various buildings in New York City.

PART I: An Open Letter to the Weatherwomen

Dear Sisters in the Weather Underground:

I am addressing this piece to you, in spite of the fact that my
concern at this point is with a far broader spectrum of women than
your tiny band of forgotten leftists, because it was our arguments
of the past year that convinced me to publicize my conversion from
the left to radical feminism. I realized after these arguments that
for me to keep silence would only support the illusion that the
"underground" is united around the male politics which you still
espouse, and these politics and practices are too reprehensible to
me as a feminist to protect them by silence. I know that seeing
this letter - which you thought you would receive as a private com-
munication - here in print will shock you and that you will regard
much of its contents as a breach of the tacit code of honor among
political fugitives. Nevertheless, my own politics demand that I
share with all women my knowledge of the sexual oppression of the
left, if only to warn other sisters against the pain that has been
inflicted on us. Perhaps you personally will never open up to fem-
inism; yet the experiences I am going to relate may speak more ef-
fectively to women involved in other branches of the left, from
McGovern organizers to Socialist Workers Party members. And I have
some hope that the impact of a public statement may do what none of
my private arguments have succeeded in doing: persuade you to leave
the dying left in which you are floundering and begin to put your
immense courage and unique skills to work for women - for yourselves.

Since this is an open letter, let me summarize for other women
what you already know of my history underground and as a feminist.
I became a fugitive in May 1970, a few days before my scheduled
sentencing for conspiracy to bomb military and war-related corpor-
ate buildings in Manhattan. I was never part of SDS or of Weather-
man, and although I'd had conversations with Weatherpeople which
were influential in my decision to go underground rather than to
prison, I lost contact with the organization shortly after I became
a fugitive. I was a serious militant leftist at that time, and the
most feminist activity I'd ever been involved with was the all-
women's newspaper Rat, which, despite its exclusion of men, re-
mained thoroughly left-identified. In the last three years I have
become a radical feminist. The change in my politics has not been
sudden, and I want to go into its causes and its substance much
more fully later in this paper. For now, I only want to set the
scene of my renewed acquaintance with the Weather Underground by
saying that when it occurred I was decisively through with the left
and had, at least mentally, rededicated myself to the cause of a
revolution made by and for women.

It was in this general frame of mind then, just about a year ago,
that I was attending a public lecture and, a few minutes after seat-
ing myself, noticed a man sitting nearby who looked vaguely famil-
iar. I would not have noticed him at all except for the fact that
he was very obviously staring at me and at the same time making
laughing, surprised comments to the people around him. I thought
with some alarm that he must be either an agent or a dangerous fool,
and I was both more and less apprehensive when I finally realized
who he was.

It was Mark Rudd.

After I recovered from the shock, I became excited by this rare
and unhoped-for opportunity to share experiences with a fellow-
fugitive and for a short time I relished it in spite of the prob-
lems. Rudd was living with a woman I hadn't met before, whom I'll
call Caroline. She seemed to be a strong and sensitive person and
I would have loved to get to know her well, independently of Rudd
himself. This was not possible because Rudd made it difficult for
us to see each other without him, and because when the three of us
were together he made a practice of interrupting her and seemed to
regard himself as the spokesman for them both. Nevertheless, his
obvious dependence on her combined with his frequent apologies to
me for his manipulative behavior in past years (toward me in par-
ticular and women in general) gave me some hope that he had funda-
mentally changed and might even have become a sympathetic ally to
the Women's Movement. I was soon disillusioned.

What finally woke me to the reality of this man's character was
a conversation we had while Caroline was out of town. He made a
special point of wanting to get together with me at this time and,
as we were sitting on the front seat of a car on a rainy evening,
he attempted to put our relationship on a more intimate footing
by means of the following confession. He told me that approximate-
ly a year earlier Caroline had had a serious ovarian infection
which made sex very painful for her. This, he said, was the root
of a whole range of "problems" in their relationship, ranging from
his virtually raping her (he couldn't help himself, he said) to
his imagining himself in love with another woman. He described to
me how titillating he found it that this other woman looked on him
as a revolutionary hero, how she excited him sexually without sat-
isfying him intellectually, how he couldn't resist the excitement
of an affair with her though it was causing great anguish to Caro-
line. The affair ended, however, when he learned that the "other"
woman was pregnant by him and that she wanted to have his child.
He regarded the pregnancy as entirely her own fault, since she had
stopped taking birth-control pills without telling him, and he ex-
plained that this willful and self-destructive carelessness - as he
saw it - was what had proved to him that "a man can't politically
educate a woman." It slowly dawned on me that Rudd was telling me
this story (1) because it proved what an irresistibly highly-sexed
masculine creature he was, and (2) because as a "liberated woman,"
not to mention a presumably pro-abortion feminist, he quite sin-
cerely expected me to cluck a sympathetic tongue over his problems
with this dumb chick.

I told Rudd in the strongest terms of which I was capable how
appalling his behavior was to me, but though my failure to sympa-
thize seemed to startle him, nothing I could say would convince
him of the seriousness with which I regarded his crimes. "Of course
I trust you," were his benevolently paternalistic last words to
me. "I know you wouldn't do something like those Boston women who
denounced Eric Mann (a Weatherman who served a two-year prison
term) as a sexist pig who deserved his imprisonment."

While it wasn't possible for me to establish much of a relation-
ship with Caroline given the short time we were in the same geo-
logical area and Rudd's obtuse omnipresence, I could at least look
forward to getting in touch, through Rudd, with women in the Wea-
ther Underground. I was wary about this because I knew you Weather-
women had never given a sign, publicly or privately, of being more
receptive to a feminist point of view than Rudd himself was; that
you had never risked the esteem of leftist men in any statement or
action; and that the few statements of your organization which
made reference to the Women's Movement revealed a complete failure
to understand it and an intense eagerness to co-opt it. Neverthe-
less, I respected - and respect - you in a way I never could Rudd.
I knew it was your strength that had held the organization together
when the men's desperate egomania threatened to destroy you all. I
could count on the fact that as women - and specifically as women
fugitives - we shared certain experiences that could bring us
closer together in outlook and feelings than would be possible
with even the most sympathetic and sensitive man. Finally, what-
ever the risk, it seemed well worth it if I could give even one
woman in our situation support that would help her stand up for
herself, and for all women, against our oppression in a movement
that puts our interests last. Encouragingly, my very first meeting
with one of you was a wonderful experience for me, and I was much
moved by the warm reception and attention this woman gave me and
my politics, and the genuine respect that I felt from her as well
as for her. (I suspect now, in the aftermath of other meetings,
that this may have been partly because she was unprepared for the
radical changes in my politics and therefore responded to me open-
ly and honestly. The rest of you had, in advance of meeting me,
already armored yourselves against revealing too much of your
"personal problems" as women in a male organization.) For whatever
reason, I was, as it turned out, all too ready to plunge into a dia-
logue in which I used my own skin as wallpaper while you side-
stepped and evaded every issue.

Your resistance to discussing your personal experience, your
trivializing of your own pain and suffering, your insistence that
the oppression of others is more important than your own - these
are part of the self-contempt that has been bred in all of us wo-
men, and I understand it as I understand myself. I can even deal
with your more contrived evasions, the ones that were obviously
developed only after years of building defenses against the threat
that the Women's Movement seems to you. I can see why you over-
looked security so that, apparently by chance, I ran into one more
Weatherwoman than we had agreed I would meet during the brief time
we were together, a woman who just "happened to be" rabidly anti-
feminist. I know what advantage you saw in circulating a vicious,
unfounded rumor about a well-known feminist and then asserting she
herself was not to blame for her errors because the Women's Move-
ment was responsible for her psychological destruction. I can un-
derstand too well the reasons for your flippant claim that it
"bores" you to talk about men, a pathetic way to avoid admitting
your oppression.

But the wall I cannot surmount is your insistence that if I
really practiced sisterhood I wouldn't make demands on you in the
name of feminism, but would respect your political path as equally
valid to my own. You want me to accept your claim that you are no
longer dominated by men, as you admit you were when you first
joined Weatherman, as in fact we all are as long as we live under
patriarchy. Yet in the same breath that you claim, "Women run the
organization," you admit that of the five members of the Weather-
man Central Committee, three are men. And you have no shame in
telling me that one of these three is Bill Ayers, notorious for his
callous treatment and abandonment of Diana Oughton before her
death and for his generally fickle and high-handed treatment of
women; and that another is Jeff Jones, who once told that dull-
witted misogynist Robert Palmer that if I thought Weatherman was
a male supremacist organization, I could "suck his dick." Or have
Ayers and Jones now become feminists too - like Mark Rudd, who,
after a year's leave to overcome his "arrogance and insensitivity"
(which you won't even call by its true name: sexism) you are ad-
mitting back into the organization?

The politico-feminist split is a real one, one that will vanish
as soon as we accept ourselves as women first of all, but which
will continue to divide us until we share that consciousness. It
is you leftists, you male-identified socialist and liberal and
pacifist and Weather-sympathizing women, who try to deny any sig-
nificant difference between male politics and feminist politics.
"We're all just women," you say, and we are - but to you this is
a phenomenon of the most peripheral possible interest, indeed it
only seems to occur to you when under fire from feminists. As long
as you are working politically with men, as long as you are letting
men define your attitudes, behavior and standards, then we stand
on opposite sides of a line all too visible to me in spite of your
blindness to it, but which I know you too will see once you have
crossed it. And to cross it you need do only one thing: let your
own self-interest be your highest priority. I am not asking you
to stop loving men, or to break all personal and emotional ties
with the men who are important to you. I know that those ties are
more...