It's like my whole life I've been worried  
about one quarter of my mind or another.  

I used to love people in an all-consuming,  
total, ultimate concern, way. It was like  
having a constant crush; it went right to  
my stomach. It was incapacitating to a  
great extent except that I was so disci-  
plined that I could control when I'd let  
my mind think about the one I loved and  

so I managed to function.  

I could never understand why I loved the  
women I loved. Granted, I was at that  
time a very disciplined, scientific person  
who would never let my feelings get the  
better of me. It seemed to me that my  
love feelings had no rational basis; they  
would come over me almost immediately  
upon meeting a person. I was afraid that  
they stemmed from only the physical being  
of the person, and this I thought was not  
a good enough reason for loving. So given  
that the love I felt was so unreasonable  
and incapacitating, I was a little dis-  
satisfied with it. At the same time, the  
people I loved made my life meaningful and  
gave me energy and I was very happy with  
it. The best way of expressing what love  
means to me is this zen telegram:  

———  

Seema the eae aes we  
a  
Your euBs TD have  

Sorastlen thact people  
ow.  

I've thought a lot about the immediate  
intensity of my feelings about some women  
because it has bothered me a lot. But over  
the years I've observed that my percep-  
tions of people are hardly ever wrong.  
Lots of times when I meet a sister for  
the first time I feel a huge compassion  
and empathy for her. I think it's because  
a person's experience and what they've  
gone through shows in their face and the  
way they carry themselves. You can see  
suffering through a woman's eyes.  

I can't figure out exactly when or why  
my way of feeling love changed, but I do  
remember that I had a hard time realizing  
that I still was able to love--it was just  
that my way of loving had changed and I  
couldn't recognize it. It's not very  
clear cut at all and a lot of things that  
you wouldn't think would have to do with  
it, had to do with it. Like politics and  
Women's Liberation. The change in my feel-  
ings on love had to do with my conclusions  
about the format in which I as a person and  
my love for another could survive and grow.  
I discovered while relating to a woman in  
an exclusive one-to-one relationship, that  
it inhibited my freedom as a person. The  
constant tension created in me between what I  
wanted and needed to be and do and what the  
format of the relationship allowed me to be  
and do gradually destroyed our relationship.  
The time I spent on Women's Liberation was  
resented, because she was left alone and who  
could blame her. She started going out with  
a perfectly nice boy who I was incredibly  
jealous of and whom I hated. The one-to-  
oneness of our relationship made all this  
fatal.  

The other thing I discovered later is that  
Women's Liberation isn't a 8-5 job. It is  
a process and a way of living and I wanted  
to live it and not just work at it. I  
guess some other women must have felt this  
way because 8 of us formed a women's  
collective in which we now all live. What  
I want to do with my life is be a revolu-  
tionary and you just can't do that in my  
opinion within the context of a 1:1 rela-  
tionship. Either being a revolutionary  
requires too much time to allow enough  
time to make the relationship work or as is  
statistically probable the woman you love  
isn't interested in being a revolutionary  
too.  

Anyway, I found myself feeling much more  
evenly about people--fewer highs and lows--  
more like a steady good feeling. I was less  
incapacitated and less hyper. It's prob-  
ably the disciplined sober part of me  
which makes me think this particular change  
is for the better. My feelings were so in-  
tense and seemingly based on nothing that  
I was afraid that they might end just as  
unreasonably as they began and I would have  
no control over it.  

Another thing that may have to do with  
the change in the way I love is just a  
theory of mine, but it may be true. (It  
involves the fact that the change in the  
way I felt love came just as I was getting  
into Women's Liberation.) Before I got  
involved in W.L. my time was more taken  
up by people I loved. After I got into  
W.L. my commitments to other people chang-  
ed because I'd made an ultimate commitment  
to feminist revolution. This really only  
governs my time, but time has a way of  
affecting everything. It didn't affect my  
love, its intensity or what people mean  
to me--just the time I could devote to ex-  
pressing it. To say what I'm committed to  
do says nothing about what I'd like to do  
or rather do at any one particular moment.  
It tells me what I must and should do and  
sometimes that means disciplining my feel-  
ings.  

Since I've written this, it too has been  
questioned and now I don't know where I am.  
Two women whose opinions I respect questioned  
my nice pat intellectual conclusions  
about 1:1 relationships. They said I  
sounded bitter (Now, that in itself is  
hard for an old Pollyanna like me to take.  
Although, I'm beginning to think optimistic  
people just hide or channel their bitter-  
ness--it makes us less angry, but more able  
to function.) That I had been hurt and am  
now running or at least keeping myself  
from becoming so involved again.  

I don't know how to handle that, because  
it contradicts my conception of myself. I  
thought and thought about it and I don't  
know how to go about changing my behavior.  

Yesterday, I finally could not think  
about it anymore. After a good night's  
sleep my devastated reaction that the best  
thing to do would be not relate to anyone  
anymore is subsiding and the Pollyanna in  
me is taking over again. I've always been  
amazed at how my body and mind reacted in  
healthy ways to things. There must have  
been a good reason why my mind couldn't  
think about it more. Dwelling on pain is  
constructive only up to a point and then  
it destroys you. Knowing this, the cells  
in my body and mind took the pain away from  
my consciousness to work on it with the  
strength of nature.  

Being married, I sometimes feel very much alone  

Because  

If the nuclear family (read marriage) is something  

we are determined to do away  

Where does that leave me?  

if a relationship with a  
man =  

has no future  
And a man is willing  

As I must try and un-role it  
What do we do?  

And yet, I know  
that at times -  

A Woman?  

for  

that's what it's all about-  

to change a role,  

to try and un-role himself  

I wish I could tell you  

How sorry I am  

I'm beginning to realize  

I hurt you  

I can only say  

I hurt you - I'll stop  

I care about you  

How can I hurt you?  

You told me  

I've loved women differently  

You told things you had felt and seen  
I said, I know I know  

I don't know - I'm sorry  

Women have struggled together  

How can I forget?  

You told your experiences  

I said I doubt it  

How could I?  

I can see your anger - I'm sorry  

Why can't I trust you? I'm sorry  

As even now I can't tell you, I'm sorry  
But then I'm sorry is not even enough.