This article is written for women who are committed to building a  
Feminist Revolution. We believe that an analysis of class is basic  
to any attempt to mobilize women to overthrow patriarchy. Real unity  
among women will come only from a complete understanding of the  
divisions among us. We can be unified only through concrete political  
goals, not by a mere wish to identify with all women. This  
paper is our first attempt to consolidate our ideas on the signi-  
ficance of class. Rather than attempting to categorize individuals  
or groups of women, our emphasis will be to discover why economic  
class is a vital Feminist issue. We will discuss both the ideolo-  
gical base of different classes and the potential each class has  
for effecting real revolutionary change.  

WHAT DETERMINES A PERSON'S CLASS IDENTITY?  

The words “working class women" and “middle class women" are used  
frequently in discussions without being defined. Consequently, so  
much time and energy are spent discussing whether or not a woman is  
middle class that we never get to the heart of the matter: what  
significance does class have to the revolutionary Feminist movement.  

Before we are able to develop an analysis of class, we must have  
some definition of the terms "working class woman" and “middle  
class woman." Therefore, the primary reason for determining class  
identity is the purpose of definition.  

In searching for definitions, our discussions continually became  
enmeshed in gray areas between classes. Though we knew that there  
was in fact a middle class and a working class, there was no place  
to draw a line. After much consideration, we came up with three  
criteria which we believe significantly distinguish the material  
base of class. Individual women do not fall neatly into one cate-  
gory or another and this definition is not an attempt to draw a  
clear cut line. A woman may have different aspects from different  
classes.  

Generally, a working class woman is one who works to support  
herself and/or her family, who depends upon her own income  
to this end, and who has no options to fall back on for  
financial support, such as family identification, husband,  
or other benefactors.  

The three primary factors that determine a person's class identity  
are:  

1. THE WORK SHE DOES:  

The bulk of work working class women do is service, factory,  
or office work, most often low-paying and with little hope  
for advancement. If she has a family, she must work two jobs:  
one in her home and one in the labor force. Work is a neces-  
sity for her, not an option. The bulk of work middle class  
women do is managerial, professional, or volunteer. For  
middle class women, their work is not a material necessity  
but an attempt to achieve fulfillment or escape boredom  
under the illusion that somehow their jobs are beneficial  
to the world.  

HER BACKGROUND  
The working class background: A woman growing up in a work-  
ing class family knows what it is like to have material  
needs. Her labor power is important from the time she is  
small, and often she begins supporting herself while still  
in her teens. Schools and parents try to channel her into  
learning practical skills for survival such as home-ec and  
secretarial skills, rather than college-prep courses. If she  
rebels against this, she learns no skills and must work at  
the lowest-paying, non-skilled jobs or resort to prostitu-  
tion. If she aspires and goes on to college, she finds it a  
constant struggle. Because she lacks the right contacts,  
she has great difficulty learning about loans and scholar-  
ships and receives little help finding employment after  
graduation.  

The middle class background: A woman growing up in a middle  
class family learns the skills necessary to "make it" in the  
system. She learns the proper ways of speaking and relating  
to people. She develops self-confidence through the security  
of her social environment. She is assured of a college edu-  
cation, learns what is expected of her, and is promised a  
social position. She has the luxury of sampling the latest  
fads, experimenting with different life-styles, or doing  
things just for the experience, because she knows that she  
can always get money from her parents if she needs it. When  
she takes a low-paying job, it is temporary because she has  
the skills, contacts and education to either find another  
job or to align herself with a middle class man.  

3. HER RELATIONSHIP WITH MEN:  

This is the most important determinant of class identity. The  
economic class system is a hierarchy of power among men. A  
woman's class identity is determined by her relationship to  
men: first by her father, later by her husband. The higher up  
her man is in the class hierarchy the more she benefits from  
the system. The wife of a middle class man need not work for  
her survival outside of her home because she is provided for  
by her husband. She is economically dependent on him. The  
wife of a working class man is forced to be economically de-  
pendent upon herself. The family cannot make ends meet on  
the husband's income alone.  

The single woman is obviously working class (ignoring a few  
token exceptions) because women are the lowest paid workers.  
Any woman who is economically self-dependent rather than  
male-dependent lives in the material reality of the working  
class regardless of her background.  

To conclude, the most general definition of a working class woman  
is one who is economically self-dependent.  

WHAT IS THE SIGNIFICANCE OF CLASS IN THE REVOLUTIONARY FEMINIST  
STRUGGLE?  

A patriarchal society is by nature a class society based on a hier-  
archy of power. Any revolution, by definition, attempts to over-  
throw those in control of the class system: those on top of the  
hierarchy who oppress the vast majority of people. Any revolutionary  
movement must organize sufficient political, economic, and  
military power to overthrow the oppressors and seize power from  
them.  

Am I working class or  
middle class?  

All social groups or classes do not have equal potential for build-  
ing a revolutionary movement. The material conditions of people's  
lives determine whether they are capable of taking the risks neces-  
sary to destroy the old order and establish a new social system.  

The composition of a revolutionary movement determines the nature  
of the post-revolutionary society that it will build. If the revo-  
lution in America were made by the new professionals it would re-  
flect the professionals' class and ideological bias. If the revo-  
lution were made by the male intellectuals, it would reflect their  
bias. If it were made by working class males it would reflect  
theirs and if it were made by women it would reflect ours. Each  
group would make a qualitatively different type of revolution be-  
cause each group would act in its own self-interest.  

Our goal as revolutionary Feminists is to further the revolution  
which will overthrow patriarchy and will ensure power for all women.  
We believe that this requires the destruction of the basis of the  
class system -- the institution of marriage. (For more explanation  
see "On Social Change" by RF28 and "The Document: a Declaration of  
Feminism." Both are available through our P.O. box.)  

Only women organized in their own self-interest can create a revo-  
lution that will ensure power for women and only working class  
women have the potential for creating a revolutionary movement  
which will attack the institution of marriage and thus the essence  
of the class system. This is true for two reasons: first, only  
working class women have the potential for organizing and leading  
the Feminist Revolution and second, only working class women have  
the ideological base (world outlook) necessary to bring about a  
classless Feminist State.  

We are attempting to explain why we believe that the leadership  
of the Revolutionary Feminist movement must, by definition, be  
working class and why middle class women who wish to build this  
revolutionary movement must overcome their middle class prejudices  
and adopt a working class world perspective. The rest of this dis-  
cussion is devoted to analyzing why we believe this to be true.  

Because we are concerned with Feminist Revolution we are limiting  
our discussion to the potential of WOMEN to organize and because  
we do not believe that those who benefit most from the existing  
system will rise up to overthrow it we are not considering the  
revolutionary potential or the ideology of ruling class women.  
This discussion compares and analyzes the differences between  
middle and working class women. We are totally leaving out the  
role of alliances, the relationship between Feminists and other  
oppressed groups, etc. We believe these questions are secondary to  
the creation of a Revolutionary Feminist Movement led by working  
class women.  

Number 1 Ain’t  
I a Woman?  

ON THE SIGNIFICANCE OF CLASS TO THE REVOLUTIONARY FEMINIST MOVEMENT  

MARCH 1972  
by RADICAL FEMINISTS 28  

I. REVOLUTIONARY POTENTIAL  

The revolutionary potential of a group or class within a society  
can be measured by two criteria: first, the degree to which the  
class or group benefits from the system as it exists and second,  
the amount of political, economic, and military power the group is  
capable of organizing in order to threaten the power of their  
oppressors.  

A. BENEFITS  

Hypothesis: Working class women benefit least from the  
system as it exists and are therefore the group with the  
greatest revolutionary potential.  

While middle class women enjoy a degree of economic and social  
security from their marriages, marriage for the working class  
woman is primarily an added burden to her economic self-depen-  
dency. The working class woman who is married holds down two  
jobs: one at home and one at work. Her paid employment is es-  
sential for the survival of her family as is her work of home-  
keeper, wife, and mother. The promise of being supported by a  
man in marriage, if it ever meant something to her, means  
nothing once she finds herself with a family to support. Be-  
cause the working class family has a difficult time sustaining  
itself, the homemaker can afford fewer of the modern conven-  
iences which make housewifery less burdensome. The working  
class male is often more easily brought to violence within  
the family because of his economic burdens and his need to  
demonstrate his masculinity.  

The middle class marriage does not place these same burdens  
on the woman. While the middle class woman can identify her  
oppression as a woman she is less likely to identify marriage  
as the cause of women's problems or to call for Feminist Rev-  
olution, because she is dependent both financially and emo-  
tionally on her husband, and she benefits from that dependence.  
She has leisure time, social contacts, and is materially pro-  
vided for.  

Single women (most of whom are working class) benefit little  
from the system and suffer much because they are not male-  
dependent. They are by far the most likely to join hands and  
organize the Feminist Revolution.  

This is not a glorification of the working class, but simply  
a statement that the working class has the material base  
necessary for building a revolution to seize state power. Mid-  
dle class women will not give up the privileges they enjoy in  
male society any more than men will give up their power. They  
will support the status quo until it is obvious that the work-  
ing class Feminists have organized their power and are posing  
a serious threat to patriarchy.  

B. ABILITY TO ORGANIZE POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, AND MILITARY POWER  
to overthrow their oppressors and seize state power.  

Hypothesis: Working class women are in a position to organ-  
ize the necessary political, economic, and military power  
needed to seize state power, while middle class women are  
not.  

Fundamental social change can only occur through revolution.  
Political reforms within an inherently oppressive system can-  
not change the power relationships between the oppressor and  
the oppressed. It is necessary for the oppressed to seize  
power from their masters.  

It takes power to seize power. The oppressor maintains his  
position through organized political, economic, and military  
might. The oppressed must organize comparable power to con-  
front and overthrow their oppressors.  

1. POLITICAL POWER  

Political power is created as the oppressed become more con-  
scious of their enemy and begin to organize in their self-  
interest. It is the expanding consciousness and developing  
ideology of the oppressed. It is the creation and dissemin-  
ation of an analysis of the existing system, a vision of a  
new order, and a strategy for getting from the old order to  
the new. Political power must provide direction to the econ-  
omic and military power of the oppressed -- the essential  
elements in seizing state power. No amount of political  
power alone can make the existing system topple.  

2. ECONOMIC POWER  

The system of capitalism is built and maintained on the  
backs of the masses of people -- men and women. The ruling  

males have power only so long as the masses of workers con-  
tinue to produce the goods and services and allow the ruling  
males to rake off their profits. If the life blood of the  

system, the wage earner, stopped working en masse, the econ-  
omic power of the ruling males would be severely threatened.  

18 August 1972  

Through their employment, working class women are in a posi-  
tion to organize economic power to shut the system down. For  
women in the home, organizing to stop work en masse would  
affect only the males of the same economic class as the wo-  
men doing the action. The only direct economic power in the  
hands of women in the home is control of the means of repro-  
duction of tomorrow's wage earner. The Lysistrata fantasy  
comes to mind, but to wield this power effectively would re-  
quire a firm solidarity among women of all classes. Such  
solidarity is unlikely because of the conflicting interests  
between women of different classes. Ruling class women are  
not likely to follow working class leadership because it  
means sacrificing their men. Nor are working class women  
likely to follow ruling class leadership because it means  
giving up the struggle for a classless society. Women cannot  
unite under leadership that is simply "female," irrespective  
of class, because class is an integral part of the oppression  
under which we live.  

It is therefore our belief that the most vital economic power  
which must be organized in order to seize state power is wage  
earning power -- obviously, this means working class women.  

3. MILITARY POWER  

Oppressed people must organize in their own self-defense to  
protect themselves from the tyranny of their oppressors. This  
is the beginning of military power which must eventually be  
capable of winning victories against the organized might of  
the ruling males. Without military power there is no hope of  
seizing power from the oppressors. You cannot confront guns  
with flowers.  

To most women today organized self-defense must seem like an  
unrealistic dream, as it did to most blacks before John Brown  
and Nat Turner. It is not only necessary and possible, how-  
ever, it is inevitable. Once the first women have dared to  
pose a new reality to women, many more will be able to take  
the same risks. Organized self-defense is, by definition,  
separatist in nature. It means giving our lives to the strug-  
gle for the liberation of our people, and declaring war on  
males who abuse the rights of women. Working class women  
will be the first to organize self-defense for women because  
they are the most abused by men. Middle class women will be  
reluctant to join because they benefit from their marriages.  
They are afraid that such "aggressive" acts of self-defense  
by women might start a "sex war" which would threaten their  
relationship with their men. Consequently, they are content  
to bring about legal reforms in the illusion that liberty  
can be legislated.  

Why does the working  
class have the  
greatest revolutionary  
potential?  

II. THE IDEOLOGY OF CLASS  

We have explained how we analyze the revolutionary potential of  
the working class. Now we shall discuss why the ideological lead-  
ership of the working class is necessary to build a classless  
society.  

The material condition of people's lives (the work they do, the  
needs they have, and their ability to meet those needs) determines  
the outlook (ideology) they have toward the world. For example,  
the person who has never had to worry about money or how she is  
going to provide for herself materially can voice the ideology of  
moral obligation. Her own actions can be pure and moral because  
the basic needs of her life are being met. The person who is hun-  
gry, on the other hand, cannot afford to look at the world in this  
way. She has to eat. This is what is meant by the "ideology of  
class." Each class has a different world perspective because of  
the material reality of their lives.  

(continued next page)  

Page 7