more

thoughts
on

The way in which women become involved
in feminist politics follows a natural
progression pretty much. As we move be-

yond examining our personal lives and has-

sles, we look for ways to correct the in-
justices; as we find the injustices to be
inherent in the political system of this
country, and after spending varying a-
mounts of energy and effort in effecting
change, we recognize total change to be
necessary. The work we engage in at this
point of consciousness we must see within
the framework of some larger strategy
leading to and eventually accomplishing a
revolution.

Within the larger strategy of revolu-
tion, the present structure of women's
liberation has evolved ways of meeting
the needs of women at the various points
of consciousness and with various commit-
ment due to time and situation. Because
a great deal has been written recently
suggesting new structures are needed to
further our goal, we have been prompted
to examine the effectiveness of the pre-
sent structures in achieving that end.

We began discussing this by examining
the structure within which we now work
and which has comprised the bulk of each
of our experience within the women's
movement.

The original publications cell of Iowa
City WLF was organized with the purpose
of publishing a newspaper, AIAW. There-
fore our action was to be basically above
ground, and as it turned out, resulted in
a high degree of visibility in terms of
local knowledge of the collective member-
ship. These two facts—that our work is
above-ground and that membership can be
easily found out—should be kept in mind
throughout this discussion because we
have always had to work within those lim-
itations.

The structure of the AIAW group is a
politically tight collective, trying to
develop theory/analysis which is reflected
in the paper. We share the tasks of pro-
duction and participate pretty equally in
discussion and decision-making on all le-
vels, including the ongoing process of
determining our political analysis. Disci-
pline is a prominent goal in this process,
although it hasn't been fully achieved by
any means.

Our structure evolved because we want-
ed the paper to function as effectively
as possible in a public dialog that would
have an effect on revolutionary and fem-
inist thought and activity in this coun-
try. In order to do that we had to come
to grips with our politics, and struggle
over the changes in our thinking that
happened as we worked together. Having
a stable membership with basic political
agreement was mandatory for this process
to continue, so that is how we have work-
ed. We found the best structural way
that we could to meet the goals we have
in mind.

Although we describe ourselves as
"politically tight," there are still po-
litical differences among us. We feel it
is imperative for a collective like ours
to accept that there will be some differ-
ences of this kind, because of such po-
litical factors as varying class back-
grounds, age, lifestyles or existing
personal privilege. Other groups might
have to deal with racial differences or
gay/straight divisions which we aren't
faced with at this point because we are
all white and all gay. But despite these
political differences the collective has
stayed together and progressed because of
a common commitment.

The strength of a tight collective
should be recognizable from this fact
that we have stayed together and produc-
tive for two years. Half of the present
collective was in the original cell that
started AIAW. To keep our political di-
rection progressive but stable we limit

the collective to women of very similar
political orientations, so that we are
in agreement on all basic issues we feel
are important. We therefore work in a
less publicly controlled way than groups
who have a loose turnover of members. Be-
cause of this AIAW has gradually progress-
ed as the consciousness of the collective

developed. Though it is a means to smooth-
er change, greater commitment, and trust
with each other, the very fact of limita-
tion of collective members to similarity
of politics creates problems. These are
some internal problems we face within the
collective and the ways we try to deal
with them:

1) We have often overlooked a point of
view that wasn't represented within the
collective. Right now, for instance, we
have no Black or third world women in the
collective, no women with their own chil-
dren, and no straight women; therefore,
we cannot represent those points of view
from our experiences alone. To combat
this narrowness we: listen to other women
and learn from them, and try to utilize
people from outside the collective as
sources of first-hand experience in those
areas.

2) Losing a member of such a tight col-
lective and finding and orienting a re-
placement can be traumatizing to both the
collective and the new member. Because of
the way we work, we rely greatly on our
potentials, exploring and developing not
only our political analysis but practices
as well. Orienting a new member creates
a temporary imbalance to the division of
labor and demands extra time and energy
from every other collective member to en-
courage and explain things to a woman who
is not used to working collectively. Dur-
ing the two years that the collective has
existed we have found that we progressed
most when membership was constant. Even
a small turnover was, in retrospect, de-
structive to our ability to work well.
None of these offsets the value of having
a new member, of course. But it is a
strain that has to be dealt with.

3) Because of our selectivity of poli-
tical views, the AIAW collective is not
very large, despite what our sales blurb
says at times. We have a high workload
on us, which magnifies the importance of
working well together collectively.

Although we ascribe to an across-the-
board collective ideology, we have learned
the necessity to accept some inequalities
in terms of the time commitments each of
us is capable of. The minimum commitment
is fairly high—6 hours of meeting time
each week and 9 hours during production
week for each of us—but we have learned
that differences beyond that must be ac-
ceptable in order for the paper to get out
and our process to continue. We've found
it necessary for those who have extra
time to do office work and the like, and
take that responsibility for those who
don't have the time due to jobs or other
commitments. When resentments over unequal
workloads have come up (and they have)
we've found talking them out the best way
to deal with them.

Generally we feel we have learned to
function productively within the collec-
tive, and continue to work to overcome
the limitations that our chosen structure
seems to have built in.

The collective exists within a commu-
nity and the society at large, so there
are other hassles related to our func-
tioning in that context. Working as a
tight collective, publishing AIAW, we've
realized that we're 1) too visible to do
much other political work (underground),
2) subject to accusations by women out-
side our collective for being elitist,
powerful, judgmental, and cliquish, and
3) because of that attitude we are iso-
lated from community dialog which we feel
should be going on.

Though we don't use our names in the
paper, the local community knows the mem-
bers of the collective. Also, the infor-
mation is accessible to local liberals
and police infiltrators via grapevine due
to fairly lax security consciousness in
the community. We have found our visibil-
ity frustrating but unalterable for now.
Visibility is not, however, inherent to
all collectives, but characteristic to
publishing a paper.

Although we are a closed collective we
have to deal with criticisms from the
community because of our visibility. Un-
fortunately there is no real forum for
criticism and explanation established
here, so group-to-group or individual-to-
group tensions often go unresolved or are
present for a destructively long time.
Situations of this sort that we are or
have been in are:

1) Since we are a closed collective
and have sometimes been too ready to
judge others’ politics, we have been call-
ed elitist. It is necessary and obvious
that we believe our position on an issue
is right, and we don't feel that a toler-
ant laissez-faire stance towards other
positions is called for in this situation.
What we have learned is that we must make
our criticisms specific so that a sweeping
negative judgment cannot be inferred when
we have not intended it. If after doing
that we are still called elitist then we
must feel that the charge is invalid.

2) Because we are the only women's pa-
per locally and in this region we have
been resented for being powerful. Also,
because we often write our ideas on sub-
jects contained in articles by other
groups that we've published, we've been
accused of ‘getting the last word' by our
press power and being unduly critical. On
this last point we have recognized such
misuse of press power and have establish-
ed a policy of giving the other group a
chance to edit our response to their ideas
before printing time. But we have found
little to do about general accusations of
power because we started the paper from
nothing and keep it going with very little
but sweat, and what influence that has
gained us for the spread of our ideas we
are glad we have.

3) We have been resented for seeming
to represent all women or all gay women.