PAM: Drug addicts are really intelligent people, they really are.  
They haven't read all about life in books, they've experienced it.  
And when a drug addict comes out of their nod, and starts facing  
reality, where it's really at, then society has to watch out. Be-  
cause once they get their heads together, nothing can really beat  
them.  

The psychiatrist loves to give you medication, because then you  
can walk around and not know what's happening. We'd rather not  
sleep, 'cause we want to know what's happening. We found out, it  
was hard, it was a real struggle there, and you have to be strong.  
But when you get out in the streets, that's where you really face  
the struggle.  

MARSHA: The clothes. They give you short-sleeve cotton dresses  
to wear all year round. Sometimes they don't heat the building.  
You'll be freezing, and all you got is that little fucking cotton  
dress.  

PAM: See, the physical things they do to you, you can take. We  
can wear cotton dresses in the winter. But the things they do to  
your head, some sisters just can't take it. You know a lot of sis-  
ters come in fucked up from Jump Street, I know I was, and some of  
them sit down and think, ‘Well, I'm just going to do my time and  
get out of here.’ If everybody thought 'Well, let me do my time  
and get out of here,' then nothing's going to be changed. And that  
is why the matrons hated us, because we believed in change. They're  

so brainwashed that they can't believe in anything else except what  

the United States taught them.  

There's another so-called problem they say they have. The sis-  
ters don't have it, but the matrons do. Homosexuality seems to be  
a big problem to them, a problem to what we call Front Street, the  
"higher ups." They don't want any 'Lesbians' on their Farm, they  
say.  

We don't relate to homosexuality either. Because when you love  
somebody, you love them. You don't have to call it ‘homosexuality,’  
you don't have to call it 'the gay life,' or ‘bull dagger’ or any  
of those terms the pigs use. Love is just love, whether it's a  
sister or a brother, it doesn't matter.  

The staff members up there, their minds are really fucked up  
about it. One day, there was a little announcement made in the  

dining room.  

"After you eat, if you want to sit here you have to  
sit at three tables, where the matrons can see you."  

We knew why  
they wanted to watch us, because they're thinking, ‘A couple of  
sisters are going to be getting down in the dining room.'  

We confronted the head supervisor of the hall. She says, ‘Well,  
you know, you girls do things in the bathroom.’ I really wish she  
would have said it to me, because I would have told her, ‘Yeah, I  
shit, and I piss in the bathroom.'  

Some sisters really do have a problem with so-called homosexual-  
ity because they are brainwashed, and it's not their fault. They  
think: 'If I'm going to hook up with one of the sisters, well I'm  
going to be the fucking boss. You sit here and I'll sit there.'  
See, we don't believe in that—that makes it ugly. The matrons  
like that—when they see two sisters really hooked up with one  
having to play the man role, one having to play the woman role.  

We're trying to get away from those roles anyway. A lot of sis-  
ters want to play the man role because they've been fucked around  
by men for so long. Now it's their turn, they want to fuck some-  
one else around.  

So now we've told you some things about Niantic, just a little  
bit of what happens down there, and there's a lot that really has  
to be done. It's going to take sisters like Ericka, it's going to  
take sisters like us, to do it. It's really a fucking drag that  
sisters have to go to a prison to get it together.  

Today we went to Ericka's trial. When I saw her, it was just un-  
believable. I couldn't believe it was her. You really have to meet  
her. A lot of people are afraid of her. They put her on a pedestal,  
they make her an idol. She really hates it. Because Ericka is just  
Ericka.  

She had a big smile on her face. Walked in just as strong as she  
is, you know. When we saw her Marsha and I started crying. And she  
said, ‘Wipe away the tears. Be strong.’ So I wiped away the tears.  
We were leaving the courtroom because there was no session today,  
one of the jurors was sick. She yelled "I love you," and we said,  
‘Well, we love you too Ericka.'  

And the pig that was so-called escorting us out of the courtroom  
said, ‘Hurry up, clear the courtroom.' We said, ‘Yeah, we'll clear  
it. We love you, Ericka,’ and walked out.  

* ok x  

Write to Ericka, c/o Catherine Roraback, 265 Church St.,  
New Haven, Connecticut  
06521.  

Thoughts to keep in mind as we  
find out more about ourselves...  

There are so many temptations that  
face us as we struggle to free ourselves.  

We sometimes take a leave of absence from  
the world—from the battleground which  
has hurt, tormented and sometimes deeply  
scarred and crippled us. In that leave-  
taking, we often forget one of the most  
basic truths that the Movement has  
brought out...that whatever hang-ups we  
have, whatever personality problems that  
destroy our ability to relate creatively  
and inhibit our growth—these are not  

‘mere idiosyncratic responses—our own pri-  

vate neurosis...and they just don't stem  
from what happened in our early child-  
hood, in our families...all these things  
have real roots in the society in which  
we live...in its values...its institu-  
tions...its dynamics. We developed pat-  
terns of relating for very good reasons.  

But as we find ourselves in rela-  
tionships with women, we realize that we  
have to relate differently. Many of  
us (particularly because of the various  
descriptions which appeared in different  
papers) expected a garden of Eden as we  
moved from heterosexual to lesbian rela-  
tionships. We thought that once we could  
relate to women everything would be fine.  
But we have learned that although the shit  
in us may have been a response to the de-  
structiveness of the world around us, we  
are still carrying it around with us. We  
bring along to our lesbian relationships  
many years of feelings, defenses, insecur-  
ities from that other world and it is hard  
to change oneself and even harder to be  
understanding and be sympathetic to a  
sister who reacts in ways which anger,  
displease, or hurt us.  

Many of us have felt intensely in-  
hibited physically...have moved awkwardly  
all of our lives...never really felt to-  
gether with our bodies...found it hard to  
move—to dance—to express whatever  
sensuality and sexuality we felt living  
inside of us. But, the world has taught  
us well, and has had many years to play  
with our reactions and values. We have  
been taught by experience and/or moved  
and expressed ourselves physically...for  
(as we have been so dutifully taught) if  
we did let out that fluidity...the sen-  

suality that is in all of us—we would be  
responsible for whatever happened... we  
would have to pay the debt created as men  
responded to whatever was released. Re-  
member that whatever happens is always  
the woman's fault.  

So all my life I went around feeling  
that inside me was a graceful dancer...a  
passionate sensual force which could  
never be expressed because it would be  
too dangerous. So from my earliest days I  
blotted out whatever grace I might have  
had and sought protection in no movement  
at all or in jerky awkwardness. Clumsiness  
has enormous protective value and in my  
child’s mind I think I sensed that safety  
and so I became uptight and inhibited...  
finally unable to move at all. At 30  
I could barely move—until another woman  
took the time, energy and understanding  
to teach me to dance. I was 30 before I  
could let go and feel my body merge un-  
caringly with the music. I could not  
dance before because I did not know what  
reactions would come down on me. If a  
male should respond to me and I was not  
interested there was a sense of obligation  
there. After all I HAD behaved in a cer-  
tain way...there were responsibilities...  
being called a cockteaser was a terrible  
insult...especially if you were even  
slightly 'liberated.'  

I was even afraid of being openly  
warm and affectionate with people. In fact,  
once again it was from other women that I  
learned to be easy with demonstrations of  
affection. In my past (heterosexual life)  
to be openly warm and loving entailed  
climbing into bed—always the collected  
obligation...gestures had commitments, ob-  
ligations and meanings beyond just the im-  
mediate expression of affection. I think I  
learned to be warm and easy with women be-  
cause there was no collection demand.  
Women do not have penises which when  
erected have to be satisfied.  

The belief that things that happen  
sexually are the woman's fault really does  
presuppose a certain view of male sexual-  
ity, presupposes the "myth" of the erected  
penis and its demand for explosion inside  
of your body...its demand for release.  

Take a look at D.H. Lawrence, “Drawing  

him to her so that her hanging swinging  
breasts touched the tip of the stirring  
erect phallus and caught the drop of  
moisture. She held him fast. ‘Lie down!’  
he said. 'Lie down! Let me come!' He was  
in a hurry now." A little later in that  
same scene after he has come, she examines  
the wilted penis, "And he was helpless,  
as the penis in soft, slow undulations  
filled and surged and rose up, and grew  
hard standing there hard and overweening  
in its curious towering fashion. The  
woman too trembled a little as she  
watched. 'There! Take him then! He is  
thine!' said the man."  

In all of this he never does anything  
with her body... he never explores it  
with her...everything that happens is a  
function of his erection...and we are  
taught to acknowledge, accept, and in  
fact seek the force and demand of that  
erection. We are taught the legitimacy  
and demand of his arousal...and that we  
are obligated if we are at all implicated  
in that penis' erecting...so naturally we  
learned to control all sorts of things...  
for we never knew when we would be impli-  
cated and forced by our training to ac-  
cept our obligation.  

It is not that we are cold and frigid  
in our responses to people. What we have  
to learn is that being with, loving, and  
sexually relating to women is an entirely  
different reality—a different situation  
and that old fears are not really rele-  
vant. Lesbian women know this...straight  
women don't. So many straight women get  
very uptight and threatened by Lesbians;  
they feel that they are now sexual objects  
for the whole human race...that the safety  

they had with women is gone because of  
Lesbianism. But stop just for a moment—  

that fear reveals more about the character  
of the heterosexual world—of women's role  
in that world—than anything else. And it  
is important for us—lesbians and non-  
lesbians to recognize what shaping effect  
that heterosexual—that male-dominated  
society has had on all of us. We cannot  
explain our reactions...our relationship  
to ourselves and our bodies and to each  
other without going back and understanding  
that world which has shaped us.  

Reprinted From the Women's Liberation  
Newsletter.