what I wrote for this issue on daycare from

what I can remember about how

I saw it

In the spring of 1970, the Women's Liberation Front in Iowa City
split into small cells along interest/project lines. At that time
I saw the daycare cell as one of many projects people could choose
to do but not as something that everyone should be doing. I chose
to work in the publications collective and the publishing of Ain't
I A Woman? became my priority. I sort of understood -- but not
really -- that when we split into project groups that some of the
women who chose daycare did so out of political necessity since
they had children and needed daycare. Who knows what their choice
would have been had daycare been available to them. Had I had
children of my own I too would have been in the daycare cell --
probably never allowing myself to think about whether I wanted to
work on a paper.

I did start working one morning a week at Dum Dum, the first
daycare center that the WL daycare cell organized and opened. It
was a good experience for me learning that I did in fact like kids,
that none of the kids died while I was working, that I could learn
to change a diaper. I had never been around kids before and cer-
tainly didn't completely overcome my fears, but it was a beginning.

It was just around that time that I had broken up with my hus-
band and admitted to myself that I was gay. My hatred and resent-
ment toward men was still sizzling and I found working with men
(who were recruited to volunteer at the center) hard and often of-
fensive. I saw no reason at that time (and still don't) to struggle
with men in most instances, but I understand now how women who have
children to take care of don't see that option (to not relate or
struggle with men) as a viable one even if they'd like to. In a
sense the men seemed to have incredible power in the situation
since the women needed their help and were willing to give them
equal control and struggle with them to get it. Most of the women
involved were heterosexual and had no intention of cutting men out
of their lives, but even the few women who did have that intention
didn't think women could do it themselves -- could or would take
care of each other including each other's children. At that time
I saw that as straight male-identified thinking and lack of trust
in other women. Now I think I understand better why women with
children didn't trust those of us who had no children -- who had
other political priorities, who at the most did a half day of day-
care a week and had the option not to do any.

Still there were many disagreements I had with the women who
worked in daycare. Mostly they were over separatism and over the
fact that even the women who were separatists working in daycare
did not support me and other women who were separatist or gay, and
pandered to the men and women who used the center. They believed
in community control and it seemed like any sacrifice in politics
was acceptable to that end. I don't see any way to simply describe
what I mean by community control. In this case the center was run
by general meetings of parents and volunteers. I also can't spell
out exactly how I think it should have been run. There is no op-
posite to community control, really. My complaint about it is that
there are so many contradictions between volunteers and parents
and that the way those contradictions generally get worked out is
by majority rule rather than consensus (which I think is more
right). Also even though I think people using a service and people
working there should control it, I don't think that means they have
the right to oppress anyone. Like an all-white community doesn't
have the right to be racist under the guise of community control--
like parents don't have the right to be homosexist under the guise
of community control of a daycare center.

It was during that first summer that the center was opened that
the women in daycare and the women putting out the paper clashed.
The daycare center wanted to put out some recruiting literature
to hand out at registration here at the university. AIAW offered
to give them the centerfold of the paper which could be removed
from the paper and we offered to cover the cost. However, we wouldn't
change any of our policies -- one of which was no males writ-
ing in the paper. The daycare women wanted to include reactions
from male volunteers and thought our policy was wrong. From then
on the disagreements between the paper and daycare only got worse.

In thinking back to that time I still feel my disagreements with
the daycare cell were political and valid. At that time a feminist
community was just beginning to grow and the women building it by
attempting to live independently with other women, to not relate
to men, should have been given respect and support. There never
seemed a valid reason to reject our complaints about daycare while
making concessions to male volunteers. And the arguments from the
daycare cell about the need of the parents I could never see since
the center was pretty freaky and university oriented. It all seemed
pretty middle-class to me. Mostly the disagreements we had kept me
from ever seeing the other (perhaps real) issue of daycare which
was that those of us who did not have children of our own had a re-
sponsibility to share the work involved in taking care of children.
We talked about a feminist-controlled center at that time but never
did anything about it. I stopped working at the center completely
by mid-winter and pretty much didn't relate to any women who
worked in daycare except two women who lived in my living collec-
tive. One of those women later moved in with a woman, her husband

page * Vol. 3

and three kids. I never could completely understand how she could
stand living in such a heterosexual scene but I do understand now
how much help she gave in taking care of the children. I know I
could never do anything like that and though I better understand now
how much help a biological mother needs and how I have a responsi-
bility to share the work involved, I still don't feel that it is
fair to expect a gay woman to live in a heterosexual environment

to fulfill that responsibility. But then I no longer think it's
fair that any biological mother be left alone with the responsibi-
lity for her children either. At that time as I said I didn't re-
late to any biological mothers, children, or even women working in
daycare. I think there are all kinds of walls and dividers blocking
single (especially gay) women from relating to children. For a
while this didn't bother me much at all and I still didn't feel I
had a responsibility to do daycare in addition to my other politi-
cal priorities. But eventually I started feeling that I wanted to
relate to children but relating to them always seemed to mean being
with men or heterosexual couples.

Somehow this changed somewhat. Maybe it was due to more women
becoming gay and more women becoming part of or relating to the
women's community here -- some of whom had children of their own
and some of whom had been doing childcare for some time. Through
these women and through my friend who was living with three child-
ren, I started being around children more and in situations where
I felt I could be myself and be honest with them -- instead of be-
ing uptight about my politics or gayness slipping out in front of
parents or men.

Just this summer a small group of parents and volunteers (mostly
gay) split from one of the daycare centers in town over its sex-
ism and homosexism. They began planning a feminist-controlled day-
care center. When I was called about it, I was surprised at how ex-
cited I was. And I must have changed some by that time in terms of
my consciousness of the daycare issue because even though I still
wanted to have a political group or project that was my priority
and I was pretty sure that I didn't want that to be daycare, I was
willing and thought it right that daycare time be demanded of me.
The center was started in temporary housing to provide daycare for
the children that had been left without it after the split and was
still very much in the planning stages when I left town for two
weeks. When I came back the concept of the center had changed. It
was now a center to serve low-income and working-class women. That
really disappointed me a lot. Why it disappointed me is a whole
other article but real simplistically: 1) being working class my-
self I felt that since most of the women involved in starting it
were middle class that it was presumptuous at best to think they
could supply a service to low-income and working-class mothers that
would not be exploitative and 2) I was afraid of the sacrifices
that would be made regarding feminism -- there was talk at that
time of gay women having to shuffle at the new center. However since
the center was still to have only women working there, I intended
to be active. I also saw the center as involving many women in the
women's community and being a good way to struggle over the issue

of daycare.