funding & regulations

they will reimburse you for all of it - up to 3 meals and 3 snacks
a day if you're open, say, 18 to 24 hours. So, you need at least
a temporary license.

Are there any additional licensing requirements?

Yeah - another thing you have to do to get a license is have everybody
who works at the center fill out a health form verifying a
physical examination. The children have to have them, too. They
really just want the forms sent in.

Also fire regulations - the fire marshal has to come out and inspect
the building. The board of health has to inspect it too.

So after you shell out all the bucks and get an approval you send
them into the daycare branch of the State Social Services.
Meanwhile the regional daycare consultant is coming around to your
center every now and then to look it over and report back to the
state about whether or not you should be licensed. The consultant
here, Pat Huxol, was the one who "recommended" that the centers
were not "operating legally" because of the two-year-olds. I

think it was partly her responsibility that that hassle came down
in the first place -- but in a lot of ways she tried to help us.
She pointed out different places and ways to get things and money
that we needed. She told us about Operation Mainstream and the
Neighborhood Youth Corps. Those are different federal gov't projects
providing jobs for low-income people of different ages. People
eligible for the different projects can be employed in different
community things, like daycare, and get their salary paid by the
gov't. So, if you need the help, you can get staff people for the
center. We've had people get those kinds of jobs doing the hot
lunch program work. I think those things should be ripped off as
much as possible. Those jobs should be falsified and the people
should be getting the money -- regardless of what kind of work (if
any) that they're actually doing.

Where do requirements for licensing come from?

The federal gov't sets up a 17-page booklet of requirements for
daycare centers and the state expounds on it and makes it a little
tighter. The federal ones are pretty vague and are used as an
outline by the state. One of the newest ones is "parental involvement,"
and they require that the parents be involved in the daycare
center -- this is the hip thing of the year. There are all kinds

Every single one of the people I am
writing this to is an adult. And in one
way or another you oppress children (I'm
not saying children don't oppress adults
but the certain oppression I'm talking
about is one where children don't oppress
adults).

I am 12 years old and I am talking
about sexual relations between one woman
and another in this community. Each one
of you, ask yourself if your lover is a
child. I'll guarantee you it will be
very little if any. It seems as if you
consider us someone to be nice to or kiss

but when it comes to a sexual relation

with us it is out of the question. You
can say that the person you get to love
just happens to be an adult. I don't see
it working that way. Some people may
think this is stupid but it is what I
think and I don't want to keep it inside
anymore.

I know people are trying not to fuck
kids over but they do anyway sometimes. I
would like to feel free to have a sexual
relationship with a woman but I don't.

I always seem to like an adult. I
think it's 'cause I want to be one.

A Woman?

of spatial requirements, etc. too. Like the federal standard will
say "adequate indoor and outdoor space for children appropriate to
their ages - with separate rooms or areas for cooking, toilets and
other purposes ... floors and walls that can be fully cleaned, etc.
And the state takes them and makes real picky specifications in
about square feet per child, etc. So, if you meet state standards
you meet federal ones.

Who administers hot lunch programs?

Hot lunch projects come under the State Department of Public
Instruction. Information can be gotten from them. Over that is
the Federal Dept. of Agriculture -- and that's where the money
comes from. It's matched 75% from Agriculture and 25% from the
State Dept. Hot lunch doesn't have to be administered for every
particular child. The center has to meet licensing standards, etc.
They want to know the economic background of all the people in the
center. We can be pretty upfront about it since we're trying to
serve low-income people -- but some of the centers have university
people like students and professors and they still get hot lunch
money.

How do you get matching funds for donations?

This is for within the state. Say if the Student Senate from the
University gives us money they have to set up an ongoing contract
with the county board of supervisors and it's just a lot of red tape.
Another way to get money is if any ADC parents are in the center and
are employed or go to school, especially women on the WIN Program,
they can get $75 a month to pay for childcare -- but it's a lot more
hassle and shit work for the women on ADC.

What is the WIN Program?

Work Incentive Program for women on welfare to go to school and
get a job to get off welfare. I think it's best for women on welfare
to just get that daycare money for themselves.

Anything else on licensing?

Yes -- you have to get incorporated. It's a legal thing that any
lawyer can tell you how to do and it costs about $20. It just involves
a bunch of bullshit -- you have to write out by-laws and articles of incorporation.

Some of the new proposals for standards require at least 6 staff
members -- "the nursery's childcare staff and teachers shall have

a knowledge of child development and behavior and have the ability
to give the children a feeling of security and comfort under the
supervision of the executive or operator, be responsible for the
guidance and direct childcare." We just got forms at the new
daycare center for the workers to fill out. They're part medical
and part of them are for the volunteer's work experience with
children (and just work experience.) I think that's how they're
trying to decide if people are "qualified" and have that "knowledge"
of child development. Each center is supposed to keep all kinds

of forms on all the kids and workers there on file at all times.
"Personal Records for the nursery staff will be complete, including
medical reports... No administrative professional or childcare staff
member shall be under the age of 16 or over the age of 70." I
imagine that the licensing standards vary from state to state.

What we've been trying to do is meet the requirements that we can
without too much hassle, and shying on the ones that are too much
hassle or cost too much to meet. So far we've kept temporary
licenses by doing that. I don't know how long that'll last.

children’s liberation

I think children get fucked over a whole lot and they need
help.
themselves what to do and sometimes they don't know what to do.
I have my feelings hurt a lot.
fair but think about other people except yourself and people
should think kids do have feelings also.
thinking that adults have more power and they can make you leave
the room and do other stuff that children don't like to do and
I think that maybe some people think that this letter or what
do you want to call it.
I've ever wrote but somebody had to tell people what it is about
and it's hard keeping it inside.
that's what I think about stuff going on.
different but I'm just telling people what I think is going on.

Like adults have people to talk to. Children have to ask
People probably think this isn't

But kids don't like

I think this is the heaviest thing that

I think it had to come out and
People probably think

Feo’ 73 Page 13