Teri is a three-year-old child who was  
living with her biological mother in a  
collective situation that was intolerable  
for her: while her mother was happy there,  
Teri was not compatible with the other  
people in the collective. She needed an-  
other place to live and someone else to  
live with.  

The time it took to evolve a solution  
for Teri illustrates some things we are  
gradually becoming more conscious of: that  
“children are people who have individual  
personalities, and that all adults do not  
get along with all children (or vice versa)  
any more than they get along with all  
other adults. That children are entirely  
dependent on adults for a long time makes  
it more difficult to deal with personality  
conflicts as such: you can't just stay  
away from a child you are responsible for.  
You could get someone else to take respon-  
sibility for the child, but there are two  
things that make it real hard. The main  
one, of course, is that no one is into  
giving up as much of her self-determination  
as taking care of a child requires. The  
other thing is that the mystique of mother-  
hood still haunts us and no biological  
mother is supposed to not like her child.  
Even as people give voice to the oppression  
of mothers and try to take "their share"  
of responsibility and hassle for the chil-  
dren we have, they are shocked and not  
understanding of mothers who could want to  
escape this hassle when hassle is all it is.  

Anyway, after much thinking and talking  
and hassle among adults, a group of people  
became "mothers" to Teri, taking complete  
responsibility for her. We are a group of  
eight women. All of us are gay. Five of  
us are working-class, three are middle-  
class. We all knew each other, previous  
to coming together in this group, through  
the political and social functioning of  
the women's community here. Some of us  
merely knew each other, some are good  
friends, some are lovers. We came together  
at our first meeting not knowing who would  
be there -- that meeting that finally  
happened after Teri's mother came to us  
and declared her desperation -- but we  
found that it was a reasonable number of  
people (in fact an amazingly large number  
considering how much more this is than a  
commitment to daycare) and that we all  
felt we could work together. We have basic  
agreements in theory on things like good  
foods being important for children, teach-  
ing her to be strong and independent,  
teaching her to be a dyke not a lady,  
teaching her that her mind and body are  
integral and that her sexuality is part of  
that whole, etc. We want her to learn  
these things through secure but non-depen-  
dent relationships with many people which  
we think can be formed by the structure  
that we have since set up for her.  

Actually, that structure was real simple  
and easy. We had a meeting, and there were  
eight of us, so we could each take respon-  
sibility for one day a week (with a double-  
up), just once a week, and we each put in  
$2 a month into expenses, that's not too  
much. We constructed a bedroom for her in  
the basement of the living collective of  
two in our group and moved her into the  
daycare center where we all work. In order  

for the adults to communicate across this  

structure, we have a logbook that accompa-  
nies Teri and her toothbrush wherever they  
go, and scheduled meetings twice a month to  
talk about things. And it all seems cool  

and easy...  

except that Teri is a complicated  
and needful person whose needs are much  
more than just those present material ones  

that are so easily filled. We have become  
the people who are totally responsible for  
Teri's mental and emotional well-being as  
well. That is real frightening. It depends  
on us whether she is happy, whether she  
feels loved and how dependent she is. And  
it is even more frightening to have this  
responsibility and to be trying to fulfill  
it by creating a totally new structure.  

We have an analysis of what we are doing:  
it is unnecessary, if not damaging, for a  
child (or any person) to be dependent on  
one person; the structure of mono-relating  
is conducive to the development of jealousy  
and possessiveness, which are destructive.  
Living with people who are all equally  
responsible to her, Teri will see many  
points of view and ways of dealing with  
things as valid, rather than just one or  
two. She will be with each adult for  
short enough periods of time that that time  
can be enjoyable and not oppressive for  
either of them in terms of resentment and  
hostility over constant demands, or constant  
dependency, or just constant togetherness.  
And because her "mothers" do not all live  
in the same house, and have various affil-  
iations throughout the women's community,  

the situation is in a sense community,  
rather than individual, responsibility  

to her. So, we decided she would live in  
one place four days a week and that would  
be her home, a base of security for her,  
and that other days she would visit at  
other people's houses and relate to a dif-  
ferent person each day and that will be a  
really good way for her to live.  

But how do we know? Our well-thought-  
out analysis is just that: ideas. What we  
are doing has never been tried extensively.  
No one is experienced in raising a child  
until she does it, but the way we are doing  
it has not even poor tradition to back it  
up. And much as we may believe in it, it  
is an experiment whose subject is a little  
girl whose entire life is dependent on us  
...and whom we love very much. That is why  
it is so frightening.  

And we have not worked everything out  
yet even as far as practicalities go.  
Raising a child is a long-term thing and  
people have not stated specifically that  
they plan to stay in Iowa City until she  
grows up. Since it is unlikely that our  
whole group will move, going to something  
else would mean leaving Teri. Money will  
be a bigger problem as she gets older than  
it is now. What will be the legal hassles:  
will one of us have to become her owner,  
i.e., adopt her, in order for all of us to  
take care of her? What will happen if  
there are splits within the group? Because  
it is so intensely difficult to set up such  
a new structure in this society, taking  
responsibility for Teri is made even  
more frightening.  

My perspective on writing this is that  
for several months before our group formed,  
while Teri still lived in her mother's  
collective, I had been taking care of  
Teri two nights a week. Only one other  
woman in the group was relating to her on  
any regular basis at all, although we all  
knew her to differing degrees. Now Teri  
lives in my collective, her room is right  
next to mine, she shares my bathroom and  
we are just generally thrown together a  
lot. Teri knows me better than she knows  
any of the other women, she has felt closer  
to me in some ways and more secure with me,  
and this manifests itself at times in a  
kind of clinging dependency on me that is  
a source of worry and some annoyance with-  
in our group. I have been criticized for  

perhaps not discouraging this dependency  
enough. The consensus of the group now  
seems to be, however, that it is more a  

function of our prior relationship than a  
growing unhealthy relationship now, that  
it is good that she feels close to one of  
us, and that eventually she will feel as  
close to all of us.  

Teri is happier now than she was when  
she lived with her mother's collective --  
she is more sociable and more secure. She  
has been calling our collective "my house"  
and seems to have relaxed into knowing we  
are going to be there. It seems as if for  
now our ideas are working out in practice.  
And so now we can look ahead...at the  
next 15 years.  

* a lesbian-feminist arts journal *  

AMAZON QUARTERLY  

72 pages of fiction, essays, poetry, reviews, art =  

one year subscription * $4,  
(plain wrapper or oui bf U.S. $5.)  

bulk rates: 80¢ per issue  

announces: . .  
Gay Liberation Book Service  
P.O. Box 40397  
San Francisco, Calif. 94140  

Write for a free price list.  

We welcome your correspondence,  
artwork, manuscripts, contributions.  

AMAZON QUARTERLY  
554 Valle Vista  
Oakland, Ca. 94610  
—S.  

Venture Members 235 Chr AG