Trying to write the second article  
on essential foods was much more  
difficult than I anticipated. It was  
easy in the first article to place  
the blame on man and the capitalistic  
system which fosters pollution  
through an exploitive economic system.  
A solution also was clear—through  
our collectivity, through our sisterhood  
we would refuse to eat the pig shit.  
However, now when I try to write the  
alternatives I am faced with the  
question of relevance... if we spend  
much of our energies on the ecology  
problem, are we not helping this  
system to continue (slightly improved  
for those who can afford it) rather  
than tearing it down? For example,  
Standard Oil has done a lot of advert-  
ising lately as to how they are taking  
the lead out of the gasoline and now  
we should buy their gasoline. What  
they don't mention is that by taking  
the lead out of gas (which should  
never have been put in originally) they  
are depleting "our oil reserves." And  
"our oil reserves" just happen to be  
in South America and the Middle East.  
It is not even our land they are drill-  
ing and ruining. So by supporting  
Standard Oil's "Ecology for you"  
project we are participating in the  
rape of a third world country. Wouldn't  
it be better just to take over Standard  
Oil?  

REVOLUTION  

And while we are looking at Standard  
Oil's destruction being made palatable  
for the Amerikan public, look at how  
Amerikan technology exploits farmers  
around the world. The technologists  
tried to upgrade food production  

in underdeveloped countries by  
introducing high yielding varieties  

of wheat, corn, rice, chemical fert-  
ilizers and pesticides. What they  
didn't take into account was that for  
thousands of years the whole culture  
had revolved around primitive farm  
practices directed not for money  

profit but to feed the farmer and his  
family. Each family had a small plot  

and used human wastes as fertilizer and  
animal wastes as fuel. Small crop yields  
left little to be stored. Hungry people  
ate the food before the rodents did. In  
China and South East Asia farming has  
continued in some areas for 40 centuries  
because the fertile soil is terraced,  
and irrigated waste materials are re-  
cycled. Because of Amerikan interest in  
profits, the growing of money crops in  
these countries became very advanced.  

Before World War II agriculture  
researchers directed their attention to  
rubber and sugar plantations. They  
advanced methods, and varieties to coffee  
farms, and modernized the production  
of bananas. Those crops were then used  
in foreign exchange and made the Amer-  
ikans wealthy. Because the controlling  
interests were outside the country  
and were for profits, the crops had to  
be grown right. Corn and wheat were  
cross-bred to produce higher yields  
and short stalks (easily harvested).  
They were used in India and South East  
Asia. Yields were doubled and tripled.  
Problems began to spring up because  
the new varieties of produce had a  
different taste and texture to what the  
people had preferred for centuries. As  
a result the marketplace value fell,  
and the small farmer sustained the loss.  
Some areas had no huge storehouses to  
match the yields and bushels of grain  
spoiled. The produce needed fertilizer  
and few of these countries are endowed  
with raw materials needed for manufact-  
ure of chemical fertilizers. The  
farmers needed tractors and other  
equipment and were forced to sell out  
to the large landholders who were  
becoming richer and richer. Besides all  
this the chemical fertilizers were  
reacting against the soil that had  
been recycled for generations. The crops  
were resistant to a large degree to  
insects and disease attacks (they had  
to be to survive.) The new improved  
plants were really attractive to insects  
and rodents and now pesticides have to  
be sprayed.  

The experts couldn't have cared less  
what would happen to the land when  
they supplanted the "inefficient" ways  
that had evolved for centuries. Here  
again is the capitalist exploiting  
nature and exploiting the people for  
his own profits.  

REVOLUTION  

Organic Farming constitutes conflicting  
ideas. It's true if you grow your  

own food you will not be supporting the  
capitalist system. However it also  

makes you a part of the culture because  
farming is co-optable. The land is not  
available for all people who want to  
farm and therefore a small group will  
again control the food resources and  
will be able to sell at a profit.  

And while they are harvesting and  
milking their cows, with their conscious-  
ness being satisfied, they can't be  
taking part in the Revolution and so  
the farming becomes an end rather than  
the means to an end.  

In New York City a Women's commune  
organized a food co-op (organic).  
They bought it wholesale and  

cheaper than supermarket prices. It  
was collective in action and could  
be considered as an alternative,  
keeping in mind the possibility of  
being satisfied too easily, before  
the goals are accomplished.  

When shopping in a supermarket you  
should be aware that the essential  
quality of food is to sustain. Don't  
buy foods that have additives in them,  
that do nothing for you (this would  
be supporting the whole Amerikan  
policy of overabundance and waste).  

Avoid white sugar and white bread.  
They are concentrated carbohydrates  
that contain no vitamins or minerals  
of any kind. Your body spends more  
energy trying to utilize white sugar  
than the energy it produces. Use honey  
or raw sugar, and any whole wheat or  
unbleached flour.  

Understand proteins. Protein foods are  
of two kinds—first class found in lean  
meats, eggs, milk, cheese, yeast, whole  
wheat products, especially wheat germ,  
soya beans and nuts. The second class  
proteins are found in dry beans, peas,  
corn, and gelatin. Because the Amerikan  
ideal that "a chicken in every pot" is  
equatable with social status, not much  
emphasis has been put on using soybeans  
as a meat replacement. Soybeans have a  
high percentage of protein and  
practically the same food value as  
animal protein. It contains in nearly  
maximum proportions the amino acids,  
calcium and B vitamins essential in the  
diet. Economically it is one of the  
cheapest ways of adding more protein to  
the diet.  

Avoid canned meats. These are usually  
those which are unfit for the fresh  

meat market and have to be canned to  
prevent loss. They are usually treated  
with saltpeter and nitrous acid solutions  
to add color and hide decomposition.  

You can avoid some pesticides by buying  
lean meats and chickens. Since DDT  
concentrates in fat, buy sirloin and  
round, less marbled meats with lower fat  
content.  

Eat food that represents a fair share  

of the world's food for each person.  
Think collectively. Think in terms of  
what you need to sustain. When so many  
have nothing to eat, anything besides  
what you essentially need is waste, and  
this includes all food additives.  

Know that the "superfood" you buy is  
helping the Amerikan capitalists exploit  
other lands for high yielding crops.  

Get rid of all the shit—REVOLUTION NOW