gt

SOJOURNER TRUTH,  
“THE LIBYAN SIBYL.”  

(VEGS FROM PICHICRRS  

Pissed Off Pink is a newsletter for  
women in East Lansing.  
Their address is Women's Liberation,  
209 Abbot Road #405, East Lansing,  
Michigan.  

A women's poetry magazine--plus  
photography, artwork, and anything  
else expressive of a women's  
liberation/revolutionary conscious-  
ness.  

Send poetry, photographs, artwork,  
etc. to DIANA PRESS, c/o Regina  
Sigal, 1854 Wyoming Ave., N.W.,  
Washington, D.C. 20009.  

Any proceeds from this magazine  
will go to help free political  
prisoners of the U.S. government.  

°  
°  

Indiana publishes a newsletter  
and wants contacts with other  
organizations and individuals.  
Monthly newsletter is $1.50/yr.  

Indianapolis Women's Liberation  
P.O. Box 88365, Indianapolis,  

NEWS From INDIANA  

Attention Revolutionary Artists:  

A women's poetry magazine  

A new women's poetry magazine needs  
poetry, photography, artwork, and  
anything else expressive of a women's  
liberation/revolutionary consciousness.  

Diana Press, c/o Regina Sigal, 1854  
Wyoming Ave., N.W., Washington, D.C.,  
20009.  

Their leaflet says "Any proceeds from  
this magazine will go to help free  
political prisoners of the U.S. government.  

"That man over there says that a woman  
needs to be helped into carriages, and  
lifted over ditches, and to have the  
best place everywhere. Nobody ever  
helped me into carriages, or over mud  
puddles, or gives me a best place.  

And ain't I a woman? Look at me.  
Look at my arm! I have plowed  
and planted and gathered into  
barns, and no man could head me.  
And ain't I a woman? I could work, as  
much and eat as much as a man when I  
could get it, and bear the lash as well...  
And ain't I a woman? I have borne  
thirteen children and seen them  
most all sold off  
into slavery. And when I cried out with a mother's grief,  
none but Jesus heard...  

And ain't I a woman?’  

Sojourner Truth: Speech before the Women's  
Rights Convention at Akron, Ohio in 1851.  

Sti hwest WLF ei  

oh 22 No8  

AIN'T I A WOMAN? is published  
every three weeks by the Publi-  
cations Collective of the Iowa  
City Women's Liberation Front,  
P.O. Box 1169, Iowa City, Iowa  
52240.  

We are a collective of 10 women  
functioning either as a front  
for a worldwide conspiracy of  
Radical Lesbians or the house  
cornfield of the Women's Move-  
ment.  

The voice of the Midwest needs to be  
heard in the Women's Liberation movement.  
Ain't I A Woman? will print without  
editing any laid-out page from a Midwest  
(New Mexico thru Ohio) Women's Libera-  
tion group. We would like to encourage  
other women to start working collective-  
ly to avoid elitism and destructive  
power relationships that pit us against  
each other. We will send details on  
deadlines, page size, column length,  
etc. if you would like.  

If your group wants to receive bundles  
of AIN'T I A WOMAN?, send 15¢ per copy.  
Minimum bundle: 20 copies  

TWO NEW WOMEN'S ANTHOLOGIES (LNS)  

Two anthologies of women's liberation  
material, out in paperback, have just hit  
the stands. They are: SISTERHOOD IS  
POWERFUL, edited by Robin Morgan, and  
WOMEN'S LIBERATION: BLUEPRINT FOR THE  
FUTURE, edited by Sookie Stambler. Pro-  
ceeds from both books, unlike most books  
written for the express purpose of making  
money off this new "fad", are going back  
into the women's movement. Articles in  
both paperbacks are written by women for  
women. So, pass the word.  

Dear Sisters,  

Grinnell Women's Liberation is planning a midwestern conference  
for the second weekend in November. In order to give the con-  
ference a wider cultural scope, we are having a women's art  
exhibit and sisters from VSC or Twin Oaks present views on alter-  
native lifestyles as well as radical political points of view  
expressed by Marlene Dixon and sisters from the Feminists. Al-  
though our list of guests is not yet completely definite, we  
expect sisters from several women's publications collectives,  
particularly from “Off Our Backs" and "Ain't I a Woman?"  

We'll send you more details about the women's art exhibit and  
the day-by-day schedule of events later, but, in general, this is  
what we have planned -- Remember, if you have any suggestions, be  
sure to let us know -- we want to be organized, but not rigid!  
The conference will open Friday evening at eight with a panel  
discussion defining the liberation of women in terms of the par-  
ticular goals of our sister-guests. On Saturday, a series of in-  
tensive closed workshops will be held dealing with Lesbianism,  
Organizing Women, The Institutions of Marriage and Sexual Inter-  
course, Caste and Class, and Women in the Arts and Media.  
Finally, Sunday morning at ten, there will be a closed panel dis-  
cussion, the topic, "Women's Liberation, A Basis for Social  
Change." During spare moments we hope to schedule several films,  
but right now we're not sure of which ones we'll be able to get.  
Saturday night we'll be able to provide dinner for everybody.  
Visions are of steaming pots of beef stew... Feel free to bring  
anything you wish to augment the stew -- Also, be sure to bring  
sleeping bags -- We've got lots of comfortable floor space.  

We are really very excited about the conference and eagerly  
wait to hear from you. So, let us know by November 5, at the  
very latest, how many of you expect to join us.  

Grinnell Women's Liberation  
c/o Box 32A, Grinnell College  
Grinnell, Iowa 50112  

GRINNELL CONFERENCE - Nov. 13, 14, 15  

Name of Group  

No. to attend  

Please send before Nov. 5 to  
Grinnell Women's Liberation  
c/o Box 32A  
Grinnell College  
Grinnell, Iowa 50112  

rn ‘t wd  

;