who wouldn't have fit into that, like we were all "gauche.” She  
Just quit relating to me. I wasn't cool.  

I couldn't understand it, I didn't want to and she just didn't  
care. I had never felt so totally rejected and desperate. Nothing  
I could say or do would affect her; but nothing she did or said  
would make me stop thinking about her.  

Somehow, I didn't want to do what she was doing. I didn't get  
that encouragement from those two men—I didn't fit the image and  
by that time I hated them and thought they were full of shit. In  
the next two years I had classes from them and they didn't dig me  
either. I keep thinking now that I generalized that hatred into a  
distrust of gay men, and a stereotype of gay male culture as hypo-  
critical, emotionally base, and elitist. And there's this class  
feeling about people who are on the way up, or are up, can't be  
trusted with my feelings. Or anything that could be sacrificed  
to their "cause."  

The feelings I had for Elaine and that relationship stayed with me a long time. I fantasized a lot and I had crushes on other  
girls in high school. I felt I had been wronged, I was suffering  
from injustice. I guess if I'd been in a position like you, Carrie,  
that I'd have gone to a shrink or at least read a psych book and  
gotten all freaked out that I was a lesbian and blamed my pain on  
myself. But I wasn't aware of lesbianism, I didn't know any gay  
women; I didn't know till years later that my feelings had a name,  
fit a category—I thought I was very different from most women I  
knew and I just felt real isolated, ‘cause I knew I couldn't talk  
to anyone about the feelings I really wanted to express, love for  
these women which included sexual feelings.  

There is nothing I can say to add to your story about Elaine.  
It speaks for itself. However, it bothered me the way you talked  
of Elaine and her two gay male teachers. You seemed to juxtapose  
too closely that they were gay and therefore didn't care to fuck  
her with the fact that they fucked her mind because they con-  
vinced her to reject her working-class origins and aspire to  
middle-class. What I mean is that the reason they mind-fucked  
Elaine wasn't because they were gay but because they were doing  
what they were supposed to do—teaching middle-class values. I  
guess I just thought you were too hard on them in view of what  
I've come to know of your struggle to regain an identification  
with your working-class background. From our discussions I've  
learned that all the women in AIAW that come from working-class  
backgrounds were fed middle-class values for a time and had to  
struggle earnestly to regain a consciousness of themselves as  
working-class.  

I think we should be careful in judging oppressed people and  
always take into consideration necessity. A lot of the women in  
the gay cell have to pass for straight or they'll lose their jobs  
and a lot more women in Iowa City that we don't even know sit at  
home alone or with one other woman and despise in themselves  
their way of life. But see, I'm safe saying all this because I  
have never been in a situation like you were in with those two  
working-class teachers, where you all three were of similar  
experience and yet instead of there being a kinship between you  
there was competition, denial and hatred. You were a threat to  
them because you reminded them of what they had been so they  
treated you badly. Your anger at them I can really understand—  
they had power over you. I've never been in such a situation  
with a gay woman who was using her power to make sure I didn't  
become a threat to her hard-earned position. If such a situation  
did happen, I probably wouldn't hate her for being gay, but for  
her class privilege or her power. I wonder if you did the same  
thing? You mentioned that from your experience with these two  
gay, male, working-class teachers you gained a distrust of gay  
men and a prejudiced stereotype of gay male culture. Why didn't  
you distrust them for being working-class and why do I feel I  
wouldn't come to hate a gay woman with power over me because of  
her gayness? Maybe we can't because our identification with the  
common experience between us is too strong and would mean we  
would have to hate that experience in ourselves also. Maybe the  
hatred and anger that must come for preservation of self-esteem  
has to be grounded elsewhere.  

On Monday of the week we were to put out the paper, we read  
our dialogue for the collective. A good discussion followed and  
I learned some important things which I want to include as self-  
criticism.  

We talked about my being so obsessed with happiness. I  
should have further explained that the reason I daydreamed so  
heavily about situations in which I would have to have been  
fighting for my life where group necessity might take precedence  
over individuals putting a lot of energy into creating the best  
possible life for them, was because I was having such trouble  
reconciling the kind of life I felt within me and the life I  
knew my society felt was the best for my happiness.  

The sisters from the working class pointed out that I was  
romanticizing the working-class life. The hard-working working  
class people who barely have any free time and are merely happy  
to get it is a middle-class myth. Working-class people are con-  
cerned with the quality of their lives and intricacies of hap-  
piness.  

I didn't feel I had anything in common with those men then—  
I didn't identify as working class, I thought I was middle class.  
Middle class meant everybody. I was told I was in a similar  
position to everyone I knew, but that I would have to make a  
great individual effort to find opportunities. I didn't really  
consider what I'd do if I didn't go to school. Instead of class  
differences, the divisions our teachers and parents set up were  
between those who wanted to go to college and those who didn't  
want to or didn't care (the ones who didn't care had to be middle  
class; the rest were mostly working class). Antagonisms between  
these two groups were encouraged by the authorities.  

The girls who were college prep weren't supposed to have a  
very involving social life except as it related to "bettering"  
themselves. Strong personal relationships were okay for the girls  
who were going to work after high school, going out in the "real  
world." But we "intellectuals" were supposed to think of more  
academic things and study a lot and become "leaders" and relate  
more to our teachers. Toward the end of high school it seemed  
like my personal relationships, that kind of need, were heavier  
than they were supposed to be. Like, I shouldn't get all hung  
up about loving people because that wasn't going to be important;  
I should devote my energies to study and self-reliance. So, how  
could I waste my time trying to rap with my closest friend about  
homosexual feelings? I just felt more and more isolated and differ-  
ent and wanting to leave and find people who were like me. But  
when I went to college the pressure was different—but I tried to  
go straight and middle class for a long time.  

The idea keeps going through my head that being middle class  
made it more possible for you to act on your emotions and make  
love with a woman while I was much too scared to let myself act.  
But now I just got an insight on that: I kept falling in love  
with women who I didn't feel an equality with—I felt like they  
were above me.  

I have to criticize my analysis for being homosexist about  
those teachers. My awareness of homosexism is not together  
because that hasn't been a heavy identification for me—I was  
into a women's consciousness before I came out and then I identified  
as a lesbian, but I still don't feel much solidarity with gay men  
and I know I've been unfair to gay men I've known. The class  
thing I feel more right about. But in struggling to become more  
conscious of my working-class values and breaking out of that  
self-effacing, timid response to class antagonism, I can get  
pretty arrogant and respond to what I see as middle-class jive  
in an also reactionary way.