Sometimes I feel like the women's  
movement gets itself into these tight-  
assed institutionalized trips and ends  

up making you feel like you're back  

in the family or the church or school.  

In other words, sometimes we just  

can't escape our own rhetoric and dog-  
ma, and end up becoming a very repres-  
sive thing.  

When the women's movement first start-  

ed and a lot of us rejected tradition-  

al notions... oppressive notions... of what  
it meant to be a woman, of what was  
permissible female behavior, we were left  
with no identity. Like almost all the  
ways we used to act just wouldn't do in  
the context of a life as a revolutionary  
feminist. So we took off on this incred-  
ible fantasy and made up an idea of what  
the ‘new woman' would be and proceeded to  
almost destroy ourselves and each other  

trying to live up to our projection right  
now, immediately, here in the midst of  
the monster. We rejected the politics  

of guilt, but we used the tactic of guilt  
to push each other and ourselves to  
change.  

It was a lot of bullshit, because develop-  
ing into women with revolutionized con-  
sciousness is a process, not an act or a  
decision. Moreover, it is ridiculous at  
this early point with so few women, rela-  
tively, involved in it, to pretend that  
we could set up a model so soon. I mean  
we come to the women's movement as pretty  

demented fucked-up distorted personalities.  

That's what oppression does to you.  

Like, macho and monogamy are the two best  
examples I can think of. 'Macho' and ‘mon-  
ogamy' are hard to define in the way that  
the women's movement uses them. But gen-  
erally when you're called ‘macho’, they're  
trying to say that you're acting butch,  
that you're playing at being a man, that  
you're aggressive. Mostly when you're  
being called macho as an attack they mean  
that you're generally acting like some male  
stud. ('Macho' comes from the Latin word  
machismo which basically means male chau-  
vinist pig.)  

‘Monogamy’ is a word used in a million  
different ways. It usually refers to two  
people who are lovers, and who may be into  
each other to the point of exclusion of  
others. In heterosexual monogamy, the  

woman is usually dependent on her man and  
lives through him, instead of with him.  

A lot of women in the women's movement cri-  
ticize macho women a lot, and spend a lot  
of energy avoiding ‘taking on the charac-  
teristics of men.' They feel that macho in-  
timidates and alienates other women. But  

it seems to me that growing up female and  
gay in Amerika is what intimidates and ali-  
enates women and makes us afraid of strengths  
of any sort. But just rejecting macho  
as inherently bad, as a rule we set up,  
doesn't deal with the real problem which  

is that men have always used strength  
against us, against all oppressed peoples,  

and it is the misuse of strength which leads  

to domination, not the existence or style  
of strength.  

I don't worry about macho in women... in fact  

I encourage it... because I feel the thing  
we have to worry about the most is how we  
are all going to get out of the behavior  
and gestures of femininity; how we're going  
to stop seeing ourselves as weak and pass-  
ive. Women who are trying to be strong and  
tough have a rough time of it, because we  
don't have any forms to be that in.  

There are a bunch of characteristics that  
exist in people. In a sexist society, some  

of those characteristics are called feminine  
(gentleness, delicacy, sweetness, supportive-  
ness, emotion, etc.) Some of them are called  
masculine (strength, power, aggression, arro-  
gance, technical competency, achievement, etc.)  

Now the problem with sexism isn't that men  

have technical competence and physical prow-  

ess: the problem is that ONLY men can leg-  

itimately have these characteristics, and that  

their skills and aptitudes are used against  
women and therefore become perverted. Tech-  
nology, like physical strength, is not in-  
herently bad. It's the oppressive applica-  
tions that reek. In the hands of the right  
people (oppressed people) almost all compet-  

encies can become constructive energy sources.  

So if we in the women's movement reject as  
‘male’ every characteristic assigned to men  
by pig society, then we're accepting their  

sexist categories and I don't understand how  

we intend to win our war. If women start  
strutting around (instead of swishing about)  

and start wearing leather jackets (instead  
of dainty cloth coats) and chewing on tooth-  

picks and swearing a lot and getting into  
fights (instead of sitting at home polishing  
our toenails) well that doesn't seem to me  

such a crisis. I'm worried about our  
tendencies to be submissive and to eat  
more shit than is good for our souls, to  
subordinate our struggle to other strug-  
gles out of guilt, to be wimpy and  
scared and paralyzed.  

Once it is not a dramatic act to walk  
down the street holding hands with our  
girlfriends, once rejecting rape-minded  
advances isn't guerrilla theatre, once  
wanting to be a plumber isn't ‘cute’...  
then we may be free enough to develop  
whole new ways of being strong.  

I don't understand what feminists mean  
when they say we should totally reject  
role-playing. I don't understand what  

I would do, how I would act, if I didn't  
role-play. It's not like we're so free,  
our vibes are so clear, and we are so  
unfettered that there is some ‘natural’  
way of being. One makes decisions about  
one's behavior every time she acts in  

any way. Like when I stopped wearing  
makeup and miniskirts, and I wondered  

how I should dress, feminists told me  

to just dress with whatever was at hand  
and was practical. Now that is ridiculous.  
I have to go out and rip off or buy any-  
thing that might just 'be at hand’...  
clothes don't spring into my drawers  

on their own. The thing I actually had  

to do was pick a new role, a new set  

of behavior patterns. And I think it’s  
real cool for women to experiment with  
all sorts of roles and all sorts of  
mannerisms until something really does  
click and feels natural.  

It's the same with defenses. Feminists  
are always talking about breaking down  
defenses. Well that seems to me to be  
suicidal. We're living in this evil jun-  
gle where the last thing I plan to be is  
defenseless. The women's movement should  
help us develop BETTER defenses it seems  
to me.  

It should help us develop more control  
over our defenses, so that we are able  

to let them down when we're sure it's  
safe. But who the fuck can win a war  
without self-defense on every level? I  
will not give up my aggressiveness and my  
macho because I want to survive until the  
time that they become irrelevant to my  
happiness.  

Then there's another piece of dogma that  

a lot of us dragged with us from the