Salt SAVAGE

In marriage and familyhood, wives  
and children are considered property  
and are protected by the father/husband.  
"To love, honor, and cherish/protect," I  
think the phrase goes. I'm not sure  
where these fool men are at, but what  
makes them think they can tell me what  
I must call myself? What right do they  
have? Not only do they tell me what I  
must call myself, but how many names I  
must have, and how my name must be  
written.

As I was getting into the movement,  
politics and then finally home to Wo-  
men's Liberation, I became angrier and  
angrier. As shit hit the fan everywhere  
I became angrier and angrier. As a re-  
sult, my new occupation and lifelong  
goal is to overthrow and totally de-  
stroy this sick Fascist society. I'm  
doing everything I can, whenever I can.  
And changing my name was one of those  
insignificant/unimportant (at least to  
the Pigs in Power) acts I do to show my  
total rejection of this society.

I said insignificant and unimportant  
to the Pigs in Power. But--WOW--it was  
beautiful to me. I feel like a new per-  
son. After all I went through to change  
my name, coming out of the courthouse,  
I started yelling and screaming and  
laughing with absolute JOY. I felt I  
was a new person—a new Human Being that  
I created MYSELF. I had in effect told  
the Pigs to get screwed, that I chose  
to change my name, to have one name,  
and to have all small letters. Coming  
out of the courthouse I felt FREE—it  
didn't last long, but what the hell.  
Anything for a little bit of FREEDOM.

Bureaucracy—In order to change your  
name in this Fascist society, you ei-  
ther have to be a property holder (FREE  
holder is the legal term, I think) or  
get a property holder to sign your  
form. That's real cool. Your form also  
has to be signed and sealed by a notary  
public—twice. It costs $2.00. And you  
have to tell why you want your name  
changed. This is all Piggish—designed  
to make you want to forget the whole  
thing.

In any case, I trippy-trotted down  
to the courthouse and asked for the  
form. The clerk's mouth drops two feet.  
I get the form, fill it out, get a FREE  
holder's signature, and go to the no-  
tary public for his hallowed seal. He  

puts on the seal and I went back to the  
courthouse. When the clerk saw my new  
name she about passed out. She looked  
at me like I was some sort of freak. Ha  
Ha! Right on! She looked the form over  
and saw the "Why do you want to change  
your name" blank—blank. She shoves  
it across the desk—I write "I like  
sarah-savage better"—and shove it  
back. She says, "That's your reason?" I  
say, "That's my reason," (more on this  
later). She pores over the form again.  
She shoves it back at me and says the  
notary didn't sign his name under the  
seal, that I'll have to go back and get  
it signed. Great—I'll be happy to.

The Pig. In 300° heat I run back, the  
bastard signs it. I'm back at the  
courthouse. The clerk looks it over a-  
gain. "Gosh," she says, "he's got to  
sign and seal it again. Now what's he  
thinking of? He knows it's got to be  
signed and sealed twice." At this point  
I'm ready to kill both of them. Back to  
HIM for sign and seal—back to the  
courthouse. Finally—$2.00 on the desk  
and my name is changed, but it can't be  
used in legal matters for 30 days. WOW—  
PIGSHIT is running rampant these days.

Thoughts on the "Why do you want to  
change your name?" blank—When I saw  
that question I pondered what would be  
the best approach. (After thinking this  
whole thing out later, I realized I  
didn't ponder long and carefully enough.)  
I realized that I very much wanted to  
change my name—i.e., I had something  
to lose if I didn't play their game—  
this was one of my first PITfalls. So  
I flipped by writing "sarah-savage  
better." I had considered going into a  
political rap, but decided against it  
because I didn't want to aggravate the  
situation any further—and I really  

wanted my name changed. I also knew  
lots of women were seriously thinking  
of changing their names—and I didn't  
want to jeopardize their chances.  
I felt guilty writing BULLSHIT on that  
blank, but I felt you had better write  
BULLSHIT or you won't get your name  
changed.

That's what happens—when you have  
something to lose, all of a sudden your  
back is up against the wall and you  
start compromising. If I had it to do  
over again I would go into a political  
rap on that stupid blank. Women are  

changing their names right and left a-  
round here, I just heard the other day  
that the Pigs are running out of forms.  
So what? I have a feeling that if this  
name changing continues, the Pigs  
could take some repressive measures so  
that women won't be able to change  
their names. (The Pigs can do anything  
they want, you know. The law is made to  
protect the people in power. If the  
"little people" get out of hand, the  
Pigs can do anything they want.) So  
what? If the Pigs do take repressive  
measures, several options are open to  
us: 1—Disregard the courts entirely.  
2—Take the issue to court. File suit  
against the county (or whoever it is)  
for not letting them change your name.  
If you choose this option, get a woman  
lawyer. DO NOT USE A MALE LAWYER. (More  
on this later.)

On using the legal system—Before  
going to the courthouse I had debated  
not going through the courts and just  
changing my name on my own. If I did  
this I would be showing my complete  
disregard and irreverence for the  
court system. But—I reasoned—and  
wrongly so I believe now—name changes  
never seem to stick if people don't get  
them changed legally. This could be,  
but it doesn’t have to be. Clearly,  
changing your name through the courts  
lends credibility to the whole thing.  
People all of a sudden take you seri-  
ously. It's too bad, but that's where  
people's heads are at.

On #2 above—on suing the county for  
not allowing you to change your name.  
I'm not really into this, but if that's  
where you're at, my feeling is that you  
should make the trial into a carnival.  
Women could go as WITCHES, Jane Addams,  
Sojourner Truth, anyone. Make a mockery  
of their stupid courts. Just don't go  
into that courtroom trying to prove any  
point. You may win (at least legally  
speaking) your case but your victory  
will be accompanied with more bullshit  
repressive measures. You know—like you  
might need 5 FREEholders' signatures  
and 10 notary publics' signs and seals.  
The PEOPLE never are given or win any  
thing—the PEOPLE take it. Nothing more  
needs to be said. Right on Sisters!

In Struggle

In Anger

All Power to All the People

Seize the Time

sarah-savage (or, as I used to be  
called in the old days, Jan Deahl)

a Woman? Is

July 10, 1970