The dialogue (among three women) which follows took place over a period  
of time -- shortly after a not-quite-confrontation at a general meeting  

of the daycare center workers and some mothers (who were not present, I'm a 30 year old middle-class gay woman with  

but whose letters to the meeting were read) and some of the gay women regular time and financial commitments to  

who do childcare there. a daycare center. My childcare responsi-  

The three of us who took part in this dialogue decided to have it bilities are still far from "a way of life."  
 
I am a 30 year old working-class dyke responsible, with  
several other women, for the care of a child. I have  
regular daycare hours and regular financial daycare  

responsibilities. I also have regular non-institutional  
childcare responsibilities.  

I am newly gay, newly dealing with my working-class origins,  

thirty years old.  

I have regular time and money committ-  

ments both to a daycare center and to a child whom I am  
helping to raise collectively.  

As a gay, single woman it took me a while to understand how I think  
the anger mothers focus against me makes me angry. There is no doubt  
in my mind that mothers are oppressed. But certainly not because I'm  

a single, gay woman. Their oppression started long before I came on whoever has the privilege shares in the oppression  

the scene. Like most women, mothers have been oppressed by men in the  
heterosexual world. And whether having children was not a choice for  
mothers, it still was not something urged on them by a single, gay  
world.  

But that's not really hearing the mother who is speaking.  

It's not that  

you're privileged being a single woman, it's that you're privileged  
not to do 24-hour daycare. And having control over some of your 24  
hours has more importance than having social approval which you can do  

nothing with.  
This is a privilege hard won by lesbians who came up when there  

Social approval really means the ease with which you  
handle your economic life and the safety with which  

you live your public and private life.  

"Control" every day from a heterosexual world that is already  
always there. The mother doesn't have to fight for that "control"  
during the time, however piddly, that she can get away from the  
burdens of childcare. I don't know any lesbians about my age  

who are "old gay" and who aren't also working-class. Maybe hasty,  
maybe worth considering.  

Something about "priority" of oppressions and digging up the past...  
Still should listen to the experience of women who've been dealing  
with the oppression longer (old gay vs. new gay).  

But on class oppression that's equally long or longer than  
gayness (for individual women): "length" would screw mothers  
as a criterion, since most haven't had children as long as  
most old gay women have been gay. Do you mean “within an  
oppression"?  

Obvious I can't let length screw mothers and one day's oppression is  
too much, but my suspicion of heterosexual women, oppressed four or  

five years with kids, setting policy is justified.  

But the privilege is seen only within the context of women struggling to build an  
equal community of women, because outside that community that time privilege of  
single women is piddling compared to the privilege of men. And that's what keeps  

getting ignored. That's where the struggle should be but where mothers, by the nature  

of the greater oppressive power of men, understandably could never begin to make a  

dent the way they have in the women's community of Iowa City. In the ideal socialist  
world everyone does daycare. But the fact that men almost never do daycare is oppressive  
to mothers. And secondly oppressive to the single women and the single, gay women who  

are (though only recently) shouldering responsibilities to women with children.  

The double oppression, however, is when women with children ask single, gay women--  
oppressed in a much different way by men--to work in centers with men in order that  
their sons won't become too "wimpy" (or their daughters too strong???) The mother  
who tries to move me to the rear of my oppression with her oppression is fighting a  
losing battle. I absolutely refuse to do daycare in heterosexual, sexist and homo-  
sexist daycare centers in order to right imbalances. I will try to deal with it on  
my own territory but I'll be damned if I'm stepping back into male territory to do  
it. You cannot trade one oppression for another and believe anything's gained.  
When the angry voices have died down, that's still what I have to say.  

At present in Sparky Day Care Center "trade" is inappropriate since  
lesbians are "trading" childcare and it is not clear that mothers  
are willing to "trade" any struggle on homophobia.  

It is possible that lesbians may have to do out-of-  
institution childcare in order to preserve or create  
a territory.  

"Helping balance" that (mother's) oppression is so impermanent (apropos  
remarks about biological mothers being stuck with the childcare after every-  
body else gets tired/freaks out/goes away). Part of our consciousness-  

raising about childcare should include that it should be a way of life  
for everyone, not just a do-it-in-your-spare-time thing. This applies to  
our recruiting other people to do childcare, too.  

This is true but lesbians are used to dealing with  

the "helping balance" of heterosexual women. They  

already control--determine-- issues for the movement.  

True they have not been working-class straight women, but over homophobia the shit smells the same.  

Page 16 Vol:-3 #2435  

Ain't I