I was in a prison for little.....  
girls. I was new and was just......  
getting acquainted. There was one..  
little girl, around ten years old,..  
who the other girls shied away from.  
She was the essence of life and.....  
energy. She was so delightful and...  
joyful that I could not resist her..  
We talked and played a little in....  
the hall (the prison was patterned...  
after a school) and when it was.....  
time to go back to our cells she....  
asked me to come visit her. When we  
got to her cell, I realized that....  
she was in maximum security. They..  
were going to execute her. Two.....  
doors locked after us. One old man.  
guarded the outer cell and another..  
stayed inside keeping the little....  
girl in his sight all the time. The  
cell was old and bare and in complete  
contrast with the youth and beauty..  
of the little girl. I stayed for...  
just a little while and then ner-...  
vously said I should go..... SHE eos ire  
pleaded that I stay and keep her....  
company. I was going to ask when...  
she was going to be executed and....  
assure her that we would see each...  
other before then, but I realized...  
you don't ask questions like that...  
So I just left. The next morning I.  
found out that she was to be killed.  
that day. I was hysterical to see..  
her again before she died. I could.  
make her happy for a moment by my...  
visit and I could tell her I loved..  
her. But what good is happiness....  
and love I thought, when you are to.  

watching, but I had to look. I.....  
pounded the door in pain and frus-.,  
tration and knocked one of the......  
panes out. I quick walked away.....  
whistling as if I hadn't done it;  
but a lady at the authoritarian.  

At this point there is a scene of  

desk across the gym summoned me over.  

die. There was nothing I could give.  
her; nothing I could do to help her.  

We were on our way to the gym....  
for a recreation period when I.....  
looked down the corridor and saw....  
them leading the little girl out....  

comic relief that I don't understand.  
in light of the terror of the rest of  
the dream. As I walked across the...  
floor, I figured it was all over and.  
I would have to confess, but the.....  
woman at the desk tried to make me...  

Pterodactyl, the Grinnell College underground, finally won a long, drawn-  
out and crippling court struggle, May 22nd, when a Waterloo, Iowa (Blackhawk  

County) district court judge, dismissing the case against four of us Ptero-  

dactyl vendors, declared Iowa's law unconstitutional. Last November, in Cedar Falls, Iowa, home of the University of Northern  

Iowa, the four of us were charged with a felony for selling an issue of  
Ptero which contained, among other things, a page mocking Playboy magazine.  
Ptero's mock "Playboy ad" showed a photograph of a naked young man with  

an erect penis masturbating in front of Playboy "fold-out" nudes. The ad  
copy actually originated from an ad Playboy ran in the New York Times: "What  
sort of man reads Playboy? He's young, active, affluent. A hard man to get  
through to. To sell him you've got to first reach him. With a medium that  
really involves him. Only one medium does it. PLAYBOY."  

The Iowa law banned importation, production, possession and distribution,  
of printed materials "containing obscene language or obscene print, pictures  
or descriptions manifestly tending to corrupt the morals of youth." The law  
allowed for absolute arbitrary police power over free publications; not even an  
obscenity hearing was needed before a bust! Any simple-minded police officer could  
declare an underground obscene. And this law could be used to suppress any  
Iowa paper which threatened the system in any way.  

Pterodactyl and its lawyer, Clark Holmes of the ACLU, set about to abolish  
this law. A precedent for the case was found in a Supreme Court decision to  
strike down a Michigan statute similar to Iowa's. Said Iowa Judge Blair Wood:  
"The Supreme Court of the United States, in an opinion by Justice Frankfurter,  
finds that the Michigan statute ‘by quarantining the general public against  
books not too rugged for grown men and women in order to shield juvenile  
innocence’ is, in effect, ‘to burn down the house to roast the pig'...."  

The four Pterodactyl vendors were Grinnell student Jake Margolin; Antioch  
student Bob Honig; Pterodactyl staffers Kit Leder and myself. (Kit is now  
part of Vocations for Social Change in California.) Unfortunately, our ar-  
rest forced Pterodactyl onto the road to ruin....and we can only begin to pick  
up the pieces now. When we were busted, many of our papers, our money and  
some film were seized. Iowa newsstands were afraid to continue carrying  
Pteros, and some other staff members refused to put out another issue unless  
they could censor material beforehand (to prevent further tie-ups in court.)  
This faction then split to join a new paper, the High and Mighty.  

But the rest of us wanted a free Pterodactyl! We were put out of commission  
for 6 months as we struggled it out in court. But we won, at least the first  
round. There are other Iowa laws that still threaten our existence; in fact,  
the four of us may still be tried under other sections of the Iowa Code. But  
we hope we can get these, too, struck down. CENSORSHIP SUCKS SHIT! Not only  
does it result in the suppression of controversial political views and, thus,  
in the repression of minorities but, very simply, any attempt to hide reality  
makes for ignorance, stagnancy, prejudice, perversion and fear....it makes  
for Amerikan pig society!  

The struggle against censorship is also being fought by the NOLA Express  
in New Orleans as a result of reprinting the Ptero Playboy ad. They were  
busted by the feds for sending “obscene material” through the mails. The NOLA's  
Darlene 4459 and Robert Head will prove the bullshit of charging that mock-  
ery of Playboy is obscene. Support the NOLA and Power to the people's Press!  
Off the Pig! Krys Neuman ;  

AWoman?’’? Vol Not  

say that I did not do it. I was very  
confused because the prison wasn't...  
usually run this way, but she ex-....  
plained that she didn't know how to..  
fill out forms for admitting some-...  
thing, only forms for denying some-..  
thing. As she was copying information  
from my record onto the form, I no-..  
ticed a mistake on my record. They..  
had me down as editor of the Black...  
Panther Paper but I told her I was...  
white and couldn't be. She gave me..  
my record and told me to sit down....  
and correct it. The recreation per-.  
iod which was an icecapades like.....  
thing, was about to begin so I sat...  
down in the first row next to my.....  
grandmother.  

All of a sudden I remembered the..  
little girl and my eyes saw through...  
everything like Superman's do. I saw  
the little girl seated in the prison.  
yard with a black bag over her head..  
and flanked by two men. She had just  
been shot by a man twenty-five feet..  
behind her. One of the two men lifted  
the bag from her head so she could...  
run off the last bit of her life much  
like we let a chicken with its head..  
cut off. She rose and ran to a group.  
of girls playing nearby, who were....  
put there for all executions. It was  
as if they could afford to let her...  
play after they were assured that this  
personification of freedom was safely  
dead.  

Each bunch of playing girls dis-..  
persed in fear as she ran toward.....  
them, crushing the little girl who...  
didn't understand why they wouldn't..  
play with her anymore.. Finally,.....  

death overcame her and she fell down.  
Sear liles  

Dales Dream  

SN Ike  

Censorship  
SUCKS SHIT  

Grinnell Women's Liberation Statement  
in Support of Pterodactyl "Playboy Ad"  

Grinnell Women's Liberation sup-  
ported the "Playboy ad," which ran in  
the November 11, 1969 Pterodactyl and  
the November 20, 1969 NOLA Express,  
as part of a continuing campaign  
against Playboy magazine's exploita-  
tion of female bodies and male minds.  

Last year at Grinnell College (Feb-  
ruary 5, 1969) - students disrobed at  
a campus discussion with Brice Draper,  
a representative from the magazine, to  
protest Playboy's stereotyping and  
commercializing of the female body in  
order to sell the magazine.  

This year's effort - the "Playboy  
ad" - parodied Playboy's dehumanizing  
manipulation of the male reader for  
the benefit of the magazine and its  
advertisers. The text of this parti-  
cular "ad" did, in fact, appear in ads  
for buying Playboy magazine which were  
run in the New York Times.  

We believe this "ad" to be signifi-  
cant social and political commentary  
upon Playboy magazine and its adver-  
tisers. This "ad" has our full sup-  
port.  

Grinnell Women's Liberation