‘An open letter to my sisters, in the hope that we will  
not have to wait 5,000 more years for liberation  

‘The women’s movement is being co-opted, exploited,  
ripped-off, patronized, seduced and raped. Some of us have  
begun to notice the ways in which our movement is being  
killed with seeming kindness: others are bewildered at what  
seems to be the apparent ingratitude of a few sisters at the  
attention paid to us by various male groups. The following  
consists of my own impressions and analyses; if you agree  
with me, please send in your thoughts and information c/o  
this newspaper.  

‘Subversion from the Right  

I trust that the appointment of two women generals  
by the Nation's Number One Football Fan will convince  
few women that our demands are being met. Unfortunately,  
some sisters are listening to the mealy-mouthed statements  
of male politicians, as exemplified in N.O.W.’s recent  
“Meet-the-Candidates” night at Fordham University (a  
Roman Catholic institution, dedicated to the maintenance  
of the Church, the abolition of abortion and the perpetua-  
tion of women's suffering for the greater glory of a male  
god). Entering the penthouse in a “Lavender Menace”  
T-shirt, I came upon a roomful of well-dressed men and  
women, sipping sangria and eating canapés. Twenty of the  
candidates were male and one was female. She was the  
candidate of the Liberal Party against Marchi, running on  
Staten Island — an obvious sacrifice candidate who admitted  
she was running because she was bored with life as a  
housewife and schoolteacher, and couldn't find anything  
better to do on Staten Island.  

‘A male candidate was walking around with a women's  
liberation button. I ripped it off his fat lapel after he referred  
to some women activists as “girls.” Another male candidate,  
after purchasing a copy of COME OUT from me, suggested that  
I get my hair done and go find a nice Jewish boy.  

The canapés were about as inspiring as the candidates,  
but they did fill an otherwise supperless stomach.  

I suggested to some women present that working to  
elect an all-male slate of candidates might not be the best  
road to women’s liberation. “Yes,” one replied, “but they're  
all we've got right now.”  

All? Don't we have millions of women, hands, feet,  
minds, teeth, guns, pens, printing presses, cameras, lungs,  
eyes and ears? We have all of these organs — but we seem  
to lack heart. Every woman must know intellectually that  
no male politician will give her liberation — but very few  
people, male or female, are willing to face the fact that  
they must do it themselves. It is easier to delude yourself  
by setting up a Hero, a Liberator, and pretending that the  
Big Daddy will give you what you need. But liberation is  
an adult thing, and as such cannot be given to us like  
a Christmas present. We must take it ourselves, instead of  
“letting George do it.”  

Or Georgina. Georgina is the Women’s Liberation  
Media Star. Many of us have watched her ascent into the  
heavens with an increasing incidence of ulcers and migraine;  
meanwhile, we struggle to get our groups together, working  
quietly at the day-care centers, on the mimeo machine, in  
consciousness-raising groups.  

Generally a college-educated, white, well-heeled  
woman, a woman who knows a great deal about publicity  
and publishing but who never has the time for consciousness  
raising, she is prone to make apologetic statements to the  
male press, prone to waste her time arguing with Hugh  
Hefner or Dick Cavett when she could be organizing women.  
“I have a wonderful relationship with my husband,” says  
one, denying her lesbian relationships in Life magazine —  
when only a week before, she brought tears to the eyes of  
gay women with the stories of her ill-fated lesbian affairs.  

‘Another media star, at the Women’s Strike on August  
26th, sings a tune of “We want to walk hand in hand with  
men.” “Men are not the enemy — we ourselves are the  
enemy,” says that same woman who gave gay sisters in the  
movement what was then a derogatory name, “The Lavender  
Menace;” and who, on a Boston TV show, called us “man-  
hating harpies.” Methinks the lady doth protest too much.  

If the truth be known, these stars of the white male  
media are motivated partly by the desire for fame and for-  
tune, and partly by a desperate need for male approval.  
They so despise their sisters — and themselves — that they  
can’t imagine a women's movement so strong it doesn't have  
to ask Daddy for money, for air time, or a pat on the head.  
They haven't got time for consciousness raising because they  
can’t imagine learning anything useful from other women’s  
experiences.  

These media stars, carefully coiffed and lathered with  
foundation makeup, claim to represent all women. In  
actuality, they are ripping off all women. Example: one  
woman claimed to be organizing prostitutes in the Times  
Square area. Her only contact with them was to tape some  
interviews which she plans to use in her next book.  

‘These women will betray us when the cock crows.  

Margaret Mead, who wrote some earth-shaking books  
in the 1930s and has served as an apologist for the estab-  
lishment ever since, was recently asked if she thought the  
women’s liberation movement will succeed, "If the media  
doesn’t kill it,” she replied. I agree with her.  

Visions of Madison Avenue atrocities float past my  
eyes: “Be liberated — wear the light new Womenform bra.”  
“Drive a Pantherette — the sexiest, swingingest car for the  
liberated woman from General Motors.” “Liberate your  
breath with Listerine — and catch a liberated man.”  

Don't be surprised if you see Georgina shilling for  
Procter & Gamble in the near future. If large numbers of  
women are going to passively depend on a few stars to  
liberate them, instead of getting themselves together to do  
it, the movement has gone along.  

And from the Left  

‘Subversion from the left is a more serious matter. It  
will eventually dawn on large numbers of women that they  
cannot obtain liberation under the present social structure —  
that free abortion on demand must evolve into free medical  
care and child care centers, which must evolve into socialist  
institutions. Having come to the realization that a consider-  
able degree of socialism is necessary to our liberation, they  
must turn leftward — down a path strewn with booby traps  
laid by male-dominated leftist groups and the male-  
oriented women who front for these groups.  

The male-oriented women have long since been aliena-  
ted from America, but still desperately crave approval from  
the male left. They must prove that they are as “revolution-  
ary” as men — the underlying assumption being that men  
are naturally revolutionary, particularly if they are non-  
white. Many of these women are college-educated; women  
who found that the only men who would let them use their  
intellect at all were left-wing males, women who could not  
relate at all to apolitical sisters because they despised “woman  
talk.” They cannot conceive of the notion that women can  
liberate themselves, and so they place the fate of women's  
liberation in the most male-oriented political groups in the  
country. What touching naivete!  

We need hard-working women like these, but they  
expend their energy on every other cause but women’s  
liberation, heatedly justifying any male chauvinism which  
appears in any male they consider oppressed. If a working  
class or non-white male assaults them on the street, it has to  
be understood that he is just acting out of his oppression.  

If a working class or middle class white woman is afraid to  
send her children to be bussed into Harlem, she is “reaction-  
ary," “racist,” or “stupid.” The male-oriented political  
woman has no patience with the mistakes of her own sex,  
but she is all full of pity and liberalism for the worst male  
chauvinist. A few words of kindness, a statement of support  
of women’s liberation in an otherwise male-chauvinist party  
line is enough to bring tears of gratitude to these women’s  
eyes.  

A woman can spend her whole life getting one man’s  
foot off another man’s neck and still remain on the bottom  
of the heap herself.  

The right wing says, “If you women want to be liber-  
ated, you will have to be drafted.”  

The left wing says, “If you women want to be liberated,  
you must pick up the gun and fight alongside of us.”  

In other words, the only liberation we are being offered  
is the right to be cannon fodder. The right to fight in men's  
causes, taking orders from men, in situations which they  
define and direct. We have seen the posters depicting the  
woman revolutionary with a baby slung over her back and a  
gun in her hand. We must bear revolutionary babies. No male  
revolutionary is ever depicted carrying the baby. It might  
slow him down in battle. Well, you know we always do two  
jobs and get paid for half a job, if we get paid at all.  

I say if we want to be liberated, we must pick up the  
gun and turn it on the men who are issuing all these orders,  
the very men who are telling us that we must follow them,  
obey them, in order to get our liberation.  

Hurrah for the Vanguard Party  

The Black Panther Party is the vanguard of the revolu-  
tion. The Black Panther Party, according to Huey P. Newton,  
its Supreme Commander, intends to level the earth in order  
to prepare the way for the flowering of Black Manhood.  

The Black Panther Party, a “people's democratic”  
organization, has never elected any of its offices, nor called  
a party congress in order to debate policy, nor permitted  
any deviation by any of its members from the official party  
line.  

The Black Panther Party tells us that our function is  
to bear revolutionary babies. Their statement at the so-called  
“Revolutionary People’s Constitutional Convention,” where  
they heavily oppressed those sisters who attended, was that  
women’s liberation is “right on” — that a crash program  
must be instituted to give women control of the technology  
which is relevant to our needs, i.e., child care.  

Obviously, nothing else is relevant to our needs. After  
the revolution, the Black Panther Party will presumably  
retain control over agriculture, housing, medicine (except  
for gynecology), transportation, the military, manufactur-  
ing, education, communications, and some brand-new version  
of the OGPU.  

Any white person who criticizes the Black Panther  
Party is a racist pig.  

Why is the Black Panther Party considered the “van-  
guard” of the revolution anyway? Why was Huey Newton's  
patronizing statement on Women's Liberation and Gay  
Liberation received with such touching gratitude? Why did  
some gay people walk so tall after receiving Good Huey’s  
seal of approval, as if their needs could not be considered  
valid, nor they revolutionary, unless the Black Panther  
Party approved of them?  

The Black Panthers are being shot at. This is not, in  
itself, a sufficient qualification for being a revolutionary.  
They are attempting to defend themselves with guns. This  
is again not sufficient. The Plains Indians were in the same  
position a century ago, and no one calls them revolutionaries.  
People are not revolutionary because they are under attack  
or engaged in self-defense; they are revolutionary only if  
they are consistently fighting for the liberation of all people.  

The Black Panthers might even be revolutionary with  
regard to black males. With regard to other males, their  
attitude is liberal, and with regard to women, it is indis-  
tinguishable from the attitude of the German Nazi Party,  
which also demanded increased baby production.  

It is my conviction that the reason gay males were  
fairly well treated at the Convention was that they simply  
asked to be allowed to be gay and to fight alongside the  
Panthers. Women asked for "that amount of control of all  
production and industry that would ensure one hundred  
percent control over our own destinies." In short, women  
asked for real power, and the Panthers freaked out.  

For women to allow their energies to be diverted in  
support of a group that wishes to restrict them to the old  
baby-making function is masochistic, guilt-liberal bullshit.  
Those energies could be expended on projects which would  
benefit the Women’s Movement — day care centers, clinics,  
a women’s liberation school with courses in technology and  
self-defense, a women’s publishing company. All these  
require workers and money. Yet the biggest fund-raising  
drive I have seen in the women’s movement was the drive  
to raise bail for Joan Bird. The slogans were everywhere —  

“free our sister, free ourselves." "No one is free until every-  
one is free.” Perhaps these slogans are true in some ultimate  
sense. They basically appeal to liberals who hide  
their liberalism behind radical rhetoric.  

Our resources are limited. To spend all that energy  
and time to raise $100,000 for one woman who is then  
supposed to “free” us when she steps out of jail in return  
for our dollar contribution, to spend all that on a woman  
whose Party affiliation requires unquestioning obedience to  
the Supreme Commander (male) — is that the way to make  
a woman's revolution? The Black Panthers can’t be our paid  
mercenaries — we have to liberate ourselves and fight in our  
own cause.  

Why not admit it, the purpose of that campaign was to  
prove to the Black Panthers that we in Women’s Liberation  
aren't racists. As if we could ever prove it, because we are  
racists by definition. And there they've got us — we will  
always be giving money, proving our worth, sewing shirts  
for soldiers, until we stop taking this bullshit and organize  
a revolutionary women’s movement.  

The Socialist Workers' Party  

The Socialist Workers' Party is highly attractive to  
male-oriented women who have swallowed the line that a  
socialist revolution will automatically bring about the  
liberation of women. Any careful examination of the status  
of women in nations that have already gone socialist will  
give the lie to this pleasant fantasy. In such nations, women's  
roles are defined by men, and restrictions on political activ-  
ity make it much more difficult for women to achieve  
liberation. When the Party decides that an increase in popu-  
lation is desirable, heroic mother medals are awarded. When  
women are needed in the factories, heroic workingwoman  
medals are minted. When women are needed to nurse soldiers,  
as in the USSR after the Second World War, the medical  
profession is opened to them at least on the lower levels.  

The Socialist Workers’ Party, whose membership is  
75% male and whose leadership is almost entirely male, has  
moved with frightening success to infiltrate and take over  
sections of the women’s movement. They have moved full-  
time workers into the women’s centers of New York,  
Boston, Baltimore and Los Angeles, attempting to take  
over jobs, moving in SWP literature and moving out feminist  
literature. Check it out sister, if you live in these cities.  

The SWP has a policy of infiltration, which is des-  
cribed in their handbook — a handbook issued only to  
loyal party members. I am attempting to get hold of this  
handbook, which was described to me by a disillusioned  
ex-SWP woman, and will publish it as soon as possible.  

“The SWP is also backing the Equal Rights Amend-  
ment, a deceptive piece of legislation which will strip away  
protections from working women. So this is a Socialist  
Workers' Party?  

At the Women's Strike in New York, control of the  
speakers platform was in the hands of Ruthann Miller, a  
long-time member of the SWP. A lesbian, who was attempt-  
ing to tell her sisters in Bryant Park about the pig harass-  
ment coming down on gay women in the streets, had to get  
permission to speak from Ruthann — since the Socialist  
Workers' Party has a long-term policy of expelling gay  
people from its membership, our gay sister found this a  
humiliating experience.  

The SWP has considered gay people to be counter-revolu-  
tionaries and a "danger" to the party. Seems like it’s bad  
enough to be called a Commie without being called a Commie  
Pinko Queer to boot. Some of the expelled gay people are  
now in Gay Liberation Front; and sadly enough, some of  
them are wistfully trying to get SWP to change its mind and  
readmit them now that they have proved they can be  
“revolutionary.” Maybe Huey’s seal of approval will cause  
the SWP to have a change of heart.  

It’s difficult to place one’s faith in a so-called vanguard  
— whether it’s a black vanguard or a white vanguard — when  
the members can’t think for themselves, when they can't  
even notice your oppression until it is spelled out in blood  
on the streets and cleared by the Central Committee.  

Male Orientation in Women’s Groups  

This subversion and co-optation of the women’s move-  
ment by the male-oriented left would not be possible if so  
many women were not male-oriented, and if the left were  
not so full of liberal tendencies. Women have a difficult  
time in getting rid of the need for male approval, particular-  
ly straight women. They find it almost impossible to put  
their own needs first, tending to act as if women’s needs are  
trivial. This is compounded by a tendency to see men as  
simultaneously strong and weak — too strong for poor weak  
women to successfully fight them, and too weak in their  
dear little egos for us to criticize them in any way.  

Since men are always getting into fights, and since  
they present every situation as a life-or-death crisis (or  
carefully engineer such a crisis), for us to take time out to  
criticize them or demand that