Available at Action Studies Office

303 Jefferson Bldg.  
Iowa City  

Birth Control Handbook - McGill Students Society FREE  

Century of Struggle - Eleanor Flexner - paperback $3.10  
Marxism: A Syllabus for Women by Kitty Bernick $0.10  
Motive Magazine - special issue on women $1.00  
No More Fun & Games, #3, The Dialectics of Sexism $1.00  
Women: a pamphlet introducing Iowa City WL FREE  

NEWSPAPERS BY & FOR WOMEN -- 256 25¢ each  
Current issues & some back copies available  

Ain't I A Woman? (Iowa City)  

Off Our Backs (Washington, D.C.)  

It Ain't Me Babe (Berkeley)  

RAT (New York City)  

Special issues on women you can send for:  

Radical America - Feb., 1970 - 75¢  
Radical America  
1237 Spaight Street  
Madison, Wisc. 53703  

Leviathan - excellent special issue on women - 50¢  
Leviathan  
968 Valencia  
San Francisco, Cal. 94110  

The Radical Therapist - special issue - $1.00  
Bis Oe Bom 2-15  
Minot, North Dakota  
58701  

FEMALE LIBERATION and the SEXUAL  
CASTE SYSTEM  
AN 2¥  

(10¢) Isaac Asimov — Uncertain, coy, and hard to please  
(30¢) Jack Belden — Gold Flower’s story: women’s liberation in revolutionary China  
(10¢) Mauser Benston — The political economy of women’s liberation  
(20¢) Dana Densmore — Sex roles and female oppression  
(40¢) Roxanne Dunbar — Female liberation as the basis for social revolution  
(25¢) Roxanne Dunbar — Poor white women  
(40¢) Friedrich Engels — The sexual revolution  
(10¢) A divorce trial in China  
(20¢) The place of American women: economic exploitation of women  
(20¢) Beverly Jones & Judith Brown — Toward a female liberation movement  
(10¢) Anne Koedt — The myth of the vaginal orgasm  
(10¢) Laurel Limpus — Liberation of women: sexual repression and the family  
(5¢) Pat Mainardi — The politics of housework  
(15¢) Juliet Mitchell — Women: the longest revolution  
(10¢) Marge Piercy — The grand coulee dam, about women in the movement  
(10¢) The myth of inferiority: women’s role in pre-historic societal development  
(20¢) Women welfare  
(30¢) Shulamith Firestone — Kinder, Kirche, Kuche; or, Psychology constructs the female  
(25¢) Lyn Wells — American women: their use and abuse  
(25¢) Hlene Winkler — Women workers, the forgotten third of the working class  
(25¢) Off Our Backs, a woman's news-journal  
($1) No More Fun and Games: a journal of female liberation — by Boston-area women  
($1.15) Women: A Journal of Liberation -- by Baltimore-area women  

Mail to: NEW ENGLAND FREE PRESS, 791 Tremont St., Boston, Mass. 02118 (phone, 536-9219)  

For LITERATURE as checked; please add 15% for postage (10% for orders of $5 or more)  
3% for sales tax (Massachusetts residents)  

Vol ft wes  

Bibliographies  

Women: a bibliography by Lucinda Cisler - 14 categories,  
annotated reading list of 600 items, 16 pages.  
By mail 25¢/copy. From Lucinda Cisler  

102 W. 80 St.  
New York, N.Y. 10024  

Women's Liberation: A Bibliography - PM #2  
Send a 6¢ stamp for single copy to  
Tallahassee Women's Liberation-PM  
308 S. McComb  
Tallahassee, Fla. 32301  

Copies for lending & perusal at Action Studies Office  

We have copies of all articles on women from the  
New England Free Press and the Radical Education  
Project - for lending or perusal at Action Studies  
Office - 303 Jefferson Bldg.  

Or send to Radical Education Project  
Box 561-A  
Detroit, Michigan 48232  

I Am Furious (Female) covers the influence of  
Freud & Christianity in ideological  
oppression of women. Diggs, Cantrow, et al  

Political Economy of Women's Liberation  
A basic statement of the material conditions  
in capitalist (and other) societies which  
define the group "women". Focus on the  
nature of work performed in and by the family.  
10¢ By Margaret Benston  

Bread and Roses  
Argues the centrality of the struggle for  
women’s liberation in a revolutionary  
movement. 10¢ Kathy McAfee & Myrna Wood  

Women: The Longest Revolution - good historical  
essay on women. 15¢ Juliet Mitchell  

The Place of American Women: Economic Exploitation  
Some facts & figures on economic conditions  
of women. 5¢ by Joan Jordan  

THE POLITICS OF FOOTBALL & OTHER WAR GAMES  
Definitions:  
A CAPITALIST PIG is a greedy "man who has everything"  
and wants to keep it that way; hence the  
"protection racket."  

A MALE CHAUVINIST PIG is still a pig though he may  
not be protecting anything more abstract than  
his potency.  

MALE CHAUVINISTS, PIGS, display their united strength  
in aggregates usually called "teams". Their  
uniform is the jock strap.  

JOCK STRAP -- Big Brother's holding company  

ATHLETIC SUPPORTER -- member of a “Booster Club"  
for a “team"  

NUT CUP -- a trophy, given to novice MCP's in recognition  
of their initiation into a "team"  

BALL -- that which is supposed to be kicked but is  
most of the time held onto with the hands.  

FIELD -- a battle-field, on which lines are drawn  
and games are fought (or, fights are played).  
Each team has its own field, yet is not content  
and, in true pig style, teams fight on their  
own and others' fields; but nothing is ever  
resolved and fields do not change hands.  

POSITION -- not a geographical location, but a  
status. Regardless of where he is, a team  
member must fight in, and maintain, the same  
position. A LINE-MAN, for instance, tries to  
act consistently with his line. There are also  
QUARTERBACKS and HALF-ASSES, among others.  

GOAL POST --- at the end of the fight, the ideal is  
to tear up the goals. It figures.  

FIELD