what have they done to my song ¢

Music is to me the most universal
"art" and probably the most ancient. Even
before humankind made music, there was
beautiful noise in the world. Birds, in-
sects, elephants even, all communicated
in characteristic sounds. (Maybe they
weren't "communicating", as humans would
perceive: maybe they just like to make
their noises.) And music happens when
water runs over stones; the sound has
varying pitch and rhythm. Music happens
when humans recognize patterns in all
this joyous noise.

People were of course tuned in, sen-
sitive to rhythm since their own bodies
expressed rhythms in heartbeat, breath-
ing, sucking, etc: the body moves to a
one-two, lub-dub, beat. Somewhere in the
formative years of humanity, someone
started stamping or clapping that rhythm:
someone hummed a soothing noise to her
baby; a whistling note came out of some-
one's sucking mouth; and someone dug it.

"I love to sing, love the way

it feels, the sensual feeling

of song in my throat."
--Buffy Saint-Marie

Music came out as physical joy. Music
was also sort of a mystery, a thing to
wonder at. It became associated closely
with religion in some societies. Re-
ligion and music in the last thousand
years (at least) have reflected the in-
creasing specialization and male domin-
ance of western "civilization". Since
the 15th century or so, western music
reflects class divisions: folk music
and classical music. The upper-class
"serious" music has been preserved in
written form; folk music is orally passed
on, but changes a little with each per-
son's interpretation.

Classical music seems to reflect rul-
ing class values: stability, systems &
rules, abstraction, specialization of
roles, and of course, male supremacy.
Women were tabooed out of control in m-
usic as in religion, government, arts, and
trade. And we civilized women are under
the influence of an aristocratic musical
tradition that is composed, directed and
performed mostly by men. Even when women
were breaking taboos in poetry and novel
writing (18th and 19th centuries) the
only roles for women in music were as
singers. Woman's place was in the home
and if she was musically talented that
was where she was to perform. (Of course,
men designed and produced the instruments
we use.)

"What have they done to my

song?" --Melanie Safka

"Yaaah, squeeze my lemon,

baby" —Robert Plant/the
Led Zeppelin

Some very popular, influencing music
is chauvinist: some is also over-
whelmingly cop-out (all that "I want
my own little faraway world" crap). With
a little imagination I can listen and ig-

We get letters from sisters who've seen our
paper in distant parts of the country, who are
thinking about moving to the Midwest.
help them but we need --they need --information
from more sources than just Iowa City.
Sisters in other groups in the Midwest can supply
information about their towns: like job opportuni-
ties, housing availability, etc. --whatever a
woman would need to know about a place she's never

known.

Dear Sisters,

We are a collective of women, each of whom has
been strongly emotionally based in New York, and
among us, I suppose, we've accumulated an
incredible number of interim years here.
Some of us have labored within and without the Establish-
ment and some are newly statistical adults. And
New York is guilty of
intense factionalism, the air is rotten (one
doesn't quite see New Jersey from the West Side
anymore), floods of freaks, some to organize and

now it's time to move out.

We want to

more or “change" the lyric. I really
thought for a while that a line from Let
It Be was "nothin's gonna chain my world”.
But the dreamy tenor voice came through
with "nothin' gonna change my world.” And
that is too damn much -- that should sound
like one of our people?

Economics is a weird trick: success
corrupts too many musicians. And stabi-
lity, I fear, is a figment of our parent's
imagination. Forget all that phony plead-
ing about All I Need Is You and Please
Love Me Forever, which is the prelude to
If You leave me I'll beat your ass.
There's a new world coming, but it ain't
me babe. New music for new people ... I
am a new person, according to yesterday...

Feminism can be in music; there is music
clearly expressed from a female viewpoint.
But where are the women in music? In front
of the band looking cute, squealing for
a male body; in back of the band, a groupie;
behind the scenes, never being credited or
considered. Think of one rock group with
a female instrumentalist (not a sexy
singer): I thought of only Sly and the
Family Stone; a woman is lead guitarist.
(Name a female jazz developer? a female
classical composer? a female symphony con-
ductor?) This society reflects the usual
male dominance through music even more
than through the other fine arts.

But maybe I see it that way because
I'm so into music that I want to relate
everything to it. I love to play music
so much that I was trying to cooperate
with oppressively egoistic men, just to
make music. And it was a sad realization
that I was left out of jam sessions, was
unconsidered or put down when I tried to
take the lead; I was not part of the
group, I was a chick dammit. But I
could not help it, I couldn't sing some
of those words, couldn't help squirming
at "Down by the river/ I shot my baby,
shot her dead."

Sisters join the dance ... we are full
of music... do you wish it as I do,
that women's joy, women's pride, women's
love, shall be the music in the streets
++. Can you imagine a feminist rock
group playing the music of Dancing In The
Streets? Some of us in WLF would really
like to get it together. If you are in-
to music -~ if you can play drums, piano,
flute, bass, brasses -~ if you write mu-
sic —- if you love to sing -- if you
have instruments or equipment we can use
~-get in touch with us in Iowa City WLF
and spread your sound around, Cock-rock
is not our vibration! Let's get it on,
with sisters.

Lay Lady Lay

LAY OFF!

ary woman's consciousness,
It's our intention to move to a middle or large
size city with a substantial white working com-
munity. We want to organize working women and

|
we hope to

catch them.

Some of

the
move

some for solace, abound, the Young Lords are offer-
ing viable help within Third World communities,

certain presses are being smothered or obliterated
and we feel a need to disseminate our revolution-

bp

New York, N.Y.

Voll

probably high school women.
alternatives through our life style, accurate
information, and the continuity of growth possible
when lives are freely blended.

Where we're at is that many of us have com-
mitments in N.Y,
come through to rap with us but we don't always
So we are scouting.

Roughly we'd like to know what's happening:
is there a women's center nearby and how function-
al is it --does it reach working women?
know of any women's living collective?
be shot, tarred and feathered or tolerated? Is
ON any organizing along women's lines being done?
Could you also be able to put us in touch with
people to continue to answer these questions?

Do you have word of Cedar Rapids or Des Moines?

Maybe we could set up a dialogue wherein we
could relay useful information to you about
women's groups here and speak more specifically
of what our thoughts and lives are doing now.

Judith Lindbloom
161 Lexington Ave.
10016

No. 8

We want to offer

lasting a few months. People

Do you
Would we

Forward Sisters in the Struggle
Women are the Revolution
Love, Judith

Ain't I