NO MORE FUN AND GAMES NO MORE FUN AND GAMES NO MORE FUN AND GAMES NO MORE FUN AND GAMES NO MORE FUN AND GAMES NO MORE FUN AND GAMES NO MORE FUN AND GAMES

...tunist as we have seen in the past. Mixed with the teachings that many of these women have been exposed to by meeting the Cubans, Vietnamese, Koreans, and Chinese, they will want to "go to the people" and will go to women in the community and in workplaces. But still, demoralization will set in if there is not an overview.

A strategy within which one's work can be measured and analyzed, and true criticism can be made.

There seems to be considerable disagreement as to what constitutes a revolutionary struggle. The whole system's vast brainwashing mechanism (the “combine") has confused people even in the movement. Such truisms as “America is different; we must develop a strategy that fits our circumstances" and "There has never been a successful revolution in a highly industrialized country" are used by many left theorists to actually question whether we will have to make war on the powers that be in order to take power. Some women say that “woman power" will be a revolution in itself and will change everything. But how do we take power?

It seems to me that no matter how unique America is or whether something has happened before, there are certain principles that are unchangeable in planning an overthrow of a political-economic power class based on violence, profit, and exploitation, no matter how "well-off" the population is. The first principle is that it must be done -- whether it has been done before or not, and no matter how long it takes, or what sacrifices. And the other principle is that the overthrow of a ruling class is by definition a military venture requiring armed struggle, simply because the response you will get from that ruling class will be military in nature. So what we need is not self-defense, but military strategy. We need to develop a military offensive. We need to develop tactics so that we can free political prisoners, for instance, not organize around their "repression," thereby calling for the system to give us the legal right to make a revolution against it.

What is needed is revolutionary military organization which will be primarily military but, through already existing forces in the community, will develop a struggle at every level in society -- in the schools, colleges, among workers, among women in the communities -- to support the military struggle which will be primary.

The liberal civil rights movement, the student free speech movement, the anti-war movement, the female liberation movement were very successful in mobilizing mass consciousness. They set the stage for revolutionary struggle. But, as James Forman has pointed out, the organizers tend to desert the bases they organize. This is understandable given the lack of revolutionary political experience of those who have led, and given the conscious manipulations by the counter-revolutionary forces of the government and industry in buying off a great many organizers. We must return to our bases and organize militarily, not around the issue of armed struggle, but in fact initiate armed struggle which will speak, and can be organized around on a mass basis.

It is the duty of every conscious revolutionary group to understand and develop military strategy (not just learn martial arts or how to shoot or make bombs or any other technical skill alone) while implementing the strategy tactically. Beyond confrontation with the pigs (usually defensively or in a planned confrontation) and scattered acts of sabotage, apparently out of any strategic context, there has been little military practice in North America. And those acts are better termed militant than military. This has been largely a failure in leadership in the movement and the absence of responsible leadership due to assassinations of our most outstanding leaders by counter-revolutionary forces (Malcolm X, Fred Hampton, Clyde Warrior (Ponca), Jonathan Jackson, and many others).

The most powerful force among white young people on the left has been the underground movement of Weatherman. Hopefully, the cadres of Weatherman are not giving up their basic position as a revolutionary military grouping, but are developing even more effectively, and most of all are developing military strategy, not just doing actions. The New Morning statement had a bad influence on the movement because it released and relaxed whites on the left from emulating Weatherman. What is needed is more Weathermen working under a more developed military strategy. Also, military units must organize propaganda so that it reaches the masses of people, not just the movement. Weatherman, coming from SDS, like other factions was hung up on organizing and directing the left itself, rather than developing masses of people, and standing as a model for the rest of the left to emulate.

What holds revolutionaries in North America back from dealing with the military nature of revolution? Again, the class background or perspective of most new leftists from the student movement, anti-war movement, women's movement is middle or even upper class. The tendency then is toward fear or mystification of violence, idealism, debate, sporadic action, fun and games, travel, and eventual demoralization. What is needed is the maternal and proletarian attitude of long-sustained effort, physical sacrifice, fortitude, mental strength, material application of ideas. There is also a strong tendency on the left toward opportunism. The power group in North America offers more opportunities to sell out, give up, and get off the track than has any government ever. And of course, if you don't take the deal, they kill you if you are available.

One of the most insidious tricks the counter-revolutionary forces play is the propaganda of "anti-puritanism." Leftists, like other North Americans, are hung up in ego-trips of all kinds from drugs to orgies to jet-setting to object consumption to lifestyle. So far the enemy has not had to use guns much against whites on the left because drugs, decadence, travel, things, and money have been far more efficient weapons. The “anti-puritanism" in the movement is bullshit. Whatever you call it, revolutionaries have to be extremely disciplined, conscious, controlled, and scientific. We cannot be just groovy, relaxed, hip hedonists digging on the idea of revolution -- well-rounded beings, doing what comes naturally. If that is interpreted as coldness and puritanism and inhumanity by some then they are wrong. Still, if we have to choose between being cold, whatever that means, or ineffective, I guess being cold wouldn't be the worst thing. What this tendency to lifestyle really is, rather than something new, is a maintenance or the gaining in some cases of the relative freedom of the privileged, as the country singer says, "Having our fun in '71."

The question of security is important when discussing strategy, but it should not be prohibitive. It is one thing to reveal a particular plan of action or a clandestine organization and another to analyze conditions and project a strategy and organization. What I will discuss here will be some principles of armed struggle of small organized political-military units against a superpowerful political-economic system. If some overall principles are developed in our movement, we will not pine for a large centralized organization to begin armed struggle. Such an organization is a fantasy as well as impractical and insecure to the extent it can exist. Rather, the existence of many autonomous units working from a set of strategic principles will be the beginning of a democratic centralist organization and the kernel of the new governmental structure. This kind of development is not "anarchic" -- a term most often used to bait. Anarchy is an idealistic, principled opposition to organization, to democratic centralism, to leadership, and to the existence of the state in any form. There is certainly a good deal of anarchy in the movement, but autonomous revolutionary units do not need to be opposed in principle to organization or the state. Quite the contrary, they must be building toward the seizure of power and the establishment of a people's government. In North America, the new political order will surely be drastically different from what we have now in that there will be true people's government and a great decentralization of political power. For what we have here is a giant empire, not exactly a state. The federal government has become a power unto itself in contradiction to the original concept of the United States. The central government wants to smash all local autonomy. If people in North America often seem anarchistic and provincial, it is no wonder given the abuses of the federal government. But in practice, in the armed struggle, people will learn what is necessary for survival and for winning.

Already there are some such revolutionary units operating and others in the stage of preparation throughout the Americas. Any group that begins preparation and training and action can be assured that they are not alone, and that communications will develop when that is possible.

I speak of the "Americas" as a unit. In the western hemisphere, the "New World," we have a particular situation -- a historical development of four centuries based on conquest, immigration, and slavery. Our struggles in the Americas look very different from those of Africa or Asia or the European continent. We have been liberated from the institution of chattel slavery for just a century in most parts and for less in Cuba and Brazil. The quality and quantity of racism in the Americas, and the resulting nationalism is unique in the world. The natives of the two continents carried on armed struggle for centuries, and are moving again. People came and still come to the Americas from all over the world seeking a better life and even riches.

Though different parts of America were colonized and controlled by different European governments, and language and cultural ties still exist with those European countries, the Americas constitute a truly new world -- a new breed of people; a multi-national world of mixed cultural and language patterns, the Native American and African influence very strongly present despite the systematic destruction of those cultural patterns by the Europeans.

There is a potential, a unique potential for the world and a necessity for America, for the dream of America to come true. Internationalism can be the very basis of our struggle in the Americas. Poor and working-class white Americans speak of "saving America." They mean the dream, not the reality. They do not know who has crushed this dream. They think perhaps it is the revolutionaries who seem to have no dream. They do not understand the concentration of power and how those in power have transformed the dream of America into personal fortune, commodities, escapes, national parks, and Apollo flights. Of course, the dream of America was created from the beginning by European governments and merchants, particularly English, to imperialize the "new world.” It was a trick, propaganda to get people to immigrate. Yet the people who came did believe in the dream and there were valuable goals they came for: plenty for all; freedom for all; equality for all; work for all; freedom of choice; freedom of or from religion; freedom from prison. The people should not be blamed for their own ignorance of what they were being used for and still are.

When this government propaganda says it is trying to spread the "American Way" all over the world, people believe that to mean freedom from dictators; the right to vote; a better way of life. They do not know that oppressed peoples all over the world are struggling against giant corporate landlords, who are European, North American, Japanese, etc. That these people are not “hating” America, but American imperialism. They do not know that their own “prosperity” is at the cost of millions of lives.

As long as North Americans, particularly white working people, identify the US government and its economic system, "free enterprise," as the legitimate bearer of the American dream, they will not fight the system that exists here. They won't even fight when it affects them directly, like their sons dying in imperialist wars. And those sons will keep going to war, even against us, unless they understand. Because they have a dream and they believe, want to believe it is being fulfilled. They will die for that dream. Only new ideals will replace the old, not any appeals to the pocketbook alone. As revolutionaries in this country, we have not trusted or loved the people. Our actions and words have been evasive, cowardly, abstract, and manipulative on the whole. We have had no dream.

It is understandable why that has been so, but let us begin the transformation of ourselves and the revolutionary struggle. Let us begin the attack upon the imperialists, and not waste our energy on local or even state pigs. We must attack the imperialist corporations at the point of production. We must avoid attacking public or government institutions or small businesses, but attack what is behind it all. We must develop a movement that will be the legitimate bearer of the American dream. We need to stop making merely symbolic acts “against the empire,” and begin actually cutting into its real power through attacks on its ability to produce. We need to terrorize the ruling class, not the politicians, but the big boys -- those grey, faceless men whose names we may know, but whose faces are unfamiliar because they put their automated lackeys like Nixon in the limelight so he will be hated, and if he gets out of line they will kill him like the Kennedys. Let's put them in the limelight, turn the spotlight on them.

We need to free our revolutionaries in prisons by direct action by kidnapping a big boy for ransom or assault. We need to serve the people by making food and shelter and medicine available as the services begin breaking down. We must get drugs out of our communities, and expose the systematic drugging of the North American people by the powers that be. We must organize the communities for survival, AS WE CARRY ON THE ARMED STRUGGLE, not before we begin.

In building a military strategy, we need to think along the lines of guerilla warfare though we must keep in mind that the basic principle of guerilla warfare is to develop a strategy and tactics based upon the conditions in a particular country. So no specific strategy that has been developed can be lifted and applied. We must search out principles and apply them to existing conditions, considering all factors, including historical development. We must also develop a strategy which is flexible, because flexibility is the key to wearing down the enemy, and remaining intact. The enemy's forces are mechanical and bureaucratically controlled.

We must avoid our usual cause and effect way of thinking about things, not expecting immediate results of a dramatic nature. Revolutionary armed struggle is a science. If you follow certain principles certain results will occur, but not in cause and effect fashion. We must abandon our present time scale. Revolutionary struggle has no time scale, though it is at all stages ARMED and military in nature. It must be carried on by any means necessary; won as fast as possible; fought as long as necessary (the Vietnamese say: "We will fight from one generation to the next"). We cannot look for immediate rewards, instant success, or dramatic victories. Nor can we expect excitement and adventure. Most of the work is dull, monotonous, exhausting, nerve-wracking, unrewarded, and even unproductive much of the time since we make many errors because we are learning from scratch.

If you have worked in a factory, been in the armed forces, done construction work, worked on a farm, been a truck driver, done waitressing, been in jail, done clerical work, been a housewife and mother without help, you will have some preparation in tolerance for the kind of work you will do in the armed struggle. It is not like school or professional work or lovely movement subculture. People who are accustomed to the easy life will have a difficult time adjusting to the routine and discipline. What is most difficult for anyone is the necessity to be creative and think all the time, and not expect orders from above, there being no above. Only practice brings on the skill of creativity and it is slow in coming and hard to maintain.

Your group will want to develop a very simple, very attainable program of action that fits your potential resources, and not set out to bring the empire down all by yourselves. You should see your group as contributing to the whole of the armed struggle, not as the core or even the little motor (Debray) that starts the big motor. There will have to be many little motors. Yours is just one. Your group will be a "cog in the wheel." Such an attitude does not lend itself to revolutionary adventurism. But your serious, sustained activity and development is what will bring trust from the people and their support and eventual participation. At first, you can only ask, as Marighelli put it, that the people will not OPPOSE the revolutionaries. Do not expect support at first, or even less some sort of uprising of the people. The people have been lied to many times and have a lot at stake; they are rightly suspicious and are not going to put themselves on the line for some nuts out for some fun and games, revolution for the hell of it. It will take a lot to overcome that image of revolution in this country, and it will take a while for people to know you are serious.

Remember that all worthwhile things, life itself, begin very small and develop slowly. No matter how discouraging, how hopeless your situation may seem, do not give up the basic understanding that armed struggle must be built as the basis of our movement and figure out how to work better. Do not question the laws of revolution, only the tactics. Armed struggle as the road to liberation is a law, not an idea. It won't come easy and it won't be fun.

The technical aspects of preparation may seem vast and overwhelming at first. You shouldn't try to do everything or more than you can handle. Keep it as simple and effective as possible. Don't think you have to have machine guns and dynamite to begin. And always remember the safety of the people.

Who am I speaking to when I say we should form military units? Should everyone do this? I don't think we have to worry about everyone rushing to form armed units. What we have to worry about is to get enough people doing it, in the beginning when the way is not clear. Also, not everyone should do the same thing. Some people in the movement are in good positions to work openly. That does not mean they can't live double lives and do support work for an armed group. Every movement person should be available to at least do support work if called upon by an armed group. What I am calling for here is for the formation of groups whose full occupation would be to operate as armed units furthering the armed struggle systematically with a strategy in formulation. The members would probably also work on jobs, be "housewives," etc., but under false identities, not seeing old friends and family. They would be "underground." (It would be unlikely that anyone except someone very well known and identifiable and sought after by the law would ever have to "hide out.") They would probably have to be in a different place from where they did their movement work. Any revolutionary who has the choice of a trial or prison or going underground in this way should seriously consider going underground IN THIS COUNTRY with a small group to carry on armed struggle.

In the movement, there is an aura of romanticism and mystery around armed struggle, probably because there has been so little of it by revolutionaries in this country present or past. The myth of “underground” is not easily dispelled. Serious revolutionaries are