FLEECING

THE PRESCHOOL

SHEEP: see

big business cashes in on daycare

We came in early with the commuter
traffic to get to the Hotel Commodore
where the big conference on whether and
how big business (toy makers, "educa-
tional" materials makers -- like films,
books, etc. --, established chains in
day care like Mary Moppett, and others
involved such as educators and market
analysts) should begin investing in
early learning and day care.

We came because we felt a need to
demonstrate that this kind of approach
to people's needs is all wrong. Big
business has not just had a sudden
revelation that people need day care
and therefore moved to act; rather, it
has seen that in many communities
people are moving on their own to

establish day care for their children
and seen in this a possibility to
move in, run things their own way,
and make tidy profits.

We have day care centers established.
There are two in Iowa City. There are
a dozen in New York. They are parent-
controlled. They are free. They are
staffed by parents and unpaid volunteers.
They are running on donated or bor-
rowed space and supplies. They des-
perately need funding. The most ded-
icated volunteer will eventually
have to give up if money does not
come from somewhere.

How ironic! As we are struggling
to survive and give our children
decent and loving attention, we took
a few days off to be amazed at a
conference at which delegates who had
paid $225 each came to discuss how
they could set up NON-parent-controlled,
profit-operating day care. Corner on
the market!

ACTION AT THE COMMODORE

The Commodore is right next to
Grand Central Station. As we arrived
we were leafletted with a statement
from the women and a schedule of the
conference. Outside the hotel entrance
was a moving picket line, well-stocked
with signs: FREE DAYCARE FOR OUR
CHILDREN! OUR LAMBS SHALL NOT BE
FLEECED! (this particular sign was
prompted by the title of one of the
talks: "Fleecing the Preschool Sheep").

New York, Boston, and New Haven
women had come together. Word passed
around: move up to the conference area
in small groups. We did, past a florid
hotel manager (hey! come on, now, hold
it, just get out of here....) keeping
cool, just drifting up. There were
monitors after a fashion who were
responsible (as much as possible) for
signaling when a bust was coming. The

strategy meeting the prior night had
decided to avoid a bust. When about 50
women got upstairs the signs came out
and the press towards the doors began.
It took about 3 minutes to get in;
women took over the stage and lined
the walls with their signs.

It was so easy that we felt some-
what adrift as to what to do; some
women took turns at the mike presenting
our case: that child care is a service
which should not be available only to
those who can afford to buy it; that
child care must be motivated by love
and care, by parental concern and
activity, not by profitability; we
extended an invitation to visit our
already established centers; we told
them we needed money.

Actually, nothing that clear
probably came across to anyone. The
conference was in fact disintegrating
to chaos as delegates, various factions
of the women, and, soon, children
accompanying the women challenged each
other.

The conferees were trying hard to
keep their cool, to be accommodating.
First they invited 3 women to stay for
the rest of the conference, then 4; then
a 10-minute recess was called and we
were all invited to stay on the undis-
cussed premise that we allow the pre-
sentations to be given and save our
attacks for the "proper time" and re-
main courteous (a rather naive
assumption since few if any of the women
had the slightest idea of conference
etiquette). It didn't work. Argument.
Outburst. Children screaming. We were
called racist cop-outs. They were
called fascists. We demanded money.
75¢ was collected. Pig photographers

got thrown out. The hotel people looked
very worried. Some delegates were out-
raged. Some were amused. Some were
right on.

Many delegates seemed "well-you-
may-have-a-point-and-I-am-sincerely-
interested-in-finding-it-out-but-can't-
you-be-more-orderly?" It was really
hard for me to believe that all these
people had no idea of what was going
on, no idea of why we were angry, no
idea of how desperate we are for con-
tinuing our centers on the ideals on
which they are founded: love for the
children, completely parent-controlled,

FREE: I couldn't make up my mind: were
they really so ignorant or was this a
big PR show? In any case, they really
wanted to get out of that mess. And

they pulled a good tactic. They recessed
for lunch and left the women the room.
We were getting ourselves together for

a badly-needed strategy meeting when
word came in that pigs were in formation
outside.

We split. Groups went out singing
the beautiful song: 
CHILDREN POWER TO THE CHILDREN PEOPLE!
WOMEN POWER TO THE WOMEN PEOPLE!

PARENT POWER TO THE PARENT PEOPLE!
STOP WALL STREET? POWER TO THE PEOPLE!

Iowa women went to Grand Central
and ate sandwiches and then went back
to check out the Commodore. Three pig
cars outside, the conference had been
moved to another room, and no one with-
out credentials got past the man with
the gun.

We decided to get down to the women's
center where a meeting was gathering.
Eventually we reached a consensus to
stage a strong picket, at least in the
early morning, to pass out the remaining
leaflets and to let them know we were
still there. A list of unfunded centers
was drawn up to be passed out.

And that was the extent of our
involvement with this action. I'm left
with definitely mixed feelings. The
women were not together on the action;
there were really no plans for what to
do if the conference were liberated. In
so far as such a conference should never
have been held in the first place,
though, we contributed a lot to messing
it down.

We have so damn much to do! We have
to define our needs, where we hurt and
why we hurt; and WHO in terms of EXISTING
PEOPLE is our enemy? Should I assume
a person is an enemy until he proves
himself a friend (and most of the
delegates were, of course, "he's")? We
have so much getting together to do!
ALL POWER TO THE BEAUTIFUL RIGHTEOUSNESS
OF THE PEOPLE! AND LOVE TO OUR SISTERS...

I!