**Women LOVING Women**

How do gay women make love without a penis?

Answer 1. Masters and Johnson have finally made public what many women have known all along: it's clitoral stimulation, whether direct or indirect, which leads to orgasm—not vaginal stimulation. That is not to say that pressure in the vagina doesn't feel good or is unnecessary for some women. But women can provide that pleasure for each other with their fingers or tongues. However, many women come to orgasm with no penetration of the vagina, and often prefer it that way.

Answer 2. Any woman who masturbates knows how women make love to each other. For that matter, any woman who has been lucky enough to have a male lover who didn't use his penis to make love to her, also knows. Women may use their hands, their mouths, their breasts, pressure from their knee or thigh—anything that feels good to their lover.

How do you feel about not having babies?

Answer 1. It's just not true that lesbians can't have or have given up having a family just because they don't relate to men. If I really wanted to have a baby naturally, I'd go get pregnant in the time-honored way. But there are plenty of children born already, and single-parent adoption is one clear solution to that problem.  
Answer 2. Also, there are many lesbians—married, divorced, and single—who have children.  
Answer 3. The myth of a woman's destiny and fulfillment being partially centered around having babies is pure bunk. A married woman with four children pointed out that child-bearing has been romanticized and mythologized all out of proportion.  
Answer 4. I don't like kids, but that doesn't mean I have no family. All the women in the community are my family.  
Answer 5. Several women explained that they live communally with people who do have children, and caring for and "raising" the children is done collectively.

What do you see as some of the differences between heterosexual and lesbian lovemaking?

Answer 1. Well, it's almost hard to talk of "differences" because my inclination is to think in terms of how making love with women is so much nicer than with men. But striving for objectivity, I'd say that one big difference is the result of there being so few preknown "goals" in mind when women make love. Even when a man is conscientiously trying to give a woman pleasure and bring her to orgasm, as long as he is using his penis anyway, there seems to be this goal of the great mutual orgasm in the sky. That puts a subtle tension that is almost competitive on the people involved. With women I feel that there are so many more options. A woman may make love to her lover with no sexual goal in mind for herself, other than her enjoyment of her lover's pleasure. Of course, they may make love simultaneously as well.  
Answer 2. Also, I feel that orgasm isn't this item of paramount importance when women make love. If it happens, great, but the joys of making love with a woman don't seem to be diminished if the experience isn't "successful" in what I think are heterosexual terms.  
Answer 3. Another thing I like is that I often get off making love to a woman without her "reciprocating" the way she would have to be doing if I were a male. It's like her beauty and her ecstasy evoke those responses in me naturally, without her having to think about them. In fact, the more she abandons herself to her pleasure, the more exciting it is for me.

Recently a workshop on Women Loving Women was held for women interested in discussing lesbianism. All kinds of women were there—gay women, straight women, bisexual women, and "fuzzies" (an affectionately coined word for women who think they're gay but haven't actually had a gay experience). We began by everyone saying things that they liked about women—such things as women's softness, strength, physical beauty, sensitivity, mutual trust, common experience, and emotional honesty and expressiveness were mentioned.

As we grew more comfortable with each other, the women who hadn't had gay experiences asked about things which were important for them to understand. They were beautifully honest and very basic questions to help further understanding between gay and straight women. These are some of the questions which were discussed there.

Can you be politically but not sexually gay? Like if you're celibate?

Answer 1. Sure, I guess. It seems to be increasingly common with women into WL for them to know they don't want to relate to men and in fact don't, but they feel real uptight about calling themselves gay because they've never had a physical relationship with a woman. I wish women in that place would read "Woman-Identified Woman," a really fantastic article. I feel that if a woman believes she's gay—that is, she defines herself in woman-identified ways, she knows her goals/priorities/self-concept arise from the woman she is and not what men would have her be and do, then she has a right to say she's gay.  
Answer 2. Definitely. Being gay isn't simply a sexual definition. It's all those things just described. And women in that place will eventually and naturally find that someday their emotional/sexual self will respond to a woman and it will be expressed sexually.  
Answer 3. It's been said a lot and I agree—"political" and "personal" are not mutually exclusive aspects of a person's life. Sooner or later you see how they merge into one. No matter which place you are, one leads to the other. If your politics have led you not to relate to men that's bound to affect your personal life; and if your personal life, sexually, is involved with women, sooner or later you see that's a political thing.

November 19, 1971

Do men have to be hated in, or excluded from, a gay woman's life altogether?

Answer 1. No, of course not. But mainly that's a negative way to look at it.  
Answer 2. I agree. It just makes sense that if all your priorities revolve around women, you'll spontaneously relate to fewer and fewer men. And we all know there are plenty of good reasons for not relating to most men.  
Answer 3. Yeah. Too many people have this stereotype that lesbians are irrational man-haters (the old male rap about a lesbian being a lesbian because she can't get a man). The point is lesbians are woman-lovers. That's a real positive, beautiful thing.

What are some of the problems of being gay in a heterosexual society?

Answer 1. So many of the answers here are obvious: constant play-acting to keep jobs, family approval, straight friends who would freak out if they knew. It infuriates me to see heterosexual couples holding hands or kissing in public—if we did that all kinds of shit would come down. Even lesbians who are privileged and can afford to be upfront personally have to be on guard because they could endanger their friends' security so easily.  
Answer 2. The isolation was always the worst problem for me. Lesbians who aren't in touch with a gay community—often they may not know any other gay people—have to deal with it. They have no one else for support and understanding, no models of lesbians who've made it through problems similar to theirs, no one to socialize with naturally. For so long, before the woman I loved and I ever knew any other gay women, we always had to pose as good friends, play the heterosexual game superficially, etc. etc. Now that I've met lots of gay women I feel incredibly stronger and more “natural.” It pisses me off to read articles by straight shrinks talking about how neurotic homosexuals sometimes are, as if that were “the cause of the disease,” instead of seeing the society as both the cause and the disease. And I know there are countless lesbians who still live isolated lives, and will until society as we know it no longer exists.  
Answer 3. Shit—everywhere you look: TV, movies, magazines, advertisements, everywhere: sexist/homosexist propaganda to perpetuate straight society and benefit straight men.  
Answer 4. It's the forced duplicity in everything—you're isolated from your family, and you can't be honest with the people you really want to be honest with. I've known women who have come out to their best friends—women who had known, loved, and accepted them completely for years—and the "best friend" had to stop and think about whether she could accept that, still be friends. It makes me mad that a woman would do that, but I'm madder at the society that teaches the shit that causes such an inhuman reaction.

Other good questions were asked, which were too heavy to deal with on this page. We have ideas on these but we'd like to hear what other people think.

1) How do straight women oppress gay women?  
2) Is being gay a prerequisite for being considered a serious, really committed revolutionary WL woman?  
3) What is the difference between being bisexual and being gay? How does that difference read politically?  

Page 7