We are attempting to understand class ideology in the United States  
from its material roots. While it is possible to find exceptions  

to the generalizations we will make about the ideology of both the  
working class and the middle class, these exceptions do not in and  
of themselves discount our theory. They simply demonstrate that  

the American class system is still somewhat fluid and people still  
believe in its promise of mobility.  

How should middle class  

women relate to a  

revolutionary struggle?  

A. THE IDEOLOGY OF THE MIDDLE CLASS  

Hypothesis: Because of the role the middle class plays in the  
economic hierarchy, they voice an ideology which cannot create  
a classless society.  

1. MANAGERIAL CLASS  

The middle class could be called the managerial class. They  
are the middlemen between the big bosses and the workers, and  
the professional people who have been given power over others  
through higher education. While they do not wield the power  
of the society, they are the instruments of the ruling class,  
the bosses to the majority of people. Middle class women who  
are not in these administrative positions share the same world  
outlook through their marriage. Because they receive status  
and security as members of the managerial class,  

their identification is with the bosses and not with the  
workers. Their ideology justifies their position in the class  
hierarchy.  

2. MIDDLE CLASS SUPERIORITY COMPLEX  

As an administrator, professional, or the wife of a member of  
the managerial class, the middle class woman considers her-  
self superior to the working people involved in production  
and service. She considers her work (or her husband's) vital  
and significant and the work of the common person unimportant  
and menial -- "anyone could do it." She looks down upon the  
“uneducated" working people and views their ideas as inferior.  
The middle class shuns the life of the working class: their  
manners, dress, style of speaking, standards of cleanliness,  
ways of raising children, and even their music. Country wes-  
tern was considered stupid and sentimental until it became a  
middle class fad.  

Middle class ideology again justifies the middle class posi-  
tion in the class hierarchy. Their superior attitude toward  
working people makes it impossible for the middle class to  
create a classless society. Were the middle class to lead a  
revolution the working class would simply acquire a new  
master.  

3. LIBERAL IDEOLOGY  

Perhaps the greatest instrument for justifying the middle  
class position and maintaining the status quo is liberal ide-  
ology. It insists that change must be brought about within  
the existing system, that reform will solve the great social  
ills of the society. Liberal ideology does not want to talk  
"revolution" or "seizing power" or "military organization."  
It believes in gradualism and evolution. Its proponents do  
not want to upset the balance of the social order because  
they benefit from things as they are. Liberal ideology tries  
to "help the needy" (the social worker mentality). In essence,  
it supports the institutionalization of a welfare state  
(guaranteed income, health insurance, etc.). Not having any  
immediate material needs, the middle class just wants to make  
a few changes so they can live more comfortably and absolve  
their social conscience with welfare programs. They attempt  
to appease discontent and conflict by preaching sensitivity  
and tolerance among opposing social forces. This ideology ig-  
nores power relationships and does not recognize the material  
base of class and sex differences.  

B. THE IDEOLOGY OF THE WORKING CLASS  

Hypothesis: Because of their role in the class hierarchy working  
class women voice an ideology which could create a classless  
state.  

1. PRODUCTION AND SERVICE CLASS  

Working class people are involved primarily in production  
and service work: assembly, construction, office, secretari-  
al, domestic, food service, hospital, etc. Being directly  
involved in production or service work, they know how things  

Volume 3 Number 1  

run from the bottom up. They know that their work is basic  
and contributes directly to meeting the needs of the society.  
However, they receive little in return for their labor. It is  
the managerial and ruling class who benefit from the work of  
the working class. While the working class creates the pro-  
fits, they have little or nothing to say about where the pro-  
fits go or what is produced. They have no control over work-  
ing conditions. Because they are involved in the daily reali-  
ty of production and service the working class has the mater-  
ial base necessary to overturn the existing system and to  
create and run a society of, by, and for the people.  

2. THE COMMON PERSON  

The working class woman is low-person in the hierarchy. She  
is nobody's boss. She is superior to no one but considers  
herself equal to all. Working class ideology understands the  
necessity of real work even though work is shit under the  
existing system. You clean bathtubs because you know somebody  
has to and you cook because people have to eat. The common  
person can readily understand the necessity for thinking and  
working collectively. She has no superior image to protect,  
no position to lose in the revolution. She can only benefit  
by gaining control over her life.  

A classless revolution must elevate the position of the masses  
and return to them control over their own lives. Working class  
ideology respects the common person and because of this re-  
spect is capable of leading a revolution to create a class-  
less state.  

3. MATERIALIST IDEOLOGY  

Because the working class acts from its experience and sees  
the world from a materialist perspective they are not taken  
in by middle class liberal ideology. They look for real solu-  
tions to their problems. They don't support liberal reforms  
because they realize the tax burden is on them. They look for  
practical solutions that work. In America today the only prac-  
tical solution is revolution. Working class women are not  
about to join a social movement involved in bandaging the  
existing system at their expense. They will move when they  
see a real alternative that serves their interests and allows  
them to regain control over their lives. That will be when  
there is a viable Feminist movement really talking about re-  
volution and seriously organizing to that end.  

CONCLUSION  

We began this discussion by asking the question, "What is the  
significance of class to the Revolutionary Feminist struggle?"  

We have explained why we believe the revolutionary struggle must  
be led by working class women and that women of all classes must  
unite under a working class world perspective. Further, we believe  
that the new revolutionary society must be governed by the dic-  
tatorship of working class women. Many Feminists seem to be oper-  
ating on the assumption that it is possible to move directly from  
a society where men oppress women to a society where men and women  
are equal, or that we can move directly from a society where one  
class oppresses another to a society where all classes are equal.  
This is impossible. While, without question, our goal is complete  
equality of all people we must be very practical. People’s minds  
are not changed overnight. Those who benefit from their power as  
oppressors will not become our equals simply by an exchange of  
power. It will take time and struggle to clean up the mess and  
straighten out the twisted minds that male supremacy has created  
during its centuries of rule. The ideological struggle that is  
part of a revolution must continue long after the revolutionaries  
have seized power. Bad ideas from the old society must be contin-  
ually struggled with and rooted out. Racism, Classism, and Sexism  
cannot be tolerated. The dictatorship of working class women means  
the end of oppressive games for political power among individual  
men, the end of the politics of the ego. It means the recreation  
of the matriarchy, the recreation of a society organized to pro-  
vide for the collective needs of the people, and the beginning of  
an entirely new era in human history. It will mean that for a time  
after the seizure of power working class women must control society  
and rebuild it in their interests. Counter revolutionaries must be  
deprived of their right to speak and their right to organize in  
order to ensure the success of the revolution. All other people  
will participate collectively with working class women to build a  
classless Feminist State.  

Men cannot create a Feminist State, they must follow women. Middle  
and ruling class women cannot create a classless society, they  
must follow the working class women. The task that clearly lies  
before us is the building of a powerful Revolutionary-Feminist  
Movement. Let us move forward.  

Written by  
Radical Feminists 28  
Minneapolis, Minnesota  

for more copies of this and other  
RF-28 literature write to:  

RF-28  

Box 7064  

Powderhorn Station  
Minneapolis, Minnesota 55407  

Bulk rate: 30% discount on orders  
over 25 copies