The column "Old Wives' Tales" is being sent to  
Ain't I A Woman? by the Los Angeles Self Help Clinic  
One. 5  

Same Old Wives' Tales.  

Some Old Wives' Tales *  
by  

Self-Help Clinic One  

© Copyrighted 1971  

Jeanne  

*Formerly known as "Old Wives' Tales". We enjoy printing our  
sisters' comments and questions for all sisters to share. If you  
want to contribute to "Some Old Wives' Tales" please write us in  
care of Self Help Clinic One, 1027 So. Crenshaw, Los Angeles,  
California 90019.  

We believe that the expression "Old Wives' Tales" needs to be  
used once again with its former meaning intact; "Experienced  
women's knowledge".  

We women have been systematically denied the knowledge to ba-  
sic care of our bodies. We are forced to seek "professional" help  
from a male-oriented and male-dominated system instead of knowing  
what we can safely do for ourselves. We are tired of this rip-off.  
It is time that we take back the control over our own bodies that  
we once had. Let's learn from one another and help our sisters,  
help ourselves.  

Dear O.W.T.,  

Every time I get examined I am told that I am "tipped". The  
first time this happened I freaked out. I don't seem to feel any  
different but worry because no one has yet bothered to answer me.  
Is there something wrong? Can I get pregnant more easily? Or  
cancer?  

In sisterhood,  

Margie T., Chicago, Ill.  

Dear Margie,  

Would you believe that most of us are "tipped" one way or the  
other, and have been equally scared by physicians? They  
tell us not to be concerned. The only time the angle of tip be-  
comes important is when I.U.D.'s or other instruments are inserted  
into the uterus. Skilled hands greatly diminish any risks.  

O.W.T.  

Dear Old Wives' T's;  

Every time I think about getting another pelvic examination,  
I wind up putting it off for another month. I have yet to find a  
gentle doctor and dread the examination almost as much as I dread  
sitting in the sterile white unfriendly waiting room. Other than  
a Pap test, my visit usually says everything is fine. And it is  
expensive to be told that I'm fine. Why can't we have do-it-yourself  
Pap tests? I read somewhere that a doctor in Maryland deve-  
loped such a kit about 7 or 8 years ago.  
What happened to the idea?  

Arbie S., Chicago, Ill.  

Dear Arbie,  

We too have heard of it. Apparently it is still being used  
in various places, our digging uncovered. Canadian women, for one,  
and some "underdeveloped nations" for another—to name a few. We  
can only guess that it is being withheld from us for the same  
reasons we have never been encouraged to learn more about our  
bodies and have our own speculums. To be more specific; $$$$$$$$$$  
out of you-know-who's pockets. Self Help Clinic One is trying,  
though, to get some sources for some answers.  

O.W.T.  

A Woman? (Volume 2, Issue 4-Medical Supplement).  

medics.  

Our observations  

Do you know what happened  

January 4, 1972  

medical Bulletins  

In the past several weeks, women from the Los Angeles Self  
Help Clinic have come under heavy criticism from several "leftist"  
newspapers. Both the Village Voice and the Guardian have printed  
articles attacking the L.A. women for everything from being unsafe  
to having an incorrect approach for dealing with inadequate medical  
care. In at least one case, the self-help clinic was blatantly  
misrepresented.... the accusation that the women were advocating  
cervical self-examination to replace Pap smears for cancer detec-  
tion was not true.  

Also, the women were charged with using incorrect tactics.  
It was suggested that women should be organizing around the health  
professions rather than on their own. On one hand, it may be help-  
ful to have the knowledge and skill of some sympathetic profession-  
als (no one is completely excluding that alternative). But we  
aren't going to have control of the medical institutions in this  
country until there's a revolution. Until that time, we can be-  
gin to look after ourselves as much as possible. That is exactly  
what the L.A. women and others are beginning to do.  

The self-help clinics are one of the most productive actions  
I've seen in the women's movement. Health care is a basic need of  
all people. Any skills and knowledge we can acquire in order to  
meet people's needs (especially at little or no cost to people  
who don't have the money) is valuable work. The attacks on the L.A.  
women were frightened, reactionary responses to women taking control  
of their own lives.  

The page numbers in the last issue of Ain't I A Woman  
were messed up because we had some trouble get-  
ting the medical supplement printed. Sorry if  
it was confusing.  

The AIAW collective wants to re-state the warning pertaining  
to the menstrual extraction article in the last issue of Ain't I  
A Woman. Women should not  
attempt to improvise instruments to perform menstrual extraction on  
themselves or on other women. Using too much suction to extract  
the contents of the uterus or using an instrument that will not  
collapse upon touching the uterine wall are both potentially very  
dangerous. Although the process of menstrual extraction is not  
difficult, there is still some amount of knowledge and skill required  
before it should be attempted.  

Hopefully, in the very near future, menstrual extraction will  
become more widely practiced, by doctors as well as by women.  
Until then, it is unwise to attempt doing menstrual ex-  
tractions.  

H  

Page 11