gh school  
nen  

Last week I went to West High  
with women from WL to speak to the  
students. Women's workshops were  
organized to discuss Lesbianism,  
Marriage and Roles, and Daycare  
and a male group discussed roles  
and stereotypes.  

I walked in after the workshop  
on marriage had started. Having pre-  
viously attended other workshops  
with women I did not know, I expect-  
ed the usual hostility and defensive-  
ness. I was elated that the 50 or  
so women were having a real warm  
and personal discussion. Ann from  
WL talked about her child and how  
daycare helps the child as well as  
the mother, by surrounding him  
with other people who play with  
him so he does not feel so dependent  
on one person. Some of the high  
school students really related to  
this, and I think because she had  
a child, trusted her opinion about  
daycare.  

When the second hour came all  
the students went to one room and  
some of the women decided they had  
had enough of just relating to  
women and were ready to talk to  
men. Two WL women explained that  
they had come to speak to women,  
and that they didn't intend to  
speak to a mixed group. The high  
school women were really insistent  
so we broke into two groups, one  
mixed, and one women only. Because  
the women went into the second  
workshop with the intention of  
"telling off the men", it developed  
into a shouting ego trip, and our  
presence there was totally unnec-  
essary. What I realized was that we  
had made a terrible mistake by  
dividing into two groups. First of  
all we insulted the WL women who  
had so insisted on talking to  
women only, by leaving them, to  
talk to men (remember that trip)  
in a mixed group. Secondly we had  

been invited there for a reason—  

to speak to women about women.  
Experience has shown that speaking  
in a mixed group never allows women  
to relate to each other - but again  
puts them in the position where  
they have to be defensive. Where the  
hour workshop could have been really  
important as far as allowing women  
the opportunity to speak about them-  
selves, (as the second hour women-  
only workshop did,) the time was  
wasted. I came away really upset  

for having allowed myself to fall  
for the old line of putting the  
interests of men before the  
interests of women, and frustrated  

Daminglen® Women |  

The whole business of the house came up  
when we were trying to find a place that  
wouldn't have all the drawbacks of the  
apartment that was the center last year.  
For all our sentimental attachments to it,  
everybody saw that the apartment was IMPOS-  
SIBLE. The worst thing about it was that  
people couldn't live in it with the organ-  
ization. Trying to do so was destructive  
of them.  

When we started looking for a house, the  
first thing we found was that it was impos-  
sible to find anything to rent. When the  
chance came to buy on contract with the  
owner of 414 North Park, we began - the few  
of us around at the end of summer - to  
think of ways we could do it. The biggest  
problem was getting the down-payment money  
($6000) plus $200 for insurance and legal  
fees. We were able to find people (some of  
them outside WL) who would put up the  
money, but most of them needed it back  

soon. We figured that we could sell shares  
in the house to pay them back. We would  
need to sell 260 shares at $25/share to  
make $6500, a sum that would allow a  

small cushion for emergencies. This did  
not seem impossible - in fact, we thought  
it could be done. We have a large member-  
ship, a larger periphery, friends in many  
parts. We even thought it might be easily  
done.  

We put the matter before Women's Libera-  
tion at the September meeting and got an  
enthusiastic response. Since then hundreds  
of people have seen and used the house -  
it has been successful as a center. The  
people who live in it and make the monthly  
payments have not been too hassled by  
living with a center. It has been a refuge  
for many other women who needed a tempo-  
rary place to stay. It has housed the of-  
fice, the literature, many a meeting of  
support or activity group. All in all, it's  

December 1, 1970  

because of the comparison of how  
really beautiful the first workshop  
was compared to the second. I think  
it's really important to understand why  
we should be aware of how easy it is to  
be divisive, and how destructive it  
is. We should not have offered  

any alternatives for a mixed group  

to the high school women, and should  
certainly not have supported them when  
they insisted. This is not saying  

we would not have allowed one to  

take place, if they thought it was  

so important. By supporting it and  
attending it we gave validity to  

a masculine-identified discussion  

that was anti-women.  

a good house.  

But we have a problem. We didn't expect  
September to be a good month for shares.  
October was our big hype. And by the end of  
October we had sold 16 (sixteen) shares.  

That is not very many shares. Moreover inter-  
est seems to be dying down. The house has be-  
gun to be taken for granted.  

Well, we can't take it for granted. There  
is no way we can keep the house if we don't  
pay the money. It's as simple as that. If  
we want a center - this center - we will  
have to sell shares.  

Bloomington WLF Newsletter, Nov., 1970  

For comments or contributions write:  
Bloomington WE 4K NN, Inc.  
Bloomington, Indiana 47901  

page 3