Be

safe

the tyranny of

structurelessness

During the years in which the women's liberation movement has
been taking shape a great emphasis has been placed on what are
called leaderless, structureless groups as the main—if not sole—
organizational form of the movement. The source of this idea was
a natural reaction against the over-structured society in which
most of us found ourselves, the inevitable control this gave others
over our lives, and the continual elitism of the Left and similar
groups among those who were supposedly fighting this overstructured-
ness.

The idea of structurelessness, however, has moved from a healthy
counter to these tendencies to becoming a goddess in its own right.
The idea is as little examined as the term is much used, but it has
become an intrinsic and unquestioned part of women's liberation
ideology. For the early development of the movement this did not
much matter. It early defined its main goal, and its main method,
as consciousness-raising, and the "structureless" rap group was an
excellent means to this end. The looseness and informality of it
encouraged participation in discussion and its often supportive
atmosphere elicited personal insight. If nothing more concrete
than personal insight ever resulted from these groups, that did
not much matter, because their purpose did not really extend be-
yond this.

The basic problems didn't appear until individual rap groups
exhausted the virtues of consciousness-raising and decided they
wanted to do something more specific. At this point they usually
floundered because most groups were unwilling to change their
structure when they changed their tasks. Women had thoroughly
accepted the idea of "structurelessness" without realizing the
limitations of its uses. People would try to use the "structure-
less" group and the informal conference for purposes for which
they were unsuitable out of a blind belief that no other means
could possibly be anything but oppressive.

If the movement is to move beyond these elementary stages of
development, it will have to disabuse itself of some of its preju-
dices about organization and structure. There is nothing inherently
bad about either of these. They can and often are misused, but
to reject them out of hand because they are misused is to deny our-
selves the necessary tools to further development. We need to un-
derstand why “structurelessness" does not work.

Formal & Informal Structures

Contrary to what we would like to believe, there is no such
thing as a structureless group. Any group of people of whatever
nature that comes together for any length of time for any purpose
will inevitably structure itself in some fashion. The structure
may be flexible; it may vary over time; it may evenly or unevenly
distribute tasks, power, and resources over the members of the
group. But it will be formed regardless of the abilities, person-
alities, or intentions of the people involved. The very fact that
we are individuals with different talents, predispositions, and
backgrounds makes this inevitable. Only if we refused to relate or
interact on any basis whatsoever could we approximate structure-
lessness and that is not the nature of a human group.

This means that to strive for a structureless group is as use-
ful, and as deceptive, as to aim at an "objective" news story,
“value-free" social science, or a "free" economy. A "laissez
faire" group is about as realistic as a "laissez faire" society;
the idea becomes a smoke screen for the strong or the lucky to
establish unquestioned hegemony over others. This hegemony can be
so easily established because the idea of "structurelessness" does
not prevent the formation of informal structures, only formal ones.
Similarly "laissez faire" philosophy did not prevent the economi-
cally powerful from establishing control over wages, prices, and
distribution of goods; it only prevented the government from doing
so. Thus structurelessness becomes a way of masking power, and
within the women's movement is usually most strongly advocated by
those who are the most powerful (whether they are conscious of their
power or not). As long as the structure of the group is informal,
the rules of how decisions are made are known only to a few and
awareness of power is curtailed to those who know the rules. Those
who do not know the rules and are not chosen for initiation must
remain in confusion, or suffer from paranoid delusions that some-
thing is happening of which they are not quite aware.

For everyone to have the opportunity to be involved in a given
group and to participate in its activities the structure must be
explicit, not implicit. The rules of decision-making must be open
and available to everyone, and this can happen only if they are
formalized. This is not to say that formalization of a structure
of a group will destroy the informal structure. It usually doesn't.
But it does hinder the informal structure from having predominant
control and make available some means of attacking it if the people
involved are not at least responsible to the needs of the group at
large. "Structurelessness" is organizationally impossible. We
cannot decide whether to have a structured or structureless group;
only whether or not to have a formally structured one. Therefore
the word will not be used any longer except to refer to the idea
it represents. Unstructured will refer to those groups which have
not been deliberately structured in a particular manner. Structured
will refer to those which have. A structured group always has a

page 2

formal structure, and may also have an informal one. An unstruc-
tured group always has an informal, or covert, structure. It is
this informal structure, particularly in unstructured groups, which
forms the basis for elites.

The Nature of Elitism

"Elitist" is probably the most abused word in the women's libera-
tion movement. It is used as frequently, and for the same reasons,
as "pinko" was used in the fifties. It is never used correctly.
Within the movement it commonly refers to individuals, though the
personal characteristics and activities of those to whom it is
directed may differ widely. An individual, as an individual, can
never be an elitist, because the only proper application of the
term "elite" is to groups. Any individual, regardless of how well
known that person may be, can never be an elite.

Correctly, an elite refers to a small group of people who have
power over a larger group of which they are part, usually without
direct responsibility to that larger group, and often without
their knowledge or consent. A person becomes an elitist by being
part of, or advocating the rule by, such a small group, whether or
not that individual is well known or not known at all. Notoriety
is not a definition of an elitist. The most insidious elites are
usually run by people not known to the larger public at all.
Intelligent elitists are usually smart enough not to allow them-
selves to become well known; when they become known, they are
watched, and the mask over their power is no longer firmly lodged.

Because elites are informal does not mean they are invisible.
At any small group meeting anyone with a sharp eye and an acute
ear can tell who is influencing whom. The members of a friend-

ship group will relate more to each other than to other people.

They listen more attentively, and interrupt less. They repeat
each other's points and give in amiably. The “outs" they tend to
ignore or grapple with. The "outs" approval is not necessary for
making a decision, but it is necessary for the "outs" to stay on
good terms with the "ins". Of course the lines are not as sharp
as I have drawn them. They are nuances of interaction, not pre-
written scripts. But they are discernible, and they do have their
effect. Once one knows with whom it is important to check before
a decision is made, and whose approval is the stamp of acceptance, 
one knows who is running things.

Elites are not conspiracies. Very seldom does a small group
of people get together and deliberately try to take over a larger
group for its own ends. Elites are nothing more, and nothing less,
than groups of friends who also happen to participate in the same
political activities. They would probably maintain their friend-
ship whether or not they were involved in political activities;
they would probably be involved in political activities whether
or not they maintained their friendships. It is the coincidence
of these two phenomena which creates elites in any groups and makes
them so difficult to break.

These friendship groups function as networks of communication
outside any regular channels for such communication that may have
been set up by a group. If no channels are set up, they function
as the only networks of communication. Because people are friends,
because they usually share the same values and orientations,
because they talk to each other socially and consult with each
other when common decisions have to be made, the people involved
in these networks have more power in the group than those who
don't. And it is a rare group that does not establish some infor-
mal networks of communication through the friends that are made in
it.

Some groups, depending on their size, may have more than one
such informal communications network. Networks may even overlap.
When only one such network exists, it is the elite of an otherwise
unstructured group, whether the participants in it want to be
elitists or not. If it is the only such network in a structured
group it may or may not be an elite depending on its composition
and the nature of the formal structure. If there are two or more
such networks of friends, they may compete for power within the
group, thus forming factions, or one may deliberately opt out of
the competition, leaving the other as the elite. In a structured
group, two or more such friendship networks usually compete with
each other for formal power. This is often the healthiest situa-
tion as the other members are in a position to arbitrate between
the two competitors for power and thus to make demands on whichever
they give their temporary allegiance to.

The inevitably elitist and exclusive nature of informal communi-
cation networks of friends is neither a new phenomenon characteristic
of the women's movement nor a phenomenon new to women. Such
informal relationships have excluded women for centuries from
participating in integrated groups of which they were a part. In
any profession or organization these networks have created the
"locker room" mentality and the "old school" ties which have
effectively prevented women as a group (as well as some men indi-
vidually) from having equal access to the sources of power or
social reward. Much of the energy of past women's movements
has been directed to having the structures of decision-making and
the selection processes formalized so that the exclusion of