MIDDLE CLASS

Sometimes I think that my childhood was the place to learn the -isms: sexism, racism, nationalism, etc. Classism was the all-encompassing objective. Very early I knew what class meant and I used my interpretation to my advantage. I knew what was correct and moral. I felt sorry and much contempt for those women who wouldn't be me. And at the same time I set my sights to conquer that which was even "classier" and make it my own. It wasn't until the articles in AIAW that I began to see my conception and use of class as warped.

Now, as I try to write as a class woman looking at class one woman so aptly described it, I feel (as if) my bones stick out.

As a woman from the lower upper middle class I used the privileges given to me to isolate myself from many women. Instead of fucking, I attempted to be cultured; I gained respect by being verbal;

I was praised in school; my parents expected me to graduate from college, become professional, and marry some professional man after I'd gone out in the world and worked awhile. The big thing in my mother's life was that I should have a good reputation. Middle class parents can be discreet but the message is very clear: Low class women are slutty. They chase men; swing their hips and wear low-cut flashy clothing. To have class meant to be subdued. 

MYOPIA

I remember being told whenever I would scratch at my face or fidget: "Only peasants touch themselves." Needless to say, friendships with certain "types" of women were not encouraged.

Things I remember are disgusting. I remember that being a Presbyterian was hot shit. Being a Baptist was not. Knowing that being "underdressed" was better than costume jewelry and turquoise chiffon dresses made me "better."

At the same time, I coveted the privileges of those women who lived in my upper class old established suburb and were the daughters of doctors and lawyers and whose mothers belonged to the Infant Welfare League. I coveted their subdued, expensive outfits. I tried to look like them. I secretly wanted to go to Smith. My parents seemed to reject that kind of material wealth (my mother cried when we bought a second TV) but that in itself seems suspect. Since we weren't the richest we were going to be the most dignified. I guess. So, I studied Seventeen and bought the right things to wear and dated acceptable young men and went to the University of Iowa. But my striving for a higher class meant I was aiming at higher stakes from a position that was privileged as hell in the first place.

It is hard not to feel guilty, even though I realize that that is real egotistical. I know that while I was laying my middle class values on everyone else I wasn't doing anybody a favor. Faces visit me. What I hope to do now is to stop expending energy on myself and start listening to other forms of expression besides the one that sounds like my own. (I was really into being a liberal; a pacifist; never recognizing my privilege not to be violent.)

The experience that has helped me most to understand how I isolate other women through class is recognizing the resentment and hostility I feel as a woman and knowing that that anger is clean and justified. I think it is possible to transfer that awareness and not make assumptions about other women based on middle class values. To be honest, I do place value on certain kinds of behavior. I am nowhere near ridding myself of my classist attitudes and it would be presumptuous to think that I could in such a short time. Working class women may tell middle class women that they have privileges, but it is up to middle class women to recognize what those privileges are and to change their behavior and each other.

Once I found myself stripped of class decoration (intellectually, anyway. The gut reacts in strange and horrifying ways.) I wasn't sure that there was anything left. But lo and behold I am being forced to create something for myself that has origins different from those that fed the -isms.

The workshops at the Women’s National Abortion Coalition conference began Saturday morning. Many SWP/YSA members were in evidence. The chairwomen of the workshops were apparently appointed by the staff rather than chosen by the women in the workshops. The basic similarity among all of the workshops seemed to be the insistence that this conference was a one-issue conference. This seems contradictory since there were three established demands and one other (the fourth demand) the inclusion of which was to be voted upon. Many of the workshops seemed to be lectures rather than group-participation workshops. The afternoon workshops were much the same.

Saturday evening was set aside for a plenary session at which there was to be no voting. During this session, those of us who were labelled “the lesbian issue” were repeatedly ignored when we wished to speak, we were called divisive, we were compared to Nixon, we were called the delegation from the sub-committee on un-Amerikan activities, and were booed and hissed at. We were witnesses to incredible

political movement: the railroading through of various issues. When the WISE group left the plenary to caucus, a vote was taken to slightly alter the agenda for the next day so that women from out-of-town could stay to vote. It had been specifically stated that no vote would be taken. We returned with a statement to read to the assembly which was taken directly from a YSA publication that obviously showed the YSA plan to move in and literally take over the women’s movement by supplying the leadership and education that was needed. While this was being read the assembly shouted and booed and tried to take over the microphone.

Eventually, the microphone was disconnected. When we continued to read, nearly the whole assembly began to chant “Sit down, sit down,” so we sat down in the front of the auditorium. Finally, the statement was read and met with cheers of “Right on” and other phrases in support of the YSA position from the assembly. We left the auditorium in rather advanced stages of frustration and caucussed again. We decided to meet the next morning to decide about using establishment press to try to explain what was happening.

Sunday at the final plenary I came to a point past which I cannot clearly state the facts of what happened. I saw women looking at us to see how we were voting and then voting against us. I saw women vote down the proposal for free abortion on demand which clearly means that poor women are still in the position of not being able to get abortions when they need them. After this, we (the WISE women) left again after formally withdrawing our support. After we had gone out to caucus, the assembly voted that no WISE women would be allowed to vote unless they relinquished their affiliations with WISE. They also voted that they would identify themselves and the conference as part of the Women’s Liberation Movement. On Sunday afternoon, several well-known women withdrew their support also. During their speeches, they were harassed and the microphones were disconnected.

I am angry, so angry that all I feel I can do is not forget what I saw and felt. Women came to me with statements like, “You’re a lesbian: let me ask you a question.” That kind of objectification is somehow more painful when it comes from women. I have to stop now. I am feeling sort of strangled by my feelings. I have to trust that what I have written will in some way make an impression on those that read it.