I cringe when I am told I am privileged not to have children.  
It's not a privilege--it's the logical outcome of my way of life  
which is fought against and sneered at in this society. If mothers  
talk privilege like that to gay women I'll bet they'll get a lot of  
women who feel they have been deprived of relating to children  
against their will. And there it is, not a matter of privilege,  
but two different types of people who are oppressed in different  
ways. It's too simple to say we are privileged because in very  
basic ways we are not.  

So why does there seem to be this "more oppressed than thou"  
bargaining with oppressions? Last night at the Sparky general  
meeting a working-class gay woman got mad at a middle-class gay  
mother about class and the mother got mad at the other about child-  
care. They ended their exchange with one saying "I'm sick of hav-  
ing you not listen to me about class." To which the mother replied  
"I'm sick of having you not listen to me about the oppression of  
children and mothers." The mention of one oppression should not be  
used as a defense against having to deal with another's oppression.  

But this goes on a lot. It's because of the peculiar context in  
which oppression is seen within a community whose members all have  
been maimed by society in one way or another. In order to overcome  
the psychological effects of oppression you must become angry and  
realize that instead of there being something wrong with you, there  
is something wrong with society and those oppressing you. Once you  
do that you can respect yourself. Others also, if they are urged to  
consciousness about gayness, class, or motherhood, come to respect  
what you have done and what you say politically. And that is how  
oppression becomes a source of community respect instead of a  
scourge.  

Because this is a political community and politics has to do  
with oppression, oppression and good politics are basic sources of  
respect. They, therefore, take on additional social and emotional  
meaning and that's where things get messed up. Oppression almost  
becomes a commodity that people bargain for because their egos are  
tied up in there somewhere.  

"More oppressed than thou" is an offshoot of this. It says  
"I'm more oppressed than you are so I don't have to deal with your  
problem." We must begin examining our motives when we are defens-  
ive in such a way about someone else's oppression.  

The following was an open letter from a mother written to women in the community who had  
not been doing childcare and read at the first Sparky organizational meeting.  

You have all the options--whether to take  
childcare seriously or not. You get so  
pissed off when people don’t show up to  
work daycare and you're "stuck there." Yes,  
you should be pissed but many women with  

About My Own Kids  

care tomorrow and go home and take a nap.  
It's childcare 24 hours a day all the time.  

I definitely agree that all of us in the Iowa City Women's  
Community have to deal with others' oppression by watching how we  
have been oppressed affect how we relate to other women and vice  
versa. I don’t think that mutual respect for each other's oppress-  
ions is enough without some attempt by all to help equalize our  
situations. I've never seen middle-class women do much about how  
they oppress working-class women by their privileged background  
that gives them many, many advantages working-class women never had  
and never can have. Class differences change the degree to which a  
mother or a gay woman is oppressed and I want middle-class women  
in this community to start dealing with that fact and listening to  
working-class women's suggestions on how they can change at the  
same time as we're listening to them about gayness or motherhood.  

Getting back to childcare more specifically, though, the cir-  
cumstances seem to be that women who have had children and are  
raising them are defensive about women who haven't had children  
beginning to share responsibility for children even to the point of  
doing it without the mother. It's true that it isn't that easy to  
erase the oppression of motherhood, but women without children are  
trying to help.  

I can relate to mothers' defensiveness about women without  
children suddenly taking responsibility for children because of the  
similarity between that and the old gay/new gay situation. After  
having been gay for 14 years myself there are now many, many women who  
are gay and share some experiences, but who will never feel the op-  
pressive atmosphere of isolation, condescension, fear of exposure,  
and loneliness that I lived with until the gay women's community  
blossomed in Iowa City within the last two years, and there are  
times when I resent newer gay women talking about the oppression of  
gayness because they've never gone through and never will need to  
experience what long-time gay women have had to go through. In the  
same way women just recently sharing childcare responsibilities  
will never be as oppressed by isolation, decision-making, lack of  
time for themselves, etc., that mothers have experienced. And all  
these reasons validate some lack of trust.  

The whole point of sharing childcare responsibilities for me is  
to equalize the burden that keeps some women busy 24 hours a day.  

But at the same time an exchange of consideration, and attempts at  
respect from learning other women's needs, must be happening or the  
"more oppressed than thou" syndrome will never end.  

Children in this town are "stuck there" 24  
hours a day, seven days a week and no one  
shows up to relieve her. It's so fucking  
difficult for you to be inconvenienced.  
Well, women with children are often incon-  
venienced 24 hours a day. You say you are  
so busy--you don't have time, or damned  
little time. You work full time--so fucking  
what? Women with kids do it every day and  
do childcare the other 16 hours every day.  
You can't even find time to do it once a  
week. You think childcare ends at 5:30.  

You say you have other time commitments.  
You have that option. Perhaps AIAW could  
be put out by working-class women with  
children if they weren't stuck home with  
their kids. But you say you're too busy!  
What shit.  

Your amount of commitment to childcare  
seems to vary according to your social  
life. If you're into a relationship, it  
often causes you to fuck off childcare re-  
sponsibilities. You have that option.  
Women with children don't. You say you're  
freaking out--having personal hassles. You  
have the option to spend two weeks freaking  
out, unable to do anything else (namely  
childcare). Women with children have to  
freak out about the responsibilities of  
childcare.  

You never think of having relationships  
with children. You might get off on them  
occasionally when you have to do childcare  
but you never ask them to do something that  
could be fun for both of you--you always  
ask another adult.  

When you're with someone constantly, it  
usually puts a strain on your relationship.  
Low-income women with children have no op-  
tions about being with their kids constantly.  

You stay up all night having a good time  
with adults and when you come to daycare,  
you fall asleep or are just too burned out  
to relate to the kids. You're ripping off  
the kids. It's also an option that women  
with kids don't have. Women with kids  
can't say "I'll stay up late and have a  
good time 'cause I can do my 4 hours child-  

@ Woman?  

You expect me to bring them (or be respon-  
sible for finding a ride) to and from day-  
care. Why can't you? You ask me if I'm  
going to bring them to the dance/party or  
whatever, 'cause you'd really like to see  
them. Why can't you take them?  

Kids have to eat three meals a day. One's  
at daycare...where do you think the other  
two come from every fucking day? You  
think they look real nice in butch drag.  

Do you ever buy or get them clothes? You  
think kids need shoes. Who paid $7.00 a  
pair for them? And when I think that I get  
more help with my kids than any other woman  
with kids that I know, it makes me sick to  
hear your excuses. I say you'd better  
think a long time about the lip service  

you give to childcare 'cause what's getting  
done in this town by women without kids  

for women with kids is piddly. It's only  
at your convenience that you relate to kids  
and that ain't enough.  

Additions while talking with two other  
mothers  

1. You don't have to keep your house  
straightened, there are no kids around to  
trip over junk or eat things off the floor.  
And, if you want to clean house, it will  
stay clean for more than five minutes be-  
cause there's no kids to mess it up.  

2. Some landlords won't rent to people  
with kids--especially single women with kids.  

3. You can choose what political activ-  
ities you want to be involved in. Women  
with kids have to choose daycare or there  
won't be daycare. You can put childcare  
on a charity basis.  

4. You have the option to do childcare  
only when  

a. you're in the mood  

b. you like the particular children  

c. all the supplies are provided by  
the parent  

d. the kids are the age you get off on  

e. there's only one kid  

f. you like the mother  

g. the mothers give you ego-building  

February  

thanks  

5. You can be ignorant of legalities  
concerning kids (custody etc.) and rely on  
the mother "to fill you in."  

6. You can go anywhere on a moment's  
notice.  

7. You can make definite plans and then  
not have to figure out childcare arrange-  
ments.  

8. You can go to social events and only  
think about refreshments for yourself. You  
can have parties and only think about ac-  
commodating adults.  

9. You can plan your money around one  
person.  

10. You can carry around an appointment  
book and be sure of meeting all of them.  

11. You have the option to think all this  
stuff is picky.  

12. You only have to worry about winter  
clothes and other necessities (like food)  
for yourself.  

13. You don’t have to spend money/space  
on cribs, toys, etc.  

14. You can have a house full of neat  
shit that kids would wreck.  

15. You can rely on mothers to get kids  
to and from you if it is just as much of a  
hassle for both of you.  

16. You can avoid or reduce the amount of  
energy spent dealing with schools, doctors,  
welfare, and grandparents.  

17. Basically you have two options that  
women with children don't have:  

1. to not relate to children  
2. to relate to children only under  
certain conditions.  

Page 9