doris

and the

sparkettes"

Ten of us are now members of a collective called "Non Biological Mothers Group One." It is basically a support group of women new to childcare who have come to see childcare as a political priority. The process that brought us to the place where we knew we needed the kind of collective we have was a long, often confusing and scary one. We feel it's important to analyze the conditions that brought us here, and explain the reasons our collective is necessary to us.

When the Iowa City WLF broke into cells in the spring of 1970, one of those cells was Daycare. It was responsible for establishing Dum-Dum Daycare Center, the first cooperative, free daycare center in Iowa City. Since its formation about a half-dozen similar centers have formed, and many women in the Women's Movement have volunteered at some time or other at the two centers which were politically closest to us. For political reasons explained elsewhere in this issue, a group of gay women split from an existing center and formed Sparky Daycare in the spring of 1972.

None of the ten of us participated centrally in any of this history. We were all involved in political projects such as women's medicine, providing transportation services to local poor people, AIAW, gay consciousness raising, etc. etc. There have been over a dozen groups in those two years, some for the whole period, most shorter-lived. Daycare was looked upon by most non-mothers in the Women's Movement as another group with political importance, but no political priority.

The error in this analysis gradually became clearer to many women in the women's community. We realized that childcare counts so much it should go without saying; that childcare is essential to the political life of a community which is not going to exclude biological mothers, and which envisions a society that includes all mothers equally. We came to this analysis as a result of angry mothers finally forcing us to recognize their oppression and act to change it. Another factor was a growing awareness of our age chauvinism that was brought about at the insistence of women in the community eighteen years old and under. And finally, having a daycare center available that was controlled by women, all of whom were gay, gave us a forum that allowed us to see how providing childcare was identified with meeting our own needs.

In this case a beginning analysis was far easier than handling the uproar all of our minds were in as we saw the direction that had to be taken. That uproar reached crisis proportions at a Sparky General Meeting that was called by the small collective of women who had been running and staffing the developing daycare center in temporary facilities. Many women attended the meeting who had only just committed themselves to the politics and action of doing childcare. We were confused about our responsibilities, afraid of the confrontation of mothers and full of guilt because of the validity of their anger towards us. Overall was a feeling of powerlessness; we were at a loss for direction. The group was diverse, unorganized except that we all wanted to relate to Sparky and childcare.

All of these feelings had a material effect on the group. An unorganized group has no way to deal effectively with the individual fears and confusions among its members. Even though the general purpose might be accomplished -- in this case, daycare staffing -- political progress by individual members is made almost impossible. With no ways to deal with the problems of people, energies are dissipated that might otherwise be channeled into growth and change.

Fortunately this kind of possible stagnation was avoided when a woman suggested that small groups of childless women be formed to deal with the fears and hassles many people had felt and expressed at that meeting. And we were scared! We felt awkward around kids, and defensive when people who had a lot of experience took over situations easily. We didn't know the "right" way to handle things. We didn't know how to play, how to talk to kids, how to get them to do things. A thousand "what ifs" were in our minds, pigshit and bullshit. And we felt powerless in the adult group.

At the first meeting of our non-biological mothers group we discussed much of this, and drew up a statement of purpose as a first attempt to communicate to the general membership of Sparky. This is our statement (written mid-summer 1972):

Purposes:

1. To raise our consciousness about the oppression of biological mothers and to struggle with one another (in this group) to change our part in that; to not expect biological mothers to have to raise our consciousness of how we oppress them.

2. To decide what our fears and hassles with doing childcare are, and to work out solutions to those with other non-biological mothers.

3. To commit each of ourselves to an established and regular amount of time in childcare each week, that care to be divided between work in a daycare center and in our homes. To discipline and support one another in meeting that commitment, and to increasing it over time.

page 10

volume

JZ number 2

4. To interact with children, not passively as babysitters but positively as people who have responsibility to children; to break down the socialized and pigshit things in our heads and the heads of others that work against that.

5. To build positive relationships with children.

Methods: (Methods under #1 relate to Purpose #1, etc.)
1. Meeting regularly for discussion about childcare, consciousness-raising on the oppression of biological mothers and children.

2. Taking children in our homes for gradually increasing periods of time. Making our homes baby-proof, safe and enjoyable for children to be in. (Examples: poisons locked or out of reach; treasured breakables removed; have things to play with; have some “good foods; sleeping places with privacy -- and safety -- for children.)

When taking children in our homes, we will try not to have to work alone; one other of us will help out. This should prevent freakouts (for both adults and children) and backsliding on our responsibilities. It should help us learn what to do faster and make fewer mistakes. It will also solve some problems of one person with more than one child having to be in two places at once.

3. A proportion of the time we commit to childcare will be time put in at Sparky Daycare Center. As a group we will guarantee Sparky 60 hours a week regularly, and members of this group commit ourselves to covering for each other, if any of us can't make her full daycare time commitment in a given week. There are ten of us in the group. At present three of us work full time during the hours that Sparky is open.

So that those of us who work during Sparky's hours do not have to put all their childcare time into non-collective, at-home childcare, we are considering setting up nightcare at someone's house one or more nights a week; would announce it in advance. May also try to see that childcare gets done during events that women in general would like to attend (parties, actions, etc.).

4. Once we have started and established as a regular practice our childcare time commitment (both at home and at the daycare center) we shall struggle among ourselves, with others, and -- if necessary -- with biological mothers over issues which come out in the process of re-educating ourselves to making childcare a community responsibility. (Example: dealing with the nuclear family socialization that says that biological mothers are the only and ultimate authorities about how their biological children should be treated.)

5. Given that children are people, friendships should develop if we discipline ourselves to spend enough time with different children and if we overcome our own fears and uptightness, so that we can enjoy the people we are with.