Think about what it would be like to live my life

This may take the form of an open letter to all non-biological
mothers, those of you who refer to yourselves as such and to those
of you who are not doing much childcare, for some reason or another.
I would like to start out by saying that we need help! Having a
child is a never-ending responsibility. It is too often a very fine
thing, but it is often a burden too. Mothers are accused of not
trusting you enough and of trying to exercise too much control over
our children. I want to trust you implicitly but it has been my
experience that surrogate parents will always split for one reason
or another. I can only trust you so far when I realize that your
commitment is only good as long as you are living with me or as
long as you live within geographic proximity. For this reason, I
am learning to take all the help I can while I can get it, but
taking long-term commitments lightly.

I don't want complete control of my child but I know that I
will be the only person who will be consistently responsible for
his life for the next 15 years, so I have to retain at least 30%
control. Oftentimes it is 90%. It is unfortunate that adults do
have to exercise control over children, but it is unnecessary to go
into reasons for this. Even when I've lived with two other people
who are sharing responsibility, I find that I'm the only one who
cares if he spends too much time at daycare. Children burn out on
one place and one group of people also. I'm the only one who washes
his hair or cleans up his room. As a mother I am forced into the

position of coordinator of his care. I'm the one who has to see
that some adult is with him at all times. Oftentimes my only re-
sources for childcare are other biological mothers who shouldn't
be asked to take on additional responsibility. These are the peo-
ple, however, who understand and share my problems. We are forced
to help each other for lack of non-parents taking responsibility.
Please do childcare for us and don't ask us to shuffle for it,
to always have to ask and to be sure to say please and thank you.
Call me and ask if you can take him that night or just go pick
him up from daycare and leave me a note on the blackboard. Show
me I can depend on you. I will burn out. Without your help I
will soon be looking for a divorce from my child. Also please
don't choose female children over males. We couldn't determine
the sex of our children. Mothers of male children need even more
help. It is impossible for me to reinforce non-sexist behavior
alone. This may sound very preachy and sometimes bitter. That
wasn't my intention but it might serve to demonstrate my situation,
and those of most other mothers that I have talked to. I should
add that there are a whole lot of women in this community who are
doing a fantastic job as non-biological mothers but there are too
many of you who do little childcare because you have other commit-
ments. Well I have other commitments too and there is a lot more I
want to do that I don't have the time for. Think about what it
would be like to live my life.

"Et cum spiritu tuo."

* “and with your spirit.”

I am a gay working-class non-biological
mother. I grew up as the oldest in a
Catholic family of eleven, and have done
childcare duties at home and for other
people for eleven years as a babysitter,
substitute parent (both mine work full-
time), and daycare worker. I do regular
childcare, with the help of my living
collective, outside of daycare for four
children from the women's community, plus
irregularly for several others. I have
a commitment to three "regulars" I con-
sider to be ongoing until it's not needed
anymore, and want to maintain close rela-
tionships with them for as long as possible.
I guess that hinges on their agreement to
that when they're all old enough to make
a choice, as I have done. My involvement
with all three of them came about through
daycare, before I knew their mothers, or
had specific friendships with them. This
situation has sort of free meaning to me
that I value. I do not want my relations
with these kids to be controlled by their
parents or the people they live with.
About ten children were walked out of my
life over a political split between adults
in a center here this year, and the thought
of it happening again is frightening. I
love them a lot and have as much right
and responsibility as a parent - and I am

determined not to fuck that off. I do
think that some agreements exist
between biological/legal parents and us

others, but I think it's wrong for rela-
tionships between adults to dictate or

control relationships between adults and
kids. It's unfair and fucked-up for all.

Childcare has been a primary commitment
for me since before the beginnings of my
feminist politics and involvement in the
Iowa City women's community. I came to
this town in 1969 to go to college on the
typically inadequate crumbs that the Uni-
versity and government dole out to lower-
class kids trying to "better themselves"
and class climb. It's a burn and an in-
sult -- but that's another story, right?
Bullshit...

Anyway, after my dazzling freshman year
and another stint at home, DOING 24 HOUR
CHILDCARE FOR A WORKING CLASS WOMAN, I
moved to Iowa City permanently and deliber-
ately started working in a daycare cen-
ter because I needed to find a place to
live and support myself. My growing fem-

inist consciousness, spurred by the vari-
ous males, liberals, and/or straight mid-
dle-class students around me, directed me
to Women's Liberation. There were daycare
centers, a living collective, a gay cell,
music cell, and Ain't I A Woman? - all of
which interested me. I chose daycare be-
cause it was open to me, and I liked kids
because I did think everyone should relate
to them for humanitarian reasons about
their value as the "future of the Revolu-
tion." I also knew there was to be a new
women's collective that I wanted to live in.

When I was home babysitting and working
my ass off all the time in my younger days,
however, kids were clearly an economic bur-
den and too often an emotional one, too.

My mom cracked up and almost died twice in
19 years. I always dug the idea of schools
or communities where kids could live and
work and run their own lives. (Actually, in
those days I didn't want to go to school, and
used to imagine that work was easier and
better than school.) I also wanted such

a thing because I really knew where I was
at in the social strata, and I wanted
upper-class kids to fork over the loot and
live like the rest of us. All those times
in school when I was called brassy and be-
lligerent, all that shit I took about how
if I'd behave and lose weight and tow the
line, then those things would come my way...
Fuck it! I made my decision not to get
married or have kids for class reasons

more than anything else, and I consider
that to be a political example of what
makes the working-class foxier than the
middle-class. I resent any woman of eco-
nomic privilege telling me how oppressed
she is as a mother if she is unwilling to
recognize my experience and commitment as
equally valid and substantial. I have
very certain ideas about the nuclear fami-
lies, monogamies, and parental authority,
stemming from my childhood and adult ex-
periences with daycare, and those must be
struggled with too.

The new collective finally formed above
the daycare center I worked in. The co-ops
were getting it together to get University
faculty houses, by one means or another,
and ours (University Parents’ Care Collec-
tive) was first. The center was all white,
and almost totally middle-class and Univer-
sity connected, as students and faculty.

Our collective was supposed to clean the

Volume 3; Nos. 2-3

house every week and work the first and
last hour shifts of every day, (five days

a week) in return for the use of its
second floor and "kitchen privileges."

My commitment to the center and its mem-
bers was dependent on that and my politics,
those being that daycare was for freeing
women and children and smashing monogamies
and families (as all those parents will
heartily and piggishly attest to.) All
this time my other politics, including
class, were in constant turmoil.

The group I identify with has few mem-
bers, and this was especially true here
when less than eight feminists worked in
daycare. My involvement with childcare
was a sore spot and a political division
in the AIAW collective and the whole
women's community for a long time. I've
felt the frustration of mothers and know
the meaning of their anger against women
without kids. I've had to deal with it
between myself and those women, and be-
tween myself and oppressed mothers. I've
been reactionary in situations about kids
sort of like parents are, like not trust-
ing the capabilities of non-mothers, just
taking over duties and hassles rather than
explaining things, and not dealing with
their fears or uptightness because they
weren't real to me, and I considered them
all excuses and bigotry. I do know what
it is to be burned on a commitment to child-
care, and I've heard a lot of pigshit from
those who wouldn't deal with their ageism,
privilege and laziness, but there has to
be determined struggle by all of us, and
that includes over the oppression that
non-mothers, especially gay and lower-
class ones, suffer at the hands of this
rich, male society of nuclear families.

Working in the cooperatives here is
oppressive to women, gays, and working-
class people. We've taken endless shit
from packs of middle-class professors,
students, and hippies. Just such a group,
supported by their tied, true or groupie
women, excluded gay feminists from the
first center established here by Women's
Liberation, (Dum Dum Daycare Center). It's
hard enough to struggle over political
issues, let alone try to challenge
parental superiority and ownership when
mothers are paranoid, untrusting and li-
beral to the point of being pawns in men's
hands. We've been threatened with financial