Dec. 26, 1970

Dear Sharon-share-alike, AIAW, Dirtbag, and Jill,

Before I tell you everything in order, let me describe what
happened today. I met Tracy at Grand Central at 10:35 and we were
to have lunch before her flight. While we were reconnoitering in
the waiting room off 42nd street, a young pimp, white (20-24)
came up and leered over at Tracy, "Is there anything I can do for
you?" She said that there most certainly wasn't anything he could
do for us and I said, "Beat it." He told me that that was not a
nice way for a lady to talk and sat down next to me. Well, Tracy
had to call the airlines and asked if I would be sure and off him
if he gave me any trouble. I said I'd be all right so she went to
a nearby phone booth, but kept watch through the window while she
was calling. The guy started whistling "I'll be there" very badly
so as not to let me forget he was there. He had a thigh to ankle
cast on his left leg so it stuck straight out. He said, "You
want to make some money?" I said, "What's it to ya?" He said,
"You know I'm a pimp, don't you?" And I said, "Beat it or I'll beat
you up." At this point he stood up and said, "Okay, beat me up, beat
me up." But not wanting to be arrested for starting anything I
let it go—he sat down again and began badgering me. Not only
was he insulting me and calling me names, but he was employed in
an occupation that I despise and made his money off the backs of
women. I kept getting madder and madder until I pushed him off
the bench or something (I sort of started it, but I was real fed
up) and we were standing face off, except he had me around the
neck with one hand. I still wasn't taking the whole thing too
seriously so I was calmly prying loose his fingers and when I
couldn't, I hit him in the mouth a couple of times, but he hit me
twice in the eye and knocked me down. Then, all at once out of the
phone booth jumps Tracy (who, you'll remember is 5'2"), grabs him
around the neck with both hands and threw him down on the floor.
He hit her a couple of times too, but she said it didn't hurt. By
this time people began asking what was happening so I said loudly
that the guy was a pimp and made his living by exploiting women.
I called him the scum of the earth and he ran away.

Well, Tracy and I were pretty proud of ourselves, but after all
that we had to sit down and rest—anyway my eye was swelling up
and I had to go put cold water on it. When I got back two police
were there and we gave them a description. I wasn’t sure if I
wanted to deal with cops at first, but then I decided that I
really would love to see that pimp out of commission. He must
work Grand Central Station.

The reaction of the women around was neat. One woman who saw
the whole thing smiled at us and gave the victory sign and the
two matrons in the bathroom were very solicitous and kind about my
eye.

I've done a lot
of self-cross-examination about why I didn't use
the karate I know
to get us out of that situation. One good groin
kick or side kick to the stomach would have broken his hold on my
neck and done him in as well. The only thing I've come up with is
that I considered myself as starting the physical part of our en-
counter and I associate using karate only with self-defense.
Looking deep down into the pit of my soul, however, I know that's
a rationalization, and I still haven't rid myself of the passivity
socialized into women. I sat there and took all the personal in-
sults he was laying on me, and I did nothing to defend my worth
and dignity. The only way I was able to respond physically was
in considering his exploitation of all women. It wasn't enough
that he was insulting me. I've been through that movie once
before where I came to the defense of one of my friends who had
just been given an insult that I had grinned and bared through
many times. It's not healthy for women to be so selfless. Each
time you endure a blow to your person and don't defend yourself
against it, you die a little inside.

Sorry I ended so philosophically. What I really wanted to
express in this letter was how proud I am that Tracy and I beat
up that pimp.

Love,
Da-Da

what I should've done

& very good defense
against an attacker is
a kick to the
sloppily placed

ron. Even

he will Keeping

pointing

double over + be unable 
to move.

Revolutionary Letters:
by Diane Di Prima

some in Thailand silk

till we learn to
make our own music

With SovcE raise

thigh and it is parallel
with the young Jahita

not all the works of Mozart worth one human life
not all the brocades of the Potala palace
better we should wear homespun than some in orlon

the children of Bengal weave gold thread in silk saris

six years old, eight years old, for export, they don't sing
the singers are for export, Folkways records

better we should all have homemade flutes

and practice excruciatingly upon them, one hundred years

Vol. 1 No. Ul

the power of which

comes from continuing the
source of raising our voice
more the lower the
of your leg out up to
wis around as if in how

our feet

with the bones of Wu

instead?