SMASH PHALLIC

IMPERIALISM!

Some thoughts after a G W.L. meeting.

Sex is an institution. In an oppressive society
like Amerika, it reflects the same ideology as
other major institutions. It is goal-oriented,
profit & productivity oriented. It is a prescribed
system, with a series of correct & building activi-
ties aimed toward the production of a single goal:
climax.

It’s also a drag. For women, in a culture based on
our oppression, heterosexual sex is a product we

have had to turn out. To encourage us, we are given
two minutes of this, a few moments of that, a
couple minutes at something else...all aimed towards
the Great Penetration and the Big Come. There is
great pressure to have an orgasm. Sex without orgasm
is a failure, it’s a drag, it’s incomplete, and very very
sad. (Just like marriage is not real until it is “consum-
mated.”) Because of phallic imperialism built upon
Freud’s ignorance of the female body, orgasm is
supposed to come from intercourse. That’s just terrific
for boys, but since our orgasm-producing organ is the
clitoris, external to the vagina - contradicting capi-
talist sexist physiology - many women don’t produce
the appropriate orgasm through heterosexuality. By

that criteria, they are frigid.

I’m a lesbian. A lot of people can’t figure out “what
we do”, how we make love without a penis around
for the final consummation. A lot of boys have these
ideas of dildos and bananas. Sex as an institution
is so totally tied up with the penis and its goal that
boys assume there must be some poor substitute for
their noble item.
I always hated sex with men. The pressure of the
goal, the rigidity of the process and ends was always
totally unsatisfactory. Whenever I hear the word ‘sex,’
all those shitty experiences I had with men come to
mind, I cannot separate the word ‘sex’ from the
phallic tyranny I suffered from for so many years.

For me, coming out meant an end to sex. It’s dead

and gone in my life. I reject that institution totally.

Sex means oppression, it means exploitation. It

serves the needs of boys. It has little to do with pleasure

for the greatest mass of oppressed people: women.
Physical contact and feelings have taken a new liberatory

form. And we call that sensuality. The women’s move-
ment in general, especially at the beginning, and gay
feminism now is a fantastically sensual experience

for me. I love my body and the bodies of my sisters.
Physicality is now a creative non-institutionalized ex-

perience. It is touching and rubbing and cuddling and
fondness. It is holding and rocking and kissing and
licking. Its only goal is closeness and pleasure. It
does not exist for the Big Orgasm. It exists for feeling
nice. Our sensuality may or may not include genital
experience, that may or may not be the beginning or
the ending of the experience. It may be anywhere, or
nowhere. 
To make good love with women, I don’t want to have
to ‘produce’ anything. Except pleasure. And that can
be at any level or in any form. The sensuality I feel
has transformed my politics, has solved the contra-

diction between my mind and my body because the
energies for our feminist revolution are the same as
the energies of our love for women. When we feel
good about someone we may sleep together. That
could mean a lot of things from hugs to climax to
cuddling to being very close but not touching. If

we feel good in a group we may have a pajama party,
which would be called an ‘orgy’ inside the institu-
tion of straight sex. That could be a genital thing

or not. We are free to act without pressure. I re-

fuse to feel like I must make a decision about whether
to “put out” or not. There is no such thing as putting
out among us. There is no set physical goal to our
sexuality. There is no sex.

The whole language is oppressive. It is white male-
centered and heterosexual. One word that must go is

“sex” because that describes a way of being physical

that can only draw up very bad memories for a

lot of us. We must use it only in referring to that
oppressive institution, not to any new forms we are
developing. Having sex means accepting a set of
criteria for “success” that we did not set up and
develop among ourselves.

Sensuality is formless and amorphous. It can grow
and expand as we feel it. It is shared by everyone
involved. It isn’t something one puts out for another.
Sex with boys was like doing alienated labor so

that one with power could make good profit off of
my surplus labor. Sexuality with women is a col-
lective experience growing out of our struggle.
Smashing the notion of sex, getting away from these
concepts so intimately tied up with the penis, helps
us destroy roles. One thing we realized in our

group of gay feminists is that the word “lover”
doesn’t describe anything for us anymore very much. It
is very hard to tell who is whose lover, because that is
a condition determined by genital contact in our society.
But among us, we have a very brazen setup. I don’t
sleep with the same women every night. I might cuddle
with one sister tonight because we were together and
felt close and I might crash on some mattress with a

bunch of women tomorrow because we all danced
together half the night. If your lover is someone you
feel emotional and physical attractions to and where
there is some kind of mutual commitment, then

we are surely the biggest group of floozies in town.
It’s so wonderful. Without that kind of exclusive
coupling sex and lovers breed, people cannot fall
into traditional roles so easily. Because each time
you sleep with someone you have to make the decision
that time. Dependent exclusionary relationships
take away free will. It becomes an institutionalized
habit to sleep together regularly and there is not
usually a fresh decision each time. Amongst us,

our getting together is dependent on the reality

of the present, not on the promises of before.
Sensuality is something that can be very collective.
Sex is private and tense. Sensuality is something
you want your best friends to feel and act on with
your other best friends. Sex is something you want
power and territorial rights over. Sex is localized in
the pants and limited by that. Sensuality is all over
and grows always. Sex is pinpointed in the pants
because the penis is there and the penis is, if not
the material source, the material basis for power in
Amerika. If you don’t have one you are fucked over
by those who do. If you don’t have capital you get
fucked over by those who do. Unless you attach
yourself to someone who has it so that you can
serve them in exchange for protection (known as
marriage). Sperm is coin. And that whole system
of exchange necessarily excludes us as lesbians.

We can’t pretend that those few flaps of skin that
make up the masculine apparatus are just a few ob-
jective ectodermal gatherings. That stuff is the
proof of a right to have access to privilege. Some
boys reject that privilege, but they always have
the possibility of whipping it out in an emergency
and asserting their privilege.

We are building a revolution which isn’t based on such
drivel. And we must have a new language and aes-
thetic to describe it. Lesbianism is not a sexual per-
version: it has nothing to do with sex. It is not
another way to “do it”: it is a whole other way to
have contact. Sex is a phallic term and we are in-
volved in building a humane world. It’s like when
people talk about being bisexual it blows my mind.
It’s like saying that if you have an apple and an
orange you have two apples because they’re both fruits.

Heterosexuality and lesbianism are two forms of phy-
sical contact. But that’s as far as the similarity goes.

I sleep with women, make love with women. I am
a woman, a lesbian. But I don’t have sex with anyone.
If I had sex, I could have it with a boy, but that
would be a whole other trip from what I am feeling
about my gay sensuality. It would be another ex-
perience altogether, not a different form of gay
sexuality, I would be reentering an institution the
structure of which is inherently oppressive to me.
Although particular experiences might be of reason-
able fun, radical lesbian sensuality is a form which
I myself am helping create. It is not an institution
existing outside of me, like sex is. It is me, us, as

it comes out of our new consciousness.
KATZ

relationship was limited to the few levels
we didn't want to argue about; mostly it
was physically relating and goofing off.
We were not emotionally dependent on each
other, we didn't live or work together,
and we were not either of us exclusive
because we were not meeting much of each
other's personal needs. We both related
emotionally and sexually to others. When
we got together it was a situation of

1) pure accident, 2) your bed or mine or
3) a women’s community party. The third
scene was strange. Sometimes we weren't
there at the same time; people grin and
ask me where is she (because hardly anyone
else knows her) because they connect us. I
say I don't know; someone says like that's
too bad; I think: but you're the one who
wants to know where is she. Possibly if
it didn't seem that I was supposed to be
with her I wouldn't miss her. If she's
not around people ask me questions about
her that I can't answer because I don't
know her so well. People seem to think
that strange or sad. Crap, if I knew her
mind any better, (if she let me, which
she wouldn't) I'd probably have to get
out of the whole thing. cont. on P2

Aint IC