at NATURE

HOW BEING FEMALE HELPS IN UNDER-
STANDING THE NATURE QUESTION:

As my “Earth Week" reading I picked up
Rachel Carson's Silent Spring (in keeping
with a policy of giving female authors
priority). This book deals with the prob-
lem of chemical poisoning of the environ-
ment, specifically from pesticides and
herbicides, and those who have been irre-
sponsible in advocating chemical usage
without bothering about the consequences.
One could, of course, cite this book as
further support for the radical position.
In fact, when the radical movement does
give attention to the question of ecology,
all too often attempts are made merely to
buttress the existing radical line. In
other words, we have political and econo-
mic analysis aplenty, but the question of
how we relate to nature is never raised.
(Does that sound familiar?--Radicals are
quick to analyse how to relate to the cap-
italistic power structure, etc., but never
deal with the question of how to relate to
women.)

Rachel Carson was a naturalist, and in a
very poetic way she suggests that the way
we should relate to nature is by coming to
understand nature on Nature's terms - by
learning how nature actually works and not
superimposing our hasty conclusions. For
example, she suggests that instead of rush-
ing to laboratories to cook up a new chemi-
cal weapon, the best way to deal with agri-
cultural pests or whatever lies in getting
to know that particular organism and in
finding out how it relates to the natural
scheme, then introducing natural controls -
nature provides more efficient ways of
control than man in his laboratories with-
out all the drastic consequences. We get
our clues by getting to know nature better.
That is really a mind-blowing concept!
Instead of imposing upon nature, we relate
to her as she is:

Isn't that similar to what we are strug-
gling with as females? Isn't the root of

our "coming to consciousness" a realization
that we don't know what our real needs are-

or even who we really are - because these
things have been defined for us by men?

Isn't our struggle for liberation ultimate -

ly the desire to be ourselves - to be a
real and a total self, not just a half-
self, or an “other"-self, a self defined
and thus controlled by men.

For some women, liberation means putting
aside the makeup, hair bleaches, girdles,
and all those other gimmicks for forcing
ourselves into a stereotyped image of the
"pretty female" - an image which oppresses

us, and makes us anxious because we at best

achieve only imitations of that image and

thus remain forever insecure. We have been
alienated from our own natural selves and

thus we spend untold energy and emotion in
attempting to remake our faces and figures
into a superimposed ideal.

For some of us, liberation means meeting
our own sexual interest, finding sexual
satisfaction on female terms in our female
bodies, rather than always and only defin-

ing sexual activity in terms of male inter-

est. We want to be freed from the myth of
vaginal orgasm, from all forms of prosti-
tution (including marital), and from being
"punished" for sex by having to bear

children. We want to be sexually ourselves.

/

10 Vol. | No. 6

We are already well into the problem of
finding out who we really are, rejecting
male definitions of ourselves. In fact, we
are questioning the whole male mentality -
we see its brutality, its corruption all
too well. We should likewise question the
male attitude toward and definition of na-
ture. If we no longer accept the existing
male assessment of ourselves, then we
should likewise suspect the existing male
approach toward nature. That's what got us
into all this environmental trouble anyway.
We should begin to view nature directly,
without looking through male viewpoints.

For some of us, liberation means obtain-
ing intellectual and creative fulfillment —
after all, our brains are part of our na-
tural body. We are tired of being dealt
with merely as sex objects and not as total
persons. We are angered at being forced to
spend all our time in menial work - whether
typing, washing diapers, or whatever - and
of being totally alienated or deprived from
any mental stimulation or opportunity for
growth and fulfillment. We want to be men-
tally ourselves.

For some of us, liberation means being
able to meet the most basic physical needs-
having food to eat, a bed to sleep in. For
other women this means freeing physical
bodies from the chain of perpetual child-
birth.

reprinted from [+ Aint Me Babe

HOW DEALING WITH ECOLOGY
CAN HELP US AS FEMALES:

The very term "ecology" refers to the
totality of the pattern of interrelation-
ships between organisms and their environ-
ment. Nature operates in a series of rela-
tionships. Food chains are one example of
this - the minnow eats plankton, the big
fish eats the minnow, the gull eats the
big fish, and so forth - and if you wipe
out one link in the chain, you ruin the
whole show. Our own bodies are another ex-
ample - bacteria and other organisms live
in symbiotic relationship, helping to digest
our food and thus enabling our own survival.
To focus attention upon any one organism in
isolation is to fail to understand that or-
ganism - for every organism exists in re-
lationship to others. Relationship, that's
the key. :

Instinctively, perhaps, we women are or-
ganizing ourselves into groups - the small
group pattern. We are realizing that part
of man's secret for controlling us has been
to divide us, to alienate us, to make us
compete with each other. As a result, we
each feel isolated and alone - unique in
our individual problems - and it has driven
us to the point of hysteria. We're begin-
ning to deal with that, to support each
other, to think in more communal terms.
Sisterhood is really a beautiful idea -
sisterhood speaks of women relating to each
other.

But sisters don't exist in isolation
either. Emotional support is essential,
coming to consciousness is necessary - but
women's liberation can't stop there. We hit
this, of course, whenever we try to deal
with any of the "practical" issues - child-
care, economic independence from men, con-
trol over our own bodies. For many of us,
the "web" of interdependencies has become
all too literal, and we're trapped. Some-
times it seems as though we can't even get
one single childcare center open, much less
overturn the whole economic structure which
oppresses us, or depose the male supremacist
power elite - or whatever hands are mani-
pulating the strings behind the strings.
Sometimes the whole thing seems impossible.
After all, we women have been told we can't
handle anything very complex. We have only
simple, childlike minds and are incapable
of really understanding things in their
totality.

Perhaps our clue can come from nature.
While man has been arrogantly exploiting
the earth, blithely spraying his chemicals
here and detonating his missiles there,
nature has been involved in reweaving the
whole fabric of natural relationships -
weaving man right out of the pattern. So
too while old supremacist, racist, imper-
ialist, arrogant Man is sitting high on his
throne, we shall be busy weaving a whole new
pattern of relationships among people - and
shall leave the Man out of it. And sisters,
weaving is a feminine art:

We shall survive and we shall be free.