continued from p. 0

8  
so obsessed with personal liberation, have been unable 45  
to see the contradiction in turning to attack (as utop- o  
ian, apolitical and bourgeois) women who are doing no GAY SISTERS GET TOGETHER  
more than the same thing, only with more boldness, ae . ;  
originality and courage: women refusing to marry, = Midwestern Gay Women are having a  
women setting up liberated communes, women concerned es retreat to talk, Nov. 27-29. We have  
with raising children collectively, women who have e discovered a place called the Cedar Lake  
tried to show the possibilities of experimentation with Retreat Home just outside of Milwaukee,  
free lives. 2) RR#4, West Bend, Wisconsin. It can be  
Male supremacy is a man's problem, and they are gither os had for a reasonable cost and would be a  
with us or part of the problem -- the solution is their od beautiful place for us to hold a retreat  
responsibility. What is important is building an army a over the Thanksgiving holidays.. We  
that will attack the brutal inhumanity and injustice 2) would stay in a large farmhouse on a  
of a capitalist society at every weak point of its + th large piece of land, have access to a  
abusive exploitation of the powerless, that will spread » beach house and exclusive use of the lake-  
the idea of liberation through all the web of contra- ve front (not much use to us in November),  
diction and oppression that destroys human beings before S In short, after being welcomed by a  
they are half begun in life... The arrogance, duplicity . representative of the place we would  
and culpability of men who will not admit the power and 3 enjoy complete isolation.  
authenticity of a mass movement based upon the oppres-— o We would have to bring our own food  
sion of women - all women - is to be condemned, in the w and do our own cooking, of course.  
name of revolutionary discipline, for they weaken and @ Share of the cost is 3.50 per person.  
abort the liberation of a people. These men are dupes ® Plan to arrive in early afternoon of  
and victims of their own society, containing within a a ae oe A ee Ta eat ss  
themselves the image of a ruling class, for they ex- . ON ETE COOLE CE ie ke Bema?  
hibit contempt for human beings, opposition to the free- !  
dom of human beings, an absolute refusal to stop bene- :  
fiting from the exploitation of human beings. Let if  
them come along or get out of the way. 3 ae  
-  
: aes  
The Fes, /970 :ssve of Bacdvoal Pmericr on Wemen 5 ar? Riad Rate  
Can be ordered For 75¢ £rem 2 Aes &  
a \ ot on roca  
. a <<  
Aadseal America “ \? Neue 7 ee  
SS te Spergar Street e Ca x o*  
Madisen, Wisconsin. 53703  

° Rie Nae  
pl’ ea ae  
WOMEN SEEKING ABORTIONS: Nee MeN en  

Call yD eee : bo  
e  

: we  
PY ANNING INFORMATION SERVICE x .  
FAMILY PLANNING, oR 5 oo of  
CLERGY CONSULTATION CENTER & Nos  
local branch - or telephone national offices: Cot The trapped woman is at the mercy  
212-477-0034 of the man’s technology. What can a  
254-6230 woman do?  
466-0351 COSTS: Costs vary with the  

LOCAL WOMENS LIBERATION GROUPS  

WOMENS MEDICAL GROUP REFERRAL SERVICE  
for under 12 week pregnancies call  
212-744-5640  
212-472-9164  

length of the pregnancy and where the  
operation is performed. For early  
abortions the following applies:  
Available to NYC women Only:  
Municipal hospitals — $160.  
Voluntary Hosp. clinics — $150-$300  
Available to all women:  
Voluntary Hosp. private patients  

Women who are 14-22 weeks  
pregnant have no other legal choice than  
to try to get into a hospital for a  
“salting-out” or saline type abortion.  
This involves direct injection into the  
uterus of a 20% saline solution to  

induce labor, a method for more  
Specific CLINICS trying to meet the needs for all women:  

2  
“  
4  
i  
.  

WOMENS MEDICAL GROUP  

EASTSIDE MEDICAL GROUP J 133 East 73rd St., NYC  
both groups serve women under 12 weeks only -  
using the vacuum aspirator or “suction” method .  

These groups also do follow-up counselling and  

fit for birth control.  

$200. or less  

212-472-9676 or 7  

UNI 9000  

DR. MICHAEL BERGMANN CLINIC (name may be changed)  
SO Irving Place, NYC  

WOMENS MEDICAL SERVICES  

takes referrals from Clergy Consultation Centers  

$200.  

Women must have medical confirmation of pregnancy before going here.  

As final resort, call Women’s Health and Abortion Project  

c/o Women’s Center, 36 West 22 St., NYC  

The Women’s Health and Abortion  
Project in New York, 36 West 22nd  
Street, NYC, is finding out more about  
details of cost, capacity, residency  
restrictions, etc. as well as doing  
abortion referral. They do not regard  
themselves as a social work agency but  
want to help their sisters in need and  
work in the most political way possible  

i.e. to help build a strong broadly  
based women’s movement, to change  
the health system, to give women  
control over their bodies and lives.  
Local women’s liberation groups into  
abortion counselling and referral are  
asked to contact WHAP and to send  
literature and information to them so  
that they can help out-of-state women.  
They suggest pressuring doctors,  
Planned Parenthood, and other  
institutions to set up high  
quality-low cost clinics in the State.  

691-1860 or |  

complicated than the simple “vacuum  
aspirator” or “D and C” type used for  
earlier pregnancies. The Board of Health  
recently (Sept. 9) did a non-routine  
investigation of the materials used in  
this procedure, and then suppressed the  
findings. Because a brother was able to  
rip off this report, we are able to relay  
at least some of the data: In 23 City  
{all- borough) hospitals, the saline  
solution percentage ran from 17-23.4%  
in contrast to 20%. Sterility was a  
serious question. Samples of saline  
solution were found to be contaminated  
with: 45 pieces of blue thread-like  
fibers (synthetic); 1 human hair (3”  
long), 20 blue micro synthetic fibers, 14  
pieces of glass, 1/8 inch in size; traces of  
formaldehyde; 12 pieces micro glass -  
1/16 inch in size; white crystalline sediment  
on standings; micro and insoluble  
numerous foreign particles - wood,  
cotton, synthetic fibers, and also black,  
microscopic carbonaceous particles.  

LYM wos Pee dey  

$350-$650  

Proprietary (private) hospitals —  
$350-$800  

Doctors offices and clinics —  
$50-$300  

Right now, richer women go to  
private hospitals and poorer women go  
to non-hospital clinics and doctors’  
offices. By forbidding abortions in  
and low-cost clinics a residency  
restriction is imposed on poor women  
only while rich women continue to have  
free access. NO step forward to meet  
women’s demands for abortions has  
been made. Our demands for abortion  
care are: FREE, LEGAL, SAFE, ON  
DEMAND!!!  

DISARM RAPISTS!  

WOMEN'S HISTORY RESEARCH CENTER, INC.  
2325 Oak, Berkeley  
Open most anytime  
call (415)-524-7772  

20 November 1970  

A research, lending, corresponding, and selling library of women’s literature. Work done  
by women using it. A running catalogue including addresses to order materials is available  
at cost to other groups to avoid having to start from scratch. For $1, a bibliography of  
items in our files with addresses (as of July, 1969) for ordering the material; for $5, a  
packet of action project ideas, and periodical, paper, book and book review bibliographies  
(as of Sept, 1969) of WL interest; for $2 addenda to bibliography to Jan., 1970; for $4,  
addenda to bibliography to Aug., 1970. A synopsis of women in world history is available  
for $1 including poster and postage. A paper on the suffrage movement in Western  
Europe is 15¢ plus stamp, Redstockings Manifestos East and West likewise. A SPAZM  
newsletter of women’s news, April to December 1969 (personal statements, news events,  
reviews, etc.) is available: 30 issues for $15 to individuals, $20 to institutions.  

vee ete eww ere reenter reaseeeeeres