CON'T FROM PAGE © ...

(Remember how they treated women?) These movements did not
red-bait because they generally considered socialist and commu-
nist groups outdated and irrelevant. Socialist theory as under-
stood in America did not define the needs of youth, students,
blacks, or third world people - and that goes double for women.
These movements grew by ignoring and at times throwing out
the ideologues of a moribund American Socialist tradition.
With no disrespect intended, no movement ever grew around the
theories of Herbert Apthaker or Bayard Rustin. Those struggles
that took place grew by adopting a ruthless slogan, behind which

* was a reality we must recognize. Remember "Don't trust
anyone over 30" - blacks and whites in their growing insurgent
movements adopted that slogan because it was based on a reality -
that the accommodations people make to survive can be damaging
and the more vested interests in the established order one acquires,
the less one's experiences can be trusted.

The notion that we should seek out and become women-identified
women is something of that same kind of awareness:
that some experiences can be damaging, that marriage, a family,
good jobs, male approval and all those things individual women
have accepted in this system can make them less willing to risk
an analysis that goes to the heart of the woman question. That
does not make us elitists or man-haters any more than not trust-
ing anyone over 30 made those young movements "over 30 haters".
It did mean those movements found out their own possibilities.

We intend to find out our own possibilities, not those
possibilities defined by the SWP. How touching that they formally
resolved to recognize the revolutionary potential of our independence
and try to do all they can to undermine that independence. Kind of
makes you wonder why they passed their resolution.

Anyone seeking independent power for women will be ac-
cused of red-baiting - an accusation made of no other oppressed
group which challenges the organizing principles of SWP.

You don't get independent power for women by working in
a mixed party and reporting back to your male counterparts on
how good your organizing has been - how obscene those body
counts must be. We know the effects of party members trying to
help our movement grow and the truth of Martha Shelley's claim
that feminist literature has been moved out where party workers
have moved in -- we've seen it with our own newspaper.

While trying to regain control of our lives and knowing we
must do for the sexual struggle what Marx did for the class
struggle, while working every day for changes so profound that a
genderless society will finally be realized - what can I care
about resolutions of support stamped, signed and approved by
any party's membership. Too little, Too late. I'm a woman.

—s

The assumption that building a mass movement is what women
should now be doing, I feel, has to be questioned. When the
priority in political work becomes that of involving as many
numbers as possible there becomes no way to avoid liberalism and
ultra-democracy or the lack of ideological struggle that occurs;
there becomes no effective way of working except single issue or—
ganizing.

We have not as yet come very far in an analysis of how we end
our oppression. We have recognized our position and concluded
that we must have a revolution and have come some way in defining
what that revolution must accomplish. What we have not been able
to do is form any kind of analysis on how we get there. To engage
in the ideological struggle to fill the gap between our recog-
nized position and the revolution we envision, we see as crucial.
more crucial than the number of women we involve.

It is the political content and the political accomplishments
we have to be concerned with and this leads us to question every
thing we do in terms of our goals. We can't afford the stifling
of ideological struggle that occurs when our main objective be-
comes involving as many women as possible. The tendency to try
not to alienate too often leads to shutting out all ideological
struggle, to altering a radical analysis lest we offend. To want
to involve all women at whatever level on whatever they are willing
to work on puts us in the position of not being able to engage in
self-criticism, to not be able to criticize projects and actions in
terms of a radical analysis. To engage in this sort of criticism
there must be some agreement on our ultimate goals. To question
legislative reform in terms of how it fits into a revolutionary
perspective we must agree on some revolutionary goals. We can't
engage in this kind of struggle with women who see reform as a
goal in itself.

To form the analysis we need we will have to be able to ques-
tion everything and to gain any real political change (to dare to
struggle; dare to win) there will be risks to take. Unless we can
recruit women around a political theory that will lead them to
question and struggle with their class privileges and the heter-
sexual norm, the analysis we collectively reach could easily re-
flect the middle class, heterosexual, and racist thinking of the
society we want to fight. Avoiding this reality under the guise
of ultra-democracy will enhance our societal image but it will do
little to achieve our liberation.

As the women's movement has grown, so have the contradictions
in our theory and practice or at least they have become more ap-
parent. We used to talk about the stigma the single woman suffers
in this society, about how difficult it is to remain alone. We saw
the oppression of women as closely tied to our position in marriage
and the family and seemed to conclude that women must get out of
that position they are forced to hold. When individual women put
that theory to practice - when some women choose to remain single
and others choose to end their marriages they are seen more as a
threat, accused of being elite and privileged. If we believe the
theory we have voiced then the practice that should follow would
be to support these women, not to isolate them or treat them with
jealousy and suspicion. If we recognized that marriage is an
oppressive institution for women, why do we attack women who are
not married and why do we work on reforming the institution of mar-
riage to make it more bearable? We allow single women to be criti-
cized for their lifestyle, thinking we are combating elitism,
while they cannot question or criticize women attached to men without
being accused of trying to exclude the majority of American women.

Ultra democracy draws no boundaries. No matter how many women
meet together their decisions are seen as elitist because there are
so many women they haven't reached or so many women not present who
do not agree. Ultra democracy gives no one any power over their
own lives but gives everyone power over everyone else's.

For single women to be able to survive with the social attitudes
and the material conditions they must live with, they must be sup-
ported. In Iowa City a group of women formed a living collective.
For some of the women involved, this living situation was imperative
for their financial and psychological survival if they were to re-
main single and politically active. The collective instead of being
supported as an attempt to set an example of women committed to liv-
ing together, was attacked as elitist. The pressure from women out-
side the living collective made those of us involved consumed with
guilt over attempting to change our lives, and caused us to spend
all kinds of energy trying to make other women feel welcome at all
times. (Something few married women have to do -- be pleasant and
sisterly at all hours of the day or night to any woman dropping in
or hanging around). To try to assure other women that we were not
critical of their lives, we constantly hid the fact that we did
choose this way to live — that we do think it is a better way
than being married or living alone. While bending over backwards
to not interfere or put down women who lived with men or women who
weren't politically active we accepted their assertions that our
collective was affecting their lives, affecting the women's libera-
tion organization, or intimidating newly involved women; therefore,
that they could have some say in how we lived and how our lifestyle fit into the whole organization. Our energies were consumed
with justifying our existence rather than with working out the
problems we had internally or with influencing other women to do
the same.

Ultra democracy is valued only for the numbers who agree on a
decision, not for the content of the decisions made. Majority rule
has always hurt minorities. Independent women are a minority and
will always be held down in this way unless we base our actions on
sound political theory not just how most women feel -- most women
are not yet ready to break the ties.

The concept of ultra democracy has also limited large groups to
practice that could be agreed on by the majority which always
turns out to be practice on liberal issues. Radical women are put
in the position of gaining support for only liberal actions and
are isolated and unsupported on any action that threatens the system.

Building a mass movement on a sound political analysis is quite
different from building a mass movement simply for the sake of a
mass movement. Masses of people can be united around anything from
waging a socialist revolution to waging genocide on Black Americans.
Organizing masses of women around one single issue they can agree
on "no matter what views people may have on other topics" offers
nothing more than the hope of winning a single issue. It offers

no hope of support for other issues along basic political lines.
It does offer the possibility of an organized mass with amazing
fascist and racist potential. This is my fear of what women's
liberation could become were it to continue to recruit on nothing
other than sex lines. I keep remembering the following which

THE WRONG WAY

Developing our Theory and our Practice

came out of a movement that developed this way:

"Consider what it (the electorate) has received during
the past thirty-five years from the majority of negroes,
Indians and immigrants who have been enfranchised during
the time, and then judge whether women as a body, could
not bring something to offset these last acquisitions.
Those who fear the foreign vote and the colored vote should
remember that there are more native-born women in the
United States than foreign-born men and women; more white
women than colored men and women."
Ida Husted Harper, "Would Woman
Suffrage Benefit the State, & Woman Herself?
North American Review 1904.

Our practice has been to work in small groups where we have been
able to achieve some amount of collectivity in work and decision
making and have come closer to a situation where all the members

of a group have power in that group. We felt the need to work this
way partly so we could work with other women with similar politics,
not having to compromise our beliefs or water down our analysis

to meet the approval of some mass organization. It is in the iso-
lation of the small group that we have been able to begin an analy-
sis -- to examine our ideas and practice without the fear of
alienating potential new members.

The politics we have developed in our small groups have not
however been carried over to our organizing practices. We have de-
veloped the beginning of radical theory in our small groups but
we tend to feel isolated and alone in our beliefs, only finding
support and agreement within our own group. Thus the small group
which we maintain for support has caused us to feel isolation and
a lack of support from women outside of our particular collectives.
But when we try to organize other women we don't organize them
along our political beliefs or to support us. We appeal to them
as women with any range of politics. We organize around lines that
don't offer the possibility of support.

We feel the reasons we formed small groups were and are still
valid. To go back to a mass organization would cancel all that
we have gained. When Ruthann Miller talks of the destruction of
the movement she refers to a mass movement based on single issues
with no basic political theory. Since we cannot see this kind of
movement in any radical perspective, why should we care about its
destruction? The mass organizing of women with grave differences
in political theory will be the destruction of women's liberation
because (1) women's liberation will have no political basis, and
(2) we cannot develop any analysis when new or potentially new
members are so powerful in determining the politics and actions.
By constantly having to justify our ideas and practices, we always
are looking backwards - never moving forward.

But we must solve the problems of how we avoid isolation

without compromising our political theory; how we can influence other
women to be in small groups (if we think that is valid); how we can
facilitate ideological struggle between small groups; how much of a
mass organization do we need, and how can small groups relate to a
central organization without diluting their theory and practice.

A socialist woman is a socialist first
and a woman - a feminist - second. Her pri-
orities are to a socialist revolution first
and then to a feminist revolution. Implicitly she has an allegiance to a party,
which in this country is upholding and legitimizing this form of government, and the
illusion that people participate in it.

Socialism has not dealt with the Woman
Question. A class analysis deals with work-
ers, and in not dealing with their families,
the women in their families, cannot deal
with the existence of the institutions of
marriage and the family. Socialism only
offers women the chance to work for a femi-
nist revolution once they have a socialist
state. Women don't have to work for social-
ism; the society we want includes it.

The feminist movement is composed of
those women whose goal is the liberation of
all women, those women who work towards
meeting the needs of the most oppressed

women. Any other women cannot, must not,
be included. Ruthann Miller talks about us
casting out Angela Davis and Leila Khaled.
They have chosen to work in another move-
ment, seeing their oppression differently.
To include these women, to speak as if they
included themselves, is to use them.

A different matter is to include those
women who say they do want to be in the
feminist movement, but have no place in it.
You can call yourself a feminist, and use
the rhetoric, yet still be working to uphold
this system. The oppression of women is
grounded in the oppression of other minori-
ties - blacks, third world peoples, and
homosexuals - yet Ruthann Miller seeks to
organize women "no matter what views people
may have on other topics." that is, dealing
with single issues.

We must not confuse groups fighting for
liberation with those working for change.
To speak of them in the same breath is to

see all those working for change as similar.
Socialist Workers Party cannot legitimize
itself that way, nor legitimize their cri-
ticism of us in that way.

Women have come to understand that sup-
port has both psychological and material
parts to it. "We think that homosexuals are
unjustly discriminated against and oppressed
in this society, and we fully support the
struggle of homosexuals to eliminate all
laws penalizing them and all oppression of
them." This statement is not grounded in
practice, SWP has expelled gay people from
its membership.

Their statement on women ends, "they will
do it now, in their own way, and they are
not willing to subordinate their demands to
the needs of any struggle." That is true.
Yet SWP-YSA are working to prevent just
that.

This is the perspective from which Ruthann
criticizes us.

A Woman?

January 29, 1972

ACTION STUDIES 2G Bo" 342 | 385 orecks sz = 33 3
SPRING COURSES — 1971 ote #33 | 39 282232 aes cae
Modern Science: 32° git £2? &siseg $8. Seg
Relevance In Contemporary Education cea eh Soo see ee ge eg Wee Tee
The Prairie Dog Project: A Free School Community 372 gi ngmgeet 7 2 8
Seminar on Cayce’s Rantings \ z sp 833228 aie Dee
Organic Gardening Perk z Bp OS2g5% ae be Se
Historical Background: Women’s Liberation: ES 42 Bi osee iE sete eae
Women’s Liberation: Medical Information Ses ee 520888 Be Sor got g
20th Century Women Writers: An introduction py ge £33308 PEog a
Self-Defense for Women 3 eg 285208 ; ae teen Sars |
Poetry of Resistance 5 Sg g,3232 iF Posner se
Technology and Society * vs 23285 3 8 8
Film and Social Change 2 ; gz ise3s ee tee
The New Music rs 22 ees? ce ee eel
Black Action Theatre | 58 83552 pbc go§
Writing on the Walls | Be 38263 ree ee eee 4
Men Against Sexism: Consciousness Raising for Men jo RE Res $3 ‘
Imno Poetry L —
The Cities:
‘The eee cael! Dayton, Ohio is getting together a Regional The new Getting on Women Collective's news
Women’s Center. Its purpose is to provide letter announces a woman's house in East
better communication within the woman's Lansing, Michigan - women are always wel-
movement in SW Ohio. The address for their come. The address of both the house and
newsletter is: the newsletter is:
Dayton Women's Liberation Getting on Women Collective
1721 Burroughs Drive, 358 N. Harrison
Dayton, Ohio 45406 E. Lansing, Michigan 48823