however comic-strip far out, for a  
revolutionary man -- somehow related to  
the same Supermale reasoning that permits  
the first statement on Women's Liberation  
and male chauvinism that came out of the  
Black Panther Party to be made by a man,  
talkin' a whole lot ‘bout how the Sisters  
should speak up for themselves. Such  
ignorance and arrogance ill befits a  
revolutionary.  

We know how racism is worked deep into  
the unconscious by our System -- the  
same way sexism is, as it appears in the  
very name of The Young Lords. What are  
you if you're a "macho woman" -- a fe-  
male Lord? Or, god forbid, a Young Lady?  
Change it, change it to The Young Gentry,  
if you must, or never assume that the  
name itself is innocent of pain, of  
oppression.  

Theory and practice and the light  
years between them. "Do it!" says Jerry  
Rubin in Rat's last issue -- but he  
doesn't, or every Rat reader would have  
known the pictured face next to his art-  
icle as well as they know his own much-  
photographed face: it was Nancy Kurshan,  
the power behind the clown.  

Goodbye to the New Nation and Earth  
People's Park, for that matter, conceived  
by men, announced by men, led by men --  
doomed before its birth by the rotting  
seeds of male supremacy which are to be  
transplanted in fresh soil. Was it my  
brother who listed human beings among  
the objects which would be easily avail-  
able after the Revolution: "Free grass,  
free food, free women, free acid, free  
clothes, etc."? Was it my brother who  
wrote, "Fuck your women till they can't  
stand up" and said that groupies were  
liberated chicks 'cause they dug a tit-  

‘shake instead of a handshake? The epitome  
of female exclusionism -- "men will make  
the Revolution and their Chicks." Not my  
brother, no. Not my revolution. Not one  
breath of my support for the new counter-  
left Christ -- John Sinclair. Just one  
less to worry about for ten years. I do  
not choose my enemy for my brother.  

Goodbye, goodbye. The hell with the  
simplistic notion that automatic freedom  
for women -- or non-white peoples -- will  
come about ZAP! with the advent of a  

socialist revolution. Bullshit. Two evils  
pre-date capitalism and have been clearly  
able to survive and post-date socialism:  
sexism and racism. Women were the first  
property when the Primary Contradiction  
occurred: when one half of the human  
species decided to subjugate the other  
half, because it was "different", alien,  
the Other. From there it was an easy step  
to extend the Other to someone of dif-  
ferent skin shade, different height or  
weight or language -- or strength to  
resist. Goodbye to those simple-minded  
optimistic dreams of socialist equality  
all our good socialist brothers want us  
to believe. How liberal a politics that  
is! How much further we will have to go to  
create those profound changes that would  
give birth to a genderless society. Pro-  
found, Sister. Beyond what is male or fe-  
male. Beyond standards we all adhere to  
now without daring to examine them as  
male-created, male-dominated, male-fucked-  
up, and in male self-interest. Beyond all  
known standards, especially those easily  
articulated revolutionary ones we all  
rhetorically invoke. Beyond, to a species  
with a new name, that would not dare de-  
fine itself as Man.  

A Woman?  

I once said, "I'm a revolutionary, not  
just a woman,” and knew my own lie even as  
I said the words. The pity of that state-  
ment's eagerness to be acceptable to those  
whose revolutionary zeal no one would  
question, i.e., any male supremacist in  
the counterleft. But to become a true  
revolutionary one must first become one  
of the oppressed (not organize or educate  
or manipulate them, but become one of  
them) or realize that you are one of them  
already. No woman wants that. Because  
that realization is humiliating, it hurts.  
It hurts to understand that at Woodstock  
or Altamont a woman could be declared up-  
tight or a poor sport if she didn’t want  
to be raped. It hurts to learn that the  
Sisters still in male-Left captivity are  
putting down the crazy feminists to make  
themselves look okay and unthreatening  
to our mutual oppressors. It hurts to be  
pawns in those games. It hurts to try and  
change each day of your life right now --  
not in talk, not "in your head," and not  
only conveniently "out there" in the  
Third World (half of which is women) or  
the black and brown communities (half of  
which are women) but in your own home,  
kitchen, bed. No getting away, no matter  
how else you are oppressed, from the prim-  
ary oppression of being female in a pa-  
triarchal world. It hurts to hear that the  
Sisters in the Gay Liberation Front, too,  
have to struggle continually against the  
male chauvinism of their gay brothers. It  
hurts that Jane Alpert was cheered when  
rapping about imperialism, racism, the  
Third World, and All Those Safe Topics but  
hissed and booed by a Movement crowd of  
men who wanted none of it when she began  
to talk about Women's Liberation. The  
backlash is upon us.  

They tell us the alternative is to  
hang in there and "struggle", to con-  
front male domination in the counterleft,  
to fight beside or behind or beneath our  
brothers -- to show ‘em we're just as  
tough, just as revolutionary, just as  
whatever-image-they-now-want-of-us-as-  
once-they-wanted-us-to-be-feminine-and-  
keep-the-home-fire-burning. They will be-  
stow titular leadership on our grateful  
shoulders, whether it's being a token  
woman on the Movement Speakers Bureau  
Advisory Board, or being a Conspiracy  
groupie or one of the "respectable" chain-  
swinging Motor City Nine. Sisters all,  
with only one real alternative: to seize  
our own power into our own hands, all  
women, separate and together, and make the  
Revolution the way it must be made -- no  
priorities this time, no suffering group  
told to wait until after.  

It is the job of revolutionary feminists  

to build an ever stronger independent  
Women's Liberation Movement, so that the  
Sisters in counterleft captivity will  
have somewhere to turn, to use their  
power and rage and beauty and coolness in  

THAT  

their own behalf for once, on their own  
terms, on their own issues, in their own  
style -- whatever that may be. Not for us  
in Women's Liberation to hassle them and  
confront them the way their men do, nor  
to blame them -- or ourselves -- for what  
any of us are: an oppressed people, but a  
people raising our consciousness toward  
something that is the other side of anger,  
something bright and smooth and cool, like  
action unlike anything yet contemplated  

or carried out. It is for us to survive  
(something the white male radical has  

the luxury of never really worrying about,  
what with all his options), to talk, to  
plan, to be patient, to welcome new  
fugitives from the counterfeit Left with  
no arrogance but only humility and delight  
to plan, to push -- to strike.  

There is something every woman wears  
around her neck on a thin chain of  
fear -- an amulet of madness. For each of  
us, there exists somewhere a moment of  
insult so intense that she will reach up  
and rip the amulet off, even if the chain  
tears at the flesh of her neck. And the  
last protection from seeing the truth will  
be gone. Do you think, tugging furtively  
every day at the chain and going nicely  
insane as I am, that I can be concerned  
with the puerile squabbles of a counter-  
feit Left that laughs at my pain? Do you  
think such a concern is noticeable when  
set alongside the suffering of more than  
half the human species for the past 5,000  
years -- due to a whim of the other half?  
No, no, no, goodbye to all that.  

Women are Something Else. This time,  
we're going to kick out all the jams, and  
the boys will just have to hustle to keep  
up, or else drop out and openly join the  
power structure of which they are already  
the illegitimate sons. Any man who claims  
he is serious about wanting to divest  
himself of cock privilege should trip on  
this: all male leadership of the Left is  
the only way; and it's going to happen,  
whether through men stepping down or  
through women seizing the helm. It's up  
to the "brothers" -- after all, sexism is  
their concern, not ours; we're too busy  
getting ourselves together to have to  
deal with their bigotry. So they'll have  
to make up their own minds as to whether  
they will be divested of just cock  
privilege or -- what the hell, why not  
say it? -- divested of cocks. How deep  
the fear of that loss must be, that it can  
be suppressed only by the building of  
empires and the waging of genocidal wars!  

Goodbye, goodbye forever, counterfeit  
Left, counterleft, male-dominated cracked-  
glass-mirror reflection of the Amerikan  
Nightmare, Women are the real Left. We  
are rising, powerful in our unclean bodies;  
bright glowing mad in our inferior brains;  
wild hair flying, wild eyes staring, wild  
voices keening; undaunted by blood we who  
hemorrhage every twenty-eight days;  
laughing at our own beauty we who have  
lost our sense of humor; mourning for all  
each precious one of us might have been in  
this one living time-place had she not  
been born a woman; stuffing fingers into  
our mouths to stop the screams of fear  
and hate and pity for men we have loved  
and love still; tears in our eyes and  
bitterness in our mouths for children we  
couldn't have, or couldn't not have, or  
didn't want, or didn't want yet, or wanted  
and had in this place and this time of  
horror. We are rising with a fury older  
and potentially greater than any force in  
history, and this time we will be free or  
no one will survive. Power to all the  
people or to none. All the way down, this  
time.  

FREE OUR SISTERS! FREE OURSELVES!  

by Kobsm  
HORGED  

Reprinted from  

25 September, 1970