EQUALITY UNDER THE LAW

More Of  
COMMENTARY

THE EQUAL RIGHTS AMENDMENT  
by Ann Elizabeth

The passing of the Equal Rights Amend-  
ment in the House (after 47 years of resis-  
tance) is another interesting manifesta-  
tion of a certain type of co-option. This  
one, however, is more complicated than  
most.  

First, on the issue of the draft. This  
amendment, if made part of the Constitu-  
tion, is supposed to make women subject to  
the draft, and - as Frank Blair on NBC  
news put it so cunningly - make it pos-  
sible for women to demand entrance into  
such schools as West Point (chuckle). But  
let us not forget that there is a great  
conspiracy afoot to do away with the draft.  
This great conspiracy is supported by an  
interesting cross-section of people - Mr.  
Nixon, Mr. Mitchell, various conservative  
groups, Republicans, Democrats, and oddly,  
a whole horde of anti-war proponents - men  
and women alike.

It looks as if, once again, they (males)  
will be successful in preventing women full  
participation in the war machine process.

I firmly believe that the ERA and the drive  
to eliminate the draft system are related  
in this way: That the general abhorrence  
to making women draft prone will give  
impetus to Nixon's plan to do away with  

the draft and that many, many men and wo-  
men who already want an end to the draft,  
will (should the ERA go through) push even  
harder to see it done. A large group of  
people seem to be thinking of the draft  
issue in a very short-sighted manner. The  
men (and now supposedly, women) don't want  
to go to Indo-China (an unjust war, etc.)  
and so they don't want to be drafted. Very  
simple conclusion..... do away with the  
draft. It MUST strike some of these peo-  
ple as peculiar that their bed-partners in  
this conclusion are Nixon and Mitchell. OK-  
take another view - a longer view: If  

U.S. foreign policy continues to be what it  
is, is it not absolutely mandatory that  
the U.S. public, men AND women, share the  
TOTAL responsibility of aggressions com-  
mitted against other nations by our govern-  
ment? And is not that "sharing" involve-  

Feeling only human  
I picked myself up  
Feeling human  

is like a second,  
lost your balance,  
that's alright  

Feeling human  

seems to be getting  
more difficult  
(plastic coughing)  

Feeling human is  
a sensation  
inside a crowd  

Feeling human  

is becoming more  

and more troublesome  

and that's just when  

we stop thinking about it  

and fall out of this  
writer's tree  
at my mother's words  

She is well sort of  
screaming, all worked up  
like hysterical  

While I sit up here  

angrily denouncing  
her Republicans  

Alloman%  

The Same  

ment assured by the selective service sys-  
tem? To create another set of “profes-  
sionals" is only another manifestation of  
the male route to status specialization.  
And in this case, the professionals would  
be well-paid, well-housed (according to  
Mitchell) troops (mercenaries), prepared  
to apply no individual social conscience  
to matters of killing, occupation, deten-  
tion, torture, espionage, and so on. In  
other words - they would carry out the  
abstract objectives of our male-dominant  
government in concrete terms.

We MUST retain generalized public sanc-  
tion over the military actions of federal  
authorities! One other side effect of  
doing away with the draft is that it  
would surely weaken the anti-war movement.  
The Pentagon people would have a carte  
blanche situation - which is just what  
they want.

We should also examine the draft issue  
from a view of the right of women to bear  
arms - which to this day has virtually been  
denied to us. This right is integral with  
the right to self-defense. In light of  
the violence mystique that exists in our  
culture (and the fact that we are so vul-  
nerable and subject to it), we should wel-  
come any opportunity to acquire education  
in self-defense tactics - including mili-  
tary training and participation. And we  
must be given the opportunity to RESIST  
oppression in a meaningful way - not only  
in matters of individual self-protection,  
but in a political context, the opportunity  
to say “hell, no, we won't go" and have it  
be EFFECTIVE.

The second most-debated aspect of the ERA  
is the doing away with so-called "protec-  
tive laws". Quoting from Joan Jordan: "The  
removal of beneficial legislation will not  
insure equality but rather increase profits  
through greater exploitation and inequality  
than presently exists."

Consider the fact that nationally, 80% of  
working women are NOT organized. Therefore  
without any protective laws and no work  
contracts, they would be totally subjuga-  
ted to the whim of unscrupulous employers.

Many of the protective work laws came  
into being through very hard-fought  
battles -- laws concerning limitations on  

she is too wrought up  
to care who wins  

she is hurt and  

all she can think  

is suffering  

and she cries,  

Be human.  

Sept. 15 197  

working hours, overtime, break periods,  
lifting excessive weights, cleanliness,  
good ventilation, adequate lighting, de-  
cent restroom facilities. We must not  
push these laws aside and contend simply  
that they oppress women workers. While  
it's true that some of these laws have  
been unjustly applied to prevent women  
from securing certain types of employ-  
ment -- the protective benefits derived  
from these laws are generally valid, and  
necessary to all employees - male and fe-  
male alike. The obvious political  

thrust should be not to remove these laws  
but to EXTEND them to include the male  
work force. At the same time, women must  
demand a reduced work day and week as they  
organize. If our movement looks forward  
to creating a more humane society, the  
above certainly outlines the most logical  
political thinking of women concerning  
labor.

It may be that the ERA will serve our  
purposes in the Courts and will prove  
forceful in helping women to enter areas  
of now male-dominated employment - but  
beware the co-option dilemma! Don't be  
easily pacified by this crumb of egali-  
tarianism! It's very possible that the  
ERA will have only the most minimal effect  
on ACTUAL opportunities for women. Wit-  
ness the 1963 Equal Pay Act; the 1964  
Title VII Sex Amendment; the 1954 Su-  
preme Court Decision on integration. There  
is a rather extensive list on Congres-  
sional books of laws dealing with the con-  
dition of women and civil rights. The fe-  
male population continues to move back-  
ward economically and the Blacks are bat-  
tling on all fronts ... in spite of these  
laws: Laws are valid only when the courts  
enforce them - and we've seen little evi-  
dence of strong enforcement of laws con-  
cerning women and Blacks ... and other mi-  
nority groups.

Do you support the ERA? Why? Are you  
prepared to enforce it? - to coerce the  
courts to enforce it? - to go to the  
streets to do battle to enforce it? Are  
you prepared to accept (to demand) parti-  
cipation in the military and thusly secure  
fuller participation in our government?  
Are you ready for the employer who will  
require you to work a 12 hour day with no  
overtime? Or will the ERA stand as another  
bit of lip-service paperwork? Be reminded  
also that 38 states must ratify this amend-  
ment before it becomes part of Constitu-  
tional law.

It looks good - but it's a pretty compli-  
cated hassle.

Reprinted from the Female Liberation News-  
letter, Minneapolis, Minnesota  

Name