Self—criticism and Direction

In our last issue we printed a political  
analysis of the Left and the Women's Move-  
ment called "No More Fun and Games." We  
devoted a third of the paper to the article  
because it was the most cogent analysis we  
had seen, and contained important ideas  
about what is to be done in the future.

The one flaw in the article was the  
highly offensive sentence, "I believe  
Lesbianism is a fad right now." We had de-  
cided to comment on this sentence at the  
end of the article, but in the business of  
lay-out it was forgotten. We criticize  
ourselves for the omission because it is  
important to us that we present our poli-  
tics as clearly as possible. Not comment-  
ing on the homosexist remark may have been  
confusing to many of our readers. So we  
would like to state now that such a state-  
ment is offensive to all Lesbians, and we  
denounce it.

We also want to include here an explan-  
ation about the authorship of "No More Fun  
and Games." We did, indeed, receive the  
article unsigned, but we knew who wrote  
it. It was written by a so-called move-  
ment "star." The main drawback to the  
"star" phenomenon in politics is that  
groupings develop around or against names,  
not ideas. We didn't want anyone to pre-  
judge the contents of “No More Fun and  
Games" either negatively or positively on  
the basis of its authorship. As has been  
said before, ideas are not property, and  
we generally do not credit work we print  
unless specifically asked.

We learned an important lesson from  
neglecting to comment on the homosexist  
sentence in "No More Fun and Games" and  
the discussion and self-criticism that  
followed. Several of us were at first un-  
concerned that we had omitted the comment,  
and our reasoning went something like  
this: "The politics of AIAW is strongly  
presented in the paper, so anyone who read  
“No More Fun and Games" would realize that  
we would never agree with such an offen-  
sive remark, and figure that we had strong,  
valid reasons for printing the article  
anyway."

But after examining that line of reason-  
ing, and thinking about the variety of  
people who read Ain't I a Woman? -- not  
necessarily regularly -- we realized that  
there could, in fact, be a great discrep-  
ancy between what we thought was coming  
across as our politics and what actually  
was coming across. We saw that, because  
we are a tight collective and discuss our  
politics and the articles that we print  
at great length, we have a much clearer  
understanding of our political stance on  
most issues than even a regular reader of  
the paper might have.

In an effort to clarify our politics to  
our readers in some fundamental way, we  
want to attempt an explanation of our po-  
sition. Basically we feel we are working  
toward a material analysis of this society  
and its class nature, and to work to de-  
stroy the society as it exists -- all from  
within a feminist perspective. We have

moved away from a strict feminist analysis  
to an analysis that includes all oppressed  
groups. We believe there is a great power  
behind women as a basis for a social rev-  
olution, and it is the only structure  
within which we can work. But that is not  
to say that it is the only way, and that  
we don't have a responsibility to every  
other oppressed group to work for their  
liberation as well. Basing a revolution  
solely on the end to your own group's  
oppression is, we feel, incorrect. We may  
be more personally concerned with gayness  
than race, for instance, because it's a  
gut issue in the group; but basing a whole  
analysis on gayness is narrow and unreal-  
istic.

Because we are gay women we give weight  
to the issue of lesbianism in our paper,  
of course. Gayness and class, economic  
oppression, health concerns, survival tac-  
tics for women alone, etc -- all of these  
concern us too. They are important, immed-  
iate problems that involve us all and  
should be dealt with, because we live in  
this society and will have to continue to  
do so for a long time to come. But when  
this time finally does come to an end, and  
the process of social revolution begins,  
we must be prepared in every way possible.  
And one important preparation, we feel, is  
striving to reach a clear perspective of  
the present society, and understanding the  
revolutionary changes that are required  
to ensure universal equality and prevent  
oppression in any form.

Some  
Feminism

I don't find class priority threatening or in conflict with my  
feminism, i.e. lesbianism. When I first gained some political  
awareness of oppression and injustices I knew I wanted to change  
the system that perpetuates and creates inequality on all levels.  
That's as much as my awareness comprehended at the time.

From becoming peripherally involved with SDS and RSA, two groups  
with similar concerns (I thought) as mine, I felt as intimidated  
by the male leaders as in my high school and college days. It dis-  
illusioned me tremendously to be related to as a human being  
by these people of noble intentions (working toward equality for  
all). I was related to as a chick, you know. It took me a while to  
realize the problem -- because as a woman I certainly attempt to  
understand other points of view -- as women are taught. Anger fi-  
nally started trickling out of my pores...anger at the hypocrisy  
of the goals of ending class oppression espoused by the radical  
male revolutionary bourgeois student leaders. It's funny, I never  
felt angry toward any women then, but immediately (and correctly)  
identified the men as instigating and propagating their class and  
sex privileges. My mind brought to focus the inconsistency of  
equality, and male dominance. FUCK THAT SHIT!! I can't work for a  
revolution to enslave myself. I realized being a woman is political!

So I stopped working with the left. And then...women's libera-  
tion had a well-advertised meeting. I heard the women (straight  
mostly) telling of the underlying oppression they'd experienced in  
left groups, despite the stated goals after the revolution. Well,  
of course it was a relief to me and something I identified with, so  
I got into WL.

Before too long I was more and more uncomfortable with the women  
I worked closely with. The reason: they expressed in verbal and  
non-verbal ways their uptightness about gayness. I said less and  
became as careful about touching as I'd had to be with my female  
straight friends in high school and college. I guess I permanently  
learned where my head was at from my reaction to this form of  
oppression from straight women. I stayed and took it. Because I was  
and am much more comfortable with women -- and usually can deal  
with their homosexist remarks more honestly than in a situation  
with a threatened male ego -- I don't mind giving women my energy  
and emotions -- good or bad. I did not stop trying to deal with  
and make them deal with their attitudes about Lesbians.

About a year ago, a lot of lesbians stopped working in WL to  
form gay feminist groups. I was not among those women because I  
did not see my gay oppression as having more priority in my life  
than sex and class oppression. I understood the split as gayness  
vs. womanhood. I felt that women have to work together, regardless  
of their race or class, or whether they are straight or gay, work-  
ing constantly to equalize relationships with each other within  
the women's movement. In my attempts to find a stable, comfortable  
base for political growth I eventually discovered another distinc-  
tion I had to make besides feminism.

page eight

volume two

THOUGHTS ON

and Class

Gayness. What does it mean and what are the political implica-  
tions? It is political to be gay...no lesbian with a feminist con-  
sciousness should be co-opted into working for a cause that will  
eventually put her into and under male dominance. With the present  
understanding I have of our overall situation I don't feel afraid  
that no one is looking out for the concerns of gay women -- we are  
gay women! I, personally, have come to resent and distrust straight  
women who work with men, or live with men, or fuck with men, yet  
turn to gay women to sap their strength in order to perpetuate a  
male-oriented part of their lives. Lately more and more women are  
leaving all remaining male-oriented parts of their lives to the  
men to perpetuate themselves if they can.

Turning to women for support, love, sex, fun, and political di-  
rection, lesbians are creating a post-revolution oriented culture.  
Yes. Majority, or acceptance, is a new feeling for some of us, and  
it's a good feeling.

Before I get off on how good it is to be in an accepting atmos-  
phere...I think that without allowing any stagnancy or back-slap-  
ping in congratulations at this vast, defiant accomplishment of  
creating a positive gay space we must turn our energy to the con-  
cerns we initially had that made us turn to, then leave, the left.  
Class oppression is an immediate concern to me.

The recently much-pointed-at dichotomy of class vs gayness has  
been fuzzy to me. I guess I don't see it as one or the other, I  
know I no longer feel like giving my strength and emotional sup-  
port to all women. It is exhausting and frustrating to see my sup-  
portive efforts ultimately put to use in feeding a male ego. On  
another level, yet on the same principle, I can't endorse all gay  
women. It is hypocritical and counter-revolutionary (defeating)  
to support middle class attitudes that pad a privileged existence  
for a few women who I'm supposed to be concerned about because  
they're gay. I can no longer work with all women, regardless of  
their race or class, or whether they are straight or gay, unless  
they, too, are working constantly to equalize relationships. And  
not within the women's movement -- but among gay women!

Gay women working together to end class distinctions is nec-  
essary. In our attempts to create a world we want to live in, in  
the work we've already done to create that world, we have changed  
ourselves. Our attitudes. That sounds like social change -- peace-  
ful revolution, or something like that, but I don't choose that  
as my alternative. I don't find it unhealthy, instead I take it as  
a sign of seriousness of our intentions. If we can't bring about  
immediate revolution (who can -- how?) at least we are not turning  
back to our old places to resume the old ways. We are, instead,  
using our imaginations and resources to make what changes we can  
in preparation, in practice. It's not bad or draining our strength  
for future political action.

number six ain’t i