Tues.: The morning of the meeting  
on "Loving Women” I woke up with a  
terrible pain in my stomach. I  
couldn't remember what made us think  
that we had anything to say that was  
important enough to call a meeting  
for. Why can't we think that just  
what we feel is valid enough to talk  
about without it being heavy or the-  
oretical or well written or well  
said? That afternoon we planned an  
agenda and that helped calm my  
stomach.  

We discussed why we don't show our  
affection for each other by touching  
or hugging. It's such a glaring  
problem because it's so obvious that  
we care for each other very much.  
The only time we seem to feel that  
it's alright to touch each other is  
when one of us is so upset that she  
needs to be comforted. It's like we  
need an excuse to show how we feel.  

I think we decided that our inhi-  
bition stemmed from fear that our  
touch would be taken sexually or that  
other people might think that we were  
lesbians. The gay caucus talked  
about that too. We felt even more  
inhibited when it came to touching  
because we didn’t know how the sis-  
ters would take it. It was decided  
though that this fear is another  
example of how society uses lesbian-  
ism to keep women apart.  

I should start out by admitting  
that it is very difficult for me to  
deal with this subject. I have found  
the whole subject of sexual relations  
terribly painful all my life, was  
horribly battered around by the  
pressures to have relations, the pres-  
sures to not have relations, and my  
knowing that I couldn't fit into  
either the image of a woman in this  
society (which is heterosexual) or  
the image of a lesbian which this so-  
ciety "crudely" projects.  

I guess I am just mixed up about  
where I fit in the whole spectrum.  
After the lesbian workshop when the  
gay sisters announced the caucus and  
the workshop they were having, I felt  
somehow left out but also very anx-  
ious for the workshop because I had  
been wanting to talk about this. I  
kind of feel as if I am a strong sep-  
aratist not really by any intellectu-  
al choice but because I just am. I  
have no desire for heterosexual rela-  
tions. I cannot relate to men. I  
always feel too intimidated and hu-  
miliated. I don't know if I think  
this is a valid way to feel but that  
is how I feel and therefore relations  
with men at least for the time being  
are out of the question. But I don't  
know how to relate to women even  
though I know I will have to look to  
women for my social needs. I do feel  
physical attraction to other women  
but this frightens me and I don't  
know how to deal with it. I tend to  
feel very intense about one person at  
a time.  

I guess basically I feel that all  
one-to-one intense emotional rela-  
tionships are oppressive. I have  
never been close to anyone without  
feeling that it has been somewhat a  
power relationship with one of us  
caring or being more hung up than the  
other, with one of us being weak, one  
strong, one passive, one aggressive.  
I have experienced this in all rela-  
tions whether sex was involved or  
not, but it has been intensified in  
sexual relations.  

Womanhood  

The purpose of having a gay page in  
this paper is to provide a forum for  
gay women to talk about gay woman-  
hood: sharing experiences and prob-  
lems and redefining the gay world.  
Our goal is to open up ourselves to  
promote understanding in the hope of  
breaking down the fears and taboos  
that keep us apart.  

In May, Iowa City Women's Libera-  
tion met for a day of local workshops  
on sexuality, one of which was les-  
bian consciousness. Because we felt  
that all the sisters could benefit  
from a discussion of the issues that  
concern gay women, we planned and  
held a workshop on loving women.  

In the first meetings of the gay  
sisters, we were most concerned with  
communicating with our straight sis-  
ters, but through consciousness-  
raising, we began to understand that  
our needs were important and valid in  
their own right. For these reasons,  
we agreed to form a gay cell of  
Women's Liberation.  

Anyone interested in joining us or  
in contributing articles call:  
353-5937, or write: Gay Women's  
Liberation Collective, 301 Jefferson  
Building, Iowa City, Iowa 52240.  

I came into the Women's Liberation  
Seminar on Loving Women as a new mem-  
ber of Women's Liberation and as a  
part of the Gay Women's Liberation  
Caucus.  

At the first workshop once the dia-  
logue began, ideas and, more impor-  
tantly, feelings seemed to flow  
freely. We spoke about how showing  
affection in a physical way is nice  
and in many cases should be freer  
among us. We also discussed roles,  
stereotypes, and the positive politi-  
cal aspect of lesbianism concerning  
Women's Liberation. Generally, the  
questions and responses of the non-  
lesbian sisters were full of concern  
to understand and in some cases  
showed a growing desire to relate to  
other women on a more intimate and  
mutually meaningful level. My deep-  
est emotional response - perhaps a  
combination of gratitude and affec-  
tion - came as I listened to a friend  
who had only recently discovered that  
some of her closer sisters were les-  
bians. She obviously still held  
doubts and probably anxieties about  
the issue, but instead of any with-  
drawal of affection toward these sis-  
ters, her words were full of affec-  
tion and deep concern.  

Considering that there were over 40  
women at this workshop, I think the  
discussion moved along very well. It  
didn't get too personal, but I think  
our number prevented an in-depth  
discussion. The first topic - on  
touching - was an interesting and  
pertinent lead-in to the subject  
of loving women. Points were raised  
that I thought were very true, but  
hadn't given much thought to before.  
I enjoyed listening to the different  
views and opinions that were express-  
ed, and thought the evening was very  
successful. I know I went away with  
several new ideas to think over.  

At the first workshop, I felt as if  
lesbianism was being presented as the  
alternative and I guess I have heard  
too many voices (like my ex-psychi-  
atrist) telling me to have sexual re-  
lations - that it's really groovy -  
that I am just personally hung up. I  
felt like I was hearing more of the  
same. I don't think I have ever felt  
that lesbianism was repulsive or  
wrong or any of the other things that  
society has already told me but I  
guess I do feel pretty threatened by  
the subject.  

On May 19th a meeting was held on  
Loving Women.  

To start off the meeting we went  
around the room with each sister  
stating one attribute of women which  
they really admired. They were: —  
Warmth, perseverance, good to look  
at, less destructive humor, logic  
argument without bullshitting, cour-  
age, aggressiveness, honest motives,  
sensitivity, tolerance, patience,  
frankness, strong bodies (hands in  
particular), practicality, loyalty,  
clarity of expression, consistency in  
personal relationships, tenderness,  
openness, smell of women, organizing  
power, and the manifestation of po-  
tential in present Women's Lib move-  
ments.  

As a result, I feel quite a good  
number of sisters agree that women  
are (bodily) much more beautiful than  
men. And then, too, the other at-  
tributes enhance this beauty - inside  
our strong and beautiful bodies are  
strong and beautiful minds. Looking  
back over the list, I notice many of  
those pleasing attributes could be  
applied either physically or  
intellectually.  

There are some sisters who are  
asexual because love and sex are so  
intricately tied in with our socio-  
political system that they (love and  
sex) become exploitative institutions  
themselves. This to me is one more  
argument for loving sisters - since  
this system is male-run, we can find  
our needed togetherness with our  
sisters.  

The prospect of being able to love  
a sister as I have loved a man ap-  
pears much more gratifying and beau-  
tiful than a heterosexual relation-  
ship could ever be. And not just  
that - it appears much more sensible,  
for we have a hell of a lot more in  
common - we're all sisters!