VIETNAM:  
a feminist analysis  

A year and a half ago there was a struggle between parts of the women's movement and a newly emerging anti-imperialist women's movement. AIAW was strongly opposed to the emergence of separate women's groups organized to work to end the war. Superficially, it was cooptive. The anti-imperialist women's movement was organizing women to work for the anti-war movement.  

Anti-imperialism is integral to our analysis. We received from the Women's Liberation Library Collective of Cambridge, Mass. this speech against the war given by a woman at a Boston Anti-war rally. After fighting to be able to speak she was allowed to. We think her analysis is important in uncovering the roots of imperialist behavior both at home and abroad of white males in and genocidal war on Viet Nam. We printed the article because we feel the issue of anti-imperialism is integral to a feminist analysis.  

As mother country radicals we have a responsibility to make sure we don't become too short-sighted in our analysis. What we believe to be the correct political strategy for women in this country has within structures set up by men, for goals defined by the male left, and under a radical ideology limited by the fact that it was developed by white males.  

On a more personal gut level, we felt cheated. The anti-imperialist women's movement had a limited analysis and therefore a limited vision of what a just society should be: they didn't deal with the position of Blacks, women, working-class people, or lesbians in this society. They were women against the war who were often feminist; we were feminists who considered this country to do anti-war work.  

I am speaking today about the politics of rape. There is a national phenomenon in this country that promotes myths about sex and violence that are recreated in imperialist wars against Third World countries. Rape is an act of aggression in which the victim is denied her self-determination. It is an act of violence which always carries with it the threat of death. And finally, rape is a form of mass terrorism, for the victims of rape are chosen indiscriminately, but our male-dominated culture tells us that it is women who cause rape by being immoral or in the wrong place at the wrong time—in essence, by behaving as though we were free.  

For years the male theorists of the anti-war movement have spoken about the reasons America is involved in Vietnam: the imperialist search for profits in the war in Vietnam, and the American corporate need for a war to maintain a stable domestic economy.  

This analysis of the war, while correct, has never gone far enough. It has been unable to explain the unprecedented sadism which is the overriding characteristic of this war. What is the rationale for the obsession we find in the universities, corporations, and military institutions of Amerika with increasingly hideous and perverse methods of torture and death as applied to the people of another race and land?  

Through the years, scientists and professors have been inventing things like flechette pellets—tiny steel arrows with larger fins at one end—which enter the body enlarging the wound and lodge in the blood vessels—they're designed to shred the internal organs; white phosphorus, a more sophisticated version of napalm, that usually has to burn its way down to the bone before going out. The area denial program where they flood whole areas with hundreds and thousands of mines designed to look like leaves or animal droppings and to make the area totally uninhabitable for humans. Thousands of square miles of territory in Indochina are now flooded with little mines which are manufactured for the sole purpose of blowing off a foot. They can't blow up a truck or anything else; they are only designed to make living impossible. While white-collar boys sit in their labs inventing these atrocities, the army recruits from its male youth the manpower to prove the potency of its weaponry on the battlefield.  

The result is Total War, primarily against the civilian population. The civilians are usually the ones that are in and around the villages; they can't keep on the move all the time because they have families & belongings and homes. They are the ones who signal the weapons, the ones who are the main casualties.  

A 23-month-old baby is senselessly electro-shocked into unconsciousness.  

Where does this come from in the American psyche? These perversions are the products of the mentality of rape. The mentality that produces the kind of war they continue to fight starts at home. Let's run down a few unknown facts about rape—about male sexual violence.  

Susan Griffin in an article called "The Politics Of Rape" found that official crime statistics tell women: forcible rape is the most frequently committed violent crime in Amerika.  

Now let's once and for all smash the white male propaganda that says most crimes of rape are committed by black men on white women. Historically and statistically this is a lie. 90% of all incidences of rape do not cross racial lines—these crimes of sexual violence are usually committed by men against women of their own race.  

Another myth: the rapist is a lonely creep who sees a woman without male protection and is suddenly overpowered by his innate craving for sex. BULLSHIT.  

83% of rapes by men in twos are premeditated,  

90% of all group rapes are premeditated.  

58% of single rapes are premeditated. Rape is not a crime of passion; it is an act of aggression. An undeclared war against women.  

Page 4—  

We heard from the Library Collective that another radical feminist paper, The Furies, refused to print this speech because they 'don't want to encourage women who have come to see the limitations of the anti-imperialist women's movement' to take such a stand. The content of such a statement is racist and condescending when coming from citizens of the country which is waging an imperialist war often counter to the interests of the third world. Other minority groups are less prone to this than women are. They have a similar status within this country as their brothers and sisters in the third world; they are colonized and ghettoized inside the US. Women's status is much less definite. We don't have a distinct race or class connection with the third world. We are more prone to be reactionary in relation to the third world and therefore have to be even more careful in examining our politics.  

However, the  

Another myth: that men who rape women are pathological, as distinct from your basic average run-of-the-mill male. Amir's study called "Patterns In Forcible Rape" says men who rape are not abnormal. Amir writes "studies indicate that SEX OFFENDERS DO NOT CONSTITUTE A UNIQUE OR PSYCHOPATHOLOGICAL TYPE; nor are they as a group invariably more disturbed than the control groups to which they are compared." Allen Taylor—a parole officer who has worked with rapists in prison facilities stated the question in plainer language: "Those men were the most normal men there. They had a lot of hangups, but they were the same hangups that men walking out on the street have."  

Let's just examine two more aspects of rape—keeping in mind that all these things about rape are symptoms of a male-dominated culture which feeds on the combination of sex and violence. The myth that some men protect you and some men rape you is false. First of all, the rapist is an average man. But secondly, every man in this society gets male benefits from the existence of rape. These armchair rapists have their potency and masculinity vicariously confirmed through rape—witness the number of pages given over to violent sex crimes in men's adventure magazines.  

Another way all men have their power enhanced by rape is the need they put into women for protection—the ancient chivalry rackets, men protecting women from other men. It's not unlike the protection relationship which the mafia establishes with small businesses.  

And finally, it is a fact that the most excessive degrees of violence occur in group rape. Far from discouraging or curbing violence upon women, the presence of other men may in fact encourage sadism, and even cause the behavior. Men egg each other on ...  

What does all this have to do with Vietnam?  

What starts as the socialization of male sexual violence in this culture is used by corporate and military interests to train a vicious, killing army—in the labs and on the battlefields. Examples of the inseparability of sex and violence in the male are endless. In basic training the following chant is used to teach the distinction between a rifle, which is a weapon, and a gun, which is a cock. "This is my rifle, this is my gun. One is for killing,