Liberating Men? Women From Old Nation

To the collective:

Congratulations to the women with enough initiative to publish
a paper. All of us concerned with the role of women thank you. I
gained from the first issue of Ain't I A Woman insights, deserved
verbal ear-boxing, and considerable consternation. Implicit in
several articles were arguments about the nature and plight of wo-
men which I think deserve explicit attention. Contributors to the
first issue are far from clear and even further from agreement on
fundamentals. For the sake of debate I shall point out some of

the confusions which plague the movement for the liberation of
women.

Much of the confusion emerges from an indecision about whether
men are to blame for the subordination of women, or whether they
are with women victims of the predominant culture. Let me illus-
trate. One of the attributes of women reported from the symposium
on “loving women” is that women are physically more attractive than
men. Either women are objectively more attractive than men, in
which case men are not to be blamed for thinking so; or women are

only subjectively more attractive, in which case anyone (male or
female) who finds women more attractive simply is expressing cul-
tural norms.

The illustration suggests an even deeper confusion. Is there
something about being a woman which is worth preserving? Women
were described in the symposium as "gentle," "sympathetic." What
is the basis for these particularly womanly virtues? Is it bio-
logical? Surely it is partly social? If there are virtues worth
preserving then there must be parts of the sexual role differen-
tiation worth preserving. It is not clear from most of the state-
ments by WLF members whether women are seeking equality in the
sense of identity (an elimination of all role differences) or in
some sense of "separate but equal" (an elimination of role dif-
ferences deemed unfair, erroneous, improper). Short hair and
karate lessons seem to imply the former; loving women gua women
seems to imply the latter.

Many of the articles in the first issue of Ain't I A Woman refer
to the necessity for separation from men as if it were an estab-
lished precept. I should appreciate an article defending separa-
tism explicitly. I dislike sounding like a reactionary. But it
seems to me that the basic problem is not liberating women from
men. Rather the problem is liberating men and women from old no-

Redefining

I hope you will understand that I am not saying your problems
are insignificant but I am attempting to share with you an entirely
different perspective on what we can do to eliminate the causes.
Our perspectives are so different because we do not agree on
such basic things as what are real gains, what is political, or
what is racism.

People who come to understand their oppression come to
understand the need for revolution. That's what women's libera-
tion is all about. We need liberation, not relief, because we are
oppressed as women. You cannot decide what to call the condition
of women--you refer to discrimination, subordination, inequality,
unjust exploitation (is there a just exploitation?), but never to
oppression.

No, the basic problem is not "liberating men and women
from old notions of what it is to be a woman!" any more than the
problem of racism is liberating whites and blacks from old notions
of what it is to be black. That view assumes that the oppressed
have themselves to blame for their condition, a strange position
for someone to take who points to other women as racists.
Racists are made by the conditions of a racist society--none of
us have escaped it. It is not just a reflection of the cultural
norms but the fact that there have been material rewards for
being a white racist--rewards for the people who have benefitted
from the labor power of blacks. We have to struggle to change
the conditions and institutions which perpetuate racism, but not
by changing the attitudes and values of our oppressors. One
lesson from the civil rights movement is that you don't change
people's values and expect behavior to change but vice versa--
change behavior and attitudes will follow. It is not that exception-
al blacks have talked their way to freedom, or "saved!" their
brothers and sisters, but that the threat of a strong black com-
munity has been great.

How well we can see from the black movement in America
that the "bootstrap" theory of improving oneself doesn't work--
not for a group so necessary for the cheap labor of a capitalist
society. There is strength only in unity--we can drop our forms
of "strategic behavior" (not threatening our masters by seeming
too bright, too aggressive, too uppity, etc.) when we are strong
enough to survive without them.

If we consider it unwise to 'overemphasize the similarities"
between the oppression of women and blacks we risk misunder-
standing both, and we risk being played off against our black
sisters and brothers again (as happened to the women's movement

What is

tions of what it is to be a woman. I resent passionately being
considered a piece of fluff with a vacuum cleaner. I throw things
when everyone who telephones my office assumes I am the secretary.
Will these attitudes really be overcome by shutting out men and
women who do not consider them injustice? Most women are boring;
they have been taught to be boring: they have been taught they
ought to want to be boring. (Most men at least are boring on a
greater variety of subjects.) It seems to me at least as reason-
able to encourage more women to be interesting and competent, as
to demand that men first realize that women potentially are not
boring.

What I am trying to argue, among other things, is that a serious
movement for the liberation of women cannot afford to be revolu-
tionary. If real gains are to be made women cannot afford to be
ideological purists: many women are unjustly exploited who enjoy
marriage, support the system, are offended by obscene language.

Are they to be chalked off as not worth saving? It is political
suicide to insist upon espousal of too large a system of values.

Certainly, the exploitation of women shares characteristics
with other forms of exploitation. For at least two reasons, how-
ever, it is unwise to overemphasize the similarities. In the first
place, exploitation is not necessarily cumulative; nor is the blame
cumulative. To emphasize the similarity frequently is to obscure
the fact that those whose values need to be changed differ. At
least half the racists I know are women. Black men exploit women
no less than white men. Eliminate all white Anglo-Saxon men and
the same forms of exploitation will still exist. This leads to the
second reason for not insisting upon revolutionary purism. The num-
ber of people who do not approve of and do not practice any form of
exploitation is very small. The number of people who disapprove
of and actively oppose some form of exploitation is much larger.

It is only politically sensible to recruit all people who oppose
discrimination against women. The object of political action, re-
volutionary or not, is to change values and not to eliminate people.

If the revolution comes tomorrow the cessation of discrimination
against women is likely to be eleventh on a list of eleven grie-
vances. It is more likely to get lost in the shuffle. In the mean-
time I shall continue to demand equal treatment in the job market,
the right not to bear children, and the right not to want to be
boring. These are demands with political solutions short of revo-
lution. Some of us are not willing to wait.

Political

in the 19th century) by a white male power structure which uses
the labor of blacks, browns and women in this country as a
source of cheap labor power to run a capitalist society. We run
the risk of thinking that black men have had the power to oppress
us (Yes black men do oppress women less than white men) if
we are white and middle class.

What can it matter to the woman forced to do the menial
tasks for little pay (be she white or black) that you don't like
being mistaken for a secretary? The real question is why do
you resent it? How can you talk in one breath of uniting all
people who oppose exploitation and in the other of resenting to
be mistaken for a secretary? By the very definition of your
problem you have already stopped identifying with most women.

Women's liberation as a movement is in the process of
redefining what is political--only then can we say what makes
political sense. Surely there are virtues that oppressed people
have which are worth preserving, but it is as strange to consider
these part of a sexual role differentiation worth preserving as
it would be to consider preserving "racial role differentiation."
It is this very notion of preserving differences that is at the
basis of a separatist movement, something women's liberation
as a movement is not. We ask nothing of men (especially not
that they recognize us as potentially not boring) because we see
that the boys will just have to get themselves together or be
left behind. Personal sympathy and personal help from indivi-
dual men is nice but you don't build a movement on it. We
know that from the dynamic of the black movement and we under-
stand the basis on which revolutionary black organizations like
the Black Panther Party make coalitions with white organizations --
not mergers, but coalitions.

I think we can afford to ask for everything and to see the
process of revolution as Rosa Luxemburg did: "the true
dialectic of revolutions (is) not through a majority to revolu-
tionary tactics, but through revolutionary tactics to a majority--that
is the way the road runs."

The question is not what would happen if the revolution comes
tomorrow--the question is what we are doing to unite women for
a revolutionary struggle. Ultimately, nothing else matters--
not your job or mine, your debating points or mine, your
boredom or my anger. But I think you will just have to wait
because there are no individualist solutions to oppression, it
is material conditions and not values which must be changed,
and you have no strength so long as you prefer to run hand in
hand with your oppressor.

Vol. 1, No. 5 Ain't I