GETTING IT

TOGETHER

WE get it together in small
groups. The New People's group
of WLF gathers on Wednesday night
at 9 P.M. Call us at 337-4398

for where, who, why or anything
we could enlighten you about.

The Action Studies Office has
women’s literature in their library for

your use in Room 301, Jefferson Bldg.

There are books, pamphlets, under-
ground papers, free leaflets, &
this paper.

Betty Friedan couldn't tell me;
Marlene Dixon couldn't tell me; my
favorite neighbor, who was in Women’s
Liberation, couldn't tell me; it took
my own explosion against the power-
lessness I felt as a woman to push
me into doing something about my
own and my sisters’ liberation. What
I wanted at first was to be heard
and understood and to get this chain
off my cradle-to-grave "identity."

I got a lot more than I expected.
My sisters were more than just nom-
inally that. They were aware,
articulate, and angry. (Shoot down
my “other-women-are-stupid" stereo-
type.) For the most part, they were
not competitive nor personal power-
seeking; although I consider myself
worth listening to, I have never

Coming into a new people's group is
like discovering a sanctuary. The absence
of male-type influence means to me that
we'll be free of some of the games people
play.

It doesn't take long to relax into the
group even though you don’t know the other

women. We're all here under the same con-
ditions. These words have brought us to-
gether: Women....Liberation. Each of us

is a woman; each of us has a personal in-
terest in liberation. Each woman's opin-
ion is what we are hearing. A first-
timer, a high school student is rapping...
her words come slowly at first, deep feel-
ings rising to the surface... then someone
nods yes, me too...confidence increases
and she finds herself more articulate and
more people flash yes, I know, I've been

personal politics

Views from new Sisters

there too...soon we see we've all been
there. Are our problems really personal
when so many of us have the same problems,
the same frustrations, even the same words?
I have been annoyed, thwarted, hurt by
individuals who these women have never
seen; yet they have suffered the same in-
justices. Maybe those who hurt me would
have hurt my sisters in the group for I
am "just a woman" too. Imagine just what
would be insulting to any woman. Isn't
that insult common? It's ---oppression,
that's what it is. We must push back
oppression, all together. We all feel
it and our unity gives each of us its
strength. Now we know we want to do some-
thing as we are together more often we'll
find what we want that something to be.

been heard as attentively as by the
women in the Iowa City Women's Lib-
eration front. Age and special
interests cease to be barriers.
Rarely has analysis become dogmatic;
everything is subject to question,
including what we thought yesterday.
I have never felt so together with
a group of people in my life.

It's tough to make any changes in
your own life and it's extraordina-
rily difficult to do it when it in-
volves making demands on other people
-- especially a man you might be
close to. You can't even do that
by yourself, much less change the

whole system, alone. You gotta
have sisters for both of those.
That is how you begin.

“What Security?”
SHE Said

These are a series of photos from the women's strike on

August 26th in New York.

Women lose the benefits of
security when they marry (instead
of their husbands).

When the police saw
us coming with our signs they locked
all the doors to the
Federal Building refusing us entrance
and locking out some
of their own employees as well.
They were photographing us from inside. Betty
Friedan arrived and at once they told her she could come in

At which point two police officers came and
forcibly threw 2 of us out.
Until a woman is allowed equal
benefits she should refuse to pay any taxes
to a system that exploits her labor.

We turned and lost all of us in.
We demanded they let

us in.

& WOMEN?

We had just arrived at the Social
Security building at Federal Plaza to speak to some officials
about the fact that women lost most of their own social se-

If for example you have worked 5 years,
earning less than what your husband did - when you marry you
are entitled to a share of your husband's benefits.

When 10 of us did get in they shut the doors.
They forcibly threw 2 of us out.

Sept ~mber 25, 1970