Castrating  
bitches  

Dedicated to Sarah Ottens  

Our goal is to regain control of our own bodies and lives.  
Yet, I am always amused and often greatly irritated to  
hear claims that the women's movement seeks to  
emasculate men. I should like to point out the irony of it.  
Women’s bodies have been subjected to men's  
imaginations and manipulations for centuries.  

There were the pre-revolutionary Chinese who broke  
their women’s feet and socialized them into believing they  
were more beautiful that way when in reality they had  
fixed it so that their women could never run away from  
their slave positions.  

There were Moslem men who buried their women under  
veils and robes in the sweltering desert sun in order to  
inhibit their own sexual desires.  

There were the American bluecoats who sliced the  
genitals of Indian men and women, wearing the women's  
genitals on their hats for sport.  

There were the tortures of chastity belts, those iron girdles  
which not only prevented a woman's freedom of  
choice, but which were unbearable, cold contraptions  
which collected filth and disease. Women were left at home  
burning with disease while their Christian soldiers were  
raping Moslem women or lying dead on battlefields, the  
chastity belts’ keys gone forever.  

Freud managed to further louse things up for women by  
subjecting their psyches to his male interpretations of  
female sexuality. Post-Freudian doctors operated on  
women, removing their clitorises so they would experience  
the vaginal orgasms that Freud thought to be more mature  
than the “immature” clitoral orgasms.  

There were women who, because of church doctrine,  
were burned as witches, who died or suffered from forced  
motherhood or in the hands of illegal abortionists because  
the patriarchal church banned birth control and abortion.  
All these, not to mention countless women past and present  
in all societies who have been subjected by men to  
beatings, rape, murder and prostitution.  

Certainly when I think of all these inhuman,  
premeditated cruelties that women's bodies have endured  
due to whims of their menfolk, I must laugh in rage against  
some man's fear of being emasculated. When I dream of  
the inner rage of women collectively coming together for a  
purpose, and think: “Castration?”...It would be too kind.  

The demystified Fortress  

Then,  

If I stole your armor,  
Your tron suit, lance,  
Face guards, epaulets,  
And put them in the Museum  
Under the Tower  
Where I secretly practiced  
Wearing them.  

I even perfected  
Your signature  

On my death warrant,  
Daddy,  
ALL of you aromatre,  
Robins-egg blue.  

Then I sat in the glass Tower  
Wondering if you could see me  
without my tron vest  

Or red wig; like Queen Bess  
Imagined letting your severed head  
Bleed over my velvet robe.  

--Barbara Unger  

Due to a pregnancy I was married at 19. My groom was 22. Men-  
tally and emotionally we were both children. During the first two  

years of my marriage I was slapped and knocked around quite often.  

Usually it happened when I could no longer keep my mouth shut and  
became "bitchy" about the fact that I was always home alone while  
he was out drinking or playing poker or with his girlfriend.  

Once he hit me while I was attempting to learn how to drive "be-  
cause I was so stupid." The encounter that I remember most vividly  
occurred the night I brought my child home from the hospital. It  
had never occurred to me to ask his permission to breastfeed my  
baby. It seems he had some fucked up hang-up about nursing. He  
claimed that he didn't want anyone sucking on my tits but him.  

I was completely intimidated and changed immediately to the bottle  
method. I never even considered nursing my second child. I had  

a black eye for two weeks that I received after a party for yelling  
at him in front of his friends about having an affair.  

For a long time I never said anything to anyone except my clos-  
est friend. Everyone who knew him thought him a gentle and kind  
person. During this time I never fought back. I just cowered and  
cried. I think I felt that the shame he later felt each time was  
my strongest weapon. At some point I couldn't stand it any longer  
and started to hit back. That may have happened twice before the  
violence ceased for good. I told him if he ever touched me again  
I would leave him. It took me four more years to get my shit to-  
gether to do that but it wasn't due to violence. Once during that  
time I confessed all this to some women who were also married.  

They all admitted similar experiences that they had never discussed  
before.  

Why this is not talked about, I'm not sure. I imagine most  
women are trying to protect their husbands, their marriages; mostly  
it is a real loss of face in suburban circles to admit that you are  
unhappy. I was never actually beat up, just knocked around. Some  
women are not so lucky and still nobody is talking. The taboo  
against admitting all this is so great that even now I find it in-  
credibly difficult to write this article.  

It's really bad but I kind of have an attitude that goes along the lines of straight  
women who are assaulted by their boyfriends and still continue to relate to them are  
stupid and there doesn't seem to be much I can do about it. I mean if they continue  
to allow themselves to be fucked over (and I see being fucked over as a form of vio-  
lence) and especially hit, then I can’t see a road open for me to even begin to bring  
them down. I don't know how to tell someone to take that first step. I see that as es-  
sential to dealing with women and violence. Women are going to have to retaliate and I  

Page 4  

know if I'm putting my life on that kind of line, it's not going to be for someone who  
will go and do the same thing over again.  

I want revenge and I deserve it but the revenge I seek is (1) personal against men  
that fuck lesbians over (2) political i.e. maybe it will give women courage to do some-  
thing about the violence they themselves are subjected to. I want men everywhere to  
be afraid of women in the same manner women are afraid of men. Men are not going to  
take this fear on voluntarily; they are going to have to be subjected to women's rage  
and not to one woman's rage but to women as a whole. I want the guy that I pass on a  
dark street late at night to be as afraid  

the morning and hear on the news that a man  
was found castrated in an alley every time I  
hear that a woman has been raped. I am para-  
noid and scared shitless of men because I  
know their violence that is directed toward  
women comes from a basic premise that women  
are lesser persons than they are and will  
not be able to harass them as much as a  
man (an equal) can so it's no sweat - no  
sweat to bat them around a bit. Well, they  
have got to learn that we are persons; we  
tried the education, dissertation, kissing  
ass methods and women are still getting  
abused constantly so every day it becomes  
more and more apparent that direct physi-  
cal assault is the only answer.