Following a week of window smashing, mass rallies, and the burning of the old  
armory building, students at the Univ. of Iowa voted to strike under the fol-  
lowing demands: (1) U.S. out of Indo-China now, (2) An end to all political  
repression, (3) An end to all racist attacks on black people, especially the  
Black Panther Party; and an end to sexism (the exploitation of women), (4) The  
abolishment of ROTC and all military recruitment on this campus, (5) The  
punishment by law of police who assaulted students, especially the police  
who shot at the four blacks, (6) The granting of amnesty for all persons  
protesting America's Aggressive War in Southeast Asia, (7) The Tuesday,  

May 12 meeting of faculty senate on the status of ROTC must have 10 stu-  
dent representatives. Roll call vote published, (8) All university employees  
affected by the strike be paid for lost wages.  

Monday night, sitting in the union, I say to Ginna, "No more confronta-  
tion politics." She agrees. We are all angry about Kent State. Hours later  
the phone wakes me. It's Da-da. There are people in the streets downtown.  
Should we go? We'll feel horrible in the morning if we don't. I say, "Pick  
me up. I'll be ready in 5 minutes."  

It is a typical street riot. I am scared & concerned about the makeup  
of the group. It begins to sound like a big social event. "Hey, there's  
Shelley." "There's Carmen & Bruce." "Let's go talk to them." "Aren't many  
political people here." "Hey, let's stay together." The crowd smashes win-  
dows at Iowa Book & Supply. That's cool. The place exploits the hell out  
of students. But the crowd stops short of really looting. I wanted them to.  
I wanted them to smash & loot the hell out of the whole town but I was in  
the back of the crowd—unsure—immobile—chickenshit. Wished we could find  
more sisters. I keep saying to myself, "I've been through this movie be-  
fore." Where are all the women? Do I want to get arrested now? Aren't I  
saving my ass for some glorious women's rebellion? More sisters show up  
and we muddle through the evening.  

The events that followed for the next two weeks led my mind to mull over,  
questions I still haven't answered, like how do I relate to the crowd that  
masses for rallies every night, how do I relate as a feminist? I realized  
soon that I had to somehow participate. I was too angry about Kent, about  
Cambodia, about a lot to do nothing. I also have a gut feeling of guilt  
about everything evil that takes place. I know that the enemy can do what  
it wants. It has all the power. But I am responsible for what I  

—swirew-ir-to function against only my silences  

Saturday people get together in the union and vote to strike. We begin  
to choose demands and I think, "I have joined the student left again. I  
am giving up romantic fantasies of all women strong & separate fighting  
together but there are still minimal conditions for my existence. They  
must at least grant a sentence: We demand the end to sexism. I am too  
scared to bring it up. I've done that before in student politics and soon  
learned that as a woman I had few friends there. My husband proposes it.  
Jesus Christ, I know he was sincere but after all the scene was too much  
to take. I'm too scared so my husband fights for women's rights. Good Gawd!  
There is a typical left fight over it. I could have fallen asleep & known  
what would be said. Divisive! Divisive! If you really care about ending the  
war you'll give up your personal concerns and fight on that issue, etc. —  
However, they finally voted as one demand, “an end to racism & attacks on  
the Black Panther Party! and an end to sexism (the exploitation of women)."  
They had to add the latter in parentheses because most of them didn't know what  
sexism was. Some thought it was promiscuity. Dig that!  

Well, I decided that at least some good political education could come  
out of it. At least people would know what sexism was. But it is still  
hard to work with people who don't have their heads together. It is hard  
to work with men when they call you chick and are taking masculine poli-  
tical ego trips, of women who are so damaged that they have no self-esteem,  
who can't understand why they should mind being called a chick. Everyone  
was involved for different reasons. Some wanted to protest the war, some  
primarily wanted ROTC off campus. People kept running around saying, "Join  
us—you don't have to support all the demands—if you support one of them  
join us." Well that kind of reasoning stinks and here's why:  

We want a just society where people—all people—have a chance to deve-  
lop & be truly alive. It is not enough to be against the war and not a-  
gainst the exploitation of other peoples—any people by anyone. It is not  
enough to be against ROTC on campus and not support an end to racism. It  
is not enough to be against racism and not against sexism. It is not enough  
to want justice for only some people.  

If a revolution came off tomorrow in this country it would be a mess  
and little worth the trouble. For a revolution to mean anything it has to  
come from a mass of people who collectively want to end oppression of any-  
one by anyone. There is a lot of work to be done till people collectively  
are willing to fight for everything that is just. And there is even more  
work to be done till a sufficient number of people are willing to risk  
small privileges today for no privilege tomorrow, till students are  
willing to chuck their A's until their campus is decent enough for human  
beings to live and work there with dignity.  

By the end of the activity there still was no collective thinking on  
what we were really fighting for let alone tactics, but some people (mostly  
men) were at least starting to verbally defend all of the demands and doing  
a nice job of it and coming to some kind of understanding on why all the  
issues were important and related. Maybe that's a beginning.  

A lot of things happened during  
the May strike actions at Iowa. Also,  
a lot of things didn't happen: like  
violence and extensive property dam-  
age. Nonetheless, a frightened uni-  
versity establishment reacted hyster-  
ically against the terror that never  
came, and took a few victims of their  
own. Chief among these were four stu-  
dents: Leona Durham, the newly-appoint-  
ed editor of the campus newspaper,  
The Daily Iowan, and three "radicals"  
on her staff. They were fired before  
they had ever put out a single issue  
of the paper.  

Although the firing would probably  
not have happened at a quieter time,  
certain key figures at the newspaper  
were worried about Leona from the  
day she had been hired, one month be-  
fore she was fired. She expressed  
some radical ideas, she was a graduate  
student who had never previously been  
connected with the paper, and she was  
a woman.  

The sexist issues, then, didn't  
stand alone, but they were there.  

The day after she was hired, Leona  
was quoted in the paper as saying she  
hoped to have at least 50% of her  
staff female. That started the rumor  
mill producing, and it got some fresh  
material a few days later, when Leona  
ran an ad for new staff members. The  
ad, among other things, invited those  
interested in “bread and roses for  
all" to apply for jobs. Among a cluster  
of really absurd rumors (she was  
a "Communist plant from Berkeley"; she  
“announced” she would follow a policy  
of "deliberately slanting the news"  
and many others) was the story that  
she was involved in the women's lib-  
eration movement. (She was, and is.)  
In its context, this was obviously  
meant to show her disreputable char-  
acter.  

A week before she was to take over,  
Leona complained to the advertising  
manager about two grossly sexist ads  
that when she became editor, he was  
not to accept such atrocities. This  
story soon made the rounds as a rumor  
that she had demanded complete con-  
trol over all advertising.  

Both the current editor and the  
chairman of the board which oversees  
the paper expressed sexist attitudes  
against Leona. The editor, Lowell  
Forte, told one of his staff that a  
woman shouldn't be editor of a news-  
paper. The chairman, a political  
science professor, has long been no-  
torious for his male chauvinism: He  
allegedly once refused to work on the  
same staff with a woman (the poly sci  
department is still 100% male), and  
reportedly once told a class that  
"any red-blooded male who says he  
wants to come home to a wife who is  
competitive is lying." During the  
week when he led the movement to fire  
Leona, he told one of the paper's  
staff that "Leona can convince me of  
many things about her political be-  
liefs, but she can't convince me she  
isn't pro-women's rights."  

When Leona was initially suspended,  
she was not given an adequate explana-  
tion of the board's high-handed actions.  

She was first told that in a time of  
crisis, the old staff was more exper-  
ienced and should stay on; then, later,  
that she and the other three were  
“technically incompetent," and,  
finally, that by publicly protesting  
her suspension, she had shown a “lack  
of faith" in the board and thus de-  
served to be fired. Fear of radicals,  
the student protests, faculty outrage  
at a student who talked back to them,  
petty politics by old Iowan staffers  
angry that an "outsider" had been  
picked as editor, and sexism all com-  
bined to give Leona the axe.  

June 26, 1970  

But Leona isn't a passive type of  
female, and she did not meekly accept  
the board's decision. She fought  
back with help from several lawyers  
and from many liberals and radicals  
who were appalled at the board's un-  
just action. And when the local  
Chapter of the ACLU urged the board  
to reconsider the firing, things be-  
gan to look up for Leona.  

Under all this pressure, the board  
set up an outside fact-finding com-  
mission to hear the case. On June 11  
the commission released a blistering  
report, which stated that the board  
acted “unreasonably, and without suf-  
ficient cause" in firing Leona, and  
recommended that she be fully rein-  
stated. In their words, "the over-  
whelming evidence is that the board  
threw Leona to the lions—and then  
blamed her for getting bitten.”  

One week later, the board met and  
reinstated her. She and her new  
staff took over The Daily Iowan on  
June 20, after one last nasty jab by  
the old Iowan staff. Ungracious in  
defeat, these sexists put a filler  
item in their last issue of the paper  
which said: "The Women's Liberation  
Movement is something. The trouble  
with most women who insist they can  
get along without men is they look  
like they already have."  

Thoughts about the strike: very  
confused. I felt at a loss as to  
how to relate as a woman and as a  
person to what was going on; I wanted  
to rejoice in the window-smashing,  
building-burning, etc., yet couldn't  
feel there was any clear political  
motivation for it—they seemed to be  
just half-assed undirected property-  
damage trips participated in as much  
(or more) by idiot jocks as by dedica-  
ted revolutionaries on the path to a  
goal. I couldn't stand the endless  
pompous chauvinist male-rapping at  
rallies—why the hell didn't I have  
the courage or togetherness or what-  
ever to get up there and straighten  
everyone out (ha)? An air of excit-  
ement, things happening, the Revolu-  
tion coming home to roost—yet no-  
thing significant occurred. The pas-  
sionate angry desire to act—yet how?  
Not just by trailing along following  
the crowd. The choice seemed to be  
between 1-woman violent action which  
I was too scared to undertake, and  
getting ourselves together as women  
to seize the leadership and do some-  
thing serious. But, I thought, that  
can't be done on the spur of the mo-  
ment; have to know things about tac-  
tics, have complete trust in our co-  
horts, be confident of our analysis  
and ability to carry it out. Whence  
cometh such confidence if not by do-  
ing it?  

I really don't know if any good  
came out of the strike. So the Fac-  
ulty Senate offered ROTC—the trustees  
will doubtless veto their decision.  
A few students may have been politi-  
cized by the obvious freakout of the  
police in several instances, or in  
the mass arrest of 200+ peaceful sit-  
in-ers, or in the spur-of-the-moment  
suspension, then firing, of the new  
DI editor. But I felt my own lack of  
political development during the cri-  
sis, and I think a great many would-  
be radicals felt similarly. An eye-  
opener. Perhaps the next time we'll  

be better prepared?  

The Iowa City child care collective  
decided to start a free day care cen-  
ter. We got the basement of a campus  
Lutheran chapel to use for free. It's  
one big carpeted room with a kitchen  
and bathroom off to one end. The  
people donated toys, four cribs, two  
bassinets, four mattresses and two  
playpens and got together on a Satur-  
day morning and made more toys from  
scrap lumber. We made a large play-  
pen where there's plenty of room for  
several non-walkers to crawl around  
without getting trampled or picking  
up chokable bits.  

There are 16 children involved but  
no more than 13 come at one time.  
They are all under 3 years old (one  
is 4 weeks, another was born 3 days  
ago and will come starting next  
week).  

The adults come there according to  
a fixed weekly schedule. About half  
of us are volunteers and half are  
parents. One-fourth to one-half  
of the adults there at one time are  
male volunteers and fathers. Parents  
must put in 8 hours a week unless  
they are working. Six adults come  
every morning and 5 every afternoon.  

We take the walking children to the  
city park every morning and take the  
babies outside to the small church  
lawn. One day a week the 2-year-  
olds go to a farm 20 miles away  
where one of the children lives.  
Everything is free play and so far  
we haven't insisted on naps although  
we may have to. They're very pos-  
sessive so we're trying to insist  
that “everything is everybody's!"  
instead of "mine." It hasn't  
changed any behavior but it's se-  
mantically better for us.  

Parents bring lunch, clean diapers,  
and a clean change of clothes and  
do their own laundering. We have  
collective snack material (apples,  
juice, crackers) which is supplied  
by one set of parents a week.  

We haven't got into any legal hassles  
yet. At first we checked on certifi-  
cation requirements but decided we  
didn't want welfare breathing down  
our backs. Unfortunately one of us  
was in the food stamp line and was  
recognized so we're sort of trapped  
into going next week. The lawyer  
said he didn't think we had to be  
certified but welfare thinks other-  
wise. We’ve had all parents sign  
liability releases but we don't know  

how much good they'll do. The lawyer  
said that certification, incorporation  
and liability insurance are all pre-  
requisites for each other plus a  
showing of financial stability (I  
guess we are stable at nothing) and  
permanence.  

A medical student arranged to have  
four med students come to the center  
one evening and give all the children  
medical examinations under the  
supervision of their pediatrics  
professor. These free physicals  
were both a service to the parents  
and for use in case of emergencies.  
We've decided to try to set up at  
least a couple more day care centers  
before the end of the summer. These  
will be more parent established and  
controlled. A couple of us will try  
to phase ourselves out of this center  
to help with setting up the new ones.  
We'll also ask the parents in this  
center to use some of their liberated  
time to help a new group of parents  
get set up.  

For the summer the political use of  
the day care centers will be self  
education about what's involved in  
day care and whatever organizing  
can be done with the parents and  
volunteers involved. When the stu-  
dents return to campus in the fall  
we will use the centers to make  
demands on the University.  

One thing that's happening is that  
we're finding ourselves in the  
position where we may be working  
politically with men. But we  
definitely want men to start taking  
responsibility for children and when  
they take this responsibility and  
work 8 hours or more a week they  
should have a say on the day care  
center's political use.  

We find ourselves in an "after the revolution” position  
before the revolution. We teach the  
kids that everything's everyone's  
but what can we say when they want  
to take a ride in a car that's just  
sitting there but isn't ours? We're  
in a position of feigned equality  
with men which is a strain on us all.  
I suppose it's because we hope the