PEEEPREREREE

must we be hassled by WL? If separatism
hasn't become an end in itself - there
should be room in WL for groups (Lesbians,
older women) to caucus about their oppres-
sion by their sisters in WL and also for
groups who wish to work with men to do so.
I would like to say something about
the "end in itself" attitude I seem to
have toward day care and how this relates
to working with men. I am beginning to
feel that at this time, it is only the
privileged who have the time, energy and
lack of personal responsibility to ques-
tion the established order and become
revolutionaries. This is one reason why
the Left has been largely middle class
white males. I think we have to criti-
cally look at Women's Liberation and fig-
ure out what privilege means within the
female caste. We can no longer just de-
fine privilege according to class and race,
although the correlations will be high.
For instance I must realize that living
as I do with 7 women in a Women's Libera-
tion collective without children is one
of the most privileged positions a re-
volutionary woman can be in. I believe
that married women with children are low
on the scale of privileges within the
female caste. Women have certain de-
fenses that make their lives livable:
they love to serve their husbands, they
love to take care of their children 24
hours a day, they think their bosses are
smarter, etc. As a privileged woman in
my position I have been telling them that
their husbands are oppressors that they

shouldn't have to have 24 hour a day re-
sponsibility for the total physical and
emotional support of children, that they
should be able to use their minds and
their creativity. I then expect them to
be able to look at the reality of their —
lives, drop their defenses and work for
Women's Liberation, with a hope for an
end to their oppression "come the revo-

I expect this even though they
may have no free time to work for Women's
Liberation because they must continue
their responsibility to their children
and they see no alternative to daily ex-
istence with husbands or bosses on whom
they are completely dependent for money
to survive. My point is that unless we
can offer some alternatives now, we can't
expect most women to drop the defenses
that validate their lives. And unless we
offer some alternatives now some women
will never have the time or energy to
work in Women's Liberation. I therefore
don't see the function of day care centers
primarily to organize women but rather as
a necessary prerequisite for the organi-
zation of women.

Because it is not after the revolution,
this means compromise, it means working
with liberals, it means working with men.
We have to establish day care centers where
we can: In churches although we don't
like what religion does to women, through
universities although we don't like what
they do to women, etc. It means involving
men who will spend time caring for child-

ren and will fight for the establishment
of new day care facilities. Day care could
be spread out so that all women shared
equal responsibility for children, thus
taking the privileges away from some women
and freeing others. However, I feel it's
more desirable to have as many men as
are willing, working at day care centers
and working to establish new day care
centers. Timewise this frees women to

a greater extent to question their lives
and work politically. If we maintain a
purist view toward day care (for instance
a totally female controlled and estab-
lished day care center in a non-sexist
location) there will be very few day care
centers. We privileged women will continue
to theorize about the revolution, we

will refuse to be co-opted, but our revo-
lution will be based on the theories of
privileged women not on the mass of wo-
men we didn't involve because it required
from us reformist services.

Sisters - I hope I want the same re-
volution you want - I can't leave the
support I get from you - but I believe no
one, not even WL, knows how to pull this
revolution off right. If my new (old?)
way won't work, I'll find out - my femi-
nist consciousness won't leave me. But
please, don't have an unquestionable
dogma - that when broken or questioned
makes a sister not quite the sister she
used to be.

Love to the sisters and power to the
people.

To Be A Revolutionary Woman -

tive strength will ever make women a part of the people.
Slogans, education, or what now would be an unequal con-
frontation won't do it. Confrontation implies a clash
of at least two sides each with relatively equal power.
If women were to face men with their sexism now, there
could be no confrontation -- just a squish.

To take men into women's liberation, as some women
would do, is to give up the right of women to define
their own needs and to discover the ways of meeting
those needs. It is profoundly anti-woman that men should
want that power. We should not have fears of making
alliances with other groups when we share common goals:
the end to that primary contradiction as well as the
contradictions of being poor in a rich land or black in
a white land, but we must not cut off our most basic
belief by denying our right to define our own needs.

We should set up no standards for politically aware men
which ignore that primary contradiction of being female
in a patriarchal world.

Consider that if the gay cell had proposed to take
men into their cell because they share with gay men the
experience of homosexuality in a world with a hetero-
sexual norm, the issue would have been treated quite
differently. We would have demanded that lesbians see
a primary contradiction, that they identify as women. 
Should we ask any less of mothers, wives, and all sisters?

Really identifying with other women is perhaps the
most important and also the most difficult task we have.
To achieve it we must deny the heterosexual norm -- the
standard from which we are accused of deviating.

Women working, living, or loving without men are
viewed as separate from a group of people, against the
people and the "people's revolution." Men and women a-
like often see that as a negative reaction to men. Such
a view sees working with women only as a stage that must
be transcended because working with men, being a hetero-
sexual grouping is seen as natural. But no woman should
be obligated to work with men for a year, a month or a
lifetime. We must support those women who choose to
positively identify with other women.

something women who work with men will not have to worry
about. Society will consider them normal, just as it
considers their secondary status natural.

says little of what we think of men, or ecology, or going
to the moon. It says something about how we feel toward
other women. It is an act of revolutionary love.

Consider how basic and deep our conceptions of hetero-
sexuality are. Many people think that men loving other
men must do so out of a negative reaction to women. Not
that they still view child-care as the responsibility of women.

We are committed to fighting male supremacy and dom-
ination, but that is not the basis for our identification
with love, or work with women.

Women's Liberation is separatist in origin -- like
Weatherman or the Republican Party, we started somewhere
else. It refers to the act which took place -- the
withdrawal from an original organization. We left old/new left organizations when we realized our own
oppression within them, living to deny our oppression for some greater good (that is, the male defined goals) of a "people's revolution."
We realized that we were functioning to women's needs as
the NAACP functions to blacks -- token leaders, women to
keep other women cool, conforming to the image of the
good revolutionary.

But separatist means nothing about how the group
functions, and we realized the lie we were living to deny our oppression for some greater good (that is, the male defined goals) of a "people's revolution."
But the "woman question" is too
important for us to function that way.

Men who may help us meet our needs will be willing
to help us define those needs. No men would sustain a day care project, because

Men are very much involved in day care because our
society is still based on a nuclear family and children
have fathers. Working to establish day care centers, women face problems of how
to work with men that many other projects never have to
face.

The direction this issue will take and its impor-
tance are unclear. In a society based on the heterosexual norm they will receive little support; mothers often have husbands. 

The direction this issue will take and its importance are unclear. We don't even know if it is possible to work on day care with a strong feminist perspective.

Despite our uncertainty and our criticism we do not want
to deny the love and commitment the women in day care
have displayed. Wanting to build a strong movement of women, for women: we have been critical of what we consider failures on their part but we don't want that to negate what we recognize as their accomplishments.
Because men are involved in day care is no reason
they should be members of women's liberation groups.
Women will have to do the analysis of day care as it
concerns women, whether men ignore, share equally or
dominate the centers. But the experience of one issue cannot determine the direction of the women's movement.