Most of the experiences we had during  
the five days from the takeover of the  
Modern Language House to the University's  
granting of a house for the day care cen-  
ter are ones most of my sisters and I had  
never had before: being arrested and jail-  
ed, and the "shadowing" action we did on  
the Vice-Provost. But because of the sup-  
port of my sisters (in addition to some  
very specific middle-class privileges we  
all shared) jail did not intimidate us and  
university officials could not coopt our  
efforts.  

Along with frequent notes and indications  
of support from our friends outside, made  
us feel pretty much on top of it all.  

But Sunday night, unexpectedly, one  
of us was bonded out. Then another and  
another. We'd known that we'd be gotten  
out eventually, but we hadn't expected to  
be taken away little by little. The  
women bonded out didn't want to leave and  
those of us remaining felt the threat to  
our morale: our physical unity was im-  
portant to our strength. It was then that  
we decided that the last two or three  
people would refuse to be bailed out sep-  
arately. No one was to be left alone in  
that place, without a sister for support.  

Not long term prisoners. Our healthy  
rebellion against the way people are  
treated in jails made us say over and over  
again that there should be no jails at all.  
We know, too, that because we are middle  
class (or offspring of middle class people)  
we are unaccustomed to being handled in an  
authoritarian, shut-up-I'm-in-charge-here-  
and-don't-you-forget-it manner, and we  
have the anger and strength to fight  
against it: the deputy's hassling one of  

us by accusing her of being a junkie (and  
then acting as if he were doing it out of  
"concern" for her); the matron's calling  
one of the sisters names for things she's  
alleged to have written about that jail;  

My first sharp vision of things to  
come, both with regard to (1) our really  
being jailed and (2) the role that sister-  
hood would take in all that, appeared  
while we were still in the Language House.  
One of my sisters—who works in the same  
cell as five of us who were later arrested—  
came to us and hugged us with tears in her  
eyes and said she had to go before the  
police came. Her hassles with an extreme-  
ly sexist and politically conservative  
boss are acute; and we all knew how des-  
perately she needs to keep her job to  
support all three people in her family. I  
was pretty anxious myself when, a few  
minutes later, I was put alone in a police  
car. Then two of my sisters joined me,  
and the intimidation of that moment was  
gone. We went to the station with our  
arms around each other and smiling in our  
secret strength. The same thing happened  
later as we were taken to the jail cell.  
At first, I was the only one in the cell:  
moments of fright (they'd already started  
hassling us, and I knew an uncomfortable  
amount about the deliberate dehumanization  
that occurs in the "total institution"):  
then the sisters were brought in a few  
at a time until—a rush of relief—we were,  
all eight of us, together.  

We were feeling good—given the cir-  
cumstances. The facilities available for  
women (one 9 x 12 room in the whole county  
jail and that without any fire escape) were  
awful compared to the men's (which are nine  
times that size, include books, t.v., walk-  
ing space). But still our morale was  
fantastically high. Pictures of Dum Dum  
children and of each of us were being  
drawn on the walls and one sister had just  
finished lettering Sisterhood is Powerful  
with a pen they hadn't taken away from us,  
when one matron came in and told us with a  
self-satisfied air that we'd have to wash  
off anything we wrote before we left.  

When we could no longer hear her steps  
going down the stairs, one quiet voice  
said, "Then we'll just have to carve it  

in." And we did. In the course of our  
stay there we sang and learned to ululate  
(like the women in Algeria). These things,  

I have volunteered at Dum Dum for almost a year now although I  
have never been involved in the planning or decision making pro-  
cess. I didn't feel I had that kind of energy because of the time  
I put in working on AIAW. I also knew that I have very ambiva-  
lent feelings about community organizing and knew that I did not  
choose to work with men. I therefore did not attend the weekly  
cooperative meetings.  

I heard about the building takeover hours after it had  
occurred, I did know that people were thinking about doing it  
but nothing had been definite. It upset me that my living collec-  
tive was called after the action had already taken place and asked  
to support it. I'm not sure just how much of my upset was due  
to not having been informed beforehand since I had put in as  
much time at Dum Dum as most of those who participated in the  
action or how much was due to the fact that I live in a women's  
collective and women I live with were involved. Two women liv-  
ing in the collective were among those arrested.  

Living in a collective like ours you are affected by every  
thing anyone in the house does and I guess I think we should in-  
form one another about anything that is going to seriously disrupt  
that house. The phone in our house did not stop ringing until two  
or three in the morning with either questions about what hap-  
pened and what people could do (which I didn't know) or requests  
of us to call people, organize support for the action etc. Many  
of the requests I couldn't fulfill because I had to work that week.  
Many of the requests I wouldn't do under any circumstances. I  
have felt pretty burned out from a year of political work and ten-  
sions, and pretty freaked out about my economic situation so I  
was in all around bad mental shape and the tensions of that day,  
of feeling that I had a responsibility to relate to something that I  
had not had any say in nor had I been informed of, really did me in.  

Several of us went down to the building after we heard about  

the takeover. We arrived in time to see people arrested and to  

retrieve the children of arrested parents. The scene was so  

familiar it was almost boring. Everyone acted out their estab-  
lished roles - the people making a simple request, taking a build-  
ing that they had a right to have; the university having all the  
power and owning the building. So the university administrators  
got out their police and had those who chose to remain in the  
building removed and arrested. Sweet and simple; expected and  
despicable. Expected because anything people do to help them-  
selves and each other is bound to be against the law in this coun-  
try and yet no matter how many times I see the same scene  

that raw display of how the cards are stacked in this capitalist  
society will always be despicable to me.  

I am working at a temporary job on a factory line, the  
first work I've had since September. Our living collective was  
broke and had many bills which we couldn't pay. If I had gotten  
arrested I could not have paid back anyone who would have bailed  
me out and the people closest to me who would have somehow  
gotten the bail together could not really afford it. The Dum Dum  
action cost $1700 in bail money and times are hard. That some-  
how seems like a blaring contradiction to me.  

While I watched people being taken from the building and  
kept track of the probable bail, I thought how dumb middle-class  
people were. They were paying more for that one day action  
than they will now pay for a year's rent. All my life I thought  
middle-class people had something - some quality that I wanted.  
They have money and a secure background of having money so  
that allows them to be dumber than me. It allows them to go to  
jail being sure that they'll be out in a day. Their experience is  
so different from that of most people who have gone to jail or  
remain there awaiting trial. I don't know what is correct polit-  
ical strategy in a time of depression but I think that is a question  

women should be addressing now.  

9. Aenobin S8C2ne oben den dale. d9naven dsforte doendien daeIne Wig afeare.