BIRTH CONTROL:

is it genocide?

The Guardian runs an article under
the headline "U.S. tries to reduce third
world population." Various left groups
attack Planned Parenthood as an agent
of genocide. In all of this there is
the explicit charge that any talk of the
population explosion is a reactionary
smoke screen to cover up the desire of
the United States to continue raking
off 60% of the world’s resources, while
holding down third world population
growth which threatens to eat into that
60%.

There is a glaring omission in most
of these arguments; but before I go in-
to that, I want to point out the areas
where I do agree: (1) It is a clear
cut case of economic blackmail when the
United States offers foreign aid only
on the condition that contraceptives
(usually the loop or pill) be pushed
throughout the country. (2) There are
developing countries which are under-
populated in relation to their labor
force needs--it would be absurd to
limit population growth in such a case
before the necessary degree of indus-
trialization has been reached so that
people power can be replaced by machine
power. (3) Every case of involuntary
sterilization of women that occurs is
a denial of the human rights of that
woman.

One of the most hysterical articles
comes from the Red Women's Detachment
and is called "The Genocideology of
Birth Control." Any attempt to make
birth control available to people who
previously couldn't afford it is called
“vomiting on the American working class
a poisonous concoction of left-over
neo-Malthusianism and curdled genocide."
Lifting phraseology from Peking Review,
Malthus is called "a sanctimonious
running dog of British Imperialism."
Women working for free abortion on
demand are accused of trying to ensure
"the phony sexual revolution."

They have totally ignored the im-
plications of their argument, the impli-
cations for black and brown women, for
all working women. That is, they ne-
glect to openly argue for the right of
women to have an unlimited number of
children, BECAUSE IF THEY DID, the in-
humanity of their position would be
clear. Don't tell me that a woman liv-
ing at near-starvation level, whose
children's minds and bodies are un-
healthy because they don't get the right
kinds of food, who is forced to prosti-
tution and petty larceny to feed and
clothe her children--that this woman is
supposed to fight for the right to
have more children.

In this oppressive, capitalist so-
ciety, the more children a woman has
(note: I don't say: the more children
a man and woman have), the more ex-
ploited and oppressed she is. If want-
ing to have fewer children and thus be
less exploited and oppressed is counter-
revolutionary, then I am tempted to
accuse the Red Women's Detachment of
desiring to further the oppression of
women on the grounds that it raises
their revolutionary potential. But
that's too cynical, so I won't make the
accusation.

The Red Women's Detachment says:
"middle-class women and women's libera-
tion groups can afford to make a big
joke out of these issues (birth con-
trol and abortion) but women on welfare
and working women with small incomes
can't." I don't think women on welfare
and working women with small incomes
can or do make a joke out of the other
side of the coin--having many children,
some perhaps wanted, but most probably
unwanted.

The heart of the paper is the argu-
ment that "the monstrously reactionary
capitalist class systematically cultiva-
tes pseudo-scientific theories (i.e.,
birth control, abortion, and steriliza-
tion) and props them up with massive
propaganda campaigns in order to under-
mine the revolutionary potential of the
proletariat." The drift of the entire
paper is that birth control, abortion,
sterilization are counter-revolutionary
in and of themselves. 

The fact that a middle-class woman
can obtain an abortion if she wants to
doesn't reflect on the abortion itself:
it's a hideous reflection on the system
that will satisfy the needs of only
those who can pay. The fact that a
middle-class woman wants birth control
drugs or devices doesn't make them any
safer for her than for the working
women.

The fact is, that in this society,
the woman with children is exploited
and oppressed, to a certain degree if
she is middle-class but to a cruel and
inhuman degree if she is without a man
and must support herself and her child-
ren. Alleviation of this kind of ex-
ploitation and oppression is not coun-
ter-revolutionary. It is the sine qua
non of the revolutionary participation
of women in the struggles for a free
society.

Human rights is always the funda-
mental issue. Perhaps the single most
important right for a woman is the right
to control over her own body. The fact
that women must bear society's children
lies behind a multitude of oppressive
factors: from the notion that “woman's
place is in the home,” to economic dis-
crimination on the grounds that a wo-
man is just a "temporary" worker, to
the double duty many women must do to
maintain both a job and a home.

As a member of women's liberation,
however, I am appalled by arguments
that encourage, for example, rapid pop-
ulation growth among blacks in the U.S.,
presumably to "equalize" the balance
between white and black populations.
That view sees black women as little
more than brood mares, whose function
is to produce more and more of the right
kind of people. That view is opposed
to women's fight for freedom.

That view is as blind to the rights
and needs of women as the corresponding
view among Catholics (at least among
those who obey the Pope). The only
group that holds something like that
view and that seems headed in a more
humane direction is the Black Panther
Party, which--if they are encouraging
the birth of more black children--is
at least concerned with putting into
practice the equal responsibility of men
and women for the care and raising of
children.

That view ignores the fact that the
essence of a post-revolutionary society
is equality, but not the numerical
equality of all racial groups so that
they can act as checks and balances
upon each other--not the kind of nu-
merical equality that is a way of pit-
ting power group against power group.

It must not be forgotten that in
nearly every present society, encourag-
ing population growth (that neutral,
clinical phrase) really means oppress-
ing women by concentrating on their
function as breeders. Unfortunately,
the opposite side of the coin, discour-
aging population growth, (at least at
the present time) also means oppressing
women by forcing them to use inadequately
tested and possibly hazardous drugs
and devices.

But when women's liberation groups
attack the drug companies for "pill
pushing," it is not to be seen as an
anti-contraceptive campaign. It is a
campaign for full disclosure—disclo-
sure by the drug companies on harmful
and/or unpleasant side effects and dis-
closure by doctors on the statistical
effectiveness of each kind of contra-
ceptive drug or device (you'd be
amazed at the discrepancies). This
must serve as the basis upon which
women can make informed choices.

A woman cannot make an informed
choice about the way she wishes to use
her body without complete freedom to
choose among the various methods of
contraception, including sterilization.

It seems clear from the actions of
women in women's liberation that they
are wholly aware of the direct forms of
oppression that result from "population
growth." These women are, in increas-
ing numbers, choosing to remain un-
married, or if they are married,
choosing to remain childless.

Disregarding the oppression exper-
ienced within the institution of mar-
riage itself, for the moment, these
decisions are obviously made to avoid
the unavoidable oppression that-- in
this society--is the lot of women with
children. Birth control, far from be-
ing genocide in and of itself, is for
the women seeking liberation the only
way out of one of the worst manifesta-
tions of the oppression of women.

In an article on the liberation of
blacks and women in the Black Scholar,
Linda La Rue writes: "The black woman
is demanding a new set of female defi-
nitions and recognition of herself as
a citizen, companion, and confidant,
not a matriarchal villain or a step
stool baby-maker. Role integration ad-
vocates the complementary recognition
of man and woman, not the competitive
recognition of same.

"The recent, unabated controversy
over the use of birth control in the
black community is of grave importance
here. Black people, even the ‘most lib-
erated of mind,' are still infused with
ascribed inferiority of females and the
natural superiority of males.

“How many potential revolutionary
warriors stand abandoned in orphanages
while blacks rhetorize disdain for
birth control as a ‘trick of the man
to halt the growth of black population?
Why are there not more revolutionary
couples adopting black children? Could
it be that the American concept of bas-
tard, which is equivalent to inferior
in our society, reflects black anglo-
saxonism?"

"Do blacks, like whites, discrimi-
nate against black babies because they
do not represent ‘our own personal’
image? Or do blacks, like the most
racist of whites, require that a child
be of their own blood before they can
love that child or feed it? Does the
vanguard recognize the existence of the
term 'bastard'?"

"Someone once suggested that the
word 'bastard' be deleted from the values
of black people. Would it not be more
revolutionary for blacks to advocate
a five-year moratorium on black births
until every black baby in an American
orphanage was adopted by one or more
black parents? Then blacks could
really have a valid reason for contin-
uing to give birth."

"Children would mean more than simply
a role for black women to play, or fuel
for the legendary vanguard."

"Indeed, blacks would be able to tap
the potential of the existing children
and could sensibly add more potential to
the black struggle for liberation. To
do this would be to do something no
other civilization, modern of course, has
ever done, and blacks would be allowing
every black child to have a home and not
just a plot in some understaffed child-
ren's penal farm.