I had a chum from the first grade named Ann. She was always  
first on the achievement tests, and I was a faraway second, so I  
guess that's why she chose me. We also had the same last initial  
and were seated together alphabetically for the first six grades.  
The proximity gave me a great advantage over all the other boys  
and girls attracted by her strangeness and beauty. She was  
serene at six, and my idol. But she was also alone, and I filled  
what part of the void could be filled. I was hired as a  
female executive trainee. In 1959 I was sixteen and had a car.  
One night Ann asked me to take her to a friend's house to meet  
some people. It was a group of women who met every Friday night  
at Mary's house, while her husband was out. There were several  
teachers, Mary, some college students, and us, younger by at least  
5 years than the youngest. We used to talk about women a lot,  
and sometimes Joey would repeat poetry like the "Hound of Heaven."  
I liked the evenings, which ended with a large steak cut up into  
small pieces on a common platter, and served with bread to mop  
up the juices. When it came time for her to leave, I never  
understood the nature of the group. Ann gave me THE WELL OF  
LONELINESS to read. I had had warm feelings for a girlfriend  
for a year, and many things came clear. I wanted to know more  
about this "type” of woman, so the next Friday night I asked  
Bobby (who had been in the army, like the heroine of the book  
had been in the ambulance corps) if she had ever met any  
"homosexual women." She smiled, while Ann gave me a damn hard  
nudge in the ribs to shut up. I thought I had brought up a  
no-no subject, so I shut up and acted on my own impulses,  
starting a relationship with my friend of a year. I also read  
and re-read THE WELL. It was kept in the “locked case" of our  
small town public library, and I had awful nightmares each time  
before I checked it out.  

(Later I learned that the staff was mostly gay, but at that time  
I was sure someone would tell my parents, so I would try to hide  
the book in a big pile, and hope they wouldn't notice.) Ann had  
started her own relationship with Mary by this time. I knew they  
were close, and I projected from my own physical relationship  
that they might have something going, but we never discussed it.  
One night we heard a loud crash at the bottom of the hill. Ann  
and I ran down the street to see what had happened. It was  
Mary's little car, all crushed, and she was decapitated. Ann  
went into shock. Somehow I got her away from there and home.  
When she finally came out from under a few hours later she said,  
"Go away, I want to be with her, I want to die." So I told her  
mother that everything would be O.K., knowing that might not be  
the case. I got Ann to the bedroom, then hid in a corner where  
she couldn't see me, but where I could watch over her without  
interfering with her grief. Ann went very deep into herself after  
that, but people never knew the hell that was going on and on  
in her. We graduated and went to distant colleges. I went through  
a lot of relationships, she went through a couple, and ten years  
later we were in our hometown again for a summer, both attending  
to family matters. She was down from being dropped after five  
years. I was down from running away from too many relationships,  
and trying to keep homo and hetero sexual lovers separated. I  
had work, but Ann needed something to do, and I needed a reason  
to see her every day. She agreed to hand-build a covered bridge  
for me. It was to be a present for a woman I was looking at.  
We went out and she sketched bridges, found old wood for the  
weathered look, and carved each piece by hand. When the bridge  
and the summer were about finished, we drove up to my father's  
hunting camp one night. She was standing by the sink and I was  
sitting on the bed when she held out her arms, and I walked into  
them. We both knew it was from being friends for 20 years. A  
couple weeks later we left our hometown to pick up our  
separate lives. She was not my first or last lover; but she was  
my first sister.  

oom 6 Bisbee  
Wan se m love  
Once hy stehe  
Lwant to get ak all oub.  

TIF I could,  

Liweuld i  
Ana comber+ Upy 5  

TSe newt to our,  

Ard had you 2  

Stroke.  
And kt teuch me,  
ae  

hage 8 Volume Nomber 1. Ain't £