the hell was JDL doing about  
FAG.  

and what  
the anti-Semitic booths at the  
They weren't doing nothing.  

Suddenly we are descended upon by  
what felt like 7,000 mounted Cossacks,  
but turns out to be about 50 actual  
Jews for Jesus. It has always been my  
dearest fantasy that these for  
Jesus are Christians who converted to  
Judaism who THEN became Jews for Jesus.  
My mistake. They were Jewish kids  
frizzy haired, Ashkenazah unmistakeable  
Jews. They were mostly men but some  
women; they were all dressed in blue  
jean jackets with "Jews for Jesus"  
sparkling in studs on the back. Some  
were adorned with such endearing slo-  
gans as "Christ made me Kosher." They  
were a complete drag.  

But their whole action was so well  
coordinated that they drew the  
attention of every fair-goer in the place.  
They screamed and blew whistles and  
accosted some unprepared JDLer, yelling inde-  
cipherable incantations and causing such  
mayhem that we were freaked by the pow-  
er they could wield. There's a whole  
megillah of them out here; half the  
walls of Berkeley are covered with  
their posters (and they're a bitch to  
scrape off).  

Of course the reaction of the Jewish  
establishment, as represented by the  
officials at the fair, was that the  
JDLer MUST have provoked the Jews for  
Jesus kids in some manner. No amount of  
rapping about anti-Semitism and the fact  
that before every pogrom there is a  
movement towards conversion (rats leav-  
ing a sinking ship?) would convince  
them. It's these radicals and militants  
that cause the trouble. Same old tune.  
If that's what these people think of the  
inconsistent ineffectual JDL, how the  
hell are they ever going to deal with  
us revolutionary feminist dykes!?  

San Francisco is a city of cults.  
You've got your Hari Krishna and your  
Maharaj Ji and your Jehovah Witnesses  
and your Jews for Jesus and every shade  
of occult and religious whazoo imagin-  
able. But it seems like it's mostly  
those Christians out on the streets, and  
pushing the hardest when that available  
face either looks Jewish or has a star  
around her neck. One day me and Claire,  
who is a dark Sephardic Jew, were zip-  
ping around our neighborhood when we  
were accosted by a couple of women from  
the "House of Man." This is a very rich  
collection of Christian weirdos who  
dress all in black, are all white, who  
live on the edge of the ghetto and push  
their do-goody kuk while buying up and  
inhabiting the best buildings in their  
block. These women were wearing huge  
crosses their fragile (but pure, I'm  
sure) shoulders could scarcely bear, and  
they stared at Claire like she hadn't  
bathed in a month and needed nothing  
more than their fiery light of  
salvation.  

Jews  

Demand  
a Union Label.  

Boycott Safeway  
and A. & P.  

Support the United Farmworkers Union (AFL-CIO)  

San Francisco  

The Christians  
out here must have right  
and bought up all the  
hilltops. San Francisco is a city of hills and  
no matter where you live, your view (if  
you can afford one) includes the top of  
a hill. And the top of every hill sports  
a cross. A big one. Either these crosses  
are adorned with flashing lightbulbs or  
they are outright constructed of neon.  
They push themselves into your eyeballs  
before you have time to whisper a  
sh'mah. And the churches! Okay, so you  
have a church, and maybe a cross on it,  
stained glass windows perhaps, but  
you still have big bright signs screaming  
"JESUS IS THE ONLY ANSWER, ONLY JESUS."  

Sometimes you can excuse the Christ-  
ians their excesses, the way they have  
been the frontrunners of colonialism and  
later imperialism, pushing their pulp on  
the colored peoples of the world. Some-  
times (not often) you can try to forget  
that 6 million people were slaughtered  
in the name of their god just 30 yrs.  
ago, or that 9 million homosexuals were  
wiped out in the middle ages to save the  
"purity" of their faith. But it gets to  
be a bit much when every time you are  
in a traffic jam, you have to stare at a  
bumper sticker that proclaims "Christ is  
the ONE way" with a menacing hand with  
one—just one—finger sticking up.  
Christianity has always felt it, but  
when they start saying that their way is  
the only way, then you know that those  
of us who don't want to get "saved"  
are bound to get sliced. They really  
mean it, that there's only room for one  
kind of people, and those people have  
NEVER been Jews.  

1973 has been a big year for Christ-  
ians with their Key 73 movement, an in-  
terdenominational Christian push for  
mass conversion. They have even honored  
the Jewish people with special litera-  
ture for their Christian organizers to  
direct them in coping with our questions.  
In answer to the one they expect us to  
ask about how their ever-so-merciful  
god would allow something like the Nazi  
holocaust, they are directed to remind  
us of the words that these will burn. Now how much  
will their warning be?  

Being in San Francisco is like being  
on Mars, or at least that's how these  
people seem to see us. Having grown up  
in Pittsburgh surrounded by Jews and  
then living in Boston where there are  
several Jewish communities, being out  
here is like being submerged in a for-  
eign substance. Finding a bagel and lox  
is harder than trying to get a minyan  
together in a lesbian bar. California  
women often ask me what kind of a name  
"Katz" is, finding it very exotic and  
unusual...? Every Jewish woman I meet  
either just moved here from NYC or maybe  
is from Connecticut. A number of women  
have asked Claire if she is Chicana.  

Jewish lesbian sisters, don't come  
out here expecting a familiar lesbian  
community, expecting to melt right into  
the expansive sisterhood. We are few and  
isolated out here. Plus getting Jewish  
food is harder than starving. As for  
all of our dreams, our reasons for mov-  
ing out here: a lot of people don't  
work, it's true, but it's because their  
middle-class daddies are still puking  
the privilege their way. For those of  
us who have to take care of our own busi-  
ness, there are few jobs and fewer that  
pay real gelt. There's NO money floating  
around, unless it's been floating in  
your family for a long time.  

As for the movement, the Jewish gay  
movement consists of a group of gay men  
who are so straight they may pass for  
Watergate witnesses. And they certainly  
don't have too great a love for women,  
born out obnoxiously by repeated "Jewish  
mother" references. And the lesbian fem-  
inist movement is riddled with anti-Sem-  
itism and middle-class bias.  

Oh, and as for that great Jewish  
lesbian feminist collective, they all  
moved back to Staten Island and Manhattan  
because San Francisco is no place to be  
Jewish.  

--= Katz  

Barriga is a pun in Spanish.  

Page 7