SOJOURNER TRUTH,  
“THE LIBYAN SIBYL.  

"That man over there says that a woman  
needs to be helped into carriages, and  
lifted over ditches, and to have the  
best place everywhere. Nobody ever  
helped me into carriages, or over mud  
puddles, or gave me a best place...  

And ain't I a woman? Look at me.  

Look at my arm! I have plowed  
and planted and gathered into  
barns, and no man could head me...  
And ain't I a woman? I could work as  
much and eat as much as a man when I  
could get it; and bear the lash as well...  
And ain't I a woman? I have borne  
thirteen children and seen them  
most all sold off into slavery. And  
when I cried out with a mother's grief,  
none but Jesus heard...  

And ain't I a woman?”  

Sojourner Truth: Speech before the Women's  
Rights Convention at Akron, Ohio in 1851.  

letters  

New Orleans, La.  
November 18, 1970  

Sisters:  

We want to apologize and criticize  
ourselves for distributing the material  
from "Red Women's Detachment" in New York.  
Our decision to distribute that material  
to some of our sisters came in the wake  
of our having discovered an information  
gatherer working with us, coming to mis-  
trust our own sense of things. We thought  
we had to treat our "liberalism." Some  
of the doubts we had about GLF, women's  
liberation, and our disgust with the roles  
of SWP-YSA and NOW in the Women's  
movement were expressed in the RWD papers.  

Our mistake was to not trust our own ability  

to express what we had observed. Rather  
we took, whole and uninvestigated, papers  
from an unknown group. Also there was a  
great deal in the papers that we did not  
agree with, particularly the tone. For  
this we severely criticize ourselves.  
Since that time we have found out that  
the organization (RWD) is actually only  
two people, and the papers do not grow  
from or reflect practice.  

There is much to say about our deeper  
understanding, which would require a  
long paper, and this is meant to be a  
letter. The principle of our new thinking  
is about faith in the people. I realize  
that I lacked such faith in thinking people  
had to be pinned against the wall to raise  
their political consciousness. But  
the lack of faith is also reflected in  
a fear of struggling with sisters and  
brothers. I think most of us have been un-  
willing to trust our political judgment  
and growth, and to enter into discussions  
with people, committed to learn. Too often  
we are defensive with revolutionary and  
potentially revolutionary comrades.  

Furthermore, since the summer, we  
have thought a great deal about the ques-  
tions we had which led us to distribute  
the papers. Also, two of us went to Cuba  
on the Venceremos Brigade, and there we  
struggled over the questions we had with  
other women, white and third world, and  
with men, white, third-world, and gay,  
as well as the Cubans.  

Yet I am convinced that the revo-  
lutionary love that is necessary for our  
long struggle will only be born of our  

growing struggles, not our wishes. That  
is what I learned in Cuba: unity and love  
come from struggle, and such struggle  
must be continual for unity and  

love to subsist.  

What we must now commit ourselves  
to is the struggle. We must build a base  
among women-- the working women, mothers,  
young girls-- not just our educated sis-  
ters. We must analyze our conditions,  
learn about struggles all over the world,  
develop a strategy in relation to the  
total revolutionary movement. We must  
decide on priorities. If we cannot  
accept the necessity for priorities, we  
cannot be serious about change. Whether  
or not there should be a women's  
movement, whether or not there must be  
female leadership, whether or not revo-  
lutionary men must be clear on "the  
woman question," there is no question  
of priorities. Women's involvement and  
consciousness and growing vanguard  
role in the movement is an irreversible  
fact. No, by priorities I mean: Who will  
we organize among, since we cannot  
organize everywhere? What are our demands?  
How much can we satisfy personal needs  
before the revolution such as the kind  
of relations with men and children we  
project, lifestyle, skills, etc., and  
what do we have to sacrifice in order to  
build a revolutionary movement and win?  

More than anything, in Cuba, I was  
humbled by learning the necessity for  
sacrifice and hard work; how serious  
and long-term (all our lives) is our  
task. We learned this from the Cubans  
as well as the Vietnamese, Laotians,  
Cambodians, Africans, Latin Americans.  
In our rebellion against woman's tra-  
ditional role, we have tended to scoff  
at the virtue of sacrifice, which has  
been forced upon women and other  
oppressed peoples. But sacrifice is one  
of the basic necessities in a rev-  
olutionary struggle, for a vanguard  
force, and is a virtue we should trans-  
form from its present bourgeois setting,  
which keeps people down, to a revolu-  
tionary perspective. Let us not  
throw out the baby with the bathwater.  
Power to the sisters, Venceremos,  

Love,  
Roxanne Dunbar  

Vol. 1 No. 10  

Reprinted from Liberation News Service  
Radical Media Bulletin Board  

From: AIN'T I A WOMAN?, PO Box 1169,  
Iowa City, Iowa 52240.  

Dear Sisters and Brothers:  

Although we have used your service and  
appreciated having it made available to us,  
we feel we must be honest with you about  
our concerns. The service in general has  
not presented a very high consciousness of  
women's oppression or of the movement to-  
ward the liberation of women. Often a  
news packet will have several articles on  
women while articles not dealing specifi-  
cally with women actually ignore women.  
One example of this would be your coverage  
of the Panthers’ Constitutional Convention.  
You mentioned that the Radical Lesbians  
walked out in one sentence with nothing  
more about how women were treated. We  
feel you sincerely try but we feel you  
must try harder. Women all over the coun-  
try are starting to think we need a news  
service of our own if the services now  
available do not begin to display a higher  
consciousness when it comes to women.  

From the LNS Women's Caucus:  

Dear Sisters of Ain't I A Woman?:  

We have thought a lot about your criti-  
cism and we accept it. You are right, we  
haven't had a feminist consciousness  
throughout the packet. Most of us who have  
been on the staff for a while came to LNS  
without much political consciousness at  
all. In the past two years, some of us  
went from being general shit workers to  
having a voice in policy and decision  
making. But the tremendous amount of time  
we spend at LNS and the fact that LNS  
developed as part of a male-dominated move-  
ment, kept us for a long time from develop-  
ing a women's consciousness and expressing  
it in the packet.  

Now, we are trying to change. All of  
the new people presently coming to work at  
LNS are women and many of them do have  
close ties with the women's movement and  
have developed their political conscious-  
ness there. Together we are struggling to  
make the LNS packet reflect a feminist  
consciousness.  

Your letter was important to us. We  
realize that stories like the Panther  
Convention must be written by women. We  

are open to further criticism and we hope  

you don't give up on us, but keep on read-  

ing the packets. Love,  
LNS Women  
(AIAW -- We have heard that since this re-  

ply to us was written that some women  
have left LNS and we don't know at this  
time how many women are on the LNS staff  
or how much of a struggle is going on over  
the above issue. We trust we will be able  
to tell by reading their news packets in  
the future.)