...Fanon and the whole black liberation struggle have recently ex-
tended the dictionary definition of imperialism or colonialism to
mean a group which is prevented from self-determination by another
group—whether it has a national territory or not. The psycholog-
ical and cultural mutilation is particularly intense and the co-
lonialism more brutal when the group that colonizes and the group

colonized have different defining physical characteristics that
set them clearly apart... Women, set apart by physical differences

between them and men, were the first colonized group. And the
territory colonized was and remains our women's bodies... Our bodies

are free territory to other male colonizers when not "protected" by

an individual male colonist. What is rape but an imperialist act
upon the territory of our bodies.

There are two forms of the colonization of our bodies (territories)
by males. Most males have an individual colonial relationship to
an individual female and most males identify with and act on the
group colonization of women...

...Fanon shows that it is not enough for the colonizer to control
the territory and subject the inhabitants of it to his rule. The
colonizer must destroy the culture and self-respect of the colonized.
Fanon says, in The Wretched of the Earth, that "Colonialism...
turns to the past of the oppressed people, and distorts, disfigures
and destroys it." p.210 He says the colonized (in his book speaking
of blacks) “must demonstrate that a Negro culture exists."...
History (of art, politics, literature, etc.) as related by
males has engraved upon women's minds a male image of the world.
Women Are Now In the Process of Having to Prove that a Female
Culture Exists...

...We also hold that female and male culture began with the defini-
tion of females as embodying all those human attributes which males
as dominators could not reconcile with their own self-image and
therefore projected onto females—thus causing a schizophrenic
split of personality into masculine and feminine. That women, de-
fined by these attributes (such as emotional, intuitive, etc.) by
males and further limited by their physical position in society as
to work and tools, developed a female or "feminine" culture—and

a culture of resistance to male domination. Although the concept
of the "feminine" was imposed upon women, we have, through the
centuries, developed and created within the confines of the femi-
nine, a female culture...

(Differences in habits, customs and language)... they are the
superficials that cover up the fundamental similarity of all na-
tional cultures the world over. This fundamental similarity is
the split between male culture and female culture... The problem is
that the split is so obvious and taken for granted that practically
nobody can see it... Let us again take up those things (habits, skills,
art, concepts and institutions) which distinguish one culture from
another according to Webster's definition. Part of the customs of
a culture are its habits... It is clear that women and men have very
different daily habits. Women—in most all parts of the world—
whether they are working outside the home or not—have responsibi-
lity for the cooking, cleaning and child-"raising" chores of the
society. This means that most women spend their time with children.
This in itself is a cultural split as men go out of the home and
mix mainly with other males in the male world outside the home.
Generally males do not do any of the work designated as "female
work." Women, mainly in the company of other women and children,
organize their time and routines and socializing on an entirely
different basis than males. Female work—being so completely
caste labor—is organized and done by women in ways peculiar to
the female view of things (which is very much determined by women's
secluded workplace i.e. the home and its environs). The whole
daily routine of a man and a woman is totally different...

Most males cannot understand what is going on in female cul-
ture—art. The worth of female art is thoroughly suppressed in
a male dominated society.

A FEMALE CULTURE EXISTS. IT IS A CULTURE THAT IS SUBORDINATED AND
UNDER MALE CULTURE'S COLONIAL, IMPERIALIST RULE ALL OVER THE WORLD.
UNDERNEATH THE SURFACE OF EVERY NATIONAL, ETHNIC, OR RACIAL CULTURE
IS THE SPLIT BETWEEN THE TWO PRIMARY CULTURES OF THE WORLD - THE
FEMALE CULTURE AND THE MALE CULTURE.

The female soul, suppressed and most often stereotyped in male
art, is defined by negative comparisons to the male. The eternal
feminine is seen as a passive, earth to be molded and formed, mys-
terious, unthinking, emotional, subjective, etc.... The fact that
women live under the power of belief in these characterizations
causes a certain outlook which molds the female culture. Woman's
position in society, her economic and psychological dependence,
reinforce the female stereotypes. Because of the belief in these
attributes and woman's position in society, not because of our
inherent "female nature," women's concepts of the world are much
different from men's...

March 12, 1971

Speaks —

...Though it appears that both men and women live together within
the institutions of a society, men really define and control the
institutions while women live under their rule. The government, army,
religion, economy and family are institutions of the male culture
colonial rule of the female... Crossing national boundaries often
awakens a woman's understanding of her position in society... It is
everywhere—there is no place to escape... Most males all over the
world perceive and compare females as a caste group all over the
world... The repression of female culture is only a question of de-
gree all over the world—the underlying reality is basically the
same—the denial of self-determination for women... But it too
often happens that women falsely identify with "their" country's
dominant male culture and so cannot communicate with their sisters
in subjection in other lands or in other races. This female iden-
tification with male cultural supremacy must be overcome if the
Women's Movement is to be a truly liberating force...
..."NATIONAL" Culture is the Dominant Male Culture...

One national culture vs. another national culture is simply one
male dominated society vs. another male dominated society with
women carried along or used outside their subservient role tempor-
arily if this is necessary for victory of the male national culture...
"Our" own male dominators always want us only to resist the other
males’ domination in the guise of the destruction of "our common
culture"—which they have always excluded us from and subordinated
us to...

...For example, Fanon, in the chapter “Algeria Unveiled" in A Dy-
ing Colonialism, makes this "mistake" and exposes his own identi-
fication with male cultural supremacy. Fanon takes the veil as the
symbol of Arab and Algerian culture. "The veil worn by the women
appears with such constancy that it generally suffices to charac-
terize Arab society." p.35 And he says "The way people clothe
themselves, together with the tradition of dress and finery that
custom implies, constitutes the most distinctive form of a society's
uniqueness..." p.35

Now the veil can be seen as a distinctly Arab cultural trait—
or national cultural trait. We have shown that the national cul-
ture has a unified way of defining and limiting the female through
the veil. The female cultural suppression is symbolically repre-
sented by the veil which must be worn by pubertal females on up.

Fanon is correct in saying that the French tried to destroy
Algerian (male) culture and that this is a typical colonial tactic
of one male culture vs. another colonized male culture. But Fanon

shows a typical male inability to see the brutal colonization of

females by males...

Fanon reveals the hypocrisy of the male Third World when he mocks
the "allegations" made that the Algerian female is oppressed. His
defense of Algerian male culture is every bit as smooth as the
French justification of colonial rule. And he denies female op-
pression under the guise of defending the Algerian national culture
from vulture-like attacks by the French. No one will doubt that the
French were brutal colonizers of the Algerians but that does not
either deny or excuse the equally brutal colonization of Algerian
females by Algerian males...

...Never once does Fanon see the Algerian woman simply as a pawn of
both the French male supremacist culture and the Algerian males—
neither of whom were interested in her humanity. What he does in-
stead is to deny her oppression and then to sympathize with Algerian
male colonists who used her oppression as a symbol of their manhood
and Algerian culture...

...We use the example of Algeria only to show that a nationalist,
anti-imperialist revolution does not free women because the dominant
male culture is identified as the national culture and male supre-
macy is never attacked.

Women have always been used and abused in male revolutions be-
cause the male revolutionists are colonialist imperialists in rela-
tion to females. It's as if the Algerians fighting with the French
in WWII expected the French to liberate Algeria. The French didn't
want to be dominated by another country but they wanted to continue
their own domination of Algeria. Males don't want to be dominated
by other males or another male culture but they have no intention
of discontinuing their domination of the female culture.

Fadela M'Rabet, an Algerian woman, a few years after Algeria
won its independence, wrote a book entitled La Femme Algerienne
(published by Maspero). In it she charged that the women who
fought in the Resistance were used in the Algerian nationalist
revolution only to be returned to their former subservience after
"independence" was gained. She said that not very many women
participated in the struggle and their lives were never affected
in any way... She says, "In order to understand the situation
of the woman (and her reactions) it is necessary to start with
the man; if she submits or revolts, if she accepts her condi-
tion or does not, the Algerian woman has evolved in a world
which is made by men, for men, and at his advantage only. The
Constitution, without doubt, and the resolutions of the Congress
proclaim the equality of all citizens; but the gap is such
between the texts and the facts that all is as if the texts did
not exist.”

Claudine, in an interview in a New York Times magazine (Oct.,
1967) article after Algerian independence was won, said that she
was lucky that her father allowed her to go to school and not
to wear the veil. (Most Algerian girls get no schooling—even
after the revolution—because as Fadela M'Rabet said, too much
schooling for a girl is considered very dangerous by the male
society.)

Fadela M'Rabet argues eloquently for a female revolution now.
"Must we wait several generations under the pretext that our
society is not 'ready'? We (Algeria) are the product of 300 years
of colonialism. But how many centuries of exploitation have
women lived under? Their colonizers have been the men."

THE FOURTH WORLD MANIFESTO IS A 32 PAGE PAMPHLET WHICH CAN BE
ORDERED FROM: WOMEN — FOURTH WORLD, 741 W. BETHUNE, DETROIT,
MICHIGAN 48202. 50¢ EA. - FOR ORDERS OF 100 OR MORE 35¢ EA.