ott Our Backs : Box 4859, Cleveland Post Station, Washington D.C. 20004,

Why the persistent enthusiasm for far
away places and distant struggles with im-
perialism? Why travel to Hanoi when you
can go to Hoboken and see the same show?

Granted the costumes are native, the ac-
cents, New Jersey, the exotic touch is mis-
sing and you won't get napalm for an en-
core but the plot is still the same: Op-
pression.

There are a number of reasons why
Hanoi fascinates so many women in our
movement and why Hoboken is definitely a
drag. Visiting Hanoi or Havana and writ-
ing articles on such a visit is one way to
legitimatize our movement through partici-
pation in those areas that the white, mid-
dle class, male-left movement has designa-
ted as legitimate. It shows that we women
are reaching out beyond what the male left
defines as “Women's issues" to what they
define as the “important” issues. Women's
issues are not important. It is inconceiv-
able to think of a male left heavy going to
Hoboken to study how lack of child care fa-
cilities oppresses poor women.

I am not for one minute announcing
that U.S. imperialism is not a concern of
the Women's Liberation Movement. The strug-
gle of our Vietnamese sisters is anything
but frivolous, but the way in which many
American women approach that struggle is
both imitative and frivolous.

When our Vietnamese sisters throw out
the invader they will have yet another war
on their hands, the war against sexism in
their own society. But right now those
women are fighting for their lives. Here
in Amerika many women are also fighting for
their lives, there are no bombers but the
struggle is just as relentless and deadly--
we are the poor, the Black, the Latin and
the Lesbian. We aren't exotic and we aren't
remotely glamorous. The male left is not
concerned with us although it will make
token statements for the benefit of Black
males concerning racism (the Black woman
is supposedly incorporated in the Black
male.) By flying to Hanoi, you win the
attention of the male left. By working
in Hoboken you attract no attention at all
and by working with Lesbians you are quick-
ly dismissed as irrelevant and sick.

Another reason why Hanoi is such a
beacon for revolutionary moths: you can
return to the U.S. and rip off the liber-
als with speaking tours, books, movies,
etc. on your experiences there. That's
not to say that all who go to Hanoi are
rip offs, nor are all who go eager for male
left approval, but enough are to make it a
problem. Unfortunately, poverty and wo-
man oppression are not so lucrative a pro-
fession despite recent attempts by the es-
tablishment media to cash in on these op-
pressions.

If you worked in Hoboken, who would
be grateful but the women in Hoboken--wo-
men who have no power to bestow prestige
or money on anyone.

What I am getting at is this: It's
easier to worry about far away problems
than our problems here at home. Not only
is it easy, it's comfortable because the
problems here at home might possibly be
cleared up if we worked at clearing them
up. How far would Ho Chi Minh have gotten
if he had run all over the globe to witness
other forms of imperialism? By concentra-
ting on imperialism abroad we use quanti-
ties of energy that could be used here,
like setting up health clinics. In other
words, the priorities of the anti-imperi-
alist women are ass backwards. For exam-

Page Ten

ple, Off Our Backs, a feminist newspaper,
ran a special issue on Women and Imperial-
ism on December 31, 1970. Most issues of
this paper (after the initial six issues)
carry some article on the subject of women
and imperialism. Has there been a special
issue on Lesbianism? Articles in most is-
sues? Plain, flat, ugly, No. What about
Black women? Latin women? Poor women?
It's not fair to single out Off Our Backs,
most of the other papers and magazines are
the same. Our feminist media is young and
wobbly and because of that many of the ar-
ticles in the big city papers such as OOB
and RAT have been in those areas that male
politics has considered important. The
other papers and magazines not contamina-
ted by male left politics confined them-
selves to heterosexual interests. The me-
dia is simply a reflection of the white,
middle class, straight bias of the Women's
Liberation Movement itself.

Imperialism begins at home. The best
place to fight imperialism is at its cen-
ter. Let's stab the monster in its heart
rather than slapping its fingertips.

Imperialism, racism and the attendant
disregard for human life (change that to
all forms of life) spring from sexism.

Way back in the dim mists of prehistory
when man beat down, degraded and enslaved
women he clearly showed his career prefer-
ences. In degrading woman he degraded
himself. Once the initial inhumanity was
committed it was a simple matter to pro-
gress step by step to today. History is
man remembering the subsequent degradations
of other men over time. He degraded us at
such an early age that he has practically
forgotten it and derives little satisfac-
tion from it in a political sense although
he gets a great deal out of it personally.
The real glory is in shitting on other men.
To fight The Man we don't need to go to
Hanoi, we fight him right here.

Let's be clear in our priorities ide-
ologically (pragmatics will follow later
in the paper) and focus our energies on the
destruction of sexism rather than scatter
our energies all over the globe on the lat-
ter stages of sexism known as imperialism.
By fighting here, which is the current in-
ternational center of the latter stages of
sexism known as imperialism, we help our
Vietnamese sisters. Any attention we can
draw away from our sisters gives them more
time to breathe. In practical terms, we
cannot do more. We cannot launch an armada
to join them in combat. We can express
solidarity, which we have done, and we can
do our best to keep in communication with
our Vietnamese sisters, relating their ex-
periences and struggle to American women
and vice versa.

It does us and the Vietnamese women no
good if we join the male left in desultory
protest. Women have tried that for a num-
ber of years and the government's response
is the dreary, well-known, no response.
Uncle Sam knows how to ward off anti-imper-
ialists, after all he's had nearly 200
years experience. But he's not so ready
for anti-sexists. While he's got his arms
up fighting the NLF abroad and protestors
at home, let's grab him in the crotch and
make him howl.

Vietnamese women understand that howl.
They told Charlotte Bunch when she visited
Viet Nam in 1970 that Amerikan women must
exercise power. The cruel irony is that
the Vietnamese women take us more seriously
than we take ourselves. And isn't that the
key to woman oppression: We have interna-

Vol. 1 No. 14

lized The Man's definition of women and do
not take ourselves seriously. Neither do
we take other women seriously so we shit
on the Lesbian who in many cases does take
other women seriously. We write a lot and
we talk a lot and we cry a lot. Unless I
am completely without perception, I don't
think writing, talking and crying have yet
produced a mass movement of political power.
I'd like to present what I believe are
the first steps to political power. Since
I am only one woman I can hardly present
this as a comprehensive program in the
first phase of our revolution. If this
remains my idea then it isn't even a first
step, it's a retreat from responsibility.
If the ideas spark further ideas in your
head and you share it and build with other
women, then we will all get somewhere.
I: WORK PROJECTS

Women with economic privilege, whether
straight or lesbian, Black or white or La-
tin, should organize to meet the survival-
needs of women without economic privilege.
This means food distribution centers, child
care centers, health care centers, self-de-
fense programs and halfway houses for women
in transition or without adequate housing.
If you have special skills such as editor-
ial abilities, mechanical or medical know-
ledge, anything, set up a teaching program
and share it. These projects will take
time and work as well as patience and under-
standing with yourself. The women whose
needs you will be meeting may have no fem-
inist consciousness at all. Don't look
down on them. It's hard to have conscious-
ness of anything when you are hungry. You
will need a great deal of patience with
yourself to really get in touch with this
kind of oppression and why you have ignored
it in the past.

Together with these work projects goes
structured, disciplined consciousness rais-
ing. This process helps women get in touch
with their distinctive oppression. The
Black woman learns to understand racism in
a political sense rather than just in a
personal sense. She can begin to see the
intimate connection between racism and
sexism through testimony with her sisters.
The Lesbian recognizes Lesbian oppression
from the male culture and from heterosex-
ual women. She begins to understand how
this supposed individual trait, choice of
sex partner and lifestyle, is an attack
on the Amerikan political structure. And
so it goes, each woman learns from another
woman how her particular life is a reflec-
tion of and a response to the dominant,
white, rich, male culture and after that
the sub-culture she herself lives in. Each
woman learns that her life is a political
life and by examining that life each woman
learns the mechanics of oppression. Once
you know how something works you can begin
to fix it or fight it.
II: RE-EDUCATION

This is partly done through conscious-
ness-raising but it must be transmitted on
a large scale through the feminist media.

If we are serious in our work, we can only
trust our own feminist media and we can re-
late only to that media. That media needs
to be expanded. Each city needs its own
newspaper. We also need other forms of me-
dia--films, slide shows, music, etc. If you
start a paper, concentrate on your locality.
Local news is immediate. Women can iden-
tify with what happens in their own city

and in the lives of people like themselves.