Cont: chalogve...

the children eat better than many of us ate when we were children,  
and people are systematically making repairs and watching for main-  
tenance and play hazards.

I do not know, because I don't have to experience it, the  
quality of motherhood guilt trips, but lesbians do indeed know  
about guilt and it doesn't begin when you bear a child. It is  
precisely this kind of failure of analysts out of which comes the  
rhetoric of the absolutely oppressed that I think results in the  
kind of tit for tat some of us (including me) have been into.

- I think it comes out of anger and panic. Frankly, I'm not so  
hot at analysis, but I've been forced to try it in order to get  
straight what it is correct for me to do and what it is correct  
for me to demand.

#6 I agree with you about the name Non-biological mother, for  
the reasons you gave and for others.

There is no way I am interested in winning the trust of  
heterosexual women or newly gay mothers who are trying to fuck me  
over. The MOTHERS' MANIFESTO talks about being forced to pass  
at welfare. We're all forced to pass at times. Try it without  
a child. And what if we left it to lesbians to decide when mothers  
oppressiveness stopped...I think this again is part of a failure  
of analysis, a failure to see that you and all mothers are oppressors  
as well as oppressed.

#7 You are right I have ignored your motherhood because I will  
not let you beat me over the head with it. You have ignored my  
oppression and the oppression of others for the same reason. When  
I talk about struggle, I'm talking about getting past this point,  
not doing childcare that you think is adequate.

I feel pretty sure I did not use the expression 'hustle supports’  
guiltily because I was also speaking about myself. However trying  
to gap bridges when we're still screaming at each other was a mis-  
take and I'm sorry about it.

#8 You are right I can choose to ignore your needs and the needs  
of all mothers and what I struggle with is why, under the circum-  
stances of my life, and the fact that you are one choosing to  
ignore my needs, why I'm not perfectly justified to do so and fuck  
correct political analysis.

You compare the structure of this community of 25 or so lesbians  
with the society at large! That is a failure of analysis so of-  
fensive that I don't know where to bite. You say 'mothers have no  
power—you have all the options to pull out’. Even granting that

I have the single option to pull out, power is material. Allowing  
that we're talking about the realms all women are permitted, mot-  
hers have the power of institutionalized heterosexuality that  
enabled a handful of mothers to convince a lesbian community that  
childcare was their responsibility and then get those lesbians to  
go around saying that mothers are outnumbered and mothers are  
powerless. It is also institutional heterosexuality that controls  
the ease with which I can handle my economic life and the safety  
with which I can live my public and private life. A spin-off is  
getting your head bent.

What you say about the 'bounty of energy that comes from being  
childless' would be funny if it weren't so serious to both of us.  
Like I said in the beginning my energy goes back into—or should  
be going into—being queer and trying to survive decently in a  
society that I have to re-create every day and which I can expect  
to have to re-create for the rest of my life. It may be correct  
for me to assume childcare responsibilities but not at the ex-  
pense of the life I've been trying to live in peace for 30 years.  
Yeah, the number of years is real important for me. It's divisive,  
and tangential and blots out the issues etc. So is being queer  
forever.

#9 That is why I'm sick of straight women and gay mothers with-  
out a gay consciousness trying to force me into their world. They  
have been doing it all my life.

Your demands, the demands of all mothers are perfectly legiti-  
mate, but don't expect me to do your bidding. You fucked me over  
before you had children and you're fucking me over now. Count on  
heterosexual women, and heterosexual identified women not to even  
notice your existence unless it's to get something off you or to  
criticize the way you live. My needs come first for me and it  
pisses me off to see the political lesbian community acting on be-  
half of straight women's needs. You're damn right I do childcare  
because it suits me. Because I'm willing to create space for Teri  
to grow in. Because the pressure I've felt from the community is  
a correct tool and being there was the correct way to struggle.  
Because if I didn't work where the community was working I would be  
isolated all over again from even the crumbs of a lesbian sub-  
culture. What are lesbians doing in institutional childcare?  
Another failure of analysis, another impasse, more pig-headedness  
from both of us. I know you mean me in your last paragraph and  
now you know I mean you and where do we go from here?