what is common only to middle-class women:

Near the end of the newsletter is the real class antagonism, not something omitted, but the outright shit that working-class women in this movement are forced to listen to much of the time:

Bernadette Devlin has been quoted as saying, "I wouldn't take the Queen of England and sort of throw her out in the road. I'd take her and teach her how to type." Must women be sexists, too? The Queen, with her years of experience in government, surely is at least qualified to take an exam for the higher civil service in the Hon. Ms. Devlin's revolutionary bureaucracy. More likely, she would prefer to breed horses....

The everyday facts of most working-class women's lives are much closer to Bernadette Devlin's, to the realities of economics and family life that she grew up with, than to any of the super-bitches who wrote that—women who hide behind the accusation of sexist to hide their class antagonism. I do not share any joy with middle-class women who can be so blind and offensive on class issues while they reap the benefits of their class. What they don't understand now from a position of less power than their males, they will never understand later when their foot is more securely placed on my neck.

Professional? Revolutionary? Homemaker? Student? What do these women have in common? The need for women’s liberation, of course!

Many women are constantly striving to prove they are true professionals in the labor market in order to justify their having attained a level of responsibility. And at the same time, they are facing frustrations of further job advancement.

Many women are constantly striving to prove they are TESTED revolutionaries in order to secure their place within the male-dominated movement.

Many homemakers are constantly worrying about using the best detergent, the right cosmetic to slow aging, and having the proper centerpiece and clean kitchen floor in order to best reflect their role as help-mate and husband’s job-advancer.

Many students are constantly striving for fulfillment which romanticism has led them to believe can be found in the love which overcomes all—the perfect relationship, the perfect marriage which substitutes for everything else.

Because women find themselves in many different roles with many different problems and are generally isolated from each other, they tend to look upon their problems as strictly personal problems. If we feel frustrated, depressed, anxious, afraid, or angry we tend to see the solution in terms of our own personal readjustment. But we need to put less emphasis on psychiatry and turn to anthropology and sociology and ask why do so many women have these same feelings. We must recognize the element of commonness in our personal situations.

One element of commonness in the personal situations in the above excerpt from a Midwest women's paper is their middle-classness. The title of the article is "Sisterhood: gettin' it together" and it is a good example of the sisterhood conception in that it excludes working or lower-class women. That philosophy of "everywoman is our sister" is defined by middle-class women who are blind to anyone but other middle-class women, who refuse to see the influence of class. They say "women find themselves in many different roles with many different problems" but refuse to see that women find themselves in many different classes and therefore have different problems. To admit this most women would have to identify with their class which is to admit to their own role in oppressing other women. This is hard and painful to do but the only way to begin struggling with sisterhood on any real level. Unless that is done I think we have to realize that any analysis the women's movement comes up with now cannot be trusted. The analysis we have come up with labels common to all women what is only common to middle-class women. Any strategy based on such blindness can only aid middle-class women and has very little to do with all women.

If women go "back to the home" they will be supported there.

Us is unique; we all have worth. We must break out of the mold and demonstrate to society that we don't fit any typification.

Women have minds and they can use them. Most women, though, graduate, work for a year or two, then get married and quit. Why? They've been conditioned to believe this is a natural pattern. The resulting waste of woman power is shameful.

Most women, though, don't graduate and lots of women work all their lives because even if they sense this "natural pattern" they cannot materially afford to follow it. The middle class (including the women in it) always see middle-class unused labor as a waste, but they see the labor of lower or working-class people as that labor which can be eliminated.

I hate middle-class women for talking about industrializing housework (fit only for machines or those maids so reluctantly employed) instead of talking about industrializing what lawyers or "higher civil servants" do. A secretary or a maid performs immeasurably more valuable work than the high-paid paper shufflers we call lawyers, yet we encourage women to become lawyers. But lawyers get more money and serve the interest of the middle class which has managed to fuck up most everything else by their "laws" and now we want women to become a part of that. Somehow we've adopted all the screwy economic values of the middle class and talk about "women's work" as dull but high-paid man's work as a good "role model." There is nothing inherently pernicious about service-type jobs that women do, but middle-class women identify these as women's jobs and are repulsed by that.

I hate the classist nature of this movement that can flippantly talk about 'industrializing' (read: do away with) housework and not talk about 'industrializing'—and I mean do away with—what lawyers do. Let's start talking about "industrializing" all those middle-class jobs and creating "role models" that have more to do with the realities of lower-class women's lives than the fantasies of middle-class women who want to prove they're as competent as their fathers or husbands.

HELP WANTED: FEMALE
99.6 hours a week; bed and bored; must be a good cook, careful shopper, and loving babysitter; responsible for providing pleasant atmosphere and constant emotional support. No pay.

Supposedly, we are free now to work, to have some money of our own, some economic independence. But we average half the yearly salary that men make. We get paid so little when we work that we might as well be right back in the home. Even when we spend all day on a job, we end up doing housework anyway.

Free to work? Working-class and lower-class women must work to physically survive. It is a strange conception of freedom, one that could only be held by women who can assume that if they do housework, anyway—again, a blind view of working-class labor as not worth doing.