cramping, heavy bleeding and clotting, candidates for this procedure. Likewise,  
MENSTRUAL EXTRACTION consult a physician. (At this point you should consider the possibility that you might have  
been pregnant at the time of the extraction and failed to remove all of the uterine contents. If this is the case, you would be in  
and will be happier with the sent: Withdraw cannula while it is still attached to syringes. Your menstrual blood will  
be inside the syringe and you will have reduced your period from five days to five minutes.  
It is important to know what sensations to expect as you are performing this. When you insert the cannula expect to feel  
some resistance. The cervical canal is very tiny, especially in the uterus that has not carried any pregnancies to term  
(nulliparas), and continued pressure will be required to introduce the cannula. Keep pushing gently until the cannula reaches  
the back wall of the uterus. (The cannula will enter the non-pregnant uterus approximately 2 to 3 inches depending upon  
uterine size and the number of pregnancies the uterus has experienced.) There will probably be some cramping when the cannula  
is inserted and you will be aware of the movement of the cannula. The sensation is strange and uncomfortable but without  
severe pain. Most women undergoing menstrual extraction experience cramping (it is considered unavoidable in the nulliparas  
uterus). The flexible cannula is incapable of damaging a normal, healthy uterus (this excludes those uteri badly scarred  
or damaged by venereal disease or traumatic childbirth) but it is still a good idea to allow your sensations to guide your movements.  
If any particular movement causes strong cramping or discomfort try replacing it with some other motion. Women who have  
extracted their menses a number of times report that the cramping following the first extraction is fairly strong, but  
that with more experience, confidence and expertise (not only in the technique but in relaxing the muscles in the pelvic area)  
they can extract their period and experience only the mildest of cramping immediately afterwards.  
There are a few possible hazards which can easily be avoided. Make certain that your cannula and speculum are sterile.  
Avoid contamination of the cannula by touching the vaginal wall. Use only vacuum syringe equipment that is designed to prevent  
air from entering the uterus. (Air, when forced into the uterine cavity, enters the blood vessels and sometimes causes  
fatal air embolism.) If you should get a fever of more than 100°, or have severe  
pain, seek medical attention immediately.  
BREAST SELF-EXAM  
From here on you will be trying to find a lump or thickening. Sit or stand in front of a mirror, arms relaxed at your sides, and look for any  
change in size, shape and contour. Also look for puckering or dimpling of the skin and changes on the surface of the nipples.  
Gently press each nipple to see if any discharge occurs.  
Raise both arms over your head, and look for exactly the same things. Note differences since you last examined your breasts.  
With the same gentle pressure, feel the lower inner part of your breast. Incidentally, in this area you will feel a ridge  
of normal tissue. Don't be alarmed - it's normal.  
Now bring your left arm down to your side, and still using the flat part of the fingers of your right hand, feel under your  
left armpit.  
Use the same gentle pressure to feel the upper, outer portion of your left breast from the nipple line to where your arm is resting.  
And finally, feel the lower outer portion of your breast, going from the outer part to the nipple.  
Repeat the entire procedure, as described, on the right breast using the left hand for the examination.  
MEDICAL SUPPLEMENT PAGE 4