he TD  
Ji fered, Ss. pang ae  

Many turn to other political organizations to give them the  
kind of structured, effective activity that they have not been able  
to find in the women's movement. Those political organizations  
which see women's liberation as only one of many issues to which  
women should devote their time thus find the movement a vast re-  
cruiting ground for new members. There is no need for such organ-  
izations to “infiltrate” (though this is not precluded). The de-  
sire for meaningful political activity generated in women by their  
becoming part of the women's liberation movement is sufficient to  
make them eager to join other organizations when the movement it-  
self provides no outlets for their new ideas and energies.  

Those women who join other political organizations while re-  
maining within the women's liberation movement, or who join women's  
liberation while remaining in other political organizations, in  
time become the framework for new informal structures. These  
friendship networks are based upon their common nonfeminist politics  
rather than the characteristics discussed earlier, but operate in  
much the same way. Because these women share common values, ideas,  
and political orientations, they too become informal, unplanned,  
unselected, unresponsible elites—whether they intend to be so or not.  

These new informal elites are often perceived as threats by the  
old informal elites previously developed within different movement  
groups. This is a correct perception. Such politically oriented  
networks are rarely willing to be merely "sororities" as many of  
the old ones were, and want to proselytize their political as well  
as their feminist ideas. This is only natural, but its implica-  
tions for women's liberation have never been adequately discussed.  
The old elites are rarely willing to bring such differences of  
opinion out into the open because it would involve exposing the  
nature of the informal structure of the group. Many of these in-  
formal elites have been hiding under the banner of “anti-elitism"  
and "structurelessness." To effectively counter the competition  
from another informal structure, they would have to become "public"  
and this possibility is fraught with many dangerous implications.  
Thus, to maintain its own power, it is easier to rationalize the  
exclusion of the members of the other informal structure by such  
means as "red-baiting," "reformist-baiting," "lesbian-baiting," or  
"straight-baiting." The only other alternative is to formally  
structure the group in such a way that the original power struc-  
ture is institutionalized. This is not always possible. If the  
informal elites have been well structured and have exercised a  
fair amount of power in the past, such a task is feasible.  

These groups have a history of being somewhat politically effec-  
tive in the past, as the tightness of the informal structure has  
proven an adequate substitute for a formal structure. Becoming  
structured does not alter their operation much, though the insti-  
tutionalization of the power structure does open it to formal chal-  
lenge. It is those groups which are in greatest need of structure  
that are often least capable of creating it. Their informal struc-  
tures have not been too well formed and adherence to the ideology  
of "structurelessness" makes them reluctant to change tactics. The  
more unstructured a group is, the more lacking it is in informal  
structures, and the more it adheres to an ideology of "structure-  
lessness," the more vulnerable it is to being taken over by a group  
of political comrades.  

Since the movement at large is just as unstructured as most of  
its constituent groups, it is similarly susceptible to indirect  
influence. But the phenomenon manifests itself differently. At the  
local level most groups can operate autonomously; but the only  
groups that can organize a national activity are nationally organ-  
ized groups. Thus, it is often the structured feminist organiza-  
tions that provide national direction for feminist activities, and  
this direction is determined by the priorities of those organiza-  
tions. Such groups as NOW, WEAL, and some Left women's caucuses  
are simply the only organizations capable of mounting a national  
campaign. The multitude of unstructured women's liberation groups  
can choose to support or not support the national campaigns, but  
are incapable of mounting their own. Thus their members become  
the troops under the leadership of structured organizations. The  
avowedly unstructured groups have no way of drawing upon the move-  
ment's vast resources to support its priorities. It doesn't even  
have a way of deciding what they are.  

The more unstructured a movement is, the less control it has over  
the directions in which it develops and the political actions in  
which it engages. This does not mean that its ideas do not spread.  
Given a certain amount of interest by the media and the appropri-  
ateness of social conditions, the ideas will still be diffused wide-  
ly. But diffusion of ideas does not mean they are implemented; it  
only means they are talked about. Insofar as they can be applied  
individually they may be acted on; insofar as they require coordin-  
ated political power to be implemented, they will not be. As long  
as the women's liberation movement stays dedicated to a form of or-  
ganization which stresses small, inactive discussion groups among  
friends, the worst problems of unstructuredness will not be felt.  
But this style of organization has its limits; it is politically  
inefficacious, exclusive, and discriminatory against those women who  
are not or cannot be tied into the friendship networks. Those who  
do not fit into what already exists because of class, race, occupa-  
tion, education, parental or marital status, personality, etc.,  
will inevitably be discouraged from trying to participate. Those  
who do fit in will develop vested interests in maintaining things  
as they are.  

The informal groups’ vested interests will be sustained by the  
informal structures which exist, and the movement will have no way  
of determining who shall exercise power within it. If the movement  
continues to deliberately not select who shall exercise power, it  
does not thereby abolish power. All it does is abdicate the right  
to demand that those who do exercise power and influence be respon-  
sible for it. If the movement continues to keep power as diffuse  
as possible because it knows it cannot demand responsibility from  
those who have it, it does prevent any group or person from totally  
dominating. But it simultaneously insures that the movement is as  
ineffective as possible. Some middle ground between domination  

Page +  

On a  

WE eee ee  

and ineffectiveness can and must be found.  

These problems are coming to a head at this time because the na-  
ture of the movement is necessarily changing. Consciousness-rais-  
ing as the main function of the women's liberation movement is be-  
coming obsolete. Due to the intense press publicity of the last ~  
two years and the numerous overground books and articles now being  
circulated, women's liberation has become a household word. Its  
issues are discussed and informal rap groups are formed by people  
who have no explicit connection with any movement group. Purely  
educational work is no longer such an overwhelming need. The move-  
ment must go on to other tasks. It now needs to establish its prior-  
ities, articulate its goals, and pursue its objectives in a coordi-  
nated fashion. To do this it must get organized locally, regionally,  
and nationally.  

Principles of Democratic Structuring  

Once the movement no longer clings tenaciously to the ideology  
of "structurelessness," it is free to develop those forms of organ-  
ization best suited to its healthy functioning. This does not mean  
that we should go to the other extreme and blindly imitate the  
traditional forms of organization. But neither should we blindly  
reject them all. Some of the traditional techniques will prove  
useful, albeit not perfect; some will give us insights into what  
we should and should not do to obtain certain ends with minimal  
costs to the individuals in the movement. Mostly, we will have to  
experiment with different kinds of structuring and develop a variety  
of techniques to use for different situations. The Lot System is one  
such idea which has emerged from the movement. It is not applic-  
able to all situations, but is useful in some. Other ideas for  
structuring are needed. But before we can proceed to experiment  
intelligently, we must accept the idea that there is nothing in-  
herently bad about structure itself—only its excess use.  

While engaging in this trial-and-error process, there are some  
principles we can keep in mind that are essential to democratic  
structuring which are also politically effective:  

1. Delegation of specific authority to specific individuals for  
specific tasks by democratic procedures. Letting people assume jobs  
or tasks by default only means they are not dependably done. If  
people are selected to do a task, preferably after expressing an  
interest or willingness to do it, they have made a commitment which  
cannot so easily be ignored.  

2. Requiring all those to whom authority has been delegated to  
be responsible to those who selected them. This is how the group  
has control over people in positions of authority. Individuals  
may exercise power, but it is the group that has ultimate say over  
how the power is exercised.  

3. Distribution of authority among as many people as is rea-  
sonably possible. This prevents monopoly of power and requires  
those in positions of authority to consult with many others in the  
process of exercising it. It also gives many people the opportun-  
ity to have responsibility for specific tasks and thereby to learn  
different skills.  

4. Rotation of tasks among individuals. Responsibilities which  
are held too long by one person, formally or informally, come to be  
seen as that person's "property" and are not easily relinquished  
or controlled by the group. Conversely, if tasks are rotated too  
frequently the individual does not have time to learn her job well  
and acquire the sense of satisfaction of doing a good job.  

5. Allocation of tasks along rational criteria. Selecting  
someone for a position because they are liked by the group or  
giving them hard work because they are disliked serves neither the  
group nor the person in the long run. Ability, interest, and re-  
sponsibility have got to be the major concerns in such selection.  
People should be given an opportunity to learn skills they do not  
have, but this is best done through some sort of “apprenticeship”  
program rather than the "sink or swim" method. Having a responsi-  
bility one can't handle well is demoralizing. Conversely, being  
blacklisted from doing what one can do well does not encourage  
one to develop one's skills. Women have been punished for being  
competent throughout most of human history; the movement does not  
need to repeat this process.  

6. Diffusion of information to everyone as frequently as pos-  
sible. Information is power. Access to information enhances one's  
power. When an informal network spreads new ideas and information  
among themselves outside the group, they are already engaged in the  
process of forming an opinion—without the group participating. The  
more one knows about how things work and what is happening, the more  
politically effective one can be.  

7. Equal access to resources needed by the group. This is not  
always perfectly possible, but should be striven for. A member who  
maintains a monopoly over a needed resource (like a printing press  
owned by a husband, or a darkroom) can unduly influence the use of  
that resource. Skills and information are also resources. Mem-  
bers' skills can be equitably available only when members are wil-  
ling to teach what they know to others.  

When these principles are applied, they ensure that whatever  
structures are developed by different movement groups will be  
controlled by and responsible to the group. The group of people in  
positions of authority will be diffuse, flexible, open and tempo-  
rary. They will not be in such an easy position to institutional-  
ize their power because ultimate decisions will be made by the  
group at large. The group will have the power to determine who  
shall exercise authority within it.  

E>