Female culture to me means lesbian cul-
ture, and until recently it has been invis-
ible to most and silent. It has always ex-
isted, but was never talked of. Lesbian
culture exists in the Girl Scouts, camps,
4-H, dorms, lesbian subgroups, gay bars,
and women's collectives. It has been the
intuition of gayness without words passing,
underground parties, the culture of stolen
kisses in bathrooms and locked doors. It
has been a common experience, the quiet
suffering that we can tell in each other
which brings us together. It has been the
cherished memories of first embraces, mem-
ories carefully hidden and never written of
in letters that could be intercepted. It
has been fear, fear that leads to self-
hatred and lies, fear of parents, of hus-
bands, of discovery, of policemen, fear that
is flagrantly forgotten sometimes when we
get together. It has been the careful
probing conversations that talk all around
our gayness until we are sure enough to
kiss.

Since Gay Liberation and Women's Libera-
tion, since the women's living collective,
since new women, who haven't been hiding

all their lives have joined the gay commun-
ity, Lesbian Culture has come above ground
some and broadened. Now I talk about it as
women's culture and conceive of it as less
silent--more open. Now it's women's parties
where we dance. It's feeling free about
showing affection to other women while with-
in the protecting boundaries of the commun-
ity. It's almost always greeting each other
with a hug. It's watching Carrie and Alice
drive up to Eagle's supermarket sitting
close to each other like heterosexual cou-
ples do and slapping your knee laughing be-
cause they're so brave. Or it's Linda
kissing Connie in the middle of John's
grocery store. It's building up an oral
herstory of incidents that are passed around
the community, told with great care and
pleasure. Like the time JD kissed Ellen in
the parking lot of the Welfare Offices at
5:00 when everyone was getting off work.
It's being able to mess around with Pat
when I meet her on the street, saying "Hi
little cutie, you come here often?" And

she answers some neat femmy thing and we go
on and on not caring who hears, but I usu-
ally break up and start laughing.

Failing to put Feminism in a class perspective or how a female
culture is developing and growing.

Saar

Shoe 5, &
> 5 ‘
4002

* hee
ie
SOG

be

In writing about the female subculture that I think we have
created in the collectives that I live and work in, I first would
like to explain how that discussion is limited by not being able
to see clearly at all how class fits in with that subculture.

We prefaced the articles about collective living a couple of is-
sues ago by saying that we thought the articles sounded more Marx-
ist than feminist because we dealt so heavily with the economics
of the collective and not the sub-culture that had grown.
We've been talking more about class as the paper reflects, but this
time we've tried to see it in more feminist terms. Anne made the
comment that indeed our collective articles were very different
than the article about the COPS Commune in Berkeley that we all
read in Liberation, Autumn, 1970. She said that the things we
dealt with in our articles were very different than the things

that the male who wrote that article saw as important and dealt
with a lot. In a previous issue of AIAW we had four articles

about a living collective written by members of a women's living
collective here in Iowa City. Three of the articles dealt

mainly with the economics of the collective and how many of our
problems revolved around this. The fourth article dealt with

the outside influences in the collective. Granted we had very

Recently

FEMALE CULTURE/LESBIAN NATION FEMALE CULTURE/LESBIAN NATION FEMALE CULTURE/LESBIAN NATION FEMALE CULTURE/LES