KR

Volume 3 Numbers 2 & 3

about us  
We felt some explanation of why we haven't published an issue since  
August was due. One reason is childcare, which was work done by mo-  
thers and a few childless women with very little help from the rest  
of us. But after the last issue, some women confronted the rest of  
the women's community about not doing enough in childcare, and since  
then we have been busy beginning to share that work, helping at a  
new daycare center in town, doing outside childcare, & meeting with  
the non-biological mothers groups we formed to help deal with the  
fears and inadequacies that some of us felt about childcare. We have  
also been in an upheaval within the AIAW collective. In fall we had  
decided that our collective needed to be a tight one - a primary  
collective for all of us and that that would solve the internal mis-  
trust that was coming between us. Well, the process of tightening  
up the collective (dealing with how we all felt about the group,  
how we felt about working together) caused so much trauma that we  
were forced to reconsider whether at this period in the community  
a tight closed collective was what we needed. There are a lot of  
women in the community that we trust and feel close to politically  
and personally, & although there are times when isolating yourselves  
is advantageous, our interests currently are much more wrapped up in  
the women's community here. We share the same struggles as other  
women in town. We finally reversed directions; calling a meeting of  
women in the community we felt we could work with to talk about po-  
litical directions, about what political work we each wanted to be  
doing, to ask for suggestions about the paper & talk about the idea  
for this issue. Since the last issue, that meeting several new  
groups have formed. There are various groups now revolving around  
the daycare center, a group of women printing an anthology of the two  
women's poetry readings that were held here, & a group planning to  
start a women's press. The membership of these groups overlaps a  
lot - overcommitment is something we can't seem to solve. There  
is so much we want to do. The AIAW collective has had some changes  
in membership during this time but still remains pretty small. We  
all feel that the paper is a good thing because it's the one thing  
we do that communicates with women who we don't know or work with.  
But it is difficult to find new women who we could work with who  
want to join a collective that is 2 yrs. old. The idea of a women's  
press is new and exciting & the paper is feeling its age. But most  
of us want it to continue & to somehow serve as a chronicle of the  
struggles of our community here - to somehow have them recorded, ex-  
plained, & analyzed. That's why this issue seems important since the  
struggle over childcare has touched almost everyone in the women's  
community. —

about this issue  
All of our time seemed to be consumed with childcare - doing it,  
worrying about doing it, worrying about not doing it, fighting ov-  

February 1973  

25¢  

er it & the meetings to decide what to do about the paper, what to  
publish, who to work with, seemed distant. Mothers and a few non-  
mothers had been doing an astounding amount of work on daycare for  
yrs. & lots of other women in the community were finally getting in-  
volved with childcare too, hassling about it, doing it, or not do-  
ing it & feeling guilty, or always doing it & feeling angry. It  
seemed so logical that what we published should reflect what was  
going on in the women’s community in Iowa City & much of what was/  
is going on here revolves around childcare. & everyone has something  
to say. If you put up a sign at the daycare center about anything,  
several scribbled answers, a graffiti dialogue, will appear in a  
couple days' time. Those of us working on the paper couldn't possi-  
bly present the whole issue of childcare as it concerns this com-  
munity. Except for two of us, we have just recently got our shit  
together & started working at it. None of us are mothers. We hung  
up announcements of this issue asking all the women in the commun-  
ity to write something & decided anything submitted would be print-  
ed. We kept copies of all articles handed in in a notebook at the  
daycare center so everyone could read them. A lot of the copy in this  
issue is a result of women responding to articles other women wrote.  
We think all the articles together present a pretty good picture of  
the issue of childcare as struggled over in the women's community  

in Iowa City & that's what we wanted to do. Our hope is that people  
will read the entire paper in sequence because it is the entirety of  
the issue that tells the story. What is and has happened here as re-  
gards childcare we think is useful to other women in other communi-  
ties but in some ways our struggles may be different. This community  
is small and on a whole pretty privileged, which does not make the  
lives of poor or working-class women here much easier. But being in  
a privileged university community does make some things more possi-  
ble. The university (great white father/employer/landlord/ & master  
of us all) rents out huge bourgeois houses for $75 a month because of  
the pressure put on them & hard work done by women over a year ago,  
women in the community contribute financially to support the center  
because so many can afford to do so, & only two weeks after it start-  

ed it was full of toys, furniture, etc. It's true that some of that  

stuff was acquired from Goodwill dumpsters but even the dumpsters  
here are surrounded by goodies to snatch that you don't see around  
the dumpsters in Chicago or Boston. It was hard work to start the  
new daycare center but it was possible here. Low-income women and/or  
women in large cities may encounter struggles we glided through or  
avoided. Most women can't get beyond fighting for the physical fa-  
cility in which to start a center. But we think our experiences could  
be helpful & perhaps because our community crosses class lines and  
involves gay & straight women, a spectrum of community thought pre-  
sents a fairly accurate analysis of an issue that is real important  
in one way or another to all of us.