As women build their revolutionary movement, a strong  
movement, we are often asked to make alliances or give  
support to other revolutionary groups. Sometimes the peo-  
ple who want us to align with them are so blatantly sex-  
ist that there is no doubt that they do not take the wo-  
men's movement seriously, but in fact only use it for their  
own ends. However, most often the line is not that clear,  
and we fool ourselves into believing that something can be  
gained by working with other potentially revolutionary  
groups. We as women and they as potential revolutionaries  
must all learn to take the women's movement seriously.  

We cannot compromise our politics for what appear to be  
gains. We should know by now that no one but women can  
be expected to be on guard for the oppression of sisters.  

The Revolutionary People's Convention brings all these  
points home and it stands out as the most recent blatant  
example of the oppression of women by another supposedly  

right-on revolutionary group.  

In the male-left and straight  

papers we've seen boot-licking radical males exclaim how  
the Panthers are right-on, non-racists and must be the  
true vanguard of the people's revolution. We ask just who  

do they  

(male radicals and Panthers) think are the people?  

Women Are The People: Ain't I A Woman? would like to empha-  

size a side of the "people's"  

convention that has been only  

briefly mentioned in non-feminist papers.  

PANTHER  

We, a group of New York Lesbians, after two days  
of participation in the so-called ‘Revolutionary  
People’s Constitutional Convention,” left with the clear  
realization that if women continue to struggle for their  
liberation within contexts defined by sexist male  
mentalities, they will never be free.  

Lesbians and movement women were excited by  
Huey P. Newton's written gesture of solidarity and  
came to contribute strength and vision to the  
convention. Within our group there were mixed  
feelings. Those of us who had worked on the agenda  
committee for the convention had set up a format  
with which all oppressed peoples could relate and the  
mechanism for actually producing a constitution of,  
for and by the people was laid down. That the  
Panthers allowed such a committee to exist came  
about only through the insistence of the women who  
attended the planning session in Washington. An  
agreement was reached with the Panthers that the  
convention would reflect consciousness of women's  
oppression; that there be workshops around women’s  
oppression and sexual self-determination, that a third  
world woman with a heavy woman’s consciousness be  
a keynote speaker; and that a woman chair the  
sessions. The agenda committee kept meeting in an  
effort to provide for the administration of this agenda,  
but Panther communication got fainter and fainter  
until there was no communication at all. Those of us  
who had this experience went to the convention with  
heavy reservations but also with the hopes that the  
Panthers were operating in good faith. Those of us  
who hadn’t been involved with the agenda committee  
went in sincere anticipation of a constitutional  
convention that would unite all oppressed peoples.  
This is what we actually encountered.  

Michael Tabor was scheduled to speak at 9:00 a.m.  
with the workshops around social groupings, i.e.,  
women, lesbians, third world, etc., meeting at 2:00  
p.m. At 11:00 a.m., the Panthers began the security  
process of searching the thousands of people waiting to  
hear the speech. Sometime after 1:00 p.m. the speech  
actually began. Most of us dug it and were pleased  
with the frequent references to women and homo-  
sexuals; however, we were also disturbed at the  
superficiality of the presentation, which did not spring  
from real awareness of our oppression. The words  
“women” and “homosexual” were attached to the talk  
much like a caboose, easily detachable, is tacked on to  
the end of a train.  

Getting the gist of the message and eager to begin  
the real business of writing a constitution, we left early  
in order to participate in the Lesbian workshop and  
therefore did not hear that all the workshops were  
cancelled. Two movement sisters still present, realizing  
the importance of the workshops and the need for  
women to talk to each other, asked the Panthers to  
announce a women’s workshop for early the next  
morning. This request was denied and the women told  
that any such meeting would be considered a caucus  
outside the framework of the convention. In the light  
of the fact that the Panthers then announced a Yippie  
meeting, the sisters realized that women who dare to  
identify with their own oppression were felt by the  
Panthers to be a serious threat.  

That afternoon the Lesbian workshop produced a  
paper on demands that were born out of an awareness  
of our oppression and that were basic to gaining our  
freedom. At the same time, the agenda committee  
found a third world woman speaker with the requisite  
consciousness who was prepared to speak on the  
platform with Huey that evening. This woman speaker  
was affirmed by Panther leadership that afternoon, but  
later in the evening, denied access to the building by  
the same leadership.  

Outside McGonigle Hall, New York City Lesbians  
sat and listened on transistor radios to Huey  
declaiming about the declaration of independence for  
Black manhood and promising to level the earth in  
pursuit of the goal of the dignity, glory and flowering  
of this same Black manhood. This was followed by a  
Panther sister whose rap was totally devoid of any  
awareness of women’s oppression and merely an echo  
of male Panther rhetoric. Filled with outrage, we saw  
clearly the pointlessness of further relationship to the  

CONSTITUTION,  
CONVENTION  

sexist, manipulative Panther convention. We decided to  
take our experiences and conclusions to the scheduled  
women’s meeting the next morning.  

By Sunday morning, women had still not officially  
met together. (Although the Panthers had cancelled the  
Saturday workshops, a couple hundred women met out  
of their own need and hammered out three sets of  
demands.) The all-women’s meeting scheduled for  
Sunday at 9:00 a.m. was also cancelled by the  
Panthers. Saturday night, the sisters who tried to call a  
meeting the day before mimeographed a leaflet that  
documented the situation and called for a women’s  
meeting at the Women’s Center. However, the Panthers  
in response to the threat of an independent all-women’s  
meeting, hit the streets with a flyer that the workshop  
on self-determination for women would become the  
delayed all-women’s meeting. This resulted in women-identified women having  
to choose between making their sole contributions to  
the women’s workshop, or lending their strength to  
one of the topical workshops, i.e., distribution of land,  
control of government, etc. This overlapping scheduling  
forced many women-identified women out of the  
mainstream of the convention in the interest of having  
a dialogue with sisters about women’s oppression. And  
if you think this account of what happened is  
confusing, you should have experienced the reality —  
the reality of being fucked over by the Black Panther  
Party.  

The Lesbians went to the Panther-called meeting,  
because that is where most of the women went. Our  
intention was still to relate our experiences, raise the  
question of the relevance of the convention to  
Women’s Revolution in the light of the blatant sexism  
of the preamble and the oppressive treatment the  
women were receiving. Our meeting was presided over  
by a Panther woman with male Panther guards ringing  
the room and balconies. Immediately, women began to  
struggle with the question of the intimidating presence  
of the men, but lost to the argument that they were  
there to protect the Panther woman. Meanwhile, across  
town, the gay men were meeting with another Panther  
woman who apparently required no such security.  

As the workshop went on, a definite pattern of  
response and repression was observed. When demands  
for actions leading to the real equalization of power  
between the sexes undiluted and unsubverted by  
traditionally defined women-role concerns (i.e., the  
Lesbian demands), enthusiastic response of the women  
was met with charges of racism and bourgeois  
indulgence. To point out the absurdity of this, our  
demand for the abolishment of the nuclear family,  
heterosexual-role programming and patriarchy was  
called bourgeois and demands for 24-hour child-care  
centers were labeled right-on revolutionary. The women  
present were decidedly in need of time to continue to  
speak to each other, and voted for time to break into  
small groups around their various identifications.  

Male-identified Panther and YAWF women wanted to  
dispense with these time-consuming details and pushed  
for a quick drafting of a demands document arrived at  
by majority vote!  

In spite of the blatant put-downs and manipula-  
tions, the larger group of women tried to act in their  
own interests, some sensing for the first time that the  
Panther schedule was not designed to accommodate  
them. But even their vote for small groups was  
subverted when the women running the meeting  
arbitrarily divided the room into quarters, effectively  
ending any chance for real communication.  

Having done our best to communicate our con-  
sciousness to the women, and still fully aware of the  
irrelevance of this male-dominated militaristic hier-  
archical structure to our needs, the Lesbians caucused  
and decided to split. Part of the atmosphere that  
contributed to that decision was intimidation by  
individual threats of violence throughout the weekend,  
the unnerving presence of the guards and the prevailing  
atmosphere of sexism. More relevant than this was our  

realization that our efforts would be wasted in trying  
to deal with men without the power to validate our  
demands. We had attempted to negotiate on enemy  
territory and found it oppressive and unworkable.  

The story that unfolded after our leaving Philadelphia  
was told to us in New York by a beautiful  
Lesbian sister, who remained and followed the action.  
The sexist insensitivity of the Panthers obviously  
became apparent even to themselves. The tapes of this  
women’s workshop, made by Newsreel and Radio Free  
People, were confiscated on the spot by the Panthers.  

It was resolved on the floor that the Lesbian  
demands, which had elicited such enthusiastic response,  
be included in the demands paper even though we  
weren't present. Our sister went to the chosen  
demands committee and was assured that the Lesbian  
statement was included. That evening, at the con-  
vocation, the report from the workshop on self-  
determination for women was called for, Joan Bird and  
Mother McKeever collided mid-stage with yellow  
papers flying in a struggle for the microphone. Panther  
guards separated them, but somehow Mother McKeever  
grabbed the field. Now you know who Joan Bird is,  
but Mother McKeever is another story entirely. A large,  
gray-haired, black woman, she had spent the day in  
attempts to harass and subvert the workshop. When women  
addressed their own needs, her charges of racism were  
the loudest. She called Lesbians “men” and tried to  
discredit us by appealing to old sexist hangups. After  
an afternoon of denunciations and harangues, this same  
Mother McKeever presented herself as representative of  
the workshop. The women who had prepared the  
actual demands got tacked on to the end of the  
program.  

To put it briefly, in neither of the reports were the  
Lesbian demands included. Sisters who were waiting to  
hear them rushed forward to see what had happened,  
and to demand that they be read. What had happened  
was that someone had deleted them, but tried to  
appease the women with promises that they would  
appear in the printed copy of the workshop paper. The  
tragi-comic compromise they made with our demands  
is as follows:  

That women have the right to choose hetero-  
sexuality, bisexuality or homosexuality. That crash  
programs in the technology relevant to women be  
made available to them, i.e., child care.  

We’d like you to realize that Lesbians and  
women-identified women went to this conference with  
no awareness of being a particular threat. The  
hysterical and paranoid reaction of the Panthers has  
helped us to realize the potency of our position as  
women whose primary concern is our own revolution.  

This paper is a reconstruction of the experience of a  
group of white Lesbians at the Revolutionary People’s  
Constitutional Convention and an analysis of the  

Women’s Movement in relation to the Black Panthers.  

Although we recognize the difference in the black and  
white experiences, we are not presuming to analyze the  
black experience; but we cannot and will not invalidate  
our own experiences as women. Speaking from our  
guts, from the depth of our oppression, we say that  
the Black Panthers are sexist; that the Black Panther  
Party, supposedly our brothers in revolution, oppresses  
us is a doubly painful thing. But we will take no one’s  
shit. And we, Revolutionary Women (as opposed to  
women revolutionaries) can act only from our own  
reality. We must, we will, make our women’s  
revolution. No longer will we die alongside men who  
define our place and keep us there, whose highest  
flattery for us is our revolutionary wombs. Fuck that.  
We women of a dispersed nation will build our  
community, speak in a woman’s language born from  
our woman’s oppression, grow strong together and  
explode in our women’s revolution.