Se a

TWO RAPS ABO

In beginning to assert myself as a woman
in a male-defined world, I came through my
feminine timidity to (at last) anger, fairly
easily. It felt right - it was there, I was
a woman who had been messed over; I had to
stop making excuses for the men who had re-
lated to me only on their terms and taken
my right to define myself. My realization
of these feelings was a strengthening thing,
but I was still confused as to who/what I
was and what conditions of my life were the
really important shapers of my politics.

I continued to identify with rather simplistic
definitions made by people who had power
over me ~ influence on me ~ because they

had the confidence (gall) to do that. I
seemed to fit into a lot of convenient cate-
gories: ex-student, freak, starving artist,
college graduate, acidhead, dropout. I knew
these to be middle class trips, didn't see
that it was just middle class people calling
me one of them according to their rules.
Being vaguely political before WL, I knew
there were a lot of miserably oppressed
people out there and felt guilty for being
in my "privileged" position: a working class
woman who had made it into middle class
dropout land.

That kind of privilege was real vague;
it didn't bring any material benefits, just
frustration that, by definition, I was sup-
posed to get security, money, confidence
which I couldn't find. Those middle class
people had only invited me to share their
guilt, not their goods. Confronting myself
with the realization that I had nothing to
expect from participation in middle class
games was a painful thing, though at least
I could stop feeling that guilt. But my
hurt didn't turn quickly to anger. I still
felt intimidated by middle class women,
couldn't confront them for that. Every time
an eagerly articulate woman would interrupt
and finish a sentence for me, I wanted to
yell but ended up mumbling - couldn't shake
the restraint of remembering how I’d done
that same thing to other even more timid
women. Working class women get indoctrinated
with middle class shit and indoctrination
means you act in support of your

oppressors, act on their terms, against
each other.

At least I know I've been indoctrinated
and there was something else I would be-
lieve, the politics of my material exper-
ience, growing up in a hostile, financially
insecure environment. There's a parallel
in the heterosexual norm: heterosexuality
has to be enforced - it's not "just natu-
ral", just what everyone would be. And
people who know they don't fit into that
ideology are not legitimized, are not al-
lowed to influence this society. Working
class people who resist indoctrination are
also prevented from influencing society.

What this comes down to in my recent
experiences, is that working class women
who are still intimidated are forced to
relate to middle class women on middle
class terms because that is legitimized,
because that is all middle class women
understand. And middle class rap is big on
"there has to be understanding."

I have read and heard their middle class
ideology, but I don't know how it feels to
have come to that ideology in experience.
They don't understand my experience; I
don't understand their blindness, their
breezy, callous assumptions. I think I've
found my angry voice but I feel pain for
working class sisters who don't want me
to get angry while they attempt to get
across a watered-down (necessarily) version
of their view, to middle class women. Those
sisters’ humility, self-sacrifice, patience
and powerlessness makes me hate the women
they attempt to work with. And I think that
for reasons of survival and a sense of
sisterhood, that working class women into
WL will sometimes have to be working with
women who can oppress them. I don't know
the answers to end their frustration or my
pain for them. Now it seems that middle
class women have us divided on how to re-
late to their privileged demands! Working
class sisters are beautiful and strong and
their strength is getting wasted. I don't
want us to get wasted but they don't want
me to get angry. And my anger and my love
for them is coming from the same place.

UT

The development of class-consciousness
for the women's movement not only depends
on middle-class women becoming aware of
their class bias, but also depends on women
from working class backgrounds who have
identified with the middle class becoming
class conscious.

Living in a small, isolated town can be
deceiving as far as class goes. What was
middle class in my community does not fol-
low what is thought to be middle class in

general. One example is education for women:

most women got married within a year or two
of high school graduation and had kids. A
college education, since women weren't ex-
pected to have careers, was of little use.
And the only "professions" visible were
teaching and nursing, at that. I suppose
that what I thought was upper class was
really middle class, and what was seen as
working class wasn't.

Although my family certainly wasn't, we
always identified strongly with what the
middle class does indeed value. Education
was to enable us to get a good job, and for
the females, to meet a husband, directly
(while at school), or indirectly (at a job,
etc.). While we wanted to live graciously,
sometime, we were more interested in a
nicer house and a car that wasn't falling
apart.

We only knew that there was never enough
money, actually that any major purchase
was a trauma, and that we couldn't really
consider nicer clothes, spending money,
vacations, etc. We also knew that a large
family spent a lot on food, without eating
"well." It was clear we weren't social
stars, but, the whole time, what we saw as
middle class we said we didn't want -
“everything they own is on their backs",
real money spending, a new car every so
often, house remodeling, lots of nice
clothes, etc.

What we saw as working class were girls
dropping out of school to get married, and
then being stuck in that area, isolated,
the guy not being able to get a good job,
and being worried about money.

When we finally realized my dad had a
blue collar job, we still called it a
skilled blue-collar one. It was important
for us to maintain the myth that the U.S.
is basically middle class, or that if you
weren't, it was a coincidence. While we
faulted my dad for a lot, probably if we'd
had a nicer house, newer car and nicer
clothes, it wouldn't have made a differ-
ence. What we might have wondered then was
why we still weren't acceptable.

I guess that's what I always wanted to be
acceptable. When I got into the women's
movement and heard it called middle class
for its goals - more high-paying jobs,
liberalized abortion, etc. I didn't object
to this indirect label of myself as middle-
class for two reasons. One is that it seemed
like stuff that had been important to me
might be brought within my reach. The second
was that I was labeled middle class, or so
I thought.

One thing I had never understood was that
having a college degree didn't necessarily
make me middle class. One job I might have
had if I'd had the confidence to "sell" my-
self during the interview, I didn't get. I
didn't think I was ever able to give emp loy-
ers what they wanted. Only once - I was
asked if I would again do full-time volun-
teer work in a ghetto. That one I knew the
answer to. So I said yes.

I do know that after I got married to a
middle class man, I really tried to accept
and understand, and never could, things
like accepting gifts, and a close family.
But I always thought it was my "warped"
background that made me frustrated and in-
wardly hostile.

I don't think I realize what being married,
and to a middle class man, means. Financial

security has got to be important to me, after

wanting it so long. But family ties means I
am offered much more than mere security.
Being married itself brings a general form
of approval, at least not suspicion.

I don't know what to say about now. Ob-
viously.