The following article was originally intended as a verbalization of some ideas I had to be used as a discussion topic in a

small group I am part of.

There has been much discussion of this paper in this group.

The Women's Center has always said that its doors are open to all women -- just as the Women's Movement has said pretty much the same thing. The Women's Center encourages all women to participate in and start new programs and has never explicitly set up priorities, which might exclude some women. 

Some of these ideas have become more clear to me. I have had to question some of what I wrote. I would like to give a little background on the Women's Center in Iowa City from my point of view. I was involved in starting the Center (getting the house and funds) and worked there for several months.

The Center is housed in a University-owned building. The majority of funding comes from the University -- some from Student Senate, some from the Student Development Center (a department whose funds come from the administration). In order to receive funds -- especially from the Student Senate -- programs must be well defined and usually justified in terms of helping students.

The Center is run by a Sunday meeting where every group operating out of the Center is supposed to send two representatives. These representatives and any other interested women who come make decisions. These meetings are not well attended. Daily staffing is done by volunteers and a few women who have obtained salaries from different places (work study, Operation Mainstream, etc.) for their work at the Center.

(The first issue of the Iowa City Women's Center Newsletter reprinted the following quotation from Roxanne Dunbar.)

"Abstract analysis is important, but people are right to look for specifics. We can offer experiments, some of which we have tried. No one of these problem-solving methods or experiments nor all of them together will constitute the revolution we envision as absolutely necessary for individual as well as group survival (survival of the species).

"It is inhuman and cruel to condemn as 'reformist' anything which eases suffering. It has never been proven that the most downtrodden are the most revolutionary. On the contrary, until women are permitted to develop a human self-image they will never challenge the male structures and assumptions, even when these are leading to world annihilation.

"It is our duty to provide an analysis that is so revolutionary, so inescapably true and humane, that women cannot be co-opted into the system that formerly enslaved them."

There are a few things in the quote from R. Dunbar's article "No More Fun and Games" reprinted in the Women's Center Newsletter that I would like to respond to. I don't intend this to be in any way a critique of the reprint, but more a point of departure for what I would like to discuss about the Women’s Center.

I am picking on this quote because I think it generally touches upon several problems I see in the Women's Movement in Iowa City. Not only the content of the quote, but the fact that it was in the Women's Center Newsletter makes it relevant to what I want to say about the Women's Movement in Iowa City. Most of my comments have to be related to the Women's Center because that is what I am most familiar with.

The quote says that it is inhuman and cruel to "condemn" as reformist projects that help relieve suffering. I don't agree. I think that one of the biggest problems existing in the Women's Center is the belief that some of the projects are "revolutionary" because feminists are working on them and exposing women to feminist views. It may be true that women are exposed to feminism through service projects (and non-service projects). But, because I don't think there has been enough analysis of what revolution means in this country in terms of feminism (i.e.: where feminism fits into a revolutionary movement, what are feminist priorities, etc.), I question what women are and are not "being exposed to." Easing pain is not necessarily (or should I say in and of itself) a revolutionary tactic. Furthermore, the belief that it is can be a stagnating thing. Service projects that ease a situation for an individual or individuals are reformist insofar as they ease the tension of the situation. The projects themselves do not usually alleviate the problem that caused the situation to exist. They not only ease the tension on the individual with the problem, but they also ease tension on the cause of the problem (be it another individual, an institution, a social framework, etc.). A service project can be part of a plan that emphasizes priorities and works for change that is revolutionary, but the projects without such a plan (or clear set of long-term goals) are often reformist. They often cover for big establishments by doing what those traditional establishments won't do. Projects often feed into and contribute to these thereby posing no real threat to the big establishment.

It is not inhumane and cruel to say that. It is something that needs to be discussed openly and honestly. The term reformist is one way to define something when one believes that it cannot -- the way it exists -- cause real social change. It should not be taken defensively as I think the word "condemn" implies (in Dunbar's quote) it is being taken. It should be taken seriously. The Women's Movement in Iowa City, as everywhere, needs to discuss its priorities and discuss long-range goals. (This has to be done in small groups. Where the Women's Center fits into this I will discuss at the end of this paper.) Then service projects can be discussed coherently (i.e. what is their purpose, how to relate to them, etc.).

An example to emphasize and try to make this more clear is the fact that Black Panther breakfast programs, medical clinics, and other service programs are not called "reformist." The Panthers have a clear set of demands and an open policy of what they see as necessary for a complete and thorough revolution in this country. These are clear to everyone working on and benefiting from these projects.

On Priorities

The quote says that it has never been proven that the most downtrodden are the most revolutionary. I think this is a dangerous wavelength to be on, especially in a University town. It implies that a revolutionary person is one who has thought through and done reading on what revolution means in this country and has begun to dedicate her life to the struggle for revolution. (To put it in Dunbar's words, has also developed a “human self-image"). If Dunbar's “analysis that is so revolutionary, so inescapably true and humane" is based on "permitting" women to develop a human self-image, I doubt that it will be enough to convince enough people that we need a revolution.

Why do I think this is dangerous thinking in Iowa City? This type of "revolutionary" is easier for a college-educated person to become than one who is not well educated. I further think that this type of "revolutionary" is often on the wrong track. To make the conclusion obvious, Iowa City is full of college-educated people who often forget that there are some very "downtrodden" in the town.

I am not about to try and "prove" that the statement is wrong. I do think that a very strong argument can be made for saying that the most oppressed people are, at least potentially, "most revolutionary." The more privileges one has, the more one has to lose by a complete revolution. You might say that you don't have all that much (in terms of possessions or financial security). But to one who has less, you have that much more at stake in the society the way it is now; you are that much more to be mistrusted. That doesn't even take into account factors such as race, sex, class, etc. You may not think you are so privileged. But to one who is lower yet on the social scale, you have that much more to lose.

I see revolution very generally as whatever it takes to tear things up until there is a chance for everyone to have at least enough to survive and live comfortably.

Back to Iowa City: I think that a big problem in the Women's Center is that it cannot be what it proposes to be. It cannot run with every woman a part of the collective running of the Center. I agree that ideally it should, but then ideally it shouldn't have to exist. The Women's Center has not, to my knowledge, established its priorities, and until things are more “evened out" there cannot be enough quality even among women to run the center collectively. Obviously I see the establishment of priorities as a necessary step in trying to “even things out." Even then, I see innumerable problems in trying to operate as a collective on such a large scale.

Right now, the Women's Center is run by a small number of women who have the energy, knowledge, resources, love, or whatever other reasons they have to do it.

But the center is supposedly "run collectively" (i.e.: Sunday meetings and volunteer staffing). I think that it would be better for long-range planning and immediate organization if a tight collective of women would take on the responsibility for the overall organization of the Center. They would be available resources for the projects at the Center. I don't think it is wise for members of this collective to be active members of the project groups (at least not the way the groups are now).

The advantages of a small collective would be that it could engage in ongoing discussion of the Women's Movement in Iowa City, revolution and feminism in the U.S., priorities, etc., and it could, by allowing these discussions to guide their work at the Center, make decisions openly taking all responsibility, thereby getting things done effectively.

This suggestion needs more thought, additions, discussion, and it is, of course, useless if the Women's Center still believes that the establishment of priorities is divisive or unfair.