Questions addressed to white, middle class lesbian feminists:  
How can you believe in a materialist analysis and not dig why/how working class attitudes are not like yours? Can you relate to the contempt and resentment I feel about having a middle class education privilege? That it's not entirely a privilege to feel alienated from people I would have known if I hadn't gone to college? That I can't really "talk the talk" of most of the middle class or most of the working class?  

Can you dig that I'll be unreasonably irritated if I hear one more executive's daughter telling how she really respects and loves her father? I could feel sorry for my father 'cause he had no easy life but he was a real prick anyway, to me. Maybe some middle class fathers can afford to be nice to their kids if they can be their real prick selves to other people, for instance the other people they have power over.  

How much do you assume that I am the exception? How much do you see the middle class as the rule and not the exception? The majority of people in this country even, are not middle class.  

I am sick of trying to write about, listen to, or otherwise concern myself with MIDDLE CLASS GUILT. Not that there hasn't been change; but it's all so slow to me. Now I am seeing more and more the incredible mindfuck of working class guilt—women who identify themselves as "I was raised working class but then I got out and went to school and have all these privileges."  

And paranoia. And confusion.  

I am one of those people. Growing up in a working class family in a working class town, I was told directly and indirectly that I was middle class. Middle class values of middle class aspirations preserved the few middle class attitudes I could develop for future use. After high school alternatives appeared to me; I rejected the ideas of getting married or a "steady job." I was not at all preparing myself for either of those. What was left, besides, would for sure get me away from home and out of that town which I hated because I felt hated there. Two alternatives: go to college or, if I couldn't "make it," join the women's military and learn a skill or get some kind of education there. If I had then, when I was 16 or 17, any political education about the war and the military I might not have considered that life. If I had then more consciousness about my (mostly latent) lesbianism, I might have never applied to college but would have signed up to go where the dykes are.  

But since my mother had saved money for me and I got a scholarship (for being poor and deserving) I went to college. There I was surrounded by middle class people who educated me in liberal politics. I imagine the army trip would have been with working class people educating me in reactionary politics—but in a more homosexual community. College sure was heterosexual. The liberal politics were pretty unliberal there. So I spent near 5 years playing liberal middle class heterosexual games.  

One and a half years after graduating, I began to realize that I was none of that shit. I am a radical, working class dyke. In a community of the women's movement as it was in 1970, I first identified as a radical—that was okay—then more as a feminist radical/radical feminist. There was support for me in that; it felt right. It was right by middle class feminists. It was increasingly right to be gay—I came out, feeling approved and right by the same women. These changes spanned about 3 or 4 months.  

Six months later, living my life in the women's movement, I began to realize that I was working class and that was a whole new “coming out."  

The earlier politics of radical lesbianism were written and worked out by middle class dykes. At one time there I actually thought it was a privilege to exist as a radical dyke, saw it as a middle class thing. I felt guilt for spending so much energy (and needing so much energy) in personal relationships with other lesbians while there was so much else that needed our energy.  

Oppression as a lesbian didn't seem to threaten me economically. Within a community of mostly middle class women where lesbians were respected some, I felt some security. Sometimes I did share in goods from middle class privileges. Is it a privilege to have middle class friends? I think I had options that many working class dykes didn't. And I thought I had some options that I just hadn't checked out, like a well-paid "straight" job that I just hadn't applied for. That option seems more and more of a myth. I have held one well-paid 3-month job that required college education. That's more of a break than a lot of women ever get. But having that education has not wiped out my working class insecurity. I have to work, usually at tedious low-paid jobs.  

A Woman?  

18 August 1972  

A middle class education didn't give me middle class confidence or connections... I get scared about lying on job applications, but also scared about telling "them" too much. I'm intimidated by welfare, the phone company, cops, and landlords. When someone says "oh, don't let them hassle you, just do this or that," I feel like I'm so weak and cowardly.  

Among the people I want to be with, the radical lesbian community, I feel stronger. A group of middle class lesbians are at least people I can confront with my whole self. For a long time I listened to raps that bothered me and I didn't feel right enough to question or object. Now I'm saying a few things. I recognize what offends me, what I have no tolerance about. A few raps I would like never hearing again from my lesbian sisters: my trip around Europe; my place out in the country; why I just don't want money from my parents because it's a hassle; I can't stand kids; how my shrink really helped me; and various bullshit relating to academics and ultra-individualism. I would feel better about less individuality and more a feeling that I am not unique. And I know my feelings of isolation could hold me down because I'd internalized so much bullshit education. I tried to be intellectual, cool, rational, articulate, artistic; even though I was no success, I accepted those values. I learned to respect and imitate the academic scholar pigs and had no previous distrust or criticism of them to overcome. Of course I also internalized their class chauvinism. I felt superior because I could relate to what they considered worthwhile, or at least I could talk as if I did, and words were all that counted.  

These attitudes affected everything I did or thought about; I talked politics, wrote papers about books, read books to learn. Learning meant understanding printed words, not understanding my own experiences. Analyzing did not mean realizing my own feelings. I learned to suppress rather than express my feelings. Or if I expressed anything it was in a learned standard "form"—like writing a poem, writing about my experience in someone else's words, from someone else's point of view.  

By that time, I didn't know who I was or what my own perspective was or what my own feelings felt like.  

But soon after I got out of college I began to consider that it hadn't been worth much. The University had wasted my time and most of my parents' savings. From then considering it a frivolous education, I came to realize it had been a dangerous education: propaganda, lies, bigotry, false priorities, and an accumulation of trivia. My mind was saturated with this bilgewater and there was no question of passively forgetting it; I would have to actively wipe out those ideas and attitudes and “facts" because I was acting on them. I was a trained agent of the academic pigs, propagating that garbage in all I said. Maybe I would have remained an "agent" if there had been more reward than just a feeling of superiority. My material rewards were not happening. I did not marry a middle class man; I did not find a professional job; I did not get a deal to go to graduate school; I didn't have "connections." In the year after graduating, I worked the same unskilled jobs I had done part-time while I was a student. A BA degree was not security; I felt deceived, cynical, bitter.  

Now I am into a long process of unlearning. And I am learning, finally, to learn from experience, to understand my feelings, to accept myself without idealism, and to trust my own judgment. Also I am learning to trust my sisters who are in the same kind of position. We need to be together to build a strong lesbian working class-identified analysis and to help each other struggle against the brainwashing we got in school and in the women's movement.  

~