(aie be

I'm a waitress and I just got back from work
and I want to write some stuff about being a
waitress.

The situation of the job is total subservi-
ence. The old oppressive idea - "Woman, put the
meal on the table." In a rational, non-exploit-
ative (post-revolutionary) society I hope no
such servile jobs exist. But today they do.

I think, of course, that restaurant owners
should be forced to pay decent, living wages to
all employees, and waitresses shouldn't have to
rely on tip money to survive. I get paid $1.00
an hour, and that is even more than a lot of
other waitresses make.

The realities of tipping are hard to deal
with in terms of class. The people who can
afford to leave the biggest tips are generally
the ritzy-looking ones. So, when I'm working
for that tip money to live on, I like to see
ritzy people walking into the restaurant. That's
disgusting, I should be happier to wait on a
welfare mother who's getting out of the kitchen
for a change. I love waiting on women like that,
but at the same time don't expect her or want
her to leave a tip. So, my survival needs and
my politics conflict.

Like, I have to be nice, smiley, subservient,
and run my butt off for pigs I'd just as soon
shoot in the head - just for a lousy tip.

Tipping works to the advantage of the pig
restaurant owner who's already ripping workers
off by paying such low wages. This work-incent-
ive idea: the more subservient the waitress, the
bigger the tip she might get; what BULLSHIT.
That's all to the owner's advantage to “please
the customers.”

Then there are people who come in for "pri-
vate parties." The waitresses should be able to
charge at least a 15% service charge. But often
the boss says, "Only charge 10%," sometimes even
nothing. This means the total bill for the par-
ty is lower, and the customer is likely to come

back. The food prices are never cut,

but the waitress's pay is. She's only
making $1.00 an hour. Most people ne-

ver think of not paying the full food
charge - but never consider paying the
full service charge.

Customers say obnoxious, offen-
sive and oppressive things and I'm
in a position of not being able to
say anything. Time after time I've
had to crush the hell out of my ang-
er so as not to lose my job.

I also think of the privilege
of having a job at all. Particularly
the aspect of being within the realm
of what is physically acceptable to
the people that have power in this
society. I don't look like a dyke,
I'm not "overweight" and I'm white.
I'm sure there are other privileges
I'm overlooking.

I also wanted to write some
things you can do to help waitresses.
I used to go out to dinner, figure
out how much money I had, spend that
much on food, and if there was any
change leftover, I'd leave it for
the waitress. I suggest you con-
sciously think of tip money before
you even go out to eat.

In the restaurant, sit at a ta-
ble that is already clean. Just be
patient and courteous, and THINK be-
fore you say anything to the waitress.
Like, get your order together. If
you're not ready to order, it's bet-
ter to ask her to come back than
waste her time making her stand a-
round while you're stuttering over
the menu for two minutes. Be aware
of what else the waitress is doing,
how busy she is and how much behind-
the-counter (or whatever) work she
does before she walks out with your
food. Be organized. If you want any-
thing, ask all at once if possible.
Each trip to your table with any
bullshit thing is work for her. It's
really easier if one person asks a-
round the table what everyone needs
before the waitress gets there to

"check back."

run it down to the waitress instead
of five people getting the waitress
confused.

Remember you've got hands. You
can help by taking things, setting
them down and clearing spaces on the
table yourself. I’ve waited on so
many people who may as well be sit-
ting on their hands. It just makes me
feel more exploited.

Before you "flag the waitress
down," THINK ON IT A LOT. Is it gonna
kill you to wait a few minutes? Put-
ting your comforts above the wait-
ress's convenience is usually wrong.
Employers don't like to see their
customers (when they're trying to
please) be inconvenienced. The boss
will take out your impatience on the
waitress and hassle her about not
working hard enough - not satisfying
"her" (actually HIS) customers.

Notice how the tip/pay system
of the restaurant works. Some people
include the tip when they pay their
bill. If the restaurant owner or the
like is standing at the cash register
and is supposed to give your tip to
the waitress, don't trust him. Leave
it on the table or hand it directly
to the waitress. My boss has been
known to slip a few tips into his
pocket.