The man over there says women need to be helped into carriages and lifted  
over ditches, and to have the best place everywhere. Nobody ever helps me  
into carriages or over puddles, or gives me the best place — and ain't I a  
woman? Look at my arm! I have ploughed and planted and gathered into barns,  
and no man could head me! And ain't I a woman? I could work as much and  
bear the lash as well! And ain't I a woman?  

I have borne thirteen children and seen most of them sold  
into slavery, and when I cried out with my mother’s anguish,  
none but Jesus heard me — and ain't I a woman?  

Sojourner Truth  

a Midwest newspaper of women’s liberation  

published by the  

Publications Collective, Iowa City, Iowa  

Vol. 1, No. 2 July 1970  

to meet the needs of women  

Women are an oppressed majority in  
this society. Although we constitute 51  
per cent of the population, women are  
only one per cent of the nation’s engi-  
neers, three per cent of its lawyers,  
seven per cent of its doctors. Most wom-  
en have the same job — housewife — de-  
spite the individual differences among  
women.  

This society culturally views women as  
weak, passive, not too intelligent, emo-  
tional, maternal, belonging in the home  
and with the children. And this society  
trains women to be weak, passive, not  
too intelligent, emotional, maternal and  
to be good housewives and mothers. We  
are not given the training or encourage-  
ment needed to pursue other roles.  
Working women earn less than men  
doing the same work and, if they are  
married, work longer hours, since the  
unpaid household labor awaits them each  
evening. If they are not married, society  
views them as misfits.  

Women are shown their image as  
either unpaid household laborer or sex  
object on TV, in the schools, in maga-  
zines and newspapers; they begin to be-  
lieve in their own inferiority. The posi-  
tion of women in this society benefits the  
men they clean for and sleep with, the  
bosses they break strikes for, and accept  
lower wages and boring jobs from.  

We recognize our oppression as bene-  
fitting the U.S. Imperialist system just  
as the oppression of black and third  
world peoples has benefitted this sys-  
tem, creating reserve labor and re-  
sources to be used at the discretion of  
the rich. A woman, however, can  
achieve a financially stable position  
through dependence on a man. We real-  
ize that a male supremacist system  
whose main purpose is to accumulate  
profit for the few will not willingly  
grant the following demands. We realize  

that we will have to take the following,  
through collective struggle, to form a  
society that serves all the people.  

1. WE DEMAND THAT A SYSTEM  
OF DAY CARE CENTERS BE ESTAB-  
LISHED. These centers should be open  
24 hours a day. They must be staffed  
equally by men and women. They must  
meet the needs of children and must be  
controlled by the parents and children  
who use them.  

2. WE DEMAND THAT FREE ADE-  
QUATE HEALTH CARE BE AVAIL-  
ABLE FOR ALL PEOPLE. Medical at-  
tention is a human right, not a right of  
only the rich. All women must be able  
to receive free contraceptive devices  
that are safe, free abortions upon re-  
quest and adequate care during preg-  
nancy. Research must begin to develop  
safe contraceptive devices for both wom-  
en and men.  

3. WE DEMAND THAT WOMEN BE  
GIVEN FREE SELF-DEFENSE AND  
PHYSICAL TRAINING. Women have  
not been allowed to grow strong and  
healthy. Their physical development has  
been stifled by their socialization into  
being “ladies.” They must be trained  
beginning at a young age to be strong  
and capable of defending themselves.  
The rapes and beatings of women will  
end only when it becomes just as dan-  
gerous to attack a woman as it is a man.  

4. WE DEMAND THAT WOMEN RE-  
CEIVE EQUAL PAY, EQUAL WORK  
AND EQUALITY IN THE JOB MARK-  
ET. Women must be given opportunities  
for advancement and on-the-job train-  
ing. All fields of employment must be  
open to women, and we must have the  
opportunity to engage in productive work  
that is meaningful to us rather than the  
work which we are now given — sub-  
servient, service-type jobs — secretary,  
hostess or domestic laborer. All people  
should have work that they find mean-  
ingful.  

5. WE DEMAND THAT EVERY IN-  
DIVIDUAL IN THIS SOCIETY RE-  
CEIVE A GUARANTEED ADEQUATE  
INCOME. To live decently, no individ-  
ual should have to sell her labor or body.  
The necessities of life should be supplied  
free to all people. No woman should  
have to marry for financial security,  
nor should any woman be forced to  
face the degradation of the present wel-  
fare system. This income must be based  
on the individual, not the family unit,  
and must be enough to allow an individ-  
ual to live comfortably and decently.  

6. WE DEMAND AN IMMEDIATE  
END TO THE SEXISM WHICH PER-  
MEATES OUR CULTURAL MEDIA. The  
news and entertainment media, an ex-  
tremely influential institution in sociali-  
zation, has consistently stereotyped fe-  
males as sex objects or domestics. The  
stereotypes of women in the media today  
are comparable to the black “shoe-shine  
boy” of 15 years ago. We demand a stop  
to this sexism, substituting instead  
images of women as creative and intel-  
ligent human beings.  

7. WE DEMAND AN END TO TRACK-  
ING IN THE SCHOOLS AND THE IM-  
MEDIATE ESTABLISHMENT OF  
FREE AND RELEVANT EDUCATION.  
Relevant education should help individ-  
uals to become self-sufficient, self-re-  
specting human beings. Women can’t  
have much self-respect when they never  
study their own history, when all their  
examples of achievement are male. We  
cannot be self-sufficient if we are not  
given the knowledge for controlling our  
own lives. We must be given adequate  
training in useful trades such as carp-  
entry, mechanics, etc.  

8. WE DEMAND AN END TO THE  
DEFINITION OF INDIVIDUALS IN  
TERMS OF THEIR PERSONAL RELA-  
TIONSHIPS WITH OTHERS. Individu-  
als should be treated on their own terms,  
regardless of whether they are old or  
young, married or unmarried, homosex-  
ual or heterosexual or asexual, living  
alone or communally.  

9. WE DEMAND AN END TO THE  
MARRIAGE CONTRACT which presup-  
poses the submission of the female to  
the male. Marriage and the nuclear fam-  
ily is the acceptable living situation to-  
day. Because of this, the single woman  
is severely limited and children are  
treated as property of their parents. All  
people (including the young) must be  
treated as individuals with individual so-  
cial and economic rights.  

10. WE DEMAND AN END TO THE  
DISCRIMINATION AGAINST OUR LES-  
BIAN SISTERS. We recognize that this  
oppression is political, and that it is di-  
rectly linked to our oppression as wom-  
en. Women refuse to be defined only in  
terms of their sexuality and demand to  
be recognized as thinking, feeling human  
beings. We refuse to be defined and  
limited by arbitrary social standards  
based on unacceptable authorities which  
suppress human needs common to all  
people.  

11. WE DEMAND THE RIGHT OF  
SELF-DETERMINATION FOR ALL  
PEOPLE. There must be an immediate  
end to the exploitation of women, blacks,  
third world peoples. All forms of oppres-  
sion and exploitation must be ended. We  
demand our freedom as women, but not  
at the expense of the freedom of other  
people. Being rich by making others  
poor, being free by enslaving others, is  
not worth fighting for. We demand that  
all people be liberated. Power to all the  
people or none.