: OWES

2 alles

; The first letter in this dialogue was read at a Sparky Daycare Center general meet-
ing in response to the decision of the women who have taken responsibility for Teri
(see proceeding article) to have her attend Sparky Daycare instead of Dum Dum, the cen-

ter she attended previously.
of women in
ter serving
combination
none of the
resolved at
on over it.

of the two.

This letter concerns what I consider a blatant rip-off of working
and lower class women and children; that is, allowing Teri to
attend Sparky.
My understanding is that Sparky exists to provide a service to
women and children who have no other options for childcare--i.e.
working class women.
Teri clearly has other options. She is still a member of Dum Dum,
a privileged position to be in. I just cannot see how anyone can
justify her being in Sparky and taking a place so badly needed
by working class people. Every woman who staffs Sparky, the women
taking responsibility for Teri, and even myself are in very pri-
vileged positions. Despite the fact that some of us are from
working class backgrounds we have politics that put us at an ad-
vantage in being able to provide physically for ourselves. Being
able to staff Sparky comes of privilege too--you have time. It
seems very clear to me that the people who support Teri's member-
ship in Sparky are using their privilege to provide for an already
privileged child and group of people who are taking care of her.

I have heard some arguments why Teri should be there--or can
be there. I want to say that I consider some partially valid
but any validity is overridden by the fact that there are so many
working class people who need daycare. One argument is that some
of the people will not see Teri except one day a week if she is
not in Sparky and this is detrimental to developing any kind of
relationship with her, etc. Valid but what about the space she's
taking--that seems much more important to me.

Another is the women in the group taking responsibility for
Teri want to spend the time they do childcare at Sparky, not work-
ing part of the time at Dum Dum to keep Teri there. I can't see
why they would have to spend any less time at Sparky when the

I am writing this because I want you to know what my reaction to
your letter was. I don't think it is wise to meet with you person-

ally as you suggested because I think that will only increase second

and third hand misunderstanding and misinformation. In spite of
disadvantages, responding to you by letter has the advantage of be-
ing public (I will post a copy at Sparky) and of inviting comment
and criticism.

Several people made the following points at last Sunday's
meeting. I am repeating the ones I made, share or would like to
add. The issue about Teri coming to Sparky has already been set-
tled, but the things in your letter that concern her and which you
want to be policy are what I want to talk about.

1. It is offensive to regard all of the people who staff
Sparky as privileged. If politics could change class the Chinese
Revolution would have been won with ideas....

2. What support the community provides for its members is
largely 'moral'. In this society, sharing of material goods comes
out of bounty. Lower and working class women do not become privi-
leged when some of this bounty happens their way. A "temporary"
privilege, first of all, doesn't change your class and secondly,
it's like a welfare benefit, with all kinds of strings attached.
The money your collective pledges is a good example of a temporary
privilege coming out of bounty with strings attached.

3. I pledged money and time to Sparky not because it was to
serve lower and working class women but because I had been remiss
in childcare responsibilities and I wanted to begin struggling with
that in spite of the chaos of the Sparky-Woman Center meeting. I
never supported the notion of service and found most of what was
said about lower-working class women at that meeting offensive.

4. I got tremendously pissed at your desire to serve lower
and working class women you don't yet know, when you refused to
hear what lower and working class women, who you do know, wanted.
Teri's group is as many lower-working class as middle class women.
It is insane to declare those women privileged because they are
working with middle class women.

5. Sparky will collapse unless the staff has a stake in its
operation. That stake is community children. It is not simply a
question of working at Dum Dum being inconvenient and uncomfortable.
Women who have been struggling with class and service re childcare

The dialogue concerns itself with whether or not children
the women’s community should be at Sparky, whether Sparky should be a cen-
ter for the women's community in Iowa City or lower and working class mothers or any
At that meeting it was decided that Teri should be at Sparky and
women's community children should be asked to leave but the issue is not

this point and the dialogue that follows presents the issue and debate going

hours at Dum Dum are not very demanding--especially when there are
seven women involved and a deal could easily be made with Dum Dum.
Working those extra hours is an inconvenience and, given the mem-
bership of Dum Dum, uncomfortable. It is the privilege of the
group not to have to be inconvenienced and uncomfortable--but
what of the "inconvenience" a working class woman is subjected to
because she has no childcare?

I've heard other arguments but in my mind I always reduce
those arguments down to the fact that there are other options for
Teri and she is taking the place of another child who has no other
place.

As I've written this I've reconsidered my position on Jane,
Gladys & Betsy's being in Sparky. I had thought of it as a
different situation than Teri's because of the position they were
put in by the change from feminist to a service daycare for work-
ing class women and children. However, there are now several
openings at Dum Dum and no waiting list (I don't know the situation
at other centers) and they could get in right away. They should
have been on the waiting list of some other center long ago. I
know it's true that there are only four working class children at
this point in Sparky and that Teri, Gladys, Jane & Betsy are
not taking places that should go to working class children. I
don't know the recruiting situation at Sparky, but I do know there
are a lot of working class people who need childcare and Sparky
should fill up real fast. I can only see those few children's
presence as holding up someone who needs childcare at Sparky so
I can't see putting it off until the need arises as a good thing
to do. Also, once it's upon you to make a decision I can see the
temptation as too great to let them remain.

I think Sparky should make it its policy not to allow in any
members who have other options for childcare.

I have come to understand how and why the community should meet its
own needs.

6. If I remember correctly, at about the same time as you were
digging your class origins with others, I was too. I had more
trouble (still have) with internalized classism and shuffling over
class than I did with blatant classism. The hardest thing for
me to do was to stop trying to learn about class from middle-class
women. They have no stake in the analysis you "mutually" come up
with. I am assuming from my own experience that trying to deal
with this issue alone (alone among middle-class women) has made
the going rough and slow for you. It is a mistake to regard
"temporary privileges" as having the same effect on women from
different classes. This was offensive to the lower and working
class women in Teri's group and it is offensive to me as a working
class staff member. My commitment of time and money are at a dif-
ferent cost than middle-class women because if Sparky doesn't work,
if the community doesn't work, I've got nothing. You are probably
discovering, for example, that the education you are receiving is
different from the education middle-class women are receiving.

You will not be able to do quite the same things with your degree
as a middle-class woman can do--and you will be pissed when people
suggest that you can. Again, I am saying this based on my own
experience. You may be able to hustle “supports” from middle-class
women all your life, and while it will probably mess up your class
consciousness, it won't change your class. It should be obvious
to you that I am making the points under #6 as much for myself as
for you, but I'm taking the time to write this to you because I
believe that the criticisms in your letter come from a distorted
class consciousness.

Can I count on you to share the contents of this letter with
your collective because I think this response concerns Mary's
criticism too. I would only add for her that Teri forced us to
deal again with an admittance policy that was never firm and al-
ways contained more rhetoric and bullshit than sense.

I welcome a response if you would like to make one, either
by letter or in a group. But as I said at the beginning I will
not meet with you alone both because of the climate surrounding
this question and because the political issues always get watered
down when two people "discuss" them.

* Jane, Gladys and Betsy are children of women considered part of

the women's community here.
Feb, 1943

*The women's ctr.-Sparky meeting was an early meeting of people
interested in working at Sparky at which women who hadn't done

much childcare were confronted about it.