similiar problems, however, we as women see money as something of  
prime importance because a great deal of our oppression centers  
around economics. The male who wrote the COPS Commune article  
saw sex of major importance. We too were dealing with sex - but  
homosexuality not heterosexuality in our collective and for many  
of us it was a very heavy thing. However, with time almost all  
of us worked through lesbianism, and we've gone on to different  
problems concerning being gay. It seems to me that while times  
were good we earnestly tried to deal with many problems, but the  
two problems that we never could get into proper perspective or  
deal with realistically were money and then eventually class  
differences as they became more apparent and important. So we've  
asked why is it that we can't see feminism in a class perspective  
or class in a feminist perspective? Even in the past issues of  
AIAW it is obvious that issues dealing heavily with feminism  
deal little with class and vice versa. So not knowing exactly  
what all this has to do with a female sub-culture, I'll try to  
describe a little of the feel of what I think has grown here in  
Iowa City, much of which our living collective was the center of.  

I remember last summer as the time that many of our old  
friends dropped by the house a lot. Occasionally we'd all of a  
sudden start to have a spur of the moment dance. We'd be playing  
records and then people would get up and start dancing and pretty  
soon almost all of us would find ourselves dancing. For me the  
summer is most remembered for the dances, working through my  
feelings (really inhibitions) about touching other women, taking  
showers together, and dealing with lesbianism a whole lot in the  
house.  
It's real hard to remember back to those days and for some reason  
it's hard to think of me ever being any other way than I am right  
now. But I know that I was very different. I remember the summer  
as being fun. We had few money problems at that time, and not  
having to hassle with that gave us a lot of time to work through  
many things, and to develop a trust and love for each other that  
would have come much more difficultly. Also, that summer the gay  
cell really got going. In the gay cell women were able to talk  
with each other about things they had never dared talk to anyone  
else about before. Problems were discussed and everyone showed  
concern and interest.  

With fall came going back to school for me. The fall was mark-  
ed by me relating a lot to the gay cell, really loving the women  
there, getting through placing heterosexual roles on gay women,  

becoming very strongly gay identified, discussing woman-identified  
woman a lot, having my mind blown by it, working through the  
relationship I was having with a woman that caused me much trauma,  
and going to conferences and meeting gay women. At the same time  
we had moved to a much bigger house, and lots of new women were  
coming over, gay parties were being held more frequently, people  
from all over were crashing at our house, and the type of music  
we played was becoming almost always female singers. At that  
time we and other people viewed our house as a place where women  
could get together, where women could come for help if they  
needed it, as a place to crash if a woman needed it and as a place  
to come to rap. In general it was viewed as a women's center.  
However, those of us who lived in the house found that we could  
never live in such a place and expect to have our own personal  
needs met. Yet we held on to the idealism of trying to be every-  
thing a women's center would be and trying to meet our own needs  
too. Somehow if we couldn't do that then we had failed all those  
women that needed us.  

With time we became more comfortable with our decision to try  
to meet our own needs first. However, frequently there was  
disagreement about this, and other people still saw us in the  
idealistic way of being able to meet everyone else's needs  

(usually their own). Slowly we have become more comfortable, e.g.  
not as guilty, about our decision to try to meet our needs. With  
this I think that other people have come more and more to accept  
the definition that we had chosen for ourselves. So that now  
even though the problem is by no means entirely worked out, people  
are once again more comfortable about our collective and what we  
are. However, during this whole time we were having the financial  
problems and problems of class differences mentioned in the other  
articles two issues earlier. These problems being centered around  
our feminism and woman identification did a great deal to pretty  
much split our house in two, so that now each group relates to  
the group of women in town that we want to. This division is too  
complex to discuss thoroughly but it has to go with such issues as  
separatism, gayness and feminism vs humanism.  

Out of our living collective I see many other things coming  
besides those things that I have already mentioned. There are the  
gay parties that most of us in the house have gone to and where  
we've met many new women and become better friends with other gay  
women. There's the constant playing of music sung by female  

singers, and being excited every time we discover another record by  
a woman. There's the free space that all of us were given to be  
something different, i.e. less in the roles put on us by society,  
and become more what's really inside us. For example, I dis-  
covered that not only could I dance, but I love it, and I don't  
feel uptight about it in front of women. We're doing more things  
together as women and with other women, such as the women who  
are on the softball team. We've learned that we are not all ex-  
ceptions and that you can usually assume that to a degree other  
women have been fucked over just like you have. This realization  
and living with each other has given us confidence to reach out  
to other women that we don't even know and offer them help. For  
example, on one of our many trips to the local free medical clinic  
we met a young woman getting birth control pills, talked with her,  
and gave her a ride home. Also, we are much stronger now and  
stick up for each other, be it when facing a prick medical student  
or some jocks making sexist remarks at a wedding.  

As a result of living in a female sub-culture for a year now,  
I find that there are many assumptions that I make that other  
women cannot relate to, and I find it very hard to relate to many  
of their problems that they see as important, i.e. their husbands.  
Obviously, there is a schizophrenia that goes with living in  
a sub-culture.  

Our living collective has been a haven where we've been able  
to talk with each other about feminist issues. We've been able  
to talk with each other about our feelings and we've done it as  
one woman to another. So in a way we've developed our own style  
of talking, that is, openly and honestly without the bull  
shitting around that male left politics so often reflects. Be-  
cause I think we've developed even a different way of talking,  

I'm sure this also separates us from other people. But also  
talking alike and dealing with the same hassles has helped unify  
those of us who work together and live together. The living  
collective has now dissolved, and four of us will continue to live  
collectively. The female sub-culture which has developed and grown  
here in Iowa City around the living collective during the past year  
will continue to grow mainly among those of us who are women-  
identified women.  

Last, this article was written from the perspective of me, living  
in the living collective. It says little about what effect others  
such as the gay community had on the collective. I by no means  
want to imply that the living collective was the center of things  
happening here. In fact I feel the gay community has been a  
very important part of our collective and too often we've failed to  
see ourselves in terms of that community.  

FEMALE CULTURE/LESBIAN NATION FEMALE CULTURE/LESBIAN NATION FEMALE CULTURE/LESBIAN NATION FEMALE CULTURE/LES