love to our  
leviathan sisters  

LEVIATHAN PUBLICATIONS, INC  
968 Valencia  
San Francisco, Ca. 94110  

Sisters and Brothers,  

Leviathan has not published an issue since September, (Vol. II, #14); we are  
writing to tell you of our plans and sending along the enclosed broadside as a fare-  
well "issue." We hope you will find it useful and will want to distribute it--we  
felt it important to provide information about the Indochina war that you might use  
in many ways.  

Over the last several months Leviathan, like many other groups and organizations,  
has undergone much internal struggle and change. What began as discussion of the  
magazine's format and conception led to questions of working relationships among the  
staff, in particular relationships between men and women who put out the magazine.  
As a result of that process our staff is now made up entirely (our decision) of  
women and among us are only two who had been with the magazine before September.  

We understand that analysis and practice cannot be separated and therefore we  
envision a new magazine expressing analysis within the context of practice. Speci-  
fically, this means writing more about the movement in this country: what we are  
doing, what problems we have and the ways we are trying to deal with them. Hopefully,  
groups/collectives around the country would write about their work, making the maga-  
zine an outgrowth of people's work and thoughts. It also means that we do not see  
ourselves as journalists but as part of the women's movement putting together a maga-  
zine and at the same time being involved in other activities.  

In the next few months we will be working on getting together a collective, (not  
collection), of women who will be able to put out issues on a regular basis. We're  
excited about starting all over again on what we think is a new and better basis,  
and hope that people will give us suggestions and information which could help us.  

In the Spring, look for a new name and some new thoughts,  

til then,  
Leviathan sisters  

I feel like my mind is mostly floating  
& all the important things are  
stacked up over a mythical  
foundation that I have  

not found, that I did  

not make on purpose  

don't know what it looks like  
but I probably saw it on a  
television or front page  

don't know its shape  

but I know what it feels like  
a lump in my throat  

partial paralysis.  

and I'm floating again  

all my floating-arounds:  
dreams and politics  
wounds and images  
drives and fetishes  
poems and diatribes  
music and syllables  
feminine endings  

floating isn't freedom  

peg’,  

Our apology to Su Negrin and Times  
Change Press for using the above graphics  
without giving credit. They were taken  
from A Graphic Notebook on Feminism by  
Su Negrin, published by Times Change Press,  
1023 Sixth Ave., New York, N.Y. 10018.  

It costs $1.25.  

On a blackboard in the bathroom of a  
gay women's bar in Berkeley is written,  
"Why isn't holding and touching as im-  
portant as coming?" Yet it isn't. We  
were raised in a society with fucked up  
sexual standards and none of us seem able  
to handle sex in any other terms. We  
radical lesbians who want to make a revo-  
lution for all women continue to fuck  
each other over because our heads are so  
full of shit about sex.  

Sex is exclusive; there's no getting  
around it unless we can handle sexually  
relating to others in groups of threes,  
fours or more. How many of us haven't  
experienced being in a room where the  
sexual vibrations between two people in-  
crease and we want to look for someplace  
to run because the "couple" emanates  
"leave us alone"? What about trying to  

visit a friend and never so much as catch-  

ing a glimpse of her because she's clo-  
seted up with her lover in an exclusive  
one-to-one sexual relationship?  

We set up hierarchies of importance,  
of priorities. K. is more important to  
me than P. or N. because she's my lover.  
We tend to spend our time with those in  
priority, high on the list of sexual  
choice. Sex is more important almost  
anytime than talking to another sister,  
walking in the country, or just holding  
another sister. Why isn't holding and  
touching just as important as coming?  

I don't know.  

I'm not knocking sex. Sexual intimacy  
with a woman is a beautiful thing. But  
we who would have a total revolution  
should try to develop new ways, unexplo-  
itive to other women, of relating sexually  
to our sisters. Our tight one-to-one re-  
lationships should be broken down. Sex-  
ual jealousy needs to be struggled with  
constantly. We should work on ways of  
relating sexually with more than just one  
person at a time. We need to re-examine  
our priorities just as this fucked up  

society does.  
Ain't A