leilah Khaled's  
Story  

Soon after this, things became serious  
as we began our descent to Lydda. Of  
course, we had no intention of landing  
there—that possibility was the one thing  
that worried us. But we wanted to fly over  
our enemy's city just to show him we could  
do it.  

"Descend to one-two-zero," I told the  
pilot and the co-pilot chipped in, "You  
mean twelve thousand feet?" “You know what  
I mean." So we began the long descent and  
out of the haze the coast of Palestine  
gradually grew clearer. "What shall we do  
when we get to 12,000?" the pilot asked.  
"Let's have a round twice," I replied and  
made a swinging gesture with my left hand  
and the pilot's eyes, as always, followed  
the grenade; "we want to have a picnic  
over our land," I said.  

Needless to say, my exchanges with  
Lydda airport were not friendly. The con-  
troller was very excited and shouted at me  
angrily the whole time. Having switched to  
Lydda wavelength, I first read a message  
in Arabic for our people in Occupied Pale-  
stine. I tried to speak to the airport  
tower in Arabic but they wouldn't reply.  
"TWA 840?" they kept calling, so I re-  
sponded, "Shut up: This is Popular Front  
Free Arab Palestine. We will not respond  
unless you use this call sign. We are  
coming down. We are landing. Give us  
space."  

I said this just to frighten them, be-  
cause I don't think the Israelis wanted  
us to land any more than we wanted to land  
there. My words seemed to have had the de-  
sired effect because Lydda tower shouted  
back, "Don't come down, don't come down,  
or else we'll send Mirages to shoot you  
down."  

And I told them: "Here is Free Arab  
Palestine. What can you do about it? I  
don't care for my life. This is our land.  
We want to die over our land. But you will  
be responsible for the lives of the crew  
and passengers." (While all this was going  
on at about 20,000 feet, my friend held  
the intercom microphone near my mouth so  
that the passengers could hear the ex-  
change, which couldn't have been very com-  
forting for them.)  

There were more threats of Mirages from  
the ground and when I glanced ahead there  
they were, two of them, just in front of  
us. We were still descending, but the cap-  
tain said to me, "We can't descend any  
more. It's too dangerous with these Mi-  
rages in front." This, evidently, was how  
the Israelis were trying to prevent us  
from landing. The co-pilot then asked to  
speak to Lydda. He explained to them:  

"We have to follow her orders and de-  
scend or else the aircraft will be blown  
up. Clear the air. And, don't keep calling  
TWA 840. This is Popular Front." Perhaps  
because of his words, the Mirages moved  
out a little, though they still stayed  
with us and we descended to 12,000. We  
then did three big turns over Lydda and  
Tel Aviv. We were seven minutes in all  
over Tel Aviv: enough to make our point.  
My final message to Lydda, just to keep  
them worrying, was "Bye bye for now, but  
we are coming back!"  

17.12 hours. Compass bearing 350°  

I gave the pilot a compass reading for  
a course due north and he suggested that  
we climb because we were using up too much  
fuel at 12,000 feet. I told him to go up  
to 25,000.  

In a very few minutes Haifa was before  
us—the hump of Mount Carmel, the harbour  
below it and over to the right the oil  
tanks and the cement factory with its long  
plume of white smoke. "This is my city,"  

I told the crew. "Take a good look at it.  
This is where I was born."  

From maps I had a rough idea of the  
area in which our house stood and I think  
I identified this area but the city slip-  
ped away beneath us much too quickly. I  
felt like asking the pilot to make a turn  
over my home town so that I could have a  
better look at it but we were really run-  
ning low on fuel and every minute counted  
now.  

Just that fleeting glimpse, and a few  
dim childhood memories are all that link  
me directly, personally, with my home in  
Palestine. I was born in April 1944, so I  
was just under four when my mother, with  
us eight children, left Haifa some time  

in March 1948. I remember a staircase: one  
day there was a man with blood all over  
his face lying under the stairs. My mother  
says he died there, one of the victims of  
the battle for Haifa between the Arabs and  
the Zionists that was going on all around  
our house.  

My father was away from home, with the  
Arab fighters, but when he came home, a  
week before we left, and found that my mo-  
ther had packed up things to leave he or-  
dered her to unpack everything because we  
were not going to leave, then or ever.  

But the street fighting increased, most  
of the other women and children left, the  
Zionists were advancing and they were or-  
dering us to leave over their loudspeakers.  
Many, many times in the following years we  
asked our mother why she had left and she  
would tell us that she was forced to.  

Certainly there was a lot of fighting  
in the nearby streets and she was alone  
with eight children: the first taxi we  
sent for was hit and set on fire and I re-  
member there was shooting very close to us  
as we got into the second taxi. We left in  
a confused hurry with little more than  
what we stood up in.  

At the last minute, counting her brood  
of children in the car, my mother found  
that one was missing, myself. I was hiding  
under the stairs. I remember not wanting  
to leave home but my mother teased me by  
saying that what I didn't want to leave  
was a box of sugared dates my father had  
brought us. My mother left with a big  
bunch of keys because she had carefully  
locked up everything in the house.  

That was how my family became "refu-  
gees." But no: Palestinian is really a  
"refugee." We are displaced persons or e-  
victees. For if we were refugees and had  
found refuge, we would not want to go back  
to what we had left. Because we didn't  
leave of our own free will, but were  
pushed out according to a deliberate Zion-  
ist plan, we do want to go back, but haven't  
been allowed to. This determination to re-  
turn makes us Palestinians unique among  
the "refugees" of the world.  

As the plane crossed the frontier be-  
tween Israel and Lebanon, the co-pilot,  
looking rather worried, asked, "Are we  
going to Beirut?" "That is none of your  
business," I told him. "We don't have much  
fuel left, you know," he replied. "I know  
that, and I also know how to swim, should  
anything happen."  

I, too, was worried about our fuel si-  
tuation but I also was tremendously exci-  
ted as we flew over the beautiful blue bay  
that lies beyond Ras Nakura. On the point  
opposite the Ras is Tyre which is where we  
have lived since leaving Palestine. Our  
apartment is almost on the beach and I  
thought I could just about pick it out.  
Little did my mother know that one of her  

daughters was flying high above her head,  

I visited her on my last evening in Leban-  
on and even told her I would be home for  
dinner. I knew she would be anxious but I  
had to keep things secret. I had also left  
the usual farewell letter in case some-  
thing happened.  

I could see the waves breaking on the  
beach where I had learned to swim. This is  
how we passed our time. Tyre had no cin-  
emas then and we had no money to go to  
them even if there had been any. Away to  
the right, at the head of this splendid  
bay is what looks like a town but is really  
a camp for Palestinian refugees, 9,000 in  
all. For twenty years such camps have been  
the new homeland of our people.  

When we arrived at Tyre we were a fam-  
ily of destitutes and destitutes we re-  
mained for ten years. In Haifa my father  
was not a rich man but we were reasonably  
comfortable: he was a textile merchant  
and he also owned a small café and rented  
out a couple of shops. He lost all this,  
of course; but what was really bad was that  
like many others, he got nothing of the mo-  
ney he had in the bank, even though it was  
a British bank.  

There was so much confusion when the  
Zionists captured Palestine that for sev-  
eral months we had no word of my father and  
we gave him up for dead: he ended up in  
Egypt. This was not an unusual occurrence;  
I know of many families who were scattered  
like this into the neighboring Arab coun-  
tries.  

My father was a sick man when we saw  
him again, with blood pressure and a bad  
heart. But what he was really suffering  
from was the loss of his home and his  
work. Again, this was not unusual, I know  
of several other men of my father's age  
whose health was broken because their  
careers were broken. Perhaps he should  
have struggled on. Many Palestinians have  
made a success of their new lives and when  
we do so that too is held against us: "re-  
fugees" just can't win.  

My father was bedridden for the last  
five years of his life: he died in 1966.  
Fortunately my mother is originally from  
Tyre so for the first year we lived with  
one of her uncles. Then we moved into a  
two-roomed house in which we lived for the  
next 16 years, and by that time there were  
14 in the family.  

Crowded wasn't the word for it. But  
still, we were luckier than the others liv-  
ing in tents. During the winter storms my  
friends wouldn't come to school because  
their tents had been blown down. The small  
brother of one of my friends was washed  
away by a flood which tore through the  
camp.  

The only regular cash coming in was a  
monthly payment to us of 100 Lebanese  
pounds ($31.20 dollars) by my mother's  
uncle which doesn't go far with 14 people.  

Also we had to register as refugees  
with the UN. We received rations from the  
UN Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA). But  
UNRWA itself says that it can't afford  
anything more than a bare subsistence diet  
of 1,500 calories a day.  

But hunger one can learn to bear; what  
was unbearable was the humiliation of hav-  
ing to stand in line with our cans and  
sacks to collect our rations as “bakhshish.”  
We had become beggars, just beggars, with  
our begging bowls in our hands, except  
that the alms came from UN and not from in-  
dividuals. In the photos UNRWA has of  
ration distribution you will see few ad-  
ults in the queues. They can't bear to go,  
so they send the children, as was the case  
with us. When my sisters began working as  
school teachers in 1957, UNRWA cut our ra-  
tions, which was a blow, but we felt hap-  
pier for being less dependent.  

The best thing UNRWA has done for the  
Palestinians is to provide them with ed-  
ucation. I liked school very much, I  
think we all did, because it was the only  
place where we could show that we were  
still human beings and not just a number  
on a ration roll. I first went to an  
Anglican school in Tyre and then to an  
American missionary school in the neigh-  
boring town of Sidon on an UNRWA scholar-  
ship.  

I won another scholarship to the Amer-  
ican University of Beirut where I planned  
to become a pharmacist, which is a good  
progression for a girl in this part of the  
world. The scholarship was not sufficient  
to cover all the costs of living in Beirut  
and my family couldn't help. So I could  
only stay a year at the University, and  
having to leave was the biggest disap-  
pointment I've faced so far.  

I took a job as a teacher of English in  
Kuwait and did this for six years. I don't  
particularly like teaching but I had to  
start earning in order to help the family.  
One of my brothers got his degree in en-  
gineering and is working in Abu Dhabi in  
the Arabian Gulf, and another brother, who  
graduated in business administration, is  
working in a bank, also in Abu Dhabi.  

With all our contributions the family is  
comfortable once again. We can now afford  
to send one of my younger sisters to the  
University but, how ironical this is—she  
is more interested in becoming a fedai (a  
Palestinian resistance fighter). One of  
my brothers and I are full-time fedayeen.  

Many of our Lebanese friends ask my  
mother, "Do you really want to go back to  
Haifa after all these years?" And my  
mother answers, "Yes, I'd go tomorrow. It's  
true we have had a hard time and now things  
have become easy: we have a pleasant a-  
partment, enough to eat, funds for the  
children's education and extras like TV.  

What is more, I'm a Lebanese from Tyre. So  
I'm not a stranger, but I'm at home.  

Lebanon is my country but it is not my  
place, my place is Haifa."  
And my friends ask me whether I want to  
return to a country I barely knew since I  
left Palestine as a small child. And my  
answer is, "Yes," because I too have learn-  
ed that while I am never a stranger in  
any Arab country, I can never feel at home.  

Continued next issue—LNS