lest we begin to think ©

As we grow in size--as our movement be-
comes older--our vision of what we want
expands and the projects we commit our-
selves to increase. There is so much we
must do that we find ourselves looking for
efficient and reliable ways to get it all
done.

It is not surprising that the things we
choose as efficient ways of working too
often reflect the bureaucratic individual
business-like nonsense we have been brought
up in or the male-dominated counter left
some of us are refugees from. To learn
to work collectively we may have to sac-
rifice much efficiency and that is a dif-
ficult thing to sacrifice when we frantic-
ally want to struggle to win. Nonetheless
we must struggle in ways that enrich
and spur growth in our movement, not ways
that bureaucratize and stagnate us. We
should be concerned about appearing as a
group against the system, not a group that
looks like part of it. We cannot afford
to not question such actions as incorpor-
ating, applying for mailing permits that
require a subscription list be supplied to
the government, or hiring full-time staff
people.

For example, hiring full-time staff
puts certain women in a position to know
more about what's going on in the group
than other women--no matter how hard the
staff tries to avoid this. The staff can
afford to be at the office all the time
because they are paid while the other
women who may be equally committed have to
work full-time at jobs they hate or who
have children to take care of. Staff

people are generally hired at least par-
tially for their ability to run an office
or make public contacts--an ability many
women don't have because they have not

had the privilege to develop that ability.
The staff may be willing to teach others,
but those others will not be paid to learn

and can often not afford the time if they
have to work to earn.

I would imagine most staff hired for
Women's Liberation offices would be mid-
dle or upper class. I might be wrong.
They might be the few working-class women
in the organization, but that wouldn't be

any better because it would perpetuate
their position of shit-worker. If there

is typing to be done everyone should do it.

So a lot of middle-class, college-educated
women in Women's Liberation, who have
missed the joy of high school “office
skill" better learn to type.

In Iowa City we have tried to work out
collectively this getting-the-work-done
problem. We certainly don't claim com-
plete success, but the sacrifices in ef-
ficiency seem justifiable in terms of what
we have gained in collective consciousness
and responsibility. We have tried to
rotate office work monthly to a group con-
sisting of one person from each small col-
lective. Often the work just hasn't got-
ten done, but we maintain that if the
work to be done is decided on collectively
(which it should be), it should be done
collectively.

Some of us (8) also live together and
pool our money which allows some to not

Don't demonstrate

Try Him for contempt of our lives

Make new definitions,

Get together in small conspiracies, cells,

women you can trust

Do it now

work (system jobs) and work on Women's
Liberation projects. Some of us work in
the day care centers half-time. Something
not possible for all of those who do with-
out some kind of pooling of resources.
The day care centers offer free time to
those women at home with young children.

Women who are married and/or who work
cannot take advantage of the privilege of

living collectively with other Women's
Liberation women and mixed communes can
rarely be expected to give financial or
time priority to Women's Liberation work.
But there are some possibilities that
could be tried. Jobs can be split into
shifts done collectively so several women
with little time can participate. Pooling
resources so women who badly need the mon-
ey they get from employers they hate can
work for a period of time on Women's
Liberation activities instead.

THESE ARE NOT SOLUTIONS TO THE PROBLEM-
REVOLUTION IS. But we must avoid bringing
about a revolution like corporate business
men, (which could probably not be done any-
way).

We so often forget to check our thoughts
for their nonsense content. Some of us de-
cided we should try to fund someone to go
to Cuba. Wanting to be fair, we thought
we would draw from the names of all those
who want to go. But that is only fair to
those women who can afford the time. It
does not answer the problem of some married
women, or women with children or women with
jobs they need (what employer would give
you time off to go to Cuba).

We cannot think our way to revolutionary
victory.

Anonymous
poem

The Man is swarming all over the city

Use your invisibility - in kitchens, bedrooms, offices, streets

Abstractions are His game
Pain is real

Take everything

No more slow deaths or waiting til after...

Be creative in your anger
Show Him what it means to make chaos the rule

new conjunctions, new worlds

Vol. | No. 6

Recognize the face of sexist hate

No more halves of nothing

Purge Him from your head
Be ready for His blow
Beware his nonsense about pigs

Watch out for The Man in need of underground auxiliaries

Guard against panics that turn the key in the wedlock

age Pes Carn ee
‘ Geis

WOMEN ARE THE PEOPLE ~ -

Aint 1

iE

|

SES SF Fre e