Counseling...

When I heard that a group of women was  
interested in starting a women's counseling  
group to work out of the women's  
center, I was very skeptical. The word  
"counseling" freaked me out. It conjured  
up all those thoughts in my head about  
how so many women had been messed over by  
counselors and therapists. But at the  
same time I thought that it might be worth  
having some better alternative for women  
who wanted to talk out their hassles with  
someone besides their friends. More im-  
portant, it's a good situation to begin  
helping women see that their problems are  
not personal, but a result of the way this  
society is set up and the way people are  
socialized to function in it.

I attended the second organizational  
meeting of the counseling group because I  
wanted to see how the group was coming to-  
gether, how they were going to approach  
the work of "counseling" women and mainly  
because there were no other gay women in  
the group and I wanted us to be represen-  
ted.

The women who attended the meeting were  
a combination of political women who've  
been involved in the women's center, wo-  
men generally interested in counseling,  
and several professional counselors (or  
students in the university counseling pro-  
gram.) A lot of the discussion revolved  
around how women could be trained to be  
competent counselors of other women. That  
whole idea seems to perpetuate the concept  
that professionals have all the correct  
information and techniques. I have such  

a basic mistrust of male-dominated, cap-  
italist professions (especially psychol-  
ogy, psychiatry) that I think it may be  
justifiable for women to get together and  
start from scratch in learning how to deal  
with our problems. We need to have confi-  
dence in our own perceptions of problems.  
We should be able to help and understand  
women who have hassles -- learning from  
our own experience with drugs, being gay,  
economic problems, marriage, divorce,  
kids, loneliness and any other situation  
we'll come up against in helping one  
another. I believe it is important to  
start to work in groups to help solve  
these problems in order to break down the  
counselor-counsellee relationship which  
has so much power vested in one person.

I feel very strongly that gay women should  
deal with problems of gay women, drug  
problems should be handled by freaks and  
street people, etc. As a gay woman, I  

know I'd have very little to give to a  
woman who was having problems in her mar-  
riage. That doesn't mean that we can't  
have any understanding of each other's  
hassles; we should struggle to understand  

each other's problems. We should be es-  
pecially careful not to fuck over women  
whose situations and lives we can't or  
don't understand -- such as white women  
counseling third world women, straight  
women with gay women, middle class women  
counseling working class and poor women.  
Also, it's imperative that we look at  
all problems people have through a polit-  
ical perspective. There are certain bad  
problems people have that we can do very  
little about besides give them as much  
emotional and financial support as possi-  
ble and continue to build a revolution.

Learning to listen to anger inside yourself, to show that  
anger, is a liberating experience. It is legitimate, self-affirm-  
ing emotion. We've learned as women to feel our anger against  
males and their all-pervasive system which we have had to suffer  
under and now are revolting against. We have realized that we  
have been socialized into a role of tolerance and understanding  
with no back-talk -- a socialization that the oppressor must per-  
petuate because it is the necessary condition to allow him to  
exercise his privileges at our expense.

But anger that women feel for other women -- just as legiti-  
mate, because some women have either learned or simply been born  
into positions which oppress other women -- is harder to come to  
grips with. We know that the middle, privileged class exploits  
the working and lower, oppressed classes. We know white women  
oppress third world women. We know straight women oppress les-  
bians. But the natural anger at the antagonism from those oppres-  
sing women is often looked on with horror. Aren't we all women  
with the same needs, the same goals, the same problems? Can't we  
work together in harmony?

No. It's a lie to say that just because we are all women we  
share the same needs, goals and problems. There are enormous  
differences among us, and we must struggle over those differences.  
And the only way to do that is to listen to the anger we, perhaps  
unwittingly but very definitely, provoke in other women.

I think learning to co-opt yourself by moderating your anger  
is basically a middle class lesson. Growing up in a middle class  
family I was always taught that I must above all be considerate,  
to compromise, to speak calmly and rationally under any strain  
of hurt or outrage. Angry outbursts were labeled a "breakdown  
of communication" -- they created rifts that were unbridgeable,  
and it was my fault.  
Recently I have seen all of these dynamics of anger and nega-  
tive response to anger coming into play during meetings concerning  
the newly opened Women's Center here in Iowa City. A series of  
workshops were planned with various groups of women working on  
workshops in Daycare, Counseling and Consciousness Raising,  
Economic Class and the Women's Movement, Abortion and Birth Con-  
trol, Lesbianism, HEW agitation for equal rights and pay for  
women employees of the University, and Women's Skills and Studies.  
All of these interest groups met jointly to coordinate the work-  
shops and explain what they had planned for their group's work-  
shop. We had never met together before and many of us hadn't met  

each other. We were at a lot of different places in our heads.  
So as a group we were pretty diverse (although no third world  
women were involved, an oftentimes recurring condition of Women's  
Liberation's lack of relevance to third world women).

What happened was really classic in terms of group dynamics  
and the workings of anger vs. moderation. Probably any one of  
several of the groups could have caused it, but the Abortion and  
Birth Control group spoke first and that sparked a really essen-  
tial conflict. They had arranged for a Family Planning person  
to speak at their workshop about birth control. To many women  
in the large group who were working or lower class, or else had  
some knowledge of the way Family Planning has fucked over poor  
women, the idea was plainly classist and insensitive to poor  
women -- definitely nothing they would care to relate to, and  
therefore exclusive to the needs of middle class women. This  
perspective was pointed out by a woman who had worked in Welfare,  
it seemingly had no effect, and soon several working class women  
were angry and shouting because of the offensiveness of the ori-  
ginal idea and the apparent inflexibility of the group of middle  
class women who had planned the workshop. The distaste of most  
of the women there for this angry outburst was evident; someone  
placatingly said, "There's no need to get angry about it." And  
two women retorted, "What do you mean she has no need to get  
angry?"

Anger is a form of communication. We must learn to listen  
to women's anger, accept it as a real, valid message that we must  
reexamine the assumptions and results of what we have said or  
done. We must learn that anger is a result, not a cause. And we  
must learn to abandon the paths of action we have taken which are  
shown, by the angry responses of women directly affected by those  
actions, to be classist, racist, or homosexist.

And afterward! Those of us who knew the women who had gotten  
angry were made again and again to justify that anger. It broke  
down communication -- it created a rift -- it put people off.

The anger did that? Oh no. The responsibility lies on the  
women who were class antagonistic. They created the rift, they  
put people off because of their insensitivity to the expressed  
needs of poor women in that situation.