IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Rules:
1. Fix obvious OCR errors (like '0' instead of 'O', '1' instead of 'l')
2. Preserve the original line breaks and text blocks.
3. Preserve the original meaning and historical context.
4. Do not add any additional text.
5. Do not delete any text.
6. Process EVERY line - do not skip any content.

Corrected text:

serving our

ae - Ba

Needing and/or wanting something you
know you'll never be able to buy is a fu-
tile, rock-in-your-stomach feeling. It
used to be a hopeless feeling I had, caus-
ing me to feel inadequate because I would
never be able to have some of the extrava-
gances capitalism dangles in front of you
for incentive. Incentive isn't enough
though, they forget to tell you. You need
to be white, middle-class, and have money
already in order to become a successful
capitalist, able to afford more than bare
necessities. If you're not white, not
middle class, not a capitalist at heart,
you might be a five-finger discount artist.

Such discounts can be attempted at most
any capitalist business place: a gas sta-
tion, an office, a doctor's waiting room
or hospital, a grocery store, a clothing
store, a discount store, a hardware store,
a tool shop, a garage, a warehouse, people
who can afford it, a library, a music store,
a hobby shop, department store, a repair
shop, a restaurant. Detection, of course,
is what's to be avoided. Piggish capita-
lists have devices, gimmicks and lackeys
to do this and prevent or capture people
who do not greedily join the competitive
rat race chasing the dangling, elusive
incentives, but instead find ripping-off
the capitalists as satisfying an accomp-
lishment.

Upon entering a never-before-checked-
out establishment business a quick glance
across the tops of shelves, scanning walls
and ceiling, will reveal any reflecting
or two-way mirrors, cameras, or hidden
employee stations. Recently these detec-
tion devices have been better disguised.
The reason, a store owner told me, is
deterrent devices are ineffective, and ser-
ious detection is now necessary. Just be-
cause there aren't any mirrors, or sus-
picious looking round peep holes in walls,
don't relax. Plain-clothes detectives are
an expense some stores put up with because
they pay for themselves by the many unsus-
pecting shoplifters they expose. The hid-
den employee station and plainclothes
detectives (male and female) serve as in-
formers and witnesses later. If there are
cameras or mirrors, your own discretion
and moxie will tell you what you can do.
The trouble with two-way mirrors is, of
course, 1) you may not be sure it's a two
way mirror (but any flat mirror high up on
the wall in a remodeled building probably
is), and 2) you don't know when someone's
watching. Also, detectives go to extreme
casual disguises to catch people in huge
stores.

If your appraisal of the situation
is correct, if you're quick and alert,
and together--you should be successful.
Purse, coat or pants pocket, coat sleeve
or just under your coat, stuck inside
pants or boots, or wearing something out
of the building (preferable under something
you wore in) are usual methods. It's im-
portant to be quick, to not look around
obviously so you look suspicious, and not
to hold yourself in a rigid position once
something's under your arm or in your
pants. Some women like to buy something
to escape suspicion after spending a while
in a store, other times it's advisable to
get out fast.

It isn't true that once you've made it
to the checkout line, or paid for some-
thing, you're safe. If someone sees you
slipping something off a shelf and into
your purse or pocket they may not confront
you about it right away, even if it's an
employee. Capitalists dig authority, and
think everyone is threatened by it. Their
reasoning is it's more threatening to the
shoplifter (they're psychologists, too) if
someone with authority (a gun-a title) is
the confronter. Sometimes a uniformed
guard with a gun, if he's an off-duty pig,
works right in a store. These lackeys
“are on duty 24 hours a day, technically,”
said the PD, and they have the same author

ity to stop, search and arrest at all
times, with or without uniforms!

The Code of Iowa (709.22) permits any
merchant or employee to detain a larceny
suspect. That well-publicized information
is meant to be threatening. What they con-
veniently don't inform people of is the
right to refuse to be searched. Also in
the Code of Iowa (709.23) it's stated that,
"unless in the presence of a peace officer,
the one to be searched must give permis-
sion." So don't be intimidated by, "will
you give me what you have under your coat
or do you want one of the girls to search
you?" They can't do it unless 1) you
give your permission or 2) there's a pig

there. Male pigs, by the way, can search
both sexes. If you know you can get away -- do it.

Some employees and managers will be as-
tounded that you're not crying and apolo-
gizing and turning yourself over to them.
They'll be too shocked that you're trying
to get away to do anything about it. It
depends. If you run, you can be shot!
That's right--"fleeing felon" (someone
who's stolen over $20.00 worth of merchan-
dise) is the term that applies, and plenty
of people have been shot for misdemeanors--
but that isn't legal--but often too late

to ask. Is it any consolation that your
case would be thrown out of court? If you
escape (there's a chase) with over $20.00
of stuff, dump it immediately! A felony-
size rip-off usually provokes store owners
enough to request search warrants. They
might come and look at your place if you're
recognized.

One chance of getting around a direct
accusation naming a specific item is play-
ing really cool, denying you have it in
your possession, and directing attention
elsewhere. Like saying you dropped that
item in another aisle, or you returned it
to the shelf, diverts attention and gives
you a chance not to be further detained.
That is the purpose of this tactic--to
get away. If you don't get away, you've
sort of implicated yourself.

Feb. 11, (472

If there's no way out of getting charged
and you are detained until a pig comes,
keep cool. The consequences are humiliat-
ing on several levels, that's about all.
After a quiet ride to the police depart-
ment, the arresting officer officially
writes up the charges and books you. Small
talk isn't necessary, unless you can get
valuable information from a rookie cop.

For petty larceny (under $20.00) in Iowa,
unless you have $20.00 for a first offense
fine and $5.00 court costs, you are put

in jail until your arraignment. You need
cash -- a friend or bondsman can bring it
to you. Grand larceny (over $20.00) in
Iowa has a sentence of not more than five
years in a state prison or over 1 year in
the county jail, and/or a $1000 maximum
fine.

If you wait for a pig to come to take
you into custody, and you have over $20.00
worth of stuff (a felony) listen carefully
to the pig. He has to warn you of your
right to remain silent (which he doesn't
have to do if it’s only a misdemeanor).

If he doesn't and you can get the names of
witnesses, their case against you will
have a legal flaw you can use in court.
Whatever you do, don't ever confess (even
in custody) or provide evidence or infor-
mation of your guilt. They'll search you
to get it, but don't just hand it over at
the first accusation.

If you have a set of fake identification
you could use them for a misdemeanor charge.
All you have to show is something with
your name on it, and they ask your present
address. I think it would be easy to fal-
sify that information. The pig will pro-
bably thoroughly search you at the police
station. If you give them a rough time,
they might trump up some other charges
like resisting an officer.

An arraignment time is set up. By not
appearing for a misdemeanor charge, you
forfeit your bond money since the judge
assumes you're guilty. By appearing for
it, you may plead not guilty with or with-
out a lawyer. If there's a witness (a
camera, an employee or casual observer)
there's not much point in appearing. If
you appear, you may still be fined the
bond and court costs. Don't fail to
appear for a felony arraignment because
they'll go as far as a warrant for your
arrest on that charge.

With all the hassle of an arrest, incen-
tive is high to not get caught. In Iowa
City the statistical profile of a shop-
lifter is female, black, young. One legal
source I consulted estimated 92% of the
shoplifters in Iowa City are women. The
stores most frequently prosecuting shop-
lifters are Me Too grocery store, Osco
drug store, K-Mart, and the Stable
clothing store.

Extortion is an illegal but much-used
method capitalists resort to to detain a
suspect. They act friendly, suggesting
if you pay (2 or 3 times the worth) for
the merchandise they think you have they
won't call the pigs. Sometimes they don't
but often they do -- and keep the money --
and there's nothing you can do to prove
they've done something illegal unless you
happen to have gotten a written receipt
for what you paid them.

Psychological warfare against being
caught is fairly effective. If you're
prepared to act insulted, defensive,
strong, defiant--talk back and possibly
push--your chance of getting away is
increased. One way to prepare for the
actual confrontation is to play charades.
Act out being confronted and what you'd
say and do. A good preparation is to
have in mind ahead of time a plan of
action. If you're with another person
you should both know what you're going
to do if one gets stopped.

It's best, too, to find out your rights
in whatever state you're living in or
visiting, since the law varies. Not all
state laws permit store employees to de-
tain you like the Iowa law does. Some
states are stricter in defining detention
methods and fines are higher.

Remember that rising prices are not
caused by shoplifters, the explanation so
many capitalists find to make people turn
in suspects. The economic system in this
country is at fault, and there ain't
nothing we stop ripping off that's going
to ever lower prices.

Page a