insecurity, no daycare, and the police --  
all of which the reactionaries came through  
on. We had to attend meetings with men  
who were exploitative and condescending.  

We had to listen to the endless hassles of  
married women who oppressed us as lesbians  
and resisted feminist politics like the  
plague. If we could even be gay “publi-  
cally" it meant practically nothing be-  
yond wearing a button in a foreign lang-  
uage. Co-opted, lost and liberalized.  
There were major freak outs over teaching  
female children to defend themselves and  
not be weak, and trying to make boys be  
less macho, straight and domineering. The  
parents thought we were horrible and fas—  
cistic, and their liberal jive didn't fool  
anyone on our side.  

This summer the parents in the co-op I  
lived in expelled 20 of us—two mothers,  
plus gay and straight volunteers of both  
sexes. Specifically the splits were over  
feminism, separatism, and the gay sociali-  
zing of children. The women of our group  
wanted two days a week of only women in  
the center, and commitment by all the wo-  
men to struggling towards a radical feminist  
analysis dealing with class, race, and  
gayness. We confronted them, hassled,  
were left alone in the center, threatened  
with the police and totally ejected when  
the token Marxist family went on vacation  
and the remaining liberals could get away  
with really exercising their power as they  
saw fit. TOTAL PIC.  

So, the "radicals" were shoved out and  
our troubles were only beginning. The  
faction had to form a new center (Sparky  
Daycare Center), and the group was already  
fucked-up. We had defended irresponsible  
volunteers with transitory commitments to  
show solidarity, and had to hassle with  
men — most of whom were bad news, and I  
knew it from my past dealings with them,  
and the way they reacted to separatist  
struggle among the women. They were a  
cause of splits among us.  

The women finally split from the men  
and formed B.O.S.S. (Bitches Out to Stomp  
Sexism) and recommitted themselves, nam-  
ing the Lesbian Daycare Manifesto from  
RAT as the basis of their daycare politics.  
As it happened too many times in the past,  
a number of "committed radicals" went  
their merry way, committed to their social  
lives and despicable degeneracy. Distrust  
flourished. During these times I was  
criticized by a member of AIAW for not  
acting collectively by making decisions  
and judgments on my own, or with a few  
members of B.O.S.S. At the time I was  
used to acting on my own because I'd never  
been in any affinity group in daycare out-  
side of occasional solidarity in our liv-  
ing collective, and most of B.O.S.S. and  
Sparky was irresponsible, untrustworthy,  
and had bad politics, if any. But she  

was right, and I tried to struggle over it  
in light of the fact that primary collec-  
tives were to be discussed, etc... The  
B.O.S.S. politics were rhetoric, though,  
and I knew in my gut that I could not con-  
tribute much support to the group. I left  
with a letter to B.O.S.S. of political  
criticisms and disagreement - and a commit-  
ment to Sparky's mothers and children and  
feminist daycare.  

Most of the working-class women left  
B.O.S.S. and the remainder, dominated by  
middle-class guilt and service politics  
outside B.O.S.S. decided to form a free  
childcare center for service to working-  
class and lower-class women. This was a  
total political turnabout, and I had gut  
feelings of revulsion to the idea of those  
women ‘serving women of my class - or even  
thinking they could. It was Classism Su-  
preme, and I only recently realized exact-  
ly how bad that was. Co-opted, liberalized.  
I knew the implications of their classist  
guilt, irresponsibility, and rotten politi-  
cal methods - and I was depressed about the  
fate I expected for working-class women and  
children in their hands. But the children  
I was involved with were dependent on Spar-  
ky and it was the women's community center,  
or so parts of the community thought. If  
I had fully realized the havoc "service"  
daycare was going to wreak on the women  
staffing it - especially the gay, working-  
class volunteers who have been systematically  
insulted, ignored, de-classed, and generally  
shat on, I would have hid the insurance  
policy, grabbed the kids and split for Des  
Moines. The Lesbian Daycare Manifesto had  
been discarded like a menu.  

AMG Mujer?  

The sore points of anger over women in  
the community not relating to childcare  
came to a head at a general meeting  
slated for confrontation and lots of jus-  
tified, long-simmering resentment. But  
bad methods and confused politics domin-  
ated that anger, and it all started up  
after I and a middle-class woman from  
B.O.S.S. had a fight with another middle-  
class woman who had been irresponsible  
about childcare and refused to come to the  
meeting. I completely lost my temper and  
most of my rage against her at the time  
was based on the fact that she was priv-  
ileged, and had been making $300 a month  
as a work-study student for sauntering  

into the center a few hours a week. If  

I recall she was told to return all the  
money to Sparky and has not to this date.  
Count on middle-class women to allow  
something like that. I regret that  
fight, but I think it did have a heavy  
impact on the previously uncommitted  
women at the meeting, and on the whole  

community.  

Women who previously couldn't be moved  
by anything short of fear of death, were  
organizing and committing themselves.  

The first non-biological mothers group  
(Non BMs) formed out of women at the meet-  
ing who had not done anything for mothers  
or children, and needed a group to organ-  
ize themselves. Non BMs got their shit  
together fast, and has been responsible.  

But the formation of this group sort  

of left me out in the cold. It wasn't for  
me because I had always done childcare  
and didn't need the consciousness-raising  
that non BMs did. And it was closed to  
me, particularly, because everyone was  
pissed about that fight. The other wo-  
man was also excluded when she tried to  
join, because she was a member of B.O.S.S.  
and also, I think, because she was on  
the outs, too. For a while I felt that  
she should have been able to join because  
she hadn't really been any more together  
than Non BMs had, and that she needed the  
organization and discipline. However, this  
was an incorrect idea, because it ignored  
the fact that she was responsible for her  
behavior and lack of direction primarily,  
and it was up to her to take first steps  
to change. And she hasn't so far. The  
point I thought I was trying to make is  
that personal rifts and relationships  
seem to have an unfair influence on the  
membership and political direction of  
groups.  

Anyway, all these months relating to  
Sparky almost totally on my own has been  
a drag. Just like it's a drag to live  
alone or virtually alone and try to do  
childcare outside of daycare all by my-  
self. I now live in a gay, working-class  
collective of three women and four oc-  
casional (definite) kids. Changing my  
living situation has seemed like an ans-  
wer to some of my hassles this year.  

Very recently the volunteers of Sparky  
started to organize in protest against  
Sparky being a service daycare center.  

We all feel a need for the center as a  
place for the children we have, and a  
place where we can freely live as gay  
women, committed to radical changes,  
political education, fighting classism,  
and controlling our interest and labor  
and needs. B.O.S.S. had disintegrated.  

February, 1973  

into the Planning Committee, set up as  

an administrative group to do that kind  

of work. But most of us were too unor-  
ganized and untogether to keep the com-  
mittee and a few other women from con-  
trolling Sparky's money, lease, policies,  
and membership. I want Sparky to serve  
those people who are involved in it--  
that means the community women and the  
working-class mothers and children who  
are members. The mothers started organ-  
izing because some mothers, including  
two Sparky mothers and one non-member  
working-class mother thought the interests  
of working-class women were being trampled  
by the gay non-mothers (half of whom are  
working-class) who opposed the notion of  
service. We did not want to ask community  
children to leave because they were  
"privileged" according to those mothers,  
because they were either middle-class or  
lived within a middle-class political  
community. This was outrageous - that  

us working-class women were privileged  
because of our radical politics and high  
consciousness. De-classed, co-opted, in-  
sulted. We wanted our children in a  
center that we worked to maintain, and  
that would fulfill our physical, political  
needs. The results of the mothers’ meet-  
ings called for such things as male pa-  
rent membership, supported by the sexist  
and homosexist declarations of the mother  
organizers; that women with high feminist  
consciousness could and should deal with  

males and heterosexuals in the other co-  

ops to free up space in the service center.  
When the last general meeting of all Sparky  
workers and mothers was held it was clear  
that the mothers whose rights were supposed-  
ly so threatened by feminism and gayness,  
had not even heard a word of what we were  
concerned with - and showed definite in-  
terest in struggling over the issues. So  
much for the "low consciousness-potential"  
that lower class people are thought to  
have. And fuck middle-class attitudes  

that say that politics have to be soft-  
pedalled to the masses so they'll fight in  
the Revolution. What bigotry. Patronized,  
manipulated, and co-opted. The working-  
class mothers of Sparky are proof of our  
revolutionary potential.  

Before the last general meeting, all the  
gay working-class volunteers met and came  
up with a statement of criticism and poli-  
tics that included our refusal to work with  
men, and our commitment to struggling  
over how we oppress mothers. We also called  
for struggle from mothers, straight women,  
and middle-class women over what we say is  
our oppression, and the radical analysis we  
support and want to practice. We read it  
at the meeting and the discussion was hope-  
ful, I think, even though there are seri-  
ous splits between some of the mothers and  
a couple of volunteers and the rest of us.  

Some of the things that concern me about  

Sparky are the fact that the almighty  
University-connected women in the center,  
and that one dissenting collective contri-  
butes a large amount of Sparky's income so  
they can threaten our existence anytime.  
They have, in fact, already done so.  

Last month when they proposed complete  
service daycare, and that community child-  
ren must leave, they withheld the money  

in lieu of our protest, and the working-  
class cook's salary went unpaid, not to  
mention the rent, utilities, and food bill.  
They finally paid the money, and a proposal  
was made at the last meeting that, since  
we have to depend on their money, that  
they give the center a month's notice to  
recover it in case of further trouble.  

So now the Planning Committee is experi-  
mentally dissolved, and we are taking a  
month to discuss and explore a new struc-  
ture for Sparky. The mothers are going to  
continue to meet, as will the first non-  
BMs group. The rest of the volunteers  
have several options; to continue individ-  
ually, reform the Planning Committee, or  
form similar non-BMs groups. My living  
collective has joined a non-BMs group:  
with seven other women, five working-  
class, and all gay. Two members of our  
group are 18 or under, and one is over  
thirty. One has been married, one had a  
baby that she didn't keep, and one had an  
illegal abortion. Most of us work, and two  
of us are students. We intend to continue  
our group regardless of the specifics of  
Sparky's new structure. And our commit-  
ment to mothers, children, and our politics.