IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

ThE RED WOMEN'S DETACHMENT:

Revolting Rhetoric; Revolutionary Objections

The following three pages are devoted to consideration of some
papers received recently from the Southern Female Rights Union and
a draft constitution of the Red Women's Detachment, a part of the
Marxist-Leninist Party. Nowhere on these pages have we considered
the questions of the Red Women's organizational principles,
the advisability of willing a vanguard party into existence, or
many other questions about the role of women in the structure of
a Marxist-Leninist Party. We are interested in comments from
other groups about the Red Women and the issues they raise.

Many of the issues raised by the Red Women have been avoided
in other groups in our eagerness to spread the word and promote
the growth of women's liberation. While we have always recognized
such issues as abortion as two-edged swords, we rarely
publish such doubts or actively discourage women from working in
any way on women's liberation.

Some of the issues we have been grappling with—for example,
homosexual oppression—Red Women have made strong statements about.
While our internal criticism has been carried on continually, the
overriding principle has been that women must raise their own
consciousness as women. Some of the issues we should be speaking
to have barely been touched in Ain't I A Woman, although they have
been considered extensively in cell meetings and discussion workshops. Such questions as the long-term consequences of fighting for
abortion reform, establishing day care centers, and developing an
analysis of lesbianism compatible with women's liberation have
generally been missing from the paper. One article on "The Lesbian
in the Feminist Movement" (issue 2) raised the point that "it
isn't good enough for straight women to say that they love women
and then turn to give their ultimate love to their oppressor."

It went further to say that "Lesbians have experienced women's
oppression simply because they don't need men and haven't been
'protected' by being treated as a privileged sex." Both of
these statements seemed politically wrong. The first because it
sees individual men as the cause of oppression and avoids systemic
causes; the second because it defines lesbian oppression as an
exception to women's oppression. It says that lesbians experience
oppression by being exceptions to those things other women
experience: lesbian oppression begins where

experience: lesbian oppression begins when they give up the "privileges" of other women. If the source of lesbian oppression is everything not shared with other women, a women's liberation may not be a useful means to ending that oppression. We think this definition of lesbian oppression is wrong and that lesbians and other women together must come to a better understanding.

One of our main considerations has been broadening the women's
movement at the same time we work out an analysis of women's oppression that ensures a way to end it. We do not begin with the assumption of an inevitable proletarian revolution in this country in the same way Red Women do. We begin with a desire to figure the form and shape of a revolution in an industrially developed country, one for which no historical precedent will suffice. To do this all forms of expression have been exchanged and women speaking to their own oppression has been most important. Thus, gay women have been open in their statements to other women, and together women have been forming an analysis of lesbianism and the forms of sexual oppression in American society. If we want a larger strategy of revolution to ensure the end of lesbian oppression, working out that analysis seems crucial now. The needs of the people are not all material, and the structural changes brought about by a revolution can be better if we listen now.

The Red Women raise some important issues, but they raise
them with a rhetoric hardly conducive to open discussion. The
paper on Gay Liberation is one example. While it purports to
be a historical analysis of homosexuality, it is more a call to
smash Gay Liberation and it is particularly offensive to lesbians.
A reply from one member of the Gay Cell follows. While Red
Women say near the end of the paper that lesbians are a different
matter and they are only writing about male homosexuality, the
paper was not helpful in any construction of an analysis of lesbian oppression.

While Red Women claim to be "the definite hard-core of the
women's movement as a whole, the point at which leadership is
being developed, serious political and ideological struggle is
taking place, and new cadres are being prepared for struggle," their targets of attack are mostly other women. Hardly conducive
to building a women’s movement. Yet the issues they raise are
important—abortion as genocide, the middle class nature of WLF,
the importance of an international movement of women, the meaning

of armed struggle—and are ones we should be dealing with.

(The following article found on
Pages 8 and 9 is in response to
the Red Women's Detachment paper
concerning the Gay Liberation
Front.)

The Red Women's Detachment has
written a paper on Feminism, Women's
Liberation and Gay Liberation which
is being circulated within the Women's
Liberation movement by the
New Orleans Female Workers Union.
We in Women's Liberation and Gay
Liberation Front have been trying
to analyze the position of Gay Liberation
in the revolution for a long time. This paper is a start
in that it made us rigorously look
at issues that concern Gay Liberation
Front, but it was a false start because it is only destructive. The Red Women's Detachment
urges revolutionary feminists to
organize to smash the Gay Liberation movement because they see Gay Liberation Front as being promoted

by the ruling class to destroy the
revolutionary potential of the
feminist movement. The Red Women's
Detachment arrives at this analysis
of GLF by using two different definitions of homosexuality.

The pillar of their argument is
an analogy between feudal times
and present-day Imperialist society.
According to the Red Women's Detachment, two things are common to
both periods: the rise in homosexuality and the rise in the
struggle of women. They say that
in pre-feudal times homosexuality
was a sexual practice, but during
feudalism it came to mean the social
relationship between men in the
organizations that sprang up at
that time—the guilds, the knight-
hood, the church. Homosexual relations, say the Red Women's Detachment, were the basis for the
existence of these organizations
and the predominant form of homosexual relationship under feudalism
and imperialism is one in which one
man is dominant and one submissive
or passive... Accompanying the rise
in male-dominated social organizations during feudalism was the
greatest slaughter and oppression
of women in history—the witch hunts.

The Red Women's Detachment sees
the same thing happening (that is
the rise in homosexuality and the
increased oppression of women) in
contemporary society. They see such
homosexual relations in German,
Italian and Japanese fascism and
the native Amerikan fascism of the
KKK and minutemen. The analogous
rise in the oppression of women is
what the Red Women's Detachment is
afraid will happen if we do not
stop the spread of homosexuality.
The Gay Liberation Front, as a new
organization of homosexuals, is part
of the present rise in homosexuality
and must also be stopped.

But I don't think the Red Women's
Detachment's definition of homosexuality as a social phenomenon
applies to the Gay Liberation Front.
Gay Liberation Front is an organization of people (men and women,
unlike the male-only organizations
of feudalism) who are defined as
homosexual because of our sexual
orientation. It may be homosexual
in the social sense also in that
the members relate to one another,
but it has a definite sexual base.
Gay Liberation Front is different
in another way also. It does not
wield the power that the feudal
organizations did. They were the
structures around which feudal
society revolved. Out of all the
words that could be used to describe a male supremacist society
such as feudalism, the word "homosexual" seems to have been chosen
by the Red Women's Detachment to
aid their argument against Gay Liberation. The analogy may hold true
if you stick to the social definition
of homosexuality in both eras.
Then the guilds etc. become analogous
to the male-dominated power
structures of our society. But

Gay Liberation Front, in that it is
not part of the power structure
and not homosexual in the same
sense, is not to be feared in the
same way.

The Red Women's Detachment is
not just saying that there is a
similarity between feudalism and
contemporary society; they are say-
ing that gay liberation is being
promoted by Imperialism and that
it is a tool of the ruling classes
to put down the revolutionary potential of the feminist movement.
They arrive at this connection between Gay Liberation Front and the
ruling class by a shabby use of
Marxian economics. The predominant
homosexual-feudal relationship,
according to the Red Women's Detachment, is dominant male/submissive partner, with the junior partner performing unpaid slave
labor for the other. "The class
role of the headmaster towards his
pupil, the army officer towards his
orderly, the older ‘auntie' or
‘queen' towards ‘the inevitably
younger men' is the same as the
husband towards the wife. In all
these cases the basis of the relationship is unpaid slave labor.