FINDING DIRECTION

WHERE WE'VE COME FROM

We've been publishing Ain't I a Woman? for over a year now and
we've gone through all the heavy changes that anyone goes through
in that length of time -- only at least multiplied by ten. Most
of the year we've been a steady, tight collective. In general, new
members have been few and many of us have been members from the
start of the paper. Now half of the members have just recently
joined and many of the women who started Ain't I a Woman? have
left. Just as each new member adds something, each older member
who has left took something with her -- what she added to the
collective and what all of us had become so used to. That's been
hard to adjust to. In addition to the changes in the collective
all of us have been going through upheavals in our personal lives,
changes in living situations, jobs, etc. Some of us are feeling
burned out and unsure of what we should be doing politically. Some
of us don't feel capable at this point of doing anything. But
some of us still hold on to a hope that we can struggle through
to some path of action.

We've dealt with a lot of issues and have been able to come to
some resolutions. One of our first struggles was over gayness.

In the beginning of the collective gay women were in the minority.
But even though we weren't all gay we were resolved about thinking
in terms of that perspective. It wasn't much of a hassle to decide
to come to grips with it because the importance of dealing with
gayness was recognized early. Gradually over the year the popula-
tion of the collective has become almost all gay. This was a
result of: 1. Three new members being gay, 2. Three members real-
izing they were gay or choosing against their heterosexual rela-
tionships, 3. Two straight women having to move away from Iowa
City because of job location changes of the males they related to.
This evolution has been slow and natural and never occurred as a
result of internal problems or gay/straight disagreements.

The evolution of issues we've dealt with has had, we think, a
pattern. Gayness came first and, although it was an arduous
struggle, we feel it was relatively easier to deal with than the
struggles we're involved with now, specifically class and race,
for two reasons. First, Women's Liberation as a whole had been
dealing with gayness, at least marginally, for some time. Second,
any woman can choose to be gay, and women working on raising
their consciousness naturally have to consider that possibility
in themselves and come to an understanding of it. But coming
to a place where we are trying to deal with class and race --
which no one has a choice over as far as their backgrounds are
concerned -- has been a slower and more painful process. There
have always been class differences within the collective and we
have always struggled over that even though we didn't always
realize (or admit) the class nature of those differences. Recently
we have been really consciously trying to deal with class, but
the number of working-class women in the collective has decreased
and with the possibility of two women moving, AIAW may soon be
composed of all middle-class women. We're concerned about our
ability to deal with class if that happens -- and we feel convinced
that it is economic class that the women's movement must deal
with.

Our reaction to the Attica action is a really telling example
of that last point. It is the one thing, national or local, that
has occupied our minds and excited us politically in quite some
time. The fact that the Attica rebellion doesn't have much di-
rectly to do with the women's movement, and the ways it has forced
us to think about the class and race nature of that action, has
made us question our distance from that level of struggle and
think about being white.

So what is occupying our minds now seems to indicate a lot
about the probable direction of AIAW. We've been trying to talk
about the direction we should be going -- what the paper should
be doing -- but we haven't come up with any answers; we've only
started to clarify to ourselves the things we're concerned with
and the problems we foresee.

The excitement of earlier beginnings has ended in some ways.
None of us lives collectively anymore and some of us feel dis-
illusioned and a sense of failure about that. We see the things
we have been working on in the last two years in Women's Libera-
tion and in more than a year of working on the paper as valid, yet
at the same time none of our activities has led to anything --
any higher level of struggle. And we can't help thinking that
all of our struggles with building a community -- struggling with
our relationships, with gayness -- haven't done much to make a
place for such a community to exist. We realize how easy it is
to get involved in alternative culture and not remember that that
is only one front of struggle and not sufficient by itself --
that most women can't afford those alternatives and that the fail-
ure we feel not being able to live the way we envision has a
material basis; and it is material conditions that must be
changed, not only the conditions within our own heads.

The papers and newsletters we get in seem to indicate that most
groups are at about the same place as each other. Nothing new,
nothing exciting. What a few years ago were exciting actions have
become the status quo -- we feel starving for new directions.

A perfect example of earlier exciting actions becoming the
status quo is Daycare. Free Daycare action started in Iowa City
with the Dum-Dum Daycare Center, which set up parent-cooperative
free daycare that would provide a way for women to be freed of
24-hour child care as well as a place for kids to relate unencum-
bered by the sex, race and class biases programmed into our so-
ciety. They demanded, and got, housing from the University. Now
there are four "free" daycare centers in operation, mostly white,
mostly middle class. Early attempts to reach poor women didn't
succeed, and no one has renewed efforts in that direction except
one middle-class women's church group which provides child care
for poor women three mornings a week. It hasn't happened that
people have struggled toward establishing feminist daycare, nor
have the daycare centers yet come to much of a political conscious-
ness.

The gay cell, which functioned for consciousness-raising and
working out Lesbian lifestyles for the women involved, no longer
meets. The gay women's community is a large, unformed group
whose members live pretty independently, coming together every
couple of weeks for a party. (Note: at this writing some sort
of new lesbian consciousness raising group is forming.)

Speaking about Women's Liberation to various groups or schools
is expected now. It's something people do as a matter of course.
That doesn't mean it's unimportant, but the newness has worn off
and not much excitement is generated there. The same thing goes
for new women's caucuses or consciousness-raising groups.

We've even come to expect the emergence of new women's news-
papers and newsletters. Publishing has become the status quo!

The final example of the way the whole situation has changed
relates to our mixed feelings about the newly-opened Women's
Center in Iowa City. It's hard to get excited about because
ideological splits are already so pronounced and real that the
needed struggle seems overwhelming. We feel skeptical of the
hope that characterized the birth of Women's Liberation in Iowa
City two years ago because now we're all at so many different
places in our heads. Times have changed. Many of us have dealt
with gayness, many haven't; class antagonism is clear to some
people, invisible to others. So forging unity means lots of
energy, lots of apparent marking-time.

We're also concerned with the role we see the paper having. We
have always engaged in self-criticism -- commenting on what we
have been doing and actions elsewhere. That role seems less clear
now. We're not sure who we are talking to -- or who's listening,
and yet we feel women should be criticizing the direction of the
movement especially in terms of class and race.

We will probably be struggling with the general problem of
what we're doing and where we're going as a collective in an on-
going way, but wanted people to know what our feelings and con-
cerns are at this point.

The following articles are statements by each member of the
Ain't I a Woman? collective about her perceptions of the possible

directions the paper can now take.

We realize that there is some

overlapping of ideas here, but it seemed important to us, as a

collective, to formulate our thoughts individually from where we
are now, and to give a sense of each of us, our differences and
similarities.

Page 2

Volume 2 Number 3

Ain't I a Woman?