A continuation of the  
story of the Collective  
that has no name follows:  

III. ONGOING STRUGGLES  
Looking back, we feel that the two sisters  
who originally called the collective toge-  
ther played an important role in maintain-  
ing it during the first few months when our  
interest and loyalty had not yet developed.  
They took responsibility for regularly at-  
tending meetings, coming prepared, and  
keeping a flow to the meetings. Now that  
our collective has become very important  
to each of us, we all try to take respons-  
ibility for these functions. One goal of  
our collective is to develop the leader-  
ship potential of every individual; how-  
ever, the early and necessary leadership  
of these two women has carried over, cre-  
ating some problems of leadership and une-  
qual participation which must still be  
worked out.  

We have had one insight, however. When we  
began meeting, every woman came wondering  
how the other women in the group would  
view her. We were so self-conscious about  
how we came off that it was impossible for  
the uniqueness and beauty of our true  
selves to come through all the shit-defens-  
iveness. Each of us had developed our own  
way of projecting ourselves in a group.  
These patterns perpetuated themselves. Some  
of us dominated, others spoke very seldom.  
We have come to realize that to be our-  
selves, we must come out of ourselves. We  
must cease to relate through these same  
roles. We must relate instead to the needs  
of the group - the total, the collective,  
rather than to our self-images. Relating  
to the needs of the collective allows our  
individuality to be expressed. We find that  
as each sister risks herself with the col-  

lective and finds the response not shock  
or hostility but the sympathy, help and accept-  
ance that comes from realizing our oppres-  
sion has warped us all, the ugliness and  
fear of her “true self" becomes lost in the  
beauty and strength of the collective. What  
was before only a phrase becomes reality -  
Sisterhood is powerful. Even as we realize  
this, it is extremely difficult to act out.  
Each of us slips into periods of self-con-  

sciousness which inhibit us. We must con-  
tinue to struggle.  

We found that creating a collective means  
more than sharing the part of our sisters'  
lives brought to our weekly meetings. It  
means taking total, collective responsi-  
bility for our sisters - always. We cannot  

allow our sisters to face their daily lives  
alone. Sisterhood is all-encompassing. When  
each of us is left to struggle alone with  
our responsibilities - be they child care,  
work, transportation, family life, whatever -  
these responsibilities can easily be over-  
whelming. Each sister finds herself in the  
situation where, because she is alone, she  
does not have the time or energy to respond  
to the needs of her sisters - nor they to  
her needs. By bringing a total picture of  

our lives to our weekly meetings, we can  
share with our sisters not only a better  
idea of who we are outside the collective,  
but we can give to them a sense of what  
burdens we often find overwhelming. In this  
way we can better deal with crisis flare-  
ups (by understanding the history and mean-  
ing of these situations) as well as allow-  
ing us to plan our lives together, in order  
to meet these needs.  

We are just beginning to explore what it  
means to take collective responsibility for  
a sister. We have begun to share child  
care, cars, financial help to allow a sis-  
ter to not work for a period of time or to  
take a vacation, as well as emotional sus-  
tenance available anytime - day or night.  
Again we have just begun and, although our  
rhetoric is together, we have a long way to  
go to make that rhetoric reality. From  
realizing this we have begun to see Women's  
Liberation not as ideas and concepts that  
we try to convince other women of, but a  
concrete reality that must meet the needs  
of all women if we expect these women to  
find Women's Liberation meaningful to them.  

IV. WHY WE HAVE COLLECTIVES  
Many of the reasons why we believe that  

collectives are an essential form for build-  

ing the Women's Liberation movement have  
been expressed in earlier parts of this pa-  
per. We would like to summarize these rea-  
sons and others here:  
First: To overcome our isolation and alone-  
ness.  
As women we have been divided from each  
other. Our oppression has left each of  
us alone to fend for herself in a male  
world; as wife, mother, or worker. Men  
cannot respond to our needs even if  
they are sensitive enough to realize  
we have them. We need sisterhood with  
other women. Collectives, where sisters  
attempt to deal with each other's needs,  
can begin to help us overcome our iso-  
lation.  

Second: To overcome the learned competi-  
tiveness which makes us ineffective.  
We women have spent much of our lives  
competing with each other or compet-  
ing to make it in male circles. Col-  
lective groups by definition are con-  
stantly struggling to overcome these  
old patterns so destructive to realiz-  
ing sisterhood.  

Third: To gain the political strength we  
lack as individuals, and to build a politi-  
cal unit out of which to act.  
Alone, we as women are powerless to  
alter our situation or overcome our  
oppression. In unity there is strength.  
Our collective has enabled us to de-  
velop politically and to be able to  
articulate to each other programs or  
methods of struggle for overcoming our  
oppression. The possibilities for pol-  
itical activity in collectives which  
decide to take on projects are end-  
less: theatre, abortion repeal, women  
artists, newspapers, media groups, wo-  
men's cultural centers, writing groups,  
child care groups, women's history  
groups, etc. From our experience we  
have found it very important for sis-  
ters in collectives to be actively  
involved in working on projects toge-  
ther, as well as having regular gather-  
ings and discussions. Projects are im-  
portant in building a collective his-  
tory.  

Fourth: For companionship.  
Because of the society we live in, we  
have usually looked to men for compan-  
ionship and have considered our rela-  
tionships with women as secondary and/  
or temporary (until we found the right  
man). Our collective has enabled us to  
discover the beauty of companionship  
with women and to develop deep and  
lasting friendships to carry us through  
our daily struggles.  

Fifth: To make ourselves individually  
stronger.  
By far the most fantastic thing that  
has happened to all of us in the past  
year is that we have become individual-  
ly stronger through our involvement  
in the collective. For the first time  
we are experiencing other people real-  
ly loving us, with a beautiful love  
that can never be taken away. This has  
enabled us to look more honestly at  
ourselves and to realize our beauty.  
Sixth: To unite political and personal strug-  
gles into one struggle.  
If we are to create a decent non-oppressive  
society we must be able to unite  
our political goals with the way we  
lead our individual lives. Most of the  
insights we have had as a collective  
have not come from great political dis-  
cussions about how to bring about a  
cookbook revolution in America. Our in-  
sights have not come from what we said  
but rather from our reflection on how  
we have said it. They have come from  
beginning to break down the superstruc-  
tures through which we relate to each  
other and through the love and accept-  
ance we have for each other, which has  
made it possible for us to deal honest-  
ly with conflict, feelings and fears.  
By uniting our personal with our poli-  
tical struggles we gain the strength  
and perception needed to go out from  
our collective to further the Women's  
Liberation Movement.  
Seventh: To have collective responsibilities  
for decision-making.  
To build a collective, we must first  
decide to struggle collectively to  
solve problems rather than individually.  
Oftentimes it is very difficult; it is  
"easier" to decide things by ourselves.  
However, it is only by making decisions  
collectively that everyone can fully  
participate in carrying those decisions  
out. It is only through collective  
decisions that we overcome hierarchical  
relationships with each other and build  
a revolution in which the output of every  
individual is respected.  

Our experiences lead us to encourage other  
women to organize into similar types of  
groups. We understand collectives to be  
necessary to gain both personal strength  
and political power. We are interested in  
getting women together to start more col-  
lectives, and in developing a means of  
linking all of our collectives together.  

SISTERHOOD IS POWERFUL!  
COLLECTIVITY IS STRENGTH!  

All Power to the People who fight all forms  
of oppression  

SISTERS IN THE REVOLUTION  

for more information  
contact  

THE WOMEN'S COUNSELING  
SERVICE  

303 East Franklin Avenue  

Minneapolis, Minnesota  
Phone 338-SH77 or 339-3335