GOOD

So, RAT has been liberated, for this  
week at least. Next week? If the men re-  
turn to reinstate the pornographic photos, the  
sexist comic strips, the "nude-chickie"  
covers (along with their patronizing rhe-  
toric about being in favor of Women's  
Liberation) - if this happens, our alter-  
natives are clear. RAT must be taken over  
permanently by women ~ or RAT must be des-  
troyed.

Why RAT? Why not EVO or even the obvious  
new pornzines (Mafia-distributed alongside  
the human pornography of prostitution)?  
First, they'll get theirs - but it won't  
be a takeover, which is reserved for some-  
thing at least worth taking over. Nor should  
they be censored. They should just be  
helped not to exist ~ by any means neces-  
sary. But RAT, which has always tried to  
be a really radical cum life-style paper -  
that's another matter. It's the liberal  
co-optative masks on the face of sexist  
hate and fear, worn by real nice guys we  
all know and like, right? We have met the  
enemy and he's our friend. And dangerous.  
"What the hell, let the chicks do an is-  
sue; maybe it'll satisfy 'em for a while,  
it's a good controversy, and it'll maybe  
sell papers" - runs an unheard conversa-  
tion that I'm sure took place at some  
point last week.

And that's what I wanted to write about -  
the friends, brothers, lovers in the  
counterfeit male-dominated Left. The good  
guys who think they know what "Women's  
Lib," as they so chummily call it, is all  
about - and who then proceed to degrade  
and destroy women by almost everything  
they say and do: The cover on the last  
issue of RAT (front and back). The token  
“pussy power" or “clit militancy" arti-  
cles. The snide descriptions of women  
staffers on the masthead. The little jokes,  
the personal ads, the smile, the snarl. No  
more, brothers. No more well-meaning ig-  
norance, no more assuming that this thing  
we're all fighting for is the same: one  
revolution under man, with liberty and  
justice for all. No more.

Let's run it on down. White males are  
most responsible for the destruction of  
human life and environment on the planet  
today. Yet who is controlling the supposed  
revolution to change all that? White males  
(yes, yes, even with their pasty fingers  
back in black and brown pies again). It  
just could make one a bit uneasy. It seems  
obvious that a legitimate revolution must  
be led by, made by those who have been most  
oppressed: black, brown, and white women -  
with men relating to that the best they  
can. A genuine Left doesn't consider any-  
one's suffering irrelevant or titillating;  
nor does it function as a microcosm of  
capitalist economy, with men competing for  
power and status at the top, and women  
doing all the work at the bottom (and func-  
tioning as objectified prizes or "coin" as  
well). Goodbye to all that.

Run it all the way down.

Goodbye to the male-dominated peace move-  
ment, where sweet old Uncle Dave can say  
with impunity to a woman on the staff of  
LIBERATION, "The trouble with you is you're  
an aggressive woman."

Goodbye to the "straight" male-dominated  
Left: to PL who will allow that some work-  
ers are women, but won't see all women,  
(say, housewives) as workers (just like the  
System itself); to all the old Leftover  
parties who offer their "Women's Libera-  
tion caucuses" to us as if that were not a  
contradiction in terms; to the individual  
anti-leadership leaders who hand-pick  

certain women to be leaders and then relate  
only to them, either in the male Left or in  
Women's Liberation ~ bringing their hang-  
ups about power-dominance and manipulation  
to everything they touch.

Goodbye to the WeatherVain, with the  
Stanley Kowalski image and theory of free  
sexuality but practice of sex on demand  
for males. "Left Out!" - not Right On -  
to the Weather Sisters who, and they know  
better - they know, reject their own radi-  
cal feminism for that last desperate grab  
at male approval, for claiming that the  
machismo style and the gratuitous violence  
is their own style by "free choice" and  
for believing that this is the way for a  
woman to make her revolution...all the  
while, oh my sister, not meeting my eyes  
because WeatherMen chose Manson as their -  
and your - Hero. (Honest, at least...since  

Manson is only the logical extreme of the  
normal American male's fantasy (whether  
he is Dick Nixon or Mark Rudd): master of  
a harem, women to do all the shitwork,  
from raising babies and cooking and hust-  
ling to killing people on order.) Goodbye  
to all that shit that sets women apart  
from women; shit that covers the face of  
any Weatherwoman which is the face of any  
Manson Slave which is the face of Sharon  
Tate which is the face of Mary Jo Kopechne  
which is the face of Beulah Saunders which  
is the face of me which is the face of Pat  
Nixon which is the face of Pat Swinton. In  

a black man with a Ph.D.? A nigger. Varic-  
tion: Know what they call a Weatherwoman?  
A heavy cunt. Know what they call a Hip  
Revolutionary Woman? A groovy cunt. Know  
what they call a radical militant feminist?  
A crazy cunt. Amerika is a land of free  
choice ~ take your pick of titles. Left Out,  
my Sister - don't you see? Goodbye to the  
illusion of strength when you run hand in  
hand with your oppressors; goodbye to the  
dream that being in the leadership collect-  
ive will get you anything but gonorrhea.  
Goodbye to RYM II, as well, and all the  
other RYMs - not that the sisters there  
didn't pull a cool number by seizing con-  
trol, but because they let the men back in  
after only a day or so of self-criticism on  
male chauvinism. (And goodbye to the inac-  
curate blanket use of that phrase, for that  
matter: male chauvinism is an attitude -  
male supremacy is the objective reality,  
the fact.) Goodbye to the Conspiracy who,  
when lunching with fellow sexist bastards  
Norman Mailer and Terry Southern in a  
bunny-type club in Chicago, found Judge  
Hoffman at the neighboring table - no sur-  
prise: in the light they are all the same.  
Goodbye to Hip Culture and the so-called  
Sexual Revolution, which has functioned  
toward women's freedom as did the Recon-  
struction toward former slaves - reinsti-  
tuted oppression by another name. Goodbye  
to the assumption that Hugh Romney is safe  
in his "cultural revolution," safe enough  
to refer to "our women, who make all our  
clothes" without somebody not forgiving  
that. Goodbye to the arrogance of power in-  
deed that lets Czar Stan Freeman of the  
Electric Circus sleep without fear at  
night, or permits Tomi Ungerer to walk un-  

afraid in the street after executing the  

drawings for the Circus advertising cam-  
paign against women. Goodbye to the idea  
that Hugh Hefner is groovy ‘cause he lets  

Conspirators come to parties at the Mansion -  

goodbye to Hefner's dream of a ripe old age.  
Goodbye to Tuli and the Fugs and all the  

boys in the front room - who always knew  
they hated the women they loved. Goodbye to  
the notion that good ol' Abbie is any dif-  
ferent from any other up-and-coming movie  
star (like, say Cliff Robertson) who  
ditches the first wife and kids, good  
enough for the old days but awkward once  
you're Making It. Goodbye to his hypo-  
critical double standard that reeks  
through all the tattered charm. Goodbye  
to lovely pro-Women's-Liberation Paul  
Krassner, with all his astonished anger  
that women have lost their sense of humor  
"on this issue" and don't laugh anymore  
at the little funnies that degrade and  
hurt them; farewell to the memory of his  
"Instant Pussy" aerosol-can poster, to  
his column for Cavalier, to his dream of  
a Rape-in against legislator's wives, to  
his Scapegoats and Realist Nuns and cute  
anecdotes about the little daughter he  
sees as often as any proper divorced Scars-  
dale middle-aged (38) father; goodbye for-  
ever to the notion that he is my brother,  
who, like Paul, buys a prostitute for the  
night as a birthday gift for a male friend,  
or who, like Paul, reels off the names in  
alphabetical order of people in the  
Women's Movement he has fucked, reels off  
names in the best locker-room tradition —  
as proof that he's no sexist oppressor.

Let it all hang out. Let it seem  
bitchy, catty, dykey, frustrated, crazy,  
Solanisesque, nutty, frigid, ridiculous,  
bitter, embarrassing, man-hating, libelous  
pure, unfair, envious, intuitive, low-  
down, stupid, petty, liberating. We are  
the women that men have warned us about.

And let's put one lie to rest for all  
time: the lie that men are oppressed, too,  
by sexism -- the lie that there can be  
such a thing as "men's liberation groups."  
Oppression is something that one group of  
people commits against another group  
specifically because of a "threatening"  
characteristic shared by the latter group--  
skin color or sex or age, etc. The oppres-  
sors are indeed fucked up by being masters  
(racism hurts whites, sexual stereotypes  
are harmful to men) but those masters are  
not oppressed. Any master has the alter-  
native of divesting himself of sexism or  

racism -- the oppressed have no alter-  
native -- for they have no power -- but to  
fight. In the long run, Women's Liberation  
will of course free men -- but in the  
short run it's going to cost men a lot of  
privilege, which no one gives up willingly  
or easily. Sexism is not the fault of  
women -— kill your fathers, not your  
mothers.

Run it on down. Goodbye to a beautiful  
new ecology movement that could fight to  
save us all if it would stop tripping off  
women as earth-mother types or frontier  
chicks, if it would right now cede leader-  
ship to those who have not polluted the  
planet because that action implies power  
and women haven't had any power in about  
5,000 years, cede leadership to those  
whose brains are as tough and clear as  
any man's but whose bodies are also un-  
avoidably aware of the locked-in rela-  
tionship between humans and their bio-  
sphere -- the earth, the tides, the at-  
mosphere, the moon. Ecology is no big  
shtick if you're a woman -- it's always  
been there. |

Goodbye to the complicity inherent in  
the Berkeley Tribesman being part pub-  
lishers of Trashman Comics; goodbye, for  
that matter, to the reasoning that finds  
whoremaster Trashman a fitting model,