Dear AIAW Sisters,

We received our copy of your paper with the criticisms of  
Struggle #1 a couple of days ago. It was during the middle of the  
night that my anger reached a peak and I can't seem to function  
till that anger is expressed. Question #1. Who the fuck decides  
or what the fuck is the criteria being used to say who is or is not  
working class? I called myself middle-class in the first issue of  
Struggle! because of the fact that I was in university at the time  
even though I come from a working-class family (I think) even  
though I had just come off welfare and was waiting for a student  
loan (a government shuck which provides some money at high  
interest rates--if you "deserve it.")  

When I say I think I come from a working-class family, my  
uncertainty comes in because we never starved, we had clothes,  
mainly hand-me-downs, from relations and we had a roof over  
our heads, even if, for the first thirteen years of my life it was  
too small and in a "rough" neighborhood. We weren't as bad off  
as some of the families on the block because my parents didn't  
fight that much. We didn't have books or music in our house--  

we didn't take holidays, etc.  

I didn't know how much we didn't have until I got bussed to a  
Jr. High school with a lot of professionals' kids. God! I hated  
those kids for making me feel inferior and I would be damned if  
I was going to read "good" books, so I took to sports which was  
the only way I could last it through school, even though I had to  
take a lot of shit for being "dykey." So Christ, I got a lot of  

anger for the shit laid on me by the (upper) middle-class and it  
was me who put the line about being less integrated human beings.  
I would like to explain why I said that.  
that middle-class women are more together but I (we) figure the  
more shit you get laid on you (oppression) the more squished  
down you are. The less money you have in this fucked-up  
capitalist society the less freedom, choices, alternatives you  
have. We know the alternatives are pretty illusionary and/or  
shitty. I know you must know this stuff but my anger/resent-  
ment comes from being told in the same breath that at least my  
shit job is not supporting the system as much as some profession-  
al job (and we DON'T mean factory owner or other ruling-class  
capitalist positions) and then that my shit job is "more valuable  
as socially necessary labour."  

I am working again and at the only job I can get--a working  
class one. And Christ, it is a shit job. I work in a school  
library as a librarian-aide, so I do the shit work for the librar-  
ians like shelving books, typing format cards and filing them. I  
have no say over anything to do with me during those eight hours  
and it is the same shit, day in and day out. The last year I did  
shit work I almost cracked up (became suicidal) but this year I  
thought with Women's Liberation giving meaning to my life I  
could hack the alienation/objectification etc.  

I realized that every job I had (waitress etc.) I have had a  
woman as my immediate boss which certainly reveals the low  
status of the jobs. It is not going to do me any good to hate the  
women librarians who make me do work that any grade six kid  
could do. (Now you are probably going to say I think I am too  
good for the job--well, Christ, I don't think any human being  
should have to do only shit work so that others can do "interest-  
ing" stuff. This does not mean a middle-class job (doctor,  
school teacher, nurse, lawyer). It means I (we) want to make a  
revolution so that all --ALL--work is for the world we want to  
build/power over our own lives, as opposed to now, where all  
work supports the system we want to destroy.  

Christ, we could go through nearly every criticism made of  
Struggle #1 in your last issue and say that you misinterpreted  
what we said and projected your stereotyped image of middle-  
class women onto it, (like, you responded to us as though we  

were N.O.W. women, none of which came from our ideas.)  
We don't think our position is that different from yours or  
Spectre's, —  

1. When we said middle-class women must acknowledge their  
privileges we meant that we have got to recognize and eliminate  
the classism that we were raised with.  

2. Nowhere do we say that middle-class women can/will  
make the revolution for themselves or for anybody else. Our  
point was that the process of developing a revolutionary consc-  
iousness is not the private property of any specific group or  
class, and that every single one of us has to go through a lot of  
shit to do the struggling and the loving and the fighting and the  
changing that is necessary before we can even fucking listen to  
each other let alone make a "revolution."  

3. The revolution is not going to be made either by spending  
our energy on middle-class reformist issues or forming/joining  
unions but that doesn't mean women into that are politically in-  
valid. The revolution won't be made either by middle-class  
women taking working-class jobs which we have been given the  
impression that some women in the States are doing. When we  
said we can't/shouldn't negate our class we meant that middle-  
class women shouldn't deny their oppression--saying my working-  
class sisters are so much more oppressed that we should struggle  
for their causes. Middle-class women have their own shit to  
deal with and they must do it and that includes dealing with their  
racism, sexism (with respect to lesbianism) which holds true  
for working-class women as well and class chauvinism which  
means listening to our third-world sisters, gay sisters and  
working-class sisters. (That doesn't mean middle-class women  
can/should expect these sisters to explain/deal with their  
middle-class shit.)  

We admit that our first attempt in communicating through  
Struggle! --our ideas were not expressed clearly or explicitly —  
enough but before putting us down as not worth struggling with  
please check out your own contradictions. For example--you  
say how can one only fight classism when the definition given at  
the top of one of your pages of revolution is 'A revolution is an  
insurrection, an act of violence by which one class overthrows  
another.'  

Another point--we were not saying that we (North American)  
had transcended the problems of third-world countries, only that  
we faced different problems such as the broad middle-class,  
industrialization.  

What we mean by accusation and confrontation stuff is that we  
see nothing constructive in saying 'Christ that's middle-class  
bullshit' and leaving it at that nor in saying to women who tell  
us we are cutting off 50% of the population 'You're goddam right  
we are.' Maybe we haven't had to deal too heavily with this  
stuff here on the Canadian prairies but I have nightmares lately  
of reading history books stating that the Women's Movement was  
coopted by class struggle in the 70's. Maybe we have to be so  
reactionary to the sweet sisterhood that prevailed at first but  
let's not sever the cords (no matter how few) that give us a  
common bond as women. We all know the crucialness of creat-  
ing new ways of struggling through heavy stuff to the revolution.  

We want to see more concrete stuff written about class--  
stuff we can work with to change our lives and that has not come  
out in any articles we have read. We've learned by now that men  
haven't said all there is to say about class--so we need our own  
analysis. We hope to keep communicating with you.  

In Struggle and Faith,  
J&M