De cata

_creates,

‘with reforms it has the ability to make.

.each other as pawns in the competitive games staged by a male

Je Demand

Any discussion of why we make non-cooptable demands must begin
with a description of the system in which those demands are made.
In the Amerikan corporate-capitalist system, the only important
motivation behind the institutions of business and government is
profit. If you look behind anything that business or government
does, you will find that profit is the reason it was done, and pro-
fit is seen as the engine of progress in a capitalist society.

You can't tell the difference between business and government be-
cause they are run by the same people (men who move from defense
contractors to senators or Secretaries of Defense—continued inter-
changing directors of business and government), for the same ends—-
increasing profits. Little ditties appear on the news all the time
about how General Motors knows that to put less metal in the bodies
of cars endangers life, but they can't endanger their profits.

Talk of the social responsibility of business is a sham. To get
what we need in this society we must have money, and to get money
we must make a profit off the sale of our labor or by controlling
the labor stolen from others. It doesn't matter what gets in the
way of profit-making. We know that we cannot exist in this society
without money and we do what we can to get it. This kind of be-
havior on the individual level is necessary when a whole society
works this way. When the powerful institutions of society are
profit-motivated, the needs of the people fall by the wayside.

Big business (and big organizations, big professions) is the
pillar of this country and serves the interest of a small number
of families - those who inherit wealth and positions and their
hired managers who manipulate economic policies resulting in de-
pressions, unemployment, inflation or whatever is needed to prop
up the profits of the 200 large corporations. Economic disasters
for average people - like recessions and unemployment -- aren't
unplanned as big business and government would have you believe—-
they are planned by people with a class interest. It's socialism
for the rich and capitalist competition for the poor in America.

The corporate capitalist system is also based on competition.

We do not see competition as the means to meeting the basic needs
of all people. Cooperation is the only road we can take to assure
all people of decent lives. In this system, however, there cannot
be enough necessities for all people because there is more profit
in providing luxuries and non-necessities for the rich (and for
the poor). The nuclear family is an important part of economic
society, not something that always has and always will exist. Its
form has been determined by the changes in economic society to a
large degree. 

The nuclear family also serves to keep women out of an
over-crowded job market, or at the bottom of it. It keeps them in
a servile position in that labor within the home isn't recognized
as useful production (in fact, it amounts to the man's boss pro-
curing the labor of two people for the price of one). Because the
little power one has in this society derives from the money ob-
tained from selling one's labor, women are kept down as an oppres-
sed group by the nuclear family which keeps them from social pro-
duction. Women have to be sold on the beauties of privatization
and the concomitant need for more and more goods, and on the func-
tion of the husband to provide them.

Co-optation is the attempt of the system to appease angry people.
It isn't that these reforms are bad, but that they are irrelevant to the struggle to free all women. Given that the system is an inhumane profit-oriented one which metes out material well-being unequally and only to those who are able competitors, the government cannot grant equality and justice, and this is what we're asking for. It is the nature of power that no one who has it gives it up volun-
tarily. The reforms the system makes in answer to demands made
upon it, are things that can be given without causing a change or
disruption within its structure. But without a redistribution of
power the inherent injustice and inhumanity of capitalism remain.
A system that has profit not humanity as its basic moving force
cannot meet a demand humanely.

Demands that are not formulated so that if met, the needs of all
women would be fulfilled, will be turned against us by men in
power to increase divisions between women along class and race
lines. For instance, the demand for equal job opportunity ap-
plies to only those women who are privileged enough to be able to
compete in the job market for bearable jobs. Unless we demand the
socialization of housework as well, we are being turned against
our poorer sisters who would be the natural maids in such a sys-
tem. Being able to compete equally for the dirtiest jobs doesn't
alleviate the situation of poor women. Enforced poverty is the
problem and only a restructuring of society will relieve it.

We for once want a solidarity between all women. We have been
kept isolated and apart from each other in the economic classes
of our men. Depending on which class we have been in as the pos-
session of men in that class, we have been subjected to the un-
equal advantages or suffering of that class and turned against
the supremacist, profit-oriented system. And racism too has been
used to divide us - to blind us to our mutual womanhood. For once
we refuse to be bought off with advantages at the expense of our
sisters. We must free all our sisters to free ourselves to be
more than commodities owned and controlled by classes of men.

If we are serious in our commitment to build a society that
meets the needs of all people, then we must be careful to set our
goals high and formulate the demands of our movement in revolu-
tionary terms so that we will not be co-opted by accepting reforms
which can only help the lives of women who already have the privi-
lege of an acceptable skin color and an acceptable pocketbook.

2

The economy depends on competition between nuclear 

10. WE DEMAND AN END TO THE
DISCRIMINATION AGAINST OUR
LESBIAN SISTERS.

4. WE DEMAND THAT WOMEN RE-
CEIVE EQUAL PAY, EQUAL WORK,
AND EQUALITY IN THE JOB MARKET.

3. WE DEMAND THAT WOMEN BE
GIVEN FREE SELF-DEFENSE AND
PHYSICAL TRAINING.

Every time there is a strike against institutions like Universi-
ties or churches and the people make demands on them, there are
always some who point out that these institutions have no power
to meet demands such as stopping the Vietnamese war, racism, or
sexism. Nor do they have the inclination or money to provide free
education for all people, free 24-hour day care and free medical
care. They couldn't meet any of these demands without a radical
change in the structure and in the structure of the country. We
demand day care and medical care, adequate annual incomes, and
education because that is the minimum people need to live, but we
know it will take a revolution before people get what they need
out of this country.

If we believe that capitalism is inherently exploitative and
that anything short of abolishing that economic system entirely
will still leave some people oppressed, then we will be careful to
formulate our demands in a non-cooptable way—that is so that we
will not think they have been met by just a reform of the system.
For instance, the demand for abortion for women is stated two
different ways by women's liberation groups. The political conscious-
ness behind the demand is reflected by the way it is formulated.
Groups that demand the legalizing of abortion without demanding
that it be free do not have in mind the needs of the last first.
They also don't have their eyes open. Several states have lega-
lized abortion, but its cost still prevents millions of women from
obtaining them. The system has met the demand in a reformist way,
but the solution did not solve the problem for all women. The
liberal statement of the abortion demand also naively assumes that
it will be administered justly by an inhumane government. There
is no concern over the genocidal possibilities of legalized abor-
tion: that just as Puerto Rican women were used like guinea
pigs for testing the pill, abortion may be used to control the
growth of the third world within this country.

In formulating our demands we must keep in mind that women— all
women have been denied power and control over their lives and
that is what is needed. We do not ask to merely be granted the
availability of certain medical services but we ask that we have
control and decision-making power over what those services will
be.

We feel that the importance of our demands lies not in the abil-
ity of the present system to grant or not grant them but in the
content of those demands. For if our demands are for things which
truly will meet the needs of all women not just women who already
have advantages due to economic class or race, they will communi-
cate to all women that those of us involved in the women's libera-
tion movement are serious in our desire to liberate all women,

And they will hopefully communicate to many women the fact that
their needs are not being met within the present system.

Most important, the making of demands is a way for us to begin
to envision the society we want—the kind of real changes that
will be worth the struggle because they will free all women. We
begin thus to define the work that must be done before and after
a revolution to establish conditions within which all people can
live decently. We also begin to define the commitment we must
make, the demands on our own time and energy to bring about the
liberation of all women.

5. WE DEMAND THAT EVERY IN-
DIVIDUAL IN THIS SOCIETY RE-
CEIVE A GUARANTEED ADEQUATE
INCOME.

2. WE DEMAND THAT FREE ADE-
QUATE HEALTH CARE BE AVAILABLE
FOR ALL PEOPLE.

1. WE DEMAND THAT A SYSTEM
OF DAY CARE CENTERS BE ESTAB-
LISHED.

7. WE DEMAND AN END TO TRACK-
ING IN THE SCHOOLS AND THE IM-
MEDIATE ESTABLISHMENT OF FREE
AND RELEVANT EDUCATION.

WORKSHOPS

Saturday Sept 12 # Sept
Wesley House

IZ0 N: Dvbug Ug

hy Wonsnae Lkeraton®

/ 0:00 2am

730) py

Cordcli-gniag

The design on the cover is by Roxanne
Dunbar and reprinted from the
thrice of No More Four Kuo Games.

Vol. 1, No. 5

AIn’T.