when will it boil

Now with this kind of coverage in the media, it's no  
wonder that people of color or an unpopular culture marry  
Americans as soon as they can.

This, as I see it, is where the races and cultures part,  
because sooner or later the other white cultures do assimi-  
late in some kind of way. But the non-white people, especial-  
ly those races that have a heavy black influence, remain out-  
side the sphere of acceptability. Although there's still  
something "acceptable" to some degree about those that are  
not black. I cannot judge too well about the ranking of the  
races because such a large percentage of them are not middle  
class, and I am a very privileged person of color.

the hard facts

Here are some of my favorite examples of the melting pot  
in action:

Remember Tonto, that lovable asshole? "Tonto" is the  
Spanish word for ‘fool’, so that only brown people know that  
the Indian is being slurred. Divide and conquer.....

My cousin, a Cuban refugee, found herself in American high  
school knowing almost no English. Classes were in English  
naturally, so she had to deal with that, BUT she was also re-  
quired to take a foreign language. Spanish was her native  
language so that didn't count. She was forced to take French.  
She dropped out.

Brown working and lower class kids in Texas learn not to  
use Spanish in school on the first day when they get beat up for  
doing it.

The now mayor of New York City was asked during his cat-  
paign about what he was going to do about the fact that NYC  
was a bilingual city. His answer was that he would make every  
attempt to make sure everyone learned English.

Anyway it's real clear to me why people of color have  
such a hard time communicating with each other thanks to the  
melting pot, and why too working class whites and non-whites  
feel such antagonism toward each other.

While the melting pot is cooking up these stereotypes  
to disembowel everyone's history, they're also "packaging"  
images for Viet Nam, Africa, Latin America, etc.

Foreign countries have come to be something of a joke.  
The real problems of real people become just another Exced-  
rin headache for America, according to the 6 o'clock news.

What's happening in Third World countries now is actu-  
ally so bad the truth comes as shock to even the most dis-  
trustful of the American dream. Dole pineapple just col-  
lapsed Hawaii's economy and moved to another island where  
labor is 20 cents an hour. Viet Nam bleeds on unnoticed now.  
Famine plagues Africa. The bananeros (banana plantation  
owners) strengthen their stronghold in South America daily.

A WOMAN? Maus (47Up)

Haitian refugees to the US are denied admittance because  
most are black and the government that took power is right-  
wing enough for American standards,  
gotten better with such "old" topics as  
Korea, etc., etc?

Do you think anything's  
Bangladesh, Laos,  

The melting pot disgusts me as a Third World dyke.

We have all been trained to be such monsters that the only  
way to get rid of racism and cultural elitism is the way  
to get rid of all the other oppressions—total revolution.  
This information is to help people figure out what is oppres-  
sive to themselves and what they need to change or recog-  
nize.

hope it does that.

my problem

You know your problem's race

when  
even  
when  
even  
when  
even  
when  
even  
when  
even  
when  
even  
when  
even  
when  
even  
when  
even  
when  
even  
when  
even  
when  
even  
when  

even  
when  
even  

your father is ridiculed for his lousy English

though he's a rich fucker

the kids yell "We still like you anyway"

though they're running away from you

the white relatives treat you like shit

though your mother's white

your grandmother makes your father stay on the porch

though it's 5 below outside

Spanish is the secret code you remember

though it's sometimes dangerous to use it

white people say Spanish is easy

though they can't speak it

white people ask you to translate their Mexican shirts

though they don't need to know what they say

Ricky Ricardo is someone you identify with

though he makes you sick

you're called "a dark beauty"

though you're treated as if you are white

you're asked your opinion of the Frito Bandito

though everybody thinks he's an asshole

the Latin relatives think of themselves as white

though they call you "halfbreed"

white people think of you as an interesting cultural  
experience

though they wouldn't want their sister to marry one

white people say "are you Spanish?"

though you're Latin and only you dig that difference,

You'd like to be able to explain that

when

racist white people want to tell you

their truly reactionary feelings about race  
BECAUSE YOU PASS

and that makes them

so much more comfortable

because everybody knows

you have the option to cop out.

Although you regret that you do  
because you feel  
the difference.

You're looking for something  
nobody has given you,  
certainly nobody white,

nobody full-blooded.

Maybe another halfbreed could,  
although they haven't yet.  
Another spic halfbreed dyke?

Well

certainly if you could find her

and get her to stick around

and still remember what you have to say...

Then maybe you could explode

and let loose your best thoughts

instead of getting that familiar headache,

that compact ball of stifled feelings,

that no Excedrin can cure

because it hurts you all the way down to your gut.