and strongest in women, and as we begin to define ourselves as  
women, the qualities coming to the fore are the same ones a mother  
projects in the best kind of nurturing relationship to a child:  
empathy, intuitiveness, adaptability, awareness of growth as a  
process rather than as goal-ended, inventiveness, protective feel-  
ings towards others and a capacity to respond emotionally as well  
as rationally. If matriarchy means a society in which these are  
the qualities all human beings admire and strive to embody, a so-  
ciety in which the paradigm for all social relationships is the  
relationship of a healthy and secure mother to her child, then  
matriarchy means nothing less than the end of oppression.  

Interestingly enough, the materialist analysis brings us to  
conclusions similar to the ones I have just set forth from an  
idealist standpoint. In the Marxist dialectical-materialist view  
of history, the "vanguard" of the "revolutionary class" is that  
group which is not only greatly exploited by the class in power  
but which is also performing labor essential to the functioning  
of society. The ruling class is thereby forced to respond to de-  
mands which it puts forth in the name of the oppressed. A third  
requirement is that the class be potentially collective; each mem-  
ber should not be severely isolated from every other. In classical  
Marxism, the "revolutionary vanguard" is composed of the "indus-  
trial proletariat" who must sell their labor to the capitalists  
in order to eat, whose labor is essential to industry and there-  
fore to society, and whose work process is socialized. No revolu-  
tion founded on Marxist principles has adhered to the classic pat-  
tern: in Russia the proletariat was a tiny minority with no influ-  
ence at the time of the Bolshevik revolution, and Mao had to re-  
write both Marx and Lenin to suit Chinese conditions, defining the  
peasantry as the "vanguard" in that context. The industrial prole-  
tariat in the U.S. today are a larger group than in either pre-  
revolutionary Russia or prerevolutionary China, but are not, by  
and large, an exploited one. Through unions they have acquired a  
significant share of power, and their right-wing views do not  
spring from "false class consciousness" but rather from a hard-  
nosed sense of their own self-interest. Taken alone, Third World  
male industrial workers are much less privileged, and women in  
industry are the most exploited of all of these in respect to both  
wages and working conditions; but these very divisions of the  
"proletariat" show the obstacles to its solidarity more pointedly  
than anything else. However, if, with Firestone, we transfer our  
focus from economics to sex, that is, from production to repro-  
duction, the Marxist terminology itself begins to make more sense.  
For there is very clearly a large group of women who by reason  
both of exploitation and importance to the society perfectly an-  
swer the requirements of the vanguard, and who are increasingly  
closely in touch with one another. These women are, of course,  
mothers.  

Mothers live by their labor yet generally without standardized  
wages. If they have husbands who earn good money and are generous,  
they are amply supplied - but only as long as they can keep their  
husbands. Otherwise, they have little or nothing outside the nec-  
essities and whatever they do have goes to their children first.  
The only mothers who do earn a standard wage for the labor of  
child-rearing are those on welfare, and that pay is barely enough  
to sustain life. The job is without guarantees of security of any  
kind. Its workday is twenty-four hours, workweek seven days, no  
vacations, no holidays. Total dedication to the job is expected,  
and yet a woman who works "only" in the home is regarded, with  
some contempt, as an unemployed housewife. Women with children are  
the women who most frequently suffer from fatigue, headaches, list-  
lessness, depression, insomnia, digestive disorders, loss of ener-  
gy, nervous tension and other illnesses common to women. If the  
women who work in factories were all replaced by men, it would rep-  
resent some economic cost to industry but no alteration in the  
power structure or the basic assumptions of society concerning sex  
and class roles. The labor of these same women in the home, how-  
ever - and of all women who work at child-rearing, whether of their  
own children, adopted children or someone else's children for wages  
- cannot be replaced on a mass scale without cataclysmic changes in  
the social structure.  

Mothers are a distinctly defined group. Nevertheless, their in-  
terests as a group are in no way opposed to the interests of women  
as a whole, but are rather intimately linked with these. For mo-  
therhood itself is only the concrete expression of that potential  
which defines all women. Accordingly the domestic situation of  
women underlies the way we are treated on the job market. But the  
point of Mother Right is to reshape the family according to the  
perceptions of women, and to reshape the society in the image of  
this new matriarchal family. Because motherhood cuts across econ-  
omic class, race and sexual preference, a society in which women  
were powerful by virtue of being mothers would not be divided  
along any of these lines. Nor would any new division between women,  
such as between mothers and childless women, arise, because the  
root of motherhood and the root of female consciousness are, I  
believe, the same.  

Returning to my personal experience again, my self-interest in  
changing society is bound up with that of women who have children  
much more deeply than it is, for example, with women demanding  
equal pay for equal work, despite the fact that I am single, child-  
less and must work to support myself. If I had to sum up in a few  
words what I feel to be my own oppression in this society, I would  
say, "The enormous economic, social and psychological obstacles  
against bearing and raising children of my own." While my situation  
as a fugitive seems to all but eliminate any hope that I might  
raise a child of my own, even these unusual circumstances are only  
slightly more handicapping than those any other woman faces when  
contemplating motherhood without marriage, or at least a stable  
relationship to a man. These obstacles and the tools to overcome  
them are beginning to be studied and developed by many different  
women, notably by Lesbians who have or want to have children. The  
oppression suffered by women whose sexual preference is for other  
women is peculiar to patriarchy, it seems to me, and would be elim-  
inated as soon as women cease to be pawns in male power games. If  
Mother Right were the informing principle of society, it would make  

8 volume 3 number 4  

no difference whether a woman lived with men or women, let alone  
with whom she slept. A woman would be powerful and respected simply  
as a woman, and particularly esteemed as a mother, regardless of  
whom she lived with. For far from being in a position to exploit  

a woman because she chose to live and/or sleep with other women, a  
man would consider himself fortunate if a woman only chose to live  
and/or sleep with him.  

The conditions of life in the patriarchy are such that the over-  
whelming majority of women in the foreseeable future will continue  
to marry and raise children and to regard that role as the central  
one in their lives. This majority includes millions of women who  
also have jobs outside their homes. The Women's Movement is their  
movement not only because they are a majority, but because feminist  
consciousness springs directly from the role they play in society.  
Many segments of the Women's Movement are now beginning to implicit-  
ly recognize this truth and act upon it. N.O.W. is making a major  
push to speak to the needs of housewives by agitating for an end  
to discrimination against married women by banks, insurance compan-  
ies and credit unions. Radical feminists are demanding less that  
women leave men, and suggesting that it might be more effective in  
building a revolutionary base if women instead move to become heads  
of their families. Outside the consciously political segment of  
the Women's Movement, housewives are beginning to unite and to agi-  
tate for their common interests, starting with lower food prices.  
More mothers are expressing their dissatisfactions and talking  
about their problems, while not necessarily seeing these as rela-  
ted to the Women's Movement; more women within the Movement are  
beginning to experience their feelings as mothers as feelings  
which are integral to their identities as women. Demands relating  
to jobs, professional opportunities and electoral representation  
will continue to be important, partly because the unequal treatment  
of women in these areas makes people aware of women's overall in-  
ferior status, and partly because increasing numbers of women  
want and need to support themselves with jobs outside the home.  

But the Women's Movement must, and will, begin to focus on those  
demands which relate concretely to women's role in child-rearing.  
These more radical-feminist demands include: wages for all women  
engaged in child-rearing; paid holidays and vacations; collective  
child-care centers controlled by mothers with the participation  

of all members of the community, including fathers, older children  
and childless adults; laboratories and research facilities to be  
turned over to feminist scientists so that research into contra-  
ception, fertility, pregnancy and birth can be conducted in women's  
interests; hospital and outpatient facilities related to women's  
health to be run and staffed by women; self-help clinics, financed  
by the government but under community control; artificial insemin-  
ation, sterilization procedures, facilities for extra-uterine birth,  
and related technology to be made widely available. Technology is  
a powerful tool which will free us to bear and raise our children  
in our own way at our own time. It must be turned over to women  
now, in order to prevent its becoming an even more powerful weapon  
against us and indeed against all life.  

It is the uprising of women which will presage the end of op-  
pression, but this uprising must be based on more than opposition  
to oppression and the definition of Woman as Other. It must be an  
affirmation of the power of female consciousness, of the Mother.  
The changes which it will embody can perhaps be better imagined  
as primarily spiritual and religious, rather than economic and  
social, though they will include and embody the latter. Thus a more  
apt analogy than the Cuban or Chinese revolutions might be the Ref-  
ormation or the Christian revolution, or perhaps the revolution  
made by the patriarchy itself when the ancient gynocracies were  
invaded. I use these analogies because in each of these cases the  
economic and political changes were enormous, but they followed  
rather than preceded sweeping changes in human consciousness. The  
ripples spread through the institutions from the masses of people,  
rather than the other way around.  

These were not, and never will be, gentle ripples. The oppress-  
or is equipped with the tools of mechanized violence as never be-  
fore; we are only beginning to reclaim the ancient rage that will  
defeat his evil. Feminism is teaching us, again, the healing power  
of anger trained on the true enemies of ourselves and our children,  
and our anger will supply us the resources we will need against  
the Man's weapons. Yet, from another point of view, we may remind  
ourselves that the violence of this cataclysm is no more nor less  
than the outward sign of a struggle of the human spirit. It seems  
very significant to me that simultaneously with the contemporary  
rise of feminism, there is a great rise of interest in psychic and  
spiritual phenomena. Because the Women's Movement gets lumped with  
the left in many people's minds, it is mistakenly regarded as  
narrowly "political." Yet feminism concerns more than political  
power, essential as that is. It is closely tied to theories of  
awakening consciousness, of creation and rebirth and of the essen-  
tial oneness of the universe - teachings which lie at the heart of  
all Goddess-worshiping religions.  

We are on the threshold of what all the ancient wisdoms, many  
of them handed down from matriarchal times, teach is a new age of  
consciousness and simultaneously on what seems scientifically to  
be a threshold in the evolution of the species, as the genetic  
code is broken and life produced in the laboratory. Could it not  
be that just at the moment masculinity has brought us to the brink  
of nuclear destruction or ecological suicide, women are beginning  
to rise in response to the Mother's call to save Her planet and  
create instead the next stage of evolution? Can our revolution  
mean anything else than the reversion of social and economic con-  
trol to Her representatives among Womankind, and the resumption  
of Her worship on the face of the Earth? Do we dare demand less?  

PA  

ait ies