During the last meeting of AIAW, I realized that I hadn't written  
anything for the paper since mid-summer that was from my heart or  
my soul. It could be partly, as the "No More Fun And Games" arti-  
cle says, that the women's movement is dead or dying. I wouldn't  
say dead—I would say at a loss as to what direction to move in.  
There are many sincere women who have come to consciousness through  
the women's movement—realized their own oppression as women and  
that of Third World and poor people because of capitalism and real-  
ized that revolution is the only solution. It is this last thing—  
revolution—that is slowing me up. After early consciousness  
raising, feeling the solidarity of straight women with me, a gay  
woman, after working together, learning to get angry, learning to  
be tough and like myself that way, after beginning AIAW, putting so  
much into it and feeling we were doing something to further the  
struggle, after beginning to deal with class chauvinism and racism,  
being stymied by being middle class and my own oppressiveness but  
somehow continuing to work, after Fred Hampton's death, Angela  
Davis' capture, George Jackson's murder and after Attica. After  
all these things I saw that what it came down to was revolution  

and armed struggle. And that ain't pretty.  

I think the numbness I feel politically is due to the sobering  
realization of the nature of armed struggle. That my courage has  
not quite caught up with my political conviction.  

If this sounds middle class it is because I am from middle  
class. I have not had to daily fight for my existence as some  
Third World and poor people have. I have had the option to think  
about courage and armed struggle, to consider them carefully and  
waste a lot of time finding the correct political direction. Since  
this is the record of a middle class woman trying to come to grips  
with the realities of being a revolutionary, it will probably only  
speak to middle class women. Many poor people have known the nec-  
essity for armed struggle for a long time.  

Six months ago when someone would ask me why I was revolutionary,  
I answered as Daniel Cohn-Bendit (Danny the Red from Germany) did.  
That I was revolutionary because it is the best thing to be. But  
now I don't think it's the best thing to be at all. It is fright-  
ening and seems impossible. When I look into my future, I see no  
joyous victory, I see only years of tedious work, prison and death.  
I used to think this saying by a woman revolutionary was very beau-  
tiful: “If I return I shall kiss you. But if I fall along the way,  
I ask only that you do the same in the name of the revolution." It  
has a much different sense to me now that I don't see myself return-  
ing.  

In the end, I suppose, it doesn't matter if being a revolution-  
ary is the best thing to be or not. It is the only thing I can be  
and eventually I will find the courage.  

I don't mean to sound totally pessimistic. There are some hope-  
ful things going on in the women's movement—things that will help  
us find a direction. It's true that personal things are political,  
but I think we're realizing that it becomes politically unproduct-  
ive for women to spend a lot of energy trying to make their person-  
al lives right-on politically. I've seen straight women defensive  
about not being gay and going through inner hell because they aren't  
really comfortable with being gay even though they think it right  
politically and keep pushing themselves to change. Their defensive-  
ness has real causes. When gay women here first brought up the is-  
sue of lesbianism, we demanded that straight women deal with it and  
the lesbian within them. I needed to do that then, because I need-  
ed to feel their support and acceptance. But now that I realize  
people change and deal with things as fast as they can under their  
present circumstances, I regret the effects of our demands.  

What I'm hopeful about and see as a healthy and progressive  
thing for us here, is a change in attitude that separates the per-  
sonal from the political in some ways. That we now seem to know  
that spending a lot of time in AIAW dealing with life-style or  
spending a lot of time worrying about the correctness of our person-  
al lives does little to further the struggle and in effect wastes  

I think the numbness I feel politically is not due to the nature  
of armed struggle but due to the lack of any strategy. I think  
in some vague way I saw the women's movement and the work I did  
in it as a process that would lead up to and define armed struggle.  
That didn't happen and I'm not the only one left dangling.  

It hasn't been unlike other movements or cultural trends. Our  
analysis wasn't necessarily wrong, our consciousness not necessarily  
bad but we knew what we wanted and didn't know how to get it. I  
feel stranded with an analysis that makes this society/world  
totally unacceptable to me and one that includes the necessity of  
armed struggle to bring about a revolution as a given, but do not  
have any idea as to how I act upon such an analysis. What is the  
real power structure and how can it be seized? I'm amazed at my  
naivete about the structure of this society. It dawns on me that  
we talked more about who our enemy is and what we want in a post-  
revolutionary society much more than what it would take to win  
that society. When it became clear to me that Women's Liberation  
was not magically bringing on a revolution, that the changes it  
made in my own life (the community—the political subculture) were  
not permanent and couldn't be depended on, I retreated into my  
personal life of worrying about supporting myself, surviving, money  
in the bank, etc. The hassles and realities of my life, being  
gay, being basically alone without much money, for sanity's sake  
had to be divided somewhat from my political beliefs. Or maybe  
that's not it. Maybe my politics got narrowed down to wanting a  
revolution and I feel less concern for how people lead their  
personal lives. I really don't care if so and so is rich. I do  
care about that word becoming archaic someday when there will be  
nothing to compare it to—when free becomes a useless preface  
to words like housing, medical care, etc. As a result my attitude  
has changed toward other people and their lives. I also feel a  
growing compassion with the hassles of living in a capitalist  
sexist, racist country. I can't be hard on people for not leading  
pure (politically speaking) lives.  

But I don't know if I am speaking to your fears about armed  
struggle. I am afraid. The risks involved can't be taken very  
lightly. But I think the fears I have of being alone, of not  
being able to survive in this society—the everyday get by, make  
a buck, pay the rent, don't get sick hassles scare me more lately.  
That could be total bullshit since the everyday stuff is a reality  
to me and armed struggle still much of an abstraction.  

I'm not sure how much class enters into someone's view of  
armed struggle. It's clear that there is no answer to the oppression  
of lower and working class people but armed struggle just as it  
is clear that middle class people have individual and class options  
within this society to make their lives comfortable. That doesn't  
mean that many of us not from the middle class don't choose to  
live uncomfortable lives (or at least try to stay alive) rather  
than risk them in battle.  

More and more I find it hard to say I am a revolutionary.  

More and more I find it hard to say I am a revolutionary. It  
seems significant to me that I am a person who wants a social/  
economic revolution. There seems to be a difference. I live in  
an unrevolutionary place and must survive there and the reality of  
my desire to change that place doesn't negate the reality of me  
and my unrevolutionary life now. I'm not sure that makes sense.  

What I really wanted to say again is that I'm more terrified of  
not knowing what to do than of doing it. I think.  

a woman? 7 January 1972 page nine