Muckin’ with the Media

The two articles below are reprinted from the June 5-19 issue

of RAT.

Some of us from the Women’s
Center, RAT, and the Women's House
of Detention Bail Fund became aware
only a few hours before the taping, of
the appearance of two of our sisters
from the Radical Feminists on the Dick
Cavett Show with Hugh Hefner. At the
time we were greatly concerned with
bailing out Dionne Donghi before she
would be extradited to Buffalo the
next morning. We questioned why the
women wanted to appear on a show
with Hugh Hefner. It seemed an obvious
setup, designed to turn debate into
entertainment with total disregard for
the gut issues of women's oppression
and with total lack of seriousness for
women’s liberation as a political move-
ment. Our contention was and is that
there is no point to a discussion with a
sexist system's symbol of rich man-
pimp, hero-worshipped and successful
for making his macho off the backs, tits,
and asses of women. If at all, the only
way to appear with Hefner, it seemed to
me, is to treat him symbolically, as an
enemy — to use the forum as a means of
drawing out of him blatant remarks
about his feelings towards women. In

this way we could reach women in the

immediate and remote audience. How-
ever, few of us are together enough to
be able to pull off such a confrontation.
And there are understandable reasons
why women are powerless in such
situations.

The show, like every other institu-
tion, was male-structured, and run in
such a fashion as to force the women on
the panel into playing by men’s rules to
communicate about their own oppres-
sion. It is difficult enough for a woman
to confront a single man in an intimate

relationship, and
even more difficult for a woman to see
herself as strong, articulate and serious
enough to speak before an audience.
Furthermore, the glamorous and fright-
ening TV image depends on personality
for the projection of ideas, and on the
ability to talk and respond to two males
well-prepared and versed in their roles.
The odds are clearly against the woman.

We felt a solidarity with the women
as our sisters and we went to the Cavett
studio to support them, but also to ask
for their support. What we wanted
support for was our decision to use this
opportunity to confront Hefner with a
demand for reparations — reparations
owed us for his abuse of women as sex
objects, reparations to be used for the
women’s liberation movement, and
specifically for the bail fund. This
demand did not contradict our total
disrespect for all Hugh Hefner is and
represents nor our belief in the necessity
of ultimately offing him and the state
which encouraged his exploits. We felt
that at least by making this demand at
the beginning of the show, an exposure
of the gut issues would have to follow.

We telephoned and attempted to
personally contact the two women
scheduled for appearance. However,
they were nervous and turned on to
their TV appearance, feeling quite
cooperative with the show and its aims
partly because of the “niceness” of the
woman, a Cavett employee, who had
helped them get on the show. The
women listened to our plans but agreed
only to think about what we were going

to do. They did not offer any tangible
support.

The women’s liberation contingent
was treated as prelabelled freak ex-
tremists, as we had feared and expected.
We were seated in the balcony without
access to the stage. We were zeroed in
on by male ushers hired to keep us from
making extreme remarks and spon-
taneous comments, “Please,” the ushers
pleaded, “don’t make trouble for us.”

Our strategy became to get onto the
first floor and at appropriate moments

direct our voices, criticisms, and de-
mands to the stage. We hoped after-
wards to be brought onto the stage with
the help of the women panelists. A lone
sister, among the bunnies and their
escorts who filled the first floor, was
right on target with her well-placed
comment: “You have been exploiting
women, and we demand reparations."
Sisters in the balcony and other women
on the first floor joined her in yelling at
the stage. The two women on the panel
said nothing.

Later three of us tried again to reach
Hefner and make our demands. During a

commercial we tried to get onto the
stage. A rush of ushers tried to keep us
off. Again there was no response from
the panel women, although we were
barely 15 feet from them. There were
scattered women’s voices shouting, “Let
them speak! Let them speak!” This
action continued as the show went back
on the air. A pig was called in to force
the lone woman in front off the stage
while ushers dealt with the others. We
had no intention of getting arrested. To
call attention to what was being done to
us, the woman shouted out to the
audience and over the air: “They are
using guards and pigs here to drag us off
for speaking, for asserting ourselves. 
This is a fascist country.”

Hours later, after we left the theatre,
we heard of the repudiation of “those
militants” by our sisters.

It is wrong to blame what went down
simply on the media. The media helped
set the conditions and was destructive in
bringing out our own divisiveness. We
must make clear however that there are
differences between us, and that these
differences are serious political ones.
Once the need for revolution for change
is accepted, debate with the enemy is
seen for what it is — futile, liberal
engagements that tend to confuse and
lose sight of real issues.

Paraphrase of old Chinese
Good almost anywhere in

Women who lie down in dungheaps
Get up covered with shit.

On Tuesday night, May
26th, two sisters shared the stage

on the Dick Cavett Show while sexist pigs sat there agonizing for them — approval. We’ve got to think of

Amerika

the image of female unity that
we strive for was sacrificed. It
with Super Pimp Hugh Hefner just didn’t do any good to ask
for the Women’s Movement.
This is the second time two of
our sisters have dignified Hugh
Hefner by appearing with him. A
thoroughly bad move to begin
with, it was compounded by the
fact that the two spokeswomen,
Holly and Diane, sat expression-
less while their sisters called out
from the audience and got
dragged away by the pigs. When
several of our sisters who had
come to the studio called out to
the stage, the only one on
camera who responded was Dick
Cavett—he threatened to throw
them out and he did. Throughout
this confrontation, Holly and
Diane stared blankly off into the
distance as if they’d been hyp-
notized by the bright lights. It
looked like a parody of legendary
female disloyalty. The all-
too-familiar triangle—man on
top, women divided below—was
being glorified for the nation. It
felt even more lousy than usual
just sitting at home, watching it
happen.

Holly and Diane ignored their
sisters in favor of a word with
their oppressor. The result of
much consciousness-raising fell to
pieces in the face of male
oppression, and at the very least

better ways to get the word out.

I’ve heard some good argu-
ments for abandoning the use of
the male-dominated media alto-
gether. We shouldn't see the
kind of public confrontation
that took place Tuesday night as
a fair challenge when it always
takes place on their terms and
on their turf. But if circum-
stances were different—if we
controlled the variables—we’d be
reaching a lot of women who
want to be reached. The inter-
viewer, if not a woman, should
at least be sympathetic and
serious. We owe it to ourselves
never to get defensive. We have a
right to indignation. We have a
right to be humorless—we’re not
entertainers. It’s obvious we'll
never argue our way to freedom
on prime-time TV. Therefore,
we've got to stop the male-
dominated media from absorbing
us. If we don’t, we run the
risk of remaining a dirty joke
that elicits the uncertain laugh-
ter of defeated wives and girl-
friends. As long as we continue
to be intimidated nation-wide,
women will continue to be
dominated at home. Nights like
Tuesday night fail women and
set the struggle back.

Vol. No. 2

love & revolution to the RAT sisters & all
sisters who forcibly prevented a video-tape
"fuck-in" from being shown at the recent
conference on alternative media

ALTERNATIVE
MEDIA?

Ain't I A Woman, and many other publi-
cations by sisters around the country
began as we felt a need for alternative
media. We have to communicate without
the constraints of the pig press where
we've always had our page for recipes,
fashions and advice on how to please a
man.

Working conditions in the pig media
demand that any woman who works there
must accept a male definition of what
women are and should be. Women who
work as reporters work for the Man.
Usually the man with the most contempt
for women sits as their editor. Little
wonder that the women survive by seeing
themselves as exceptions.

The only thing that appears in the
pig media for women is propaganda in its
worst form, glorification of the social
stereotypes that keep men happy and
ridicule, vilification or pity for the
women who don't live up (down) to those
stereotypes.

Well, women in WL try not to live
that way, but those reporters keep com-
ing and we keep talking to them. Now
we get women reporters but only because
we refuse to talk to the male ones. We
should learn from that. We don't need
the pig media to sustain Women's Liber-
ation because the pig media didn't
create Women's Liberation.

Two ideas the media wouldn't know how
to convey even if those ideas didn't so
offend the values of the media pigs are
that WL is made up of women who (1) are
serious in a challenge to male authority
and (2) like other women. Put those
together and they're too much. And
when WL women take part in media events
they can make neither point. The con-
straints of the situation women have
accepted won't allow those points to
be made.

How can we believe any woman is ser-
ious who would sit to discuss her op-
pression with Dick Cavett and Hugh Hef-
ner? The best that women can expect
from such a situation is to come off
as funny bunnies (or, more likely,
strange pieces of ass).

So how do we get out of the Step-'N-
Fetchit era with the media? (Because
that's just where we are.) Surely not
by working through the pig media. We
work in other ways, through local WL
groups, through our own media, until
the pigs like Hefner and Cavett are a-
fraid to enter the same room with WL
women in the same way pig racists fear
the very presence of Black Panthers.