REVOLUTION IN THE NORTH,

AMERICAN REVOLUTIONARIES TAKE OFF FOR KOREA

KOREA

NEW YORK (LNS) -- A delegation of American revolutionaries en route to
Korea sent the following message, written in a Moscow airport, to Liberation
News Service's office in New York:

Liberation News Service

Korea in 1970. A nation of 41 million
separated by a border bristling with tanks,
troops, and artillery. In the North 12
million people -- a thriving socialist
state, economically self-sufficient, pro-
viding free medical care and free educa-
tion and one of the highest standards of
living in Asia. In the South, a brutal
military dictatorship backed up by 60,000
U.S. troops in over 100 bases, armed with
tactical nuclear weapons. Over 30 million
people living in poverty are made to com-
pete for the dwindling store of American
products sold at wildly inflated prices.

How did Korea get this way?

A chunky peninsula jutting off the
northeast end of China, only a few hun-
dred miles from Japan, Korea with its
abundant natural resources -- manganese,
iron ore, gold and miles of fertile land
has been a pawn of great powers for most
of its history. Till the end of the 19th
century, Korea was a virtual colony of
the Chinese Empire.

When the Chinese people began to top-
ple the oppression of 3000 years of feu-
dal rule in their own country, both
Japan and the United States stepped in
to bid for the now-vacant role of Korea's
"protector." However, the Japanese de-
feat in World War II left the U.S. as the
only strong capitalist power in East Asia.
And General MacArthur was only too glad
to take control of the southern half of
Korea as part of the U.S. occupation of
Japanese territories.

But most Koreans were looking forward
to being able finally to run their own
affairs. During the war, "people's com-
mittees" made up of every part of the pop-
ulation from Catholic priests to communist
guerrillas, sprouted up throughout Korea
to provide a kind of grass-roots democracy
to towns and villages and to coordinate
the struggle against the Japanese. When
Soviet troops in an agreement with the U.S.
occupied the northern half of Korea,
they recognized the people's committees

Sisters and Brothers --

Republic of Korea.

and unite the country.

or outside the U.S.
imperialist movement.

this enemy.

nationalist perspective.
POWER TO THE PEOPLE!

Kranzberg.

as legitimate governing bodies in the area.

The U.S. Military Command had a differ-
ent idea. Brushing off the southern repre-
sentatives of the people's committees as
irrelevant, the American occupiers began
to set up a government south of the agreed
upon 38th parallel. This government was
to carry out U.S. wishes faithfully, not
the least of them being to repress the
people's committees and all other mili-
tant manifestations of pro-independence
sentiment. Synghman Rhee, an undistin-
guished conservative nationalist who had
been living in the United States for thir-
ty years while most other nationalists
were battling Japanese troops, was brought
back to Korea, and by 1948 emerged as
President of the newly-christened Repub-
lic of Korea with its capital in Seoul.

The election process which made Rhee
president was something less than a model
of democratic procedures. The U.S. Mili-
tary Command had realized early in the
game that its chosen candidate would do
poorly in the areas north of the 38th
parallel where most people supported the
government of the people's committees,
which had already initiated a full-scale
campaign to abolish illiteracy and had
nationalized the primitive industrial
facilities the Japanese had built in the
mineral-rich north.

So, the Truman government rammed a
resolution through the United Nations Tem-
porary Commission on Korea, which was pack-
ed by nations favorable to the U.S. It
called for "separate elections" to be held
in the southern half of the peninsula
where over two-thirds of Korea's population
lives.

With the establishment of Rhee's gar-
rison state in the South, Koreans north
of the 38th parallel had little choice
but to forego hopes for the time being of
unifying their country under an independent
regime.

In September, 1948, representatives
from both halves of Korea set up the Demo-
cratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK)
with its capital in Pyongyang, a city of
one million inhabitants. The newly-con-

stituted government requested the with-
drawal of all foreign troops from its ter-
ritory, and the last Soviet troops left in
December. But the large American occupa-
tion army stayed where it was and began to
train and equip a colonial army in the
south.

MacArthur, Rhee, and Dulles (who was at
this time U.S. delegate to the U.N.) were
unanimous in feeling that the policy of
the southern regime should be to unify
the country under a pro-U.S. capitalist
system and that this aim could be accom-
plished in the end only by force.

To ensure that no unification would be un-
friendly to U.S. interests, the U.S. Congress
passed a "Korean Aid Bill" in February,
1950, to deprive Rhee's regime of all mil-
itary and other aid if it ever formed a
coalition government including members of
the Korean Workers Party, Korea's com-
munist party and the leading political force
in the DPRK.

Tensions near the artificial border were
ready to explode. Both the DPRK and Rhee’s
government moved troops and tanks up to
the parallel, and in the morning of June
25th, Rhee's troops, apparently without
the direct consent but certainly with the
knowledge of their U.S. advisers, invaded
the northern half of Korea.

Their fellow Koreans who intercepted
the attack were ready for it. The DPRK
Army counter-attacked and swept through
the southern part of the peninsula, liber-
ating Seoul and securing practically the
whole country in less than three months.

The Truman administration was at first
set back by the phenomenal weakness of
Rhee's army, but Harry had other cards up
his sleeve. On June 27, the United Nations
Security Council met without the USSR pre-
sent and with a DPRK representative barred
from attending. The U.S. convinced the
Council to pass a resolution condemning
the DPRK as an "invader" and pledging U.N.
support for armed forces to fight in Korea.
A year later in hearings before the Senate
Appropriations Committee, John Hickerson,
Assistant Secretary of State for U.N. Af-
fairs, admitted that the resolution which

Vow. 1, No. 4: Ain't I