Following is an excerpt from a letter  
in the June 11 issue of It Ain't Me  

Babe. The meeting with Roxanne Dunbar  
& Martha Atkins of the Southern Female  

Rights Union took place at Berkeley.  

..»-Roxanne spoke about the importance  
of dealing with racism in the women's  
movement. She criticized abortion re-  
peal and claimed that for WL to exert  
energies in this area was to water  
down the black movement. Unfortunately  
her position was unclear and inconsistent.  
Although she insisted that she  
was not advocating the reduction of WL  
to a support group for the black revo-  
lution, in fact, her position contained  
the seeds of just such a strategy.  
Oppression, she told us, had to be  
dealt with on its most basic level--  
life and death. Black people faced  
with genocide are the most oppressed  
group in America today. Legalized  
abortion would be used to further  
such genocide. "What are our indivi-  
dual lives (white women dying from il-  
legal abortions)" she asked, "compared  
to the genocide of a whole people?"  
Roxanne touched on issues that call  
for a lot of thought and discussion,  
issues vital to the women's movement.  
Yet, in this letter, I want to focus  
on other than the content of what she  
said. Before, I noted that Roxanne  
presented an inconsistent position. I  
came to that conclusion after I left  
the meeting. Sitting there in that  
audience, something very different was  
on my mind, "Why am I so stupid?" I  
thought, "Why can't I follow what she is  
saying?" Yet if it had been someone  
other than Roxanne Dunbar standing up  
there, saying what she was saying, I  
would have seen quite clearly that the  
thoughts were not holding together.  
Other elitist nasties kept coming into  
my mind as well--When other women in  
the audience expressed disagreement  
with what Roxanne said and then she  
replied to them, who did I listen to  
more carefully? Who did I credit with  
the most authority? Whose decision  
seemed more important? I confess, it  
was ROXANNE who I listened to and ex-  
pected answers from, stupid me who was  
afraid to raise her hand & ask a ques-  

tion, afraid of being thought silly or...  

Deja vu. It was just like being at  
a Leftist meeting dominated by Movement  
Machomen in days gone by. Now just how  
did this happen?  

First of all, Roxanne's meeting was  
structured in such a way that she was  
made to appear as an authority. She  
sat in front in view of everyone. She  
& Martha spoke at will, the rest had to  
raise our hands and painfully wait  
(some women had hands raised for an  
hour without being called on) to be  
recognized by them. Audience members  
were allowed one or two questions at  
most. Roxanne (and Martha, but not to  
so great an extent) talked after every  
question. I suppose the media factor  
was there too, us peons confronting  
our famous leader and theorist (who we  
read about in Newsweek and Time.)  

I don't know what we can do about  
media produced celebrities in our move-  
ment, but I feel the authority trip  
that went down at Roxanne's meeting  
was potentially very destructive...  

"Don't follow leaders  
watch your parking meters.”  
~-Mary Marvel  

(Reprinted from the June 5-19, 1970  
issue of RAT. The Feminists is a New  
York WL group.)  

THE FEMINISTS has always paraded itself as a  
feeler less group - that is, a group of equals. Despite this  
the media has consistently portrayed Ti-Grace Atkinson  
as the group's “leader”; “spokeswoman” and “theorist”.  
How could this happen in a group that professes to use  
the lot system for everything?  

Our group does choose by-lot for all tasks including  
contact with the media. Ti—Grace, however, separated  
her activities as a member of THE FEMINISTS from her  
appearances in the media as an individual expressing  
feminist ideas, the latter not subject to the lot. This  

accounts for much of the publicity she has received  

while a member of THE FEMINISTS.  

There is a belief in the Women’s Movement that it is  
necessary to cooperate with the media in allowing them  
to publicize certain individuals as this is the only way to  
spread ideas and effect change. We think that this belief  
is not only wrong, but it is also extremely dangerous.  
The media need stars; the movement does not. The  
important thing for us is getting our ideas across as free  
of individual personalities as possible. We don’t want  
women to enter the movement as somebody’s follower;  

we want everyone to contribute equally to her own  

liberation.  

The media uses stars for the very purpose of making  
ideas seem unimportant, just part of the show. Rather  
than appealing to reason, the star system nourishes and  
feeds upon an unfortunate characteristic of oppressed  
people - the need to look to someone else, to accept  
things on authority rather than trusting oneself. The  
result is the “cult of personality”, hero worship, the  
dependency of the leader/follower relationship.  

Realizing this, THE FEMINISTS passed the APRIL  
THE FIFTH RESOLUTION which reads as follows:  

Because the aim of THE FEMINISTS is revolution for  
all women and equality among all human beings;  

Because this revolution will be accomplished only  
through the collective mind and energy of women  
working together rather than individualistically;  

Because we believe that “feminist ideas” arise out of  
the common condition of women and are not therefore  
the exclusive property of any individual;  

Because we see the creation of “media stars” as  
contrary to the aims of our movement since it puts forth  
individual personalities as the originators of ideas and  
the source of inspiration rather than each and all women  
in common;  

Because we believe that the dissemination of feminist  
ideas is the work and responsibility of the groups of the  
movement and that these groups are therefore entitled  
to make political decisions about the use of the  
media;  

It is therefore resolved that all contact with the media  
on feminist issues by a member of THE FEMINISTS is  
to be decided upon by the group and chosen by lot. Any  
exceptions to the above must be approved by 2/3 of the  
group in advance.  

Anyone who violates this rule will be held  
accountable to the group. Anyone who flagrantly or  
consistently violates this rule will no longer be  
considered a member of THE FEMINISTS.  

ADDENDA: Any member of THE FEMINISTS who  
appears on the media is to be identified, if at all, as a  
member of THE FEMINISTS and not personally. The  
group is to decide if exceptions are to be made to this  
rule by a 2/3 rule.  

Two days after the resolution was passed Ti-Grace  
Atkinson withdrew from the group. Her reason: the  
resolution is “wrong on principle.”  

THE FEMINISTS is the first group in the Women’s  
Movement to bring up the principle of equality within  
our group. Our position on this issue is based on the  
assumption that the apparent inequality in accomplish-  
ment and talent among individuals is not innate but  
results from inequality of opportunity and life situation.  

To allow unequal treatment by the media is to dilute  
the force of the principle of equality within the  
Movement. Only concrete action gives credibility to an  
idea, makes it an issue and raises it above the level of  
mere rhetoric. Our resolution is a declaration that THE  
FEMINISTS intend to act, and not just talk, in  
accordance with the principle of equality and to keep  
this issue alive in the Movement.  

COMMENTS  

Usually tied to complaints about elitism is the notion that no one can tell me how  
to run my movement. But that kind of movement exists only in one person's head--it's  
not a movement, it's a cry of pain. If we are to be a movement we must deal with prob-  
lems like racism. We must find out if our actions on abortion repeal are so ill-con-  
ceived as to threaten black people and what we can do to assure that the means to our  

freedom isn't at the expense of other oppressed groups.  

Given American history we  

would be fools to dismiss any questions about black genocide.  

Agreed that we have to quit expecting answers from experts. I strongly disagree  
that the question "What are our individual lives compared to the genocide of a whole  
people" is inconsistent or unimportant. It would appear inconsistent only to a white  
woman. The question is a brutal reality in the lives of black women.  

The seeds of many strategies exist in WL. I'm worried about the seeds of a racist  
strategy which exist when white women say "no one can tell me how to run my movement."  

Indeed, deja vu. The old suffrage movement blossomed & grew when white women claimed  
a need for the vote to cancel the pernicious effects of giving the vote to black men.  

Vol. 1 No. 2  

ON  

The two articles appearing in the  
current issues of RAT & IT AIN'T ME  
BABE signify, I think, a revolt by sisters all over the country whose names  
we don't know against the heavies--the names we do know. There are two sides  
to the issue (and maybe more) but as a movement we can choose only one direc-  
tion. The question of equality--whether  
we need or want leaders--is a crucial  
one, for in a way the decision we come  
to will shape the core of our politics.  

I feel a great deal of compassion  
for the heavies. They have devoted a  
tremendous amount of time & energy to  
a movement that they are totally com-  
mitted to & it must be painful to have  
that movement dump on them.  

I am really impressed with the Fem-  
inists' Resolution & I respond with a  

real understanding to Mary Marvel's  

reactions to Roxanne. Most of us would  
because most of us will never be like  
them--will never speak as well, be as  
well known, and the idea of equality  
sounds pretty good. I wish I could talk  
to Roxanne or Ti-Grace about this issue.  
I doubt the result would be much.  
I know I would feel intimidated &  
would most likely accept what they  
said because I really believe they are  
more intelligent than I and would go  
away accepting their analysis even if  
it didn't feel comfortable to me. A  
lot of times I still find myself not  
listening to valid ideas because they  
are not well presented--meaning they  
are not presented in a style that I  
have been conditioned to think is in-  
telligent--cool, et al. And I question  
whether someone's ability or fame  
should be the determinate factor on  
how much they have to say about their  
life and what affects it.  

I can understand the argument that  

equality often means dragging everyone  
down a few notches--in effect keeping  
those with great abilities from using  
them--from growing. I don't want any-  
one kept down but I contend that in a  
leadership/follower relationship the  
follower is the one who is most likely  
kept down & there are more followers  
than leaders. Being a follower doesn’t  
do a hell of a lot for your self es-  
teem. The only thing you gain from the  
bottom half of a power relationship is  
hatred generally more toward yourself  
than those above.  

Any elite that develops will just  
from the advantages of that position  
gain more experience & receive more  
information than they would if they  
were not in that position. I don't  
think that the dynamics of a struc-  
tured situation change depending on  
who is involved. When I attack leader-  
ship I do not attack Roxanne. I don't  
want to destroy any leaders or follow-  
ers, I just don't want those roles to  
exist anymore.  

In order for them not to exist we  
must work within new structures. We  
really do not need to use our names  
when giving speeches or writing arti-  
cles. Gaining individual recognition  
for speaking & writing of course  
seems important. We have been condi-  
tioned to need recognition for being  
better in something & women have not  
been spared the desire for this recog-  
nition, just the recognition. I still  
want lots of money, a big car, a big  
house and never to have to work but  
don't anybody give it to me unless it  
is given to everyone. One person  
achieving means just that: one person  
is achieving and there are millions of  
us. The articles still need to be  
written, the speeches need giving, the  
struggle has to be waged & although  
one may not receive notoriety for hav-  
ing done so, if we win the rewards are  
high--freedom for everyone.