“the BASIC female truth, that women are oppressed and  
subjugated via the patrilinear family in a SEXUAL  
manner as economic SLAVES...”. 0 ¢ 4 If :  

Dear Sisters,  

Your issue of August 21, 1970 was sent to me here in England  
about last September. I read it with great interest and attention.  
I found it most congenial and enlightening. It does my heart good  
to know so many sisters are into this thing now. I have spent  
decades trying to think it through, having gone through hell with-  
out benefit of enlightenment, learning from errors and developing  
ideas under my own steam. I am now seriously considering expand-  
ing my ideas into a book with abundantly available documentation.  

I was brought up on and first came to the Woman Question (the  
name alone is enough to put you off) on Engels' premise that the  
solution is to bring women back into public industry. Yes, yes.  
I nodded my full agreement and espoused The Cause - without ever  
really going into it deeply. I see that NOW; it came to me  
recently. After six years of living in Ghana, I have now spent  
3+ in England. Believe me, travel like this - living in various  
places - does wonders for your views of Reality. For instance,  
in England, there are unions which gladly campaign for Equal Pay  
for Equal Work, and employers who pretend to be - maybe ARE -  
willing to grant it. Will such a victory even TOUCH this "Woman  
Question"? Bull roar. Everything will be worse than before  
because the men could then say, "Whaddya yellin' for? Ya GOT  
equal pay, aincha?"  

Without going into how I got there, I have arrived at the  
point where I see that the CORE of this Woman Question is that  
woman's MAIN FUNCTION IN SOCIETY is the production and reproduc-  
tion of labour power FOR NO WAGES. This thing that Karl Marx  
said about the man's wages covering his own AND the family's  
subsistence covers up HOW the woman is exploited. What is cover-  
ed up is that women are in fact a CLASS of economic slaves pro-  
ducing the BASIC commodity of the system, labour power, as the  
chattels of individual MEN - whose names they bear in proof  
thereof. The METHOD by which this slavery is perpetuated is the  
patrilinear family, whether monogamous (which in reality it is  
NOT anywhere in the world, except perhaps legally) or polygamous.  

If this is so, then the focal point of ATTACK for women in  
busting up female slavery must be the patrilinear family, the  
individual care of children, etc. But, of course, it then comes  
out that if you do this under capitalism not even WOMEN will be  
with you except for a far-out minority, because women's slavery  
is the oldest in existence and the most accepted of any form of  
super-exploitation, including by its victims. So women must  
ALSO fight to overthrow the whole system of imperialism (WHAT  
capitalism? My word above is WRONG) which is BASED on the nuclear  
patrilinear family. This brings up the relations between Women's  
Liberation and the rest of the Movement which is, as noted, very  
much in men's hands. But for women, the central contradiction is,  
unfortunately, the one that sets her at present against men.  

As males. Everything has to be worked out and the sisters are  
hard at it, groping, slicing, incising, wringing, twisting and  
punching. Good. It is all progress.  

NOW. If what I say above is true, then here is my comment on  
what you printed from "The Red Detachment of Women," who seem to  
me to be mouthing a lot of old whole-swallowed junk: ‘Women are  
oppressed at the point of production." Balls. Only those women  
are so oppressed who participate in production (about 90% of  
American women, at one time or another in their lives do partici-  
pate in social production according to US Labour statistics, so  
this sounds impressive). However, such participation is NOT  
women's MAIN oppression, but a secondary one: WHO when both  
partners in a marriage work stays home if the kid gets sick or  
the gas gets turned off, etc? So, during the main part of their  
lives when they are NOT at the point of production, are women  
still oppressed or not? And if so, how?  

I very much fear that the answer is: "sexually." But this  

subject was for a LONG time absolutely taboo in the Left. It  

still is in such places as China and Korea; it still is in the  
so-called orthodox Left. None of them like you to mention sex.  
You will be condemned as "petite bourgeoise," accused of drag-  
ging in "inconsequential" issues, and of changing the subject  
from what THEY say is the MAIN oppression of women, namely the  
economic. Nonetheless, proof exists that they are quite wrong.  
For, when they made socialism in Russia, in China and Korea, etc.,  
they formally made women equal to men by law; gave them equal  
pay for equal work, etc. Yet women are still oppressed in  
those countries. In an unexpected burst of candour, the Second  
Secretary of the North Korean Embassy in Accra, Ghana, told me  
one day in 1965 that, though his country had liberated itself,  
WOMEN were still oppressed there because, he said, they still  
had to carry almost the sole burden for the household. Later,  
this was glossed over in more formal discussions, which went on-  
quite fruitlessly-with the MALES of this advanced little Asian  
country.  

8 Vol.1  

No.13  

Mm. wae Ff  

The second thing I want to comment on is the reprint of Ellen  
Willis' excellent and thought-provoking article on women and  
consumerism... (She says) "For women, buying and wearing clothes  
and beauty aids is not so much consumption as work." What  
interests me is the sentence that reads, "Similarly, buying food  
and household furnishings is a domestic task; it is the wife's  
chore to pick out the commodities that will be consumed by the  
whole family." This is true, but I think we have to stress,  
bang, holler, its central MEANING. WHY is it "the wife's chore”  
to do precisely THESE things regarding precisely consumerism?  
Because this is THE focal point of the "wife's" existence; this  
is HOW she goes about producing labour power. It may be her  
chore to spend the money, but - as Ellen Willis notes - the  
DECISIONS regarding the spending of the husband's money (for that  
is what it is) rest with HIM, And that is because she performs  
her function of producing labour power in the patrilinear  
nucleus called "the home" as a SLAVE owned by the husband,  
whose name proclaims his ownership to the world.  

The big point here is this: it is NOT clarifying to keep  
mouthing the phrase "Women are oppressed at the point of pro-  
duction" except as a prelude to demolishing it with facts, be-  
cause it is a partial truth unrelated to the BASIC female truth,  
that women are oppressed and subjugated via the patrilinear  
family in a SEXUAL manner as economic SLAVES, and that this is  
their MAIN, not a secondary, occupation in the imperialist  
system. It is a KEY function within that system, for if ever  
that function could be massively disrupted, it would in turn  
massively disrupt the system. But women could ALL go out on  
strike from their jobs in industry and absolutely nothing would  
happen to the system except to alienate a few more women from  
each other and a few more men from us.  

Perhaps nobody will agree with me. But ever since I fought  
my way through to these points, everything about woman's posi-  
tion in this society has made sense and been explicable. I want  
to share these ideas with as many women as possible, because  
every bit of self-knowledge is a step in the direction of ulti-  
mate, far-off Freedom for us. If we don't understand that we  
are literal slaves, we will have illusions about what constitutes  
freedom or how to attain same. If we don't see WHY we are slaves,  
namely to produce the commodity labour power for the ruling  
imperialist class at no expense to them - we won't know what  
freedom IS when we come to struggle for it.  

I'll be interested in your comments.  
Yours in sisterhood,  

Hodee Flat 26 Gerard Gardens  

Rainham Essex RM13 8HX  
England  

...He seems to be sure that it is his view that is the right  
one: ours vagaries, deviations. And if his view is the right  
one, God knows there is nothing to live for: not a greasy  
biscuit. And the egotism of men surprises and shocks me even  
now. Is there a woman of my acquaintance who could sit in my  
armchair from 3 to 6:30 without the semblance of a suspicion  
that I may be busy, or tired, or bored; and so sitting could  
talk, grumbling and grudging, of her difficulties, worries; then  
eat chocolates, then read a book, and go at last, apparently  
self-complacent and wrapped in a kind of blubber of misty  
self-salutation? Not the girls at Newham or Girton. They are  
far too spry; far too disciplined. None of that self-confidence  
is their lot.  

Virginia Woolf  

Ain't I