mn Is A

(Continued from the last issue.) LNS

I learnt that I was something called
a "refugee" when I was six or seven years
old; I was quarrelling with a neighbor's
child and she said to me, "You are a ref-
ugee so you shouldn't shout at me." How
could I escape being aware of the Pales-
tine problem? My parents talked of their
former life in Haifa, my friends lived in
the unnatural conditions of the camp and
we learnt about Palestine in school.

By the time I was 16 I was, secretly,
a member of the Arab Nationalist Move-
ment, believing in a liberated Palestine
within a unified, socialist Arab world.
My elder brothers and sisters had joined
this party before me. We planned, we
dreamed, we argued. I visited the West
Bank, what was left of Palestine, and
travelled all over it to get to know
my country.

17.25 hours. Compass bearing 070

It took June, 1967, and the loss of
all Palestine and the expulsion of an-
other quarter million Palestinians to
make me decide that I had to do some-
thing positive for the cause of libera-
tion. This is the biggest defeat that
the Israelis have brought on themselves
by their military victories. They
brought a whole new generation of Pal-
estinians into the battle who believe
only in the armed struggle against Israel.

And so I joined the Popular Front for
the Liberation of Palestine. Last summer
I did the full commando training with the
PFLP, after which I was selected and
trained for this mission.

17.28 hours. Compass bearing 118

The Israeli Mirages stayed with us
until we crossed the Lebanese-Syrian fron-
tier. I spoke to the new Damascus air-
port tower in Arabic and told them we were
going to land there - I didn't ask per-
mission. He replied that we could land
on the right runway but I told him we
were going to land on the nearer left
runway because we were very short of
fuel.

On the intercom I told the cabin
crew to evacuate the passengers by the
emergency exits as soon as the plane
had landed because it was going to be
blown up. I asked the captain to switch
off the engines as soon as we touched
down, otherwise we could taxi too near
the airport building. "I can't do it,"
he said. "Then I can do it," I re-
plied. I also told him to apply the
brakes slowly, otherwise I might fall
and the hand grenade would go off. In
fact, he made a very good landing.

17.35 hours. Touchdown at Damascus

As soon as we stopped rolling, I
looked into the passenger cabin and
called out, "Evacuate immediately." At
this moment the crew seemed alarmed and
dashed past us into the plane. They
were in their shirt sleeves and my friend
shouted to them, "Take your jackets." But
they didn't stop. I also called, "Thank
you for your co-operation." "You're
most welcome," came from the co-pilot.
In two minutes the plane was empty.

I only saw the last four or five persons
diving through the emergency exits and
I told them, "Slowly, go slowly." But
they didn't know who I was and didn't
listen.

I went down the length of the plane
to make sure it was empty. My friend
then placed his bombs in the cockpit.
He dashed out and stood with me near
an emergency exit and I threw two gre-
nades into the first class compartment.
As soon as we threw them, we slid down
the emergency chute. My friend landed
on my head with a terrific bump and I
felt as if my legs were broken. We
picked ourselves up and ran for twenty
metres and waited for the explosion.
Nothing went off. It was awful agony
to think that the job would only be
half done.

Then my friend rushed back to the
plane to reset the explosions. Because
he is very tall he was able to pull him-
self up through another chute. I ran
after him towards the plane. After
a long minute in the plane, he slid out
again and we ran back once more.

Still no explosion. Only two min-
utes later was there a big bang and the
nose of the plane crumpled. My friend
fired many shots into the wing of the
plane to set the fuel tanks on fire but
there was so little in them that they
didn't ignite.

So it was all over. "Thank God," I
said to myself. I felt very relaxed
and very relieved and glad that no one
had been hurt.

We started walking towards the air-
port building when a bus came along and
picked up the passengers and us. We
remained in the bus for half an hour
while the Syrians cleared the airport
building. I noticed my Greek friend
and told him, "My friend and I did this.”
He burst into tears, and to comfort him
I told him I would ask the Syrian auth-
orities to cable his mother so that she
needn't worry unnecessarily. We offer-
ed the passengers cigarettes and my
friend gave the children sweets which
they took cheerfully.

Since we had to wait, I said a few
more things to the passengers to ex-
plain why we had hijacked the plane:
“You may think we are criminals, but
we are not. We are freedom fighters.
The United States has supported Israel
with Phantom planes and napalm and we
have to make our protest felt by the
American government. We were driven
out 20 years ago and in 1967 Israel
took the rest of our country and drove
us out again. We are fighting to re-
gain our freedom, our country and our
homes. Tell others not to come to
Israel as tourists. We are not against
Jews, but only against Zionists."

After I had finished speaking, a
lady, who said she was from California,
asked me whether I had learnt my Eng-
lish "in America or in England." "In
my country," I said. "We are not as
ignorant as the Zionists say we are.”

I would have liked to have seen the
pilot again to ask him whether we
had done a good job on the flight,
to talk to him about Palestine and
to invite him to visit us in Jordan.
But this wasn't allowed. I only
saw one of the pursers who told me
that one lady had been injured get-
ting out. I asked him to give her
our apologies.

I got engaged four months ago to
another resistance fighter, but who
knows when we will be able to get
married.

One question remains: will I have
to hijack another plane to see my
home town again...?