All the time I've been gay-identified—or identifying myself  
as gay—it's been less than a year—and I've been glad I was gay.  
But I keep thinking, you know, you don't just turn gay—like  
there are all these signals, things I remember that I see now in  
the context of gayness. But all the time I was falling in love  
with women—especially in high school—I didn't think I was a  
lesbian—I don't think I even saw it as wrong or sick, just pain-  
ful. I had this liberal idea of bisexuality or idealistic love,  
something like that. That it was painful sort of made it fit the  
stereotypes, like romantic love is supposed to hurt. I guess I  
expected pain. People didn't shelter me from painful things. I felt  
unjustly treated—like, my love wasn't acknowledged, I was put  
down, people didn't take my suffering seriously. But I came to  
expect injustice.  

This last thing about injustice & pain makes me think of it as  
a class feeling—but maybe middle-class gay experience is closer  
to the one lower-class straight—but this is really a connection,  
I think.  

What you wrote made me start to think about the differences  
between being middle-class and gay like me, and working-class  
and gay like you. I realize there are important differences  
between us, but just this one seems to be very interesting. I  
never stopped to think before about how being middle-class af-  
fected my also being gay. But when I do, my mind seems to cen-  
ter on expectations—expectations that middle-class parents have  
for their children. It seems to the point also that when I think  
about expectations the picture that immediately comes to my mind  
is my mother being upset with me on two occasions. First, when  
I was arrested and put in jail and second when she discovered by  
reading some of our letters that I was having a relationship  
with a woman. Those two times of trauma stick out in my mind  
when I consider my relationship with my mother because those were  
the times she was most angry with me. She was angry because I  
was jeopardizing my future—my future that was wide open. In the  
first instance I was ruining my chances of getting into medical  
school and, of course, in the second instance I was ruining  
everything.  

When Mom found out I was gay, she used her strong influence  
on me to convince me that I should go to a psychiatrist. She  
said I might think it was wonderful now, but in a few years I  
would be unhappy. I think happiness and expectations are a key  
to the connections between gay and class because before I was  
gay but, as you say, saw the signals even then, I was worried  
because I knew the values of my class, and knew what girls were  
supposed to be like and grow up to be. I also knew the values  
of my society said that people who were different than that  
wouldn't be happy. And of course I wanted to be happy because  
that was a value, too. Well, all this made me uncomfortable and  
pensive and I can remember that throughout all of high school I  
was obsessed with happiness. Every time I would see someone I  
would wonder if they were happy and feel bad if I thought they  
weren't. I bet I wondered this around three times every waking  
hour for more than 5 years.  

I used to dream of what it would be like not to be concerned  
with happiness. I imagined subsistence tribes in Africa and  
peasants in Europe who, from the pictures I'd seen, were both  
hard-working peoples that didn't have time to wonder about  
things not essential to making a living. Do you understand what  
I'm saying? That people for whom staying alive is hard would be  
happy just to get a period of rest, a holiday, a weekend. That  
would be happiness and not all this qualitative bullshit about  
directing your life in the best possible way for you, an individual  
who is unique.  

One difference that makes it hard for me to understand your ex-  
perience is our relationships with our parents—a difference in  
intensity, for one thing. I feel I didn't know what my parents'  
expectations were 'cause we just didn't know each other. My mother  
didn't have the kind of influence & control over me that would  
make her expectations so important to me. I didn't identify with  
her then. The people I wanted love & approval from were mostly  
friends my age. By the time I was in high school I was pretty  
distant (emotionally) from my family but I really identified with  
my friends' images of me, and with my own fantasy world, 'cause I  
didn't have a lot of friends. Some girls I knew had a lot of in-  
fluence on me. And their support was what I valued. So I got  
into intense emotional, always unequal, relationships.  

Like, I should have seen I was really gay when I was 15 and  
really wound up with Elaine. We were into a lot of the same  
trips but it seemed she was easily better at most things. I idol-  
ized her; we were close to each other but I knew I was not as  
important to her as she was to me. And I was physically attracted  
to her and we couldn't handle that. Sometimes I wished I was a  
boy so I could touch her and know she'd like it.  

She had everything going for her in a real straight-success way  
but when I first knew her she didn't have all the proper ambitions.  
She was all the right categories—smart, beautiful looking,  
creative—for a woman to make it, except she was working class so  
she didn't have far out clothes and things. So people didn't  
notice her a lot until we were almost in 11th grade. Then I guess  
she realized where she was at and what she could do. She got into  
this class climbing thing.  

She had become friends with these two men who taught at our  
school; they noticed her, and not in the way most males she knew  
did. They weren't out to fuck her; they were gay. They mind-  
fucked her to reject the working class identification which they  
despised in themselves. They had grown up in an even poorer city  
than ours and they had adopted the cultural bullshit of the upper  
middle class. They hadn't climbed much, though—but they thought  
Elaine could. She got right into it. Very quickly, she wanted  
what they wanted her to have. She decided to change her "style"  
as much as possible. First she dropped almost all of her friends.