& &
s WONDER. 22

ENRICHED BREAD

helps build strong bodies 12 ways!

Helps build
strong bodies
12 ways!

"Man has treated Nature and all people he
considers weaker than himself exactly

as he has treated woman... as an object
to be oppressed, suppressed, repressed,
subjugated and used up. Why else

do ecologists so commonly refer to the
"rape of the land"? Why else is the act

of rape always the culmination, the

proof and the symbol of the conqueror's
success in war." from OFF OUR BACKS

This rape by man of "Mother Earth", the
use of our bodies for his experimentation
is another example of an exploitative
economic system where the concern is pro-
fits and expansion, the drive is the
frontier ethic, pioneering, striving for
more and better—ego fulfillment and
individual monetary gains. His self-
destructive thrust, (which threatens our
survival as well), is toward excessive
production, waste, growth for its own
sake, poverty for the masses and
destruction of the air, sea, soil and
organisms that are the basis of the
life-support system.

All people should be clothed, fed, housed
decently, with adequate health care. This
is impossible if our food resources are
contaminated, our factories give off noxious
and poisoned chemicals affecting the
products that we use and our cities are
crumbling and polluted.

The purpose of these articles is to examine
the political relationship of the woman's
revolution and all third world peoples to
the ecological crisis—to examine
nutritionally how we are being exploited
and what we can do about it.

Politically—why the capitalistic system
encourages pollution (contamination of the
environment that interferes with life
processes).
Pollution is a by-product of a government
which responds best to the greatest
economic power—INDUSTRY—and not at all
to the people.
Example—for the capitalist the cost of
the wastes he discharges into the river
is less than the cost of purifying his
wastes before releasing them. —
Result—approximately eight million people
drink water with bacteriological content
that exceeds the limit of US Public Health
Service Drinking Water Standards.
Comment—“It would be the ultimate cop-out
to give all our money to the Black Panthers
and have them all die in 20 years because
they couldn't drink the water”—EARTH TIMES
Example—antibiotics and arsenicals are
put into the feed of cattle and poultry
because it affects their growth and
efficiency—female estrogen hormones are
also added as a growth stimulant that
really only adds useless fat and water.
In every year you eat 3 pounds of
intentional additives with your meals.
An additive found commonly in baby foods is
sodium nitrate, used to preserve and produce
the pink color in cured meats. Nitrates
reduce the blood's clotting ability to carry
oxygen from the lungs to the baby's tissues.
Ascorbic acid is also found in baby foods—
which makes sodium nitrate more potent.
There may be some relationship between food
and the more than 20,000 crib deaths that
occur annually where a parent puts a child
to bed and then finds the baby dead some
time later for as yet unexplained reasons.
Or white bread—the most valuable
nutrients were milled out of the flour,
that it was chemically aged, chemically
bleached, the dough treated with chemical
softeners and preservatives to make it
appear fresh, the starchy remains dosed
with 3 to 4 synthetic vitamins to replace
some 25 nutrients that were removed and
that the bread was then sold to you as an
"enriched" product. It's illegal to "enrich"
bread in Canada where this practice is
recognized as a fraud of the consumer.

2a Woman?

Dr. Ryan, editor of the Dental Digest said
"every time a natural substance is removed
from a food, every time an adulterant is
added to a food the balance in nature is
disturbed,... the chemical and cellular
processes within the body cells cannot
react to the passing whims of chemists
without disturbances in its functions.

It took thousands of years for the body

to adjust itself to changing environmental
conditions. When suddenly these conditions
are altered by the actions of men the cells
cannot make the adjustment—disease is the
result."

Consumers are the guinea pigs of big
business. They use chemicals to produce
more food than can be used in their
markets, sacrificing quality to quantity.
Then the surplus must be stored at
tremendous cost. To keep it from being
devoured by insects it must be basted
with powerful poisons. The best part

of the wheat is removed, fed to animals
and to what remains are added synthetic
vitamins to make up for the removed
nutrients and called "enriched". And
then millions of dollars are spent to
make up for the nutritional deficiencies
of food.

These are examples of man's waste and misuse
of natural resources for profit, while
millions are starving, indicative of his
exploitation and lack of regard for

people, and with no conscience about the
eventual consequences of his actions.

The health of the workers is another
consideration. The dusty trades—mining
and grinding, were historically related to
chest disease. Mercury, arsenic and lead
are still in industrial use. Solvents,
plastics, resins, lasers, etc. and more
than 10,000 chemical and physical agents
in use involve hazards to the workers who
have to handle them. Over 75,860,000 lbs
of organophosphates (commonly called
nerve gas) were produced in America in
1968. This causes tremors, muscular spasms,

convulsions and deaths. There are many
incidences of workers in the fields
being sprayed or becoming contaminated
with the poisons they are forced to use.

The American ideal—Competition—means
Exploitation. Exploit Vietnam—and dump
these chemicals on their soil, so that

the women there too have to bear malformed
children, miscarry or become sterile.

When you destroy part of the environment
you are destroying part of yourself.

"She made the very important point that
the society you're going to build is
already reflected in the nature of the
struggle that you're carrying out. And
one of the most important things in
relationship to that is the building of a
collective spirit, getting away from this
individualistic orientation toward personal
salvation, personal involvement.... One
of the most important things that has to
be done in the process of carrying out
a revolutionary struggle is to merge these
two different levels, to merge the personal
with the political where they're no longer
separate.
What people have to start doing is to build
that collective spirit. To overcome
that notion of bourgeois individuality
which separated one person from the next
and which defines the individual as some-
one who can assert himself at the expense
of his brother by destroying his brother."
“ANGELA DAVIS

By refusing to eat the pig shit that
industry is handing us is one way of
recognizing our sisterhood, our
collectivity. The pollution problem goes
beyond the middle class, because ultimately
every person is acutely affected by

the poisons he is ingesting into his
system.

It's true that there are all sorts of ways
to destroy people short of killing their
bodies. Sexist, racist, imperialistic
America has been using a slow poison

and we must stop it now.

(next article on alternatives.)