‘

a Social necessity and working-class labor is Not

Bernadette Devlin has been the target of criticism from women
in the women's movement. And the coverage she has received
in the women's media has shown a self-righteousness on our part
in criticizing her woman's consciousness while totally rejecting
her criticism of us on our class consciousness. She spoke in
Iowa City and we, too, were disappointed that she had nothing to
offer us in furthering our understanding of our oppression as
women. And I suppose enjoyed a little "we're so ahead of the
rest of the world" haughtiness. I wished she had given me as a
working-class woman some perspective on what that means—to
be a working-class woman as distinct from a working-class man.
But it is not her place to form that analysis for us, nor our place
as American women to expect that from her.

We avoided comment on Bernadette's speech because we felt it
was not needed, we had much work to do ourselves, issues and
problems to work on. But much of the women's movement used

I hung my head in shame

hearing Bernadette Devlin say

"as a woman I feel my woman's
oppression"; implicit in her tone of
voice was that as a "revolutionary" she
did not.

Bernadette, you do not know who we are. You think
we wear fur coats and are competing for jobs with
men, you've been believing what you hear on tele-

vision, read in the papers, what your International
Socialists tell you.

You should know who we are (the woman power

in your voice tells us you can see, hear):

because your analysis of imperialism, the as eS
between worker (producer) and owner (user), is

incomplete,

And until it is complete Ireland will never have
its revolution, not a real one; each will be always
instead bringing you deeper into the pit.

And that's a pity, because if ever there was a
white western society that could have a

revolution, where the people would in fact rise up,
where they did in fact rise up, and many of them
are still alive, and believe me, they've passed on
the fever to their children here in Amerika, I know,

It's Ireland. Half of New York City would go tomorrow
to fight. Well actually they might stay home if your —>
analysis and actions became feminist. The men would

stay home. The women would go.

But our revolution is not that kind of revolution,
striding about, clashes by night, Parliament.

So maybe you wouldn't like it. You have become a
professional, Bernadette. And you have male
privileges, are treated "man to man." Naturally you
don't feel the oppression of women as a revolutionary,

In fact, you could be taken for a dyke. 
But I know you are not one of us; you do not like
women.

I hung my head in shame as you scolded us for putting
"women" (which you bewitchingly embedded within the
pejorative "jelly white privileged middle-upper class
trip") ahead of "working class."

Remembering that earlier in your talk I had been one
with you (my eyes closed, all attention focused on

your sounds) as you described how the "ignorant poor"
had figured out they did all the work while 15% who
did no work got the benefits.

Remembering now with shame, you never mentioned
housewives, mothers. Is that not work? Is there
something different about it? If so, what? Talk
about the producer being alienated from power.
Never was a class of people more alienated from
power, or for so long. Men and men alone have set
made the decisions that have set into motion
the monsters that destroy us and the planet.

Bernadette, you have seen the head of the
monster, but you do not go deep enough.
the root is in the family.

I felt shame that when you thought of worker you did
not think of us. I hung my head for your shame, for
fear our eyes should meet. Out of the fear that should
our eyes meet, I might sense the little piece of
shame that you in spite of yourself could not hide

(too honest, a woman); and should you sense my
registering of your shame—that would be too heavy:
It is easier on the nerves if shame is experienced
alone. It is a vulnerable state.

But I'll give you this: when the understanding does

hit you, you'll (and women like you) have the toughest
job of all: where does one start in Ireland?

2 Women?

July 30, 1971 opawentals

her as either a saint or sinner to push their own politics. We're
reprinting one of the worst examples and commenting on it be-
cause we were offended by it. We can't let our affirmation of
ourselves—our poetry—become a destructive, class-biased,
self-indulgent cry of the middle class. Our poems will record
our revolution, but they will do nothing to make it.

The poem was entitled "Woman to Woman" though it should have
been titled "How Superior I am to Bernadette Devlin—I know how
to experience shame." Now everyone knows it is the God-given
right of middle-class people to teach lower-class people about
shame. You might think with all the experience of not having
money, not having all those marks of success, lower-class women
would have plenty of experience with shame. But middle-class
women spend a lot of time telling other women what to be shame-
ful for, what not to, why, how, and when. That's nothing new,
but it hurts to see an appeal to our common experience turned
into the same old middle-class put down.

_———————

Some (lots) of us are able to wear fur coats and she could learn
that by reading the independent women's media. This implies
that our message has been distorted but does not admit that our
message has been classist.

Implicit in the tone is that our analysis is complete.

The audacity of any American giving anyone else instructions on
their revolution—to see everyone else going deeper into a pit
until the analyzers, the poets, the intellectuals say the word
and we'll all be free.

How nice of us—offering foreign aid but as usual with strings
attached.

Aren't we saying—you don't like middle-class women—and she
probably doesn't. What objection would a professional have to
what we call revolution?

How nice to feel ashamed for Bernadette. How typically arrogant
to feel "scolded"—to belittle her message and turn everything
back to the middle-class woman's pain—to allow pity for the
"ignorant poor" so long as it doesn't threaten our own claim to
oppression.

Perhaps the root of oppression is in the middle-class family.
That doesn't make a very complete analysis and blueprint for
revolution.

How kind and brave to spare Bernadette from exposing herself.
Or was it fear that the class antagonism would show? Fear that
she would not have the self-indulgent pain of the middle-class woman?

Shame is something few lower-class women need any advice from
middle-class women about. The class system imposes shame in
every social situation and lower-class women don't have the
choice of running off alone to spare their nerves. Middle-class
people have been shaming lower-class people all their lives.

No woman who has grown up with that kind of shame could have
been so blind to such class arrogance.

Where does one start in America? We flounder about without
the slightest idea while oppressing the rest of the world and you
talk about the shame she should feel. What arrogance to sup-
pose we are so ahead of other women, that our understanding
is complete and theirs incomplete. How typically American to
suppose that our present is everyone else's future. That all
other women are going to have to hurry to catch up with us.