No more fun

We received this article unsigned. If the woman who
wrote it wishes to be credited for it, she should
contact us and we will gladly do so.

I am a revolutionary. I am a feminist. I don't know if I am a
revolutionary feminist or a feminist revolutionary. I think I am a
female revolutionary and a feminist. It is arbitrary whether I say
first I am a revolutionary or first I am a feminist. The fact is
that I am a woman, greatly limited by that fact and conscious of
my position as a woman, committed to the liberation of all women.
There is no possibility for me to be liberated except that all
women be liberated, and that means power and control on a politi-
cal-economic level, not some personal, individual freedom from
restrictions or personal fame. Having had nothing, I will not
settle for crumbs. The totality of women's historical oppression
must be understood, and we must implement our knowledge, restruc-
turing society according to that perspective.

I am, inseparable from being a woman, a human being who has
suffered extreme physical and cultural deprivation due to my class
position. I am committed to the liberation of people from politi-
cal-economic subjugation and its side effects -- extremes of
wealth and poverty; power and powerlessness; disease; ignorance;
terror; weakness; racism, etc. But even had I never personally
suffered from my class position I could not imagine struggling
for female power out of context of the struggles of all oppressed
peoples. I will not be free; women will not be free until all
humanity is free. We women should be in the front of the struggle.

Though the struggles of oppressed peoples are intimately con-
nected and inseparable, I do not believe that sexism grew directly
from the political-economic subjugation of people in general.

Capitalism is not the root cause of all the ills of the world,
and has a relatively short history. We human beings are products
of a whole evolutionary development, biological and cultural. In
fact, looking at its development dialectically, the advent of cap-
italism historically has advanced the power potential of women to
begin the struggle for liberation from biological and cultural
evolution. Sexism is older than capitalism, and has developed from
the biological difference between male and female which itself
created a division of labor with value differences. Men produce
and fight; women reproduce and support. I do not believe that
the reproductive and supportive role of the female has ever in any
society been considered as valuable as the productive, and partic-
ularly the fighting role of the male. Any exceptions only prove
that there is not a predetermined nature to the division. It is
not natural law, but an evolutionary development. Of course the
necessity and possibility of "separate but equal" made more sense
in pre-industrial societies, and women were needed. There was
probably little antagonism between male and female. With indus-
trialization and the breakdown of former "natural" patterns, the
contradiction between male and female has become antagonistic.
Anyone who abstractly denies the antagonism is simply not dealing
with reality. Men despise women; women fear and despise men. Maybe
it is a "contradiction among the people" in the working class,
but it is antagonistic in a descriptive sense.

Whatever the source of the oppression, exploitation and contempt
of women, we now have a situation of economic, political and cul-
tural deprivation and a dependency on men and the state and that
should be our field of battle, which puts us, objectively, into
a revolutionary struggle that is being waged against colonial and
class domination of the people in general. This struggle is over
a century old as is the parallel, autonomous, conscious struggle
of women for female liberation. I do not believe that we have to
make of this some grand, logical system of interconnections and
cause and effect relations, or decide who is "most oppressed." In
our revolutionary movement, due to the class composition of the
leadership, ideological development has alternated between anti-
intellectualism (pragmatism and mysticism) and idealism (logical
systems of thought out of context of social experience or social
practice). Let’s get out of the rut.

More than is generally true of other movements, the women's
movement has had a tendency toward what I will call "science fic-
tionism." The tendency is not absent in some theorists of class
struggle: The dream of cybernation making work archaic ("The New
Working Class"), for instance. Among women there is the trip of
artificial reproduction (not needing a man or even sperm: Wow, what
power!) which will "free" women biologically. Whole systems of
utopian dreams are created which do not deal whatever with current
misery and the means of taking power in order to control the im-
plementation of scientific discovery. Therefore, such images of
the future (FUTURE SHOCK) are opportunistic and futuristic and
serve, really, to demoralize and depress those who are in the morass
of oppression and in struggle, who need means of strength to fight.
(I refer to theories such as in Valerie Solanis' SCUM MANIFESTO;
S. Firestone, DIALECTICS OF SEX, p. 48 for example; and Ti-Grace
Atkinson's views of sexual intercourse and reproduction.) I, too,
have contributed to the tendency at times though the tendency has
always disturbed me and I have tried to struggle against it with
other sisters, and guard against it in my own thinking. Still in
rereading what I have written I detect a sin of omission, which
could lead to fantasy if not science fiction, rather than struggle.

What I have failed to deal with, and I believe this is true of
the movement at every level (among youth theorists, third-world
theorists, labor theorists, female liberation theorists), is a
general strategy for the taking of power; how to win. Like love
scenes in the movies of the 50's, the scene fades out when we get
to that question. Again, the class composition of the movement
means that there is a tendency toward building a sub-culture:
ideological debates in living rooms and movement centers; experi-
mentation with different theories by building elaborate paper or-
ganizations supposedly based on "democratic centralism," Marxism-
Leninism and Maoism. The dream of building the perfect ideology
and the perfect organization to make the revolution, and presum-
ably to govern "after the revolution." The by-product is in-fight-
ing and endless divisions, under the guise of ideological struggle.
The most annoying behavior being an incredible arrogance and abso-
lute sureness of a direct pipeline to the fathers of revolution.

That is one side of the sub-culture of the New Left, a growing
side. The other side is the "pragmatic," anti-ideology, action-
oriented side. The tendency there has been toward a sub-culture of
confrontation and demonstration as the style. A by-product is
elitism, for behind the scenes are the puppeteers pulling the
strings that move the faceless masses of young people. Another
tendency is toward mysticism, the “drug culture," which if you
want to speak straight is decadence, the casualties of a dying
empire. A tragedy of lost lives which is actually analyzed by some
as progressive. The decadence of the culture cannot be ignored,
but it must be treated as a problem not as a salvation.

These tendencies exist in the whole movement, but they are more
easily neutralized in the third-world struggles, due to the fact
that third-world people are involved internationally in revolution-
ary struggle at this point in history, and the reality of mass
struggle transforms the movement to some extent at every point.
That is not to say that there are no problems with pragmatism,
opportunism, mysticism, idealism and decadence. These are major
pitfalls for cadres of the third-world movement, and only intense
struggle corrects them.

The women's movement has attacked two major tendencies of the
white, male left: abstraction and elitism, which perhaps approxi-
mate what Lenin described as “economism" and "adventurism." So
there has been a transformation of the left due to the rise of
the women's liberation movement. Again I am speaking of the effects
on the whites of the left. Given those tendencies, and the nature
of the criticisms from women, and the class composition of the
women's movement, the resulting dialectic has been a tendency
toward pacifism (anti-male violence), small talk groups dealing
with the psychological, and a virulent form of anti-leadership,
male or female. The latter was partially in reaction to the pup-
peteers and partially an outgrowth of middle-class women's pro-
grammed competitiveness with each other. These new tendencies
have in turn affected the entire white new left, and have been in-
strumental in practically wiping out the "action oriented" group-
ings and the puppeteers, leaving the "Marxist-Leninist" theorists
somewhat morally justified and appearing more together and effect-
ive than they actually are.

Though the drop-out rate of women was great from these male
left organizations at the beginning and toward the middle of the
women's liberation movement in the last three years, political
women, now seeking a refuge from what appears to be a dying women's
movement, are moving toward these very male-dominated, highly-
centralized, heavily ideological, and ineffective organizations:
the "pre-party" formations. (I did this myself last fall, joining
the REVOLUTIONARY UNION.) These organizations, basically white and
middle class in perspective, are entering third-world communities
and workplaces to test their "proletarian" ideology. This tendency
of the new left is similar to the old left. In fact, many of the
new left leaders in these organizations are sons and daughters of
old leftists.

We are victims of many fads in North America, and the movement
has its own brand of fads. For a while "violence" and guns were a
fad. Still some people wear buttons with guns (why don't they
carry guns?). There was a period of great enthusiasm for Weather-
man, and then a sudden desertion of the group and their politics,
their model. Among women, there has been the “anti-imperialism"
fad (I have met the Vietnamese women and they are me). I believe
lesbianism is a fad right now. On the left, "building the party"
is still with us. Now there is a strong Asian trend from Maoism
to contemplation and body-building through health food and karate.
Trends like acupuncture will be the newest trip of the jet-set left.

More and more it seems that women's liberation itself was a fad to
many on the left. So as women withdraw from the women's movement
in boredom or seeking a new thing, the most reactionary and oppor-
tunistic sectors of the women's movement (professional women and
Trotskyists) spread their professionalism, opportunism, and
science fictionism. Though the women's movement may have been ex-
perienced by many young, hip women as a fad and used as power
against men, and used by new left women as a refuge from struggle
and an opportunity for power in the left movement, the majority
of women who have been struggling for the past 3 years to create
a women's consciousness in the movement and in the society have
been honest and serious in their efforts, and are at this point
somewhat isolated and not knowing where to go next or what to do.
Also, thousands of women were politicized and radicalized through
the women's liberation movement and are now dangling and demoral-
ized.

Perhaps we may begin to see a second surge of feminism from very
serious political women that will not be trippy, fadish, and oppor-

NO MORE FUN AND GAMES NO MORE FUN AND GAMES NO MORE FUN AND GAMES