NO MORE FUN AND GAMES NO MORE FUN AND GAMES NO MORE FUN AND GAMES

Where should these revolutionary action groups operate? We
should develop an overall military strategy for revolution in this
country based on what is already happening and the vulnerable
points of the enemy. But we don't have to have an agreed strategy
to begin. We need experience in armed struggle and an experimental
outlook (scientific). Groups should be willing to choose an area
that is unfamiliar perhaps, go there "underground" under false
identities, not all living together in a group, of course, but
rather in pairs probably, everyone meeting together in a secure
place as often as is necessary.

I speak of going to another area, because there are a great many
movement people in areas that are not key areas tactically, and in
universities, etc. Try to figure out where the enemy is weakest.
Armed struggle does not mean militant actions in support of organ-
izing or strikes -- it's just not guerrilla warfare. Armed struggle
means building a functional guerrilla with a strategy, and it is
primary, not supportive. Demonstrations and strikes should be
formed around support for the guerrilla and its demands.

Some very important books to read to work on strategy: A general
history of North America -- Leo Huberman's WE THE PEOPLE (Monthly-
Review Press) is good; Dee Brown's BURY MY HEART AT WOUNDED KNEE,
which describes the armed struggle of the Indians of the South-
West and North-West. The writings of James Forman are very impor-
tant (Black Star Pub., Detroit); Lundburgh's RICH AND THE SUPER-
RICH and Domhoff's WHO RULES AMERICA are useful; and the MINIMAN-
UAL of Marighelli. These books, in addition to studying maps of
the Western Hemisphere, are helpful in formulating a military
strategy suited to this country. They are not put forward as con-
stituting a political ideology or already formed strategy. All the
writings of the revolutionaries should be studied in developing
ideology.

WHAT DOES ALL THIS HAVE TO DO WITH FEMALE LIBERATION? Everything!
We cannot be liberated exclusive of a total social revolution.
It was very important for us to develop a woman's consciousness
and transform the consciousness of the revolutionary movements.
Now we must not stop. We are talking about the taking of power,
not just saying our piece, aren't we? Women must be in the heart
and front of the armed struggle. Otherwise it probably won't
develop and to the extent that it does it will be riddled with
"fun and games."

Some might ask if armed struggle is not a "male thing." If that

ELEPHANT POEM

Suppose you have an elephant
with 56 millimeter trunk
and say he's
tearing up the jungle
(say you think he's drunk
or crazy)
How're you going to bring that elephant down?
lion can't
bear could but don't want to
and the panther's too small for that job.

by a fly

a million flies
outweigh a trunk
a tank

a bank

a million flies

Then suppose you have an elephant

with million millimeter trunk

and his jungle is the whole green world?
(and drunk

and crazy)

you see the problem.

junk

we must be wise

ELEPHANT TURNED UPSIDE DOWN

outthink a pile of IBM

to the elephant's lies
you may think we should try

is so, what is the female alternative to taking power? There are
not many ways to take power and gain liberation. In every revolu-
tionary struggle women have been the strength and even the base;
the problem has been the suppression of female consciousness and
female leadership. We must see to it that the same does not happen
here, for more than any place in the world male domination in North
American struggle would be catastrophic.

The revolutionary units I describe could be all female or mixed.
It is difficult for men to do this kind of work. There is no room
for heavy ideology and ego-tripping; it is out of place and turns
sour in a survival situation. However, a lot of problems that
exist between women and men in a "normal" day to day life dimin-
ish in the new situation. The lines of struggle are much clearer,
and the necessity for change is absolute.

The degree to which we see to it that we women are participa-
ting and developing the revolutionary struggle is the degree to
which the female perspective will be dominant in our struggle
and in the future society. We must not withdraw from the strug-
gle, now that we have gotten to the point of actually raising fe-
male consciousness. We must be a vanguard if we are, and not say
we should be. Let us not stop though we may be tired and discour-
aged and confused. Let us build an army of women who will be so
strong, so humane that no one will have to ever "give" us power,
and we will not have to "demand" equal rights.

FUTURE SHOCK, Toffler, Alvin. Bantam Books

$1.95
SCUM MANIFESTO, Solanis, Valerie. Olympia
Press 95¢

DIALECTICS OF SEX, Firestone, Shulamith.
Bantam Books $1.25

WE THE PEOPLE, Huberman, Leo. Monthly
Review Press $3.95

BURY MY HEART AT WOUNDED KNEE, Brown, Dee.
Bantam Books is coming out with the paper-
back edition this month. The original
hardbound edition costs $10.95.

RICH AND SUPER-RICH, Lundburgh. New American
Library $1.95

WHO RULES AMERICA, Domhoff, G. William.
$2.45

MINIMANUAL, Marighelli. Radical Education

Project, P.O. Box 561-A Detroit, Mich. 48232
25¢

one more word
about elephants
No matter how hard they try
elephants cannot pick their noses
any more than bankers can hand out money
or police put away their pistols
or politicians get right with God.

a sty
in the elephant's eye
ain't nothing
but a fly in his nose
is a serious if not fatal condition
when the fly
- gets into that nostril
it begins to swell
and stay closed
he can't smell can't drink can't think
can't get one up
on anybody
he begins to regret
all that flabby ammunition
hanging on him
he begins to wish
he'd been a little more bare-faced
like an ape or a fish
all those passageways
he needs to feed himself
tied up

| Page 8

bottle flies, rock flies and sock flies

to sober him up
but the trouble isn't that he's drunk
the trouble is

that he's an elephant

with multi-millimeter trunk
who believes the world is his jungle
and until he dies
he grows and grows

we must be flies

in the elephant's nose
ready to carry on

in every town

you know there are butterflies
there are horse flies and house flies
blue flies, shoo flies and it's-not-
true flies
then there are may flies and wood flies
but I'm talking about
can flies & do flies

dragonflies and fireflies
in the elephant's nose

ready to carry on
til he goes down

by Judy Grahn

Vol. 2 No. 5