analysis of labor says middle-class labor

But we have our doubts and objections. For our own philosophies, the existence of such service occupations is unnecessary. We oppose the elitism which implies that some of us are too elevated to clean our own mess. In a similar situation to the domestic worker is the charwoman, who cleans office buildings after the other employees go home. It may be that this kind of work can be eliminated altogether, with other office workers cooperatively cleaning out their own ashtrays, wiping their own desks, and sweeping or vacuuming the floor. These workers also are hired through agencies which probably treat them as little more than labor units. Unlike domestics, they are spared direct contact with the people who have a lot of ego invested in the appearance of the office. The maximum wage of $2 an hour is hardly adequate, much less something to root for—but domestic workers rarely do so well.

An east coast women's paper reported on the formation of an agency to train domestic workers for cleaning jobs. Women felt perfectly free to comment on the value of this kind of labor, to the effect that such jobs as those of domestics are menial service labor and should not exist. This conception of what labor is socially necessary has permeated the women's movement. It is difficult to disagree when you are told that no one should have to do the kind of work you do. I used to agree and never verbalize those secret fears—I don't know how to do anything else and just shuffle along laboring at chores I was being told were unworthy of doing. No road to liberation of working people but some path to self-hatred at not being useful as defined by middle-class values of usefulness. The reasoning hinges on the service aspect of such work. But is there more service involved in cleaning an office for a corporation than there is in teaching the ideology of the middle and upper classes to American children, or upholding the legal system by being a lawyer? So far our analysis of labor—its social necessity—comes to pretty much that middle-class labor is socially necessary and productive and working or lower-class labor is not. I see no place in a revolutionary society for the ideology of middle-class America and consequently no use for those professionals who serve to perpetuate that ideology through art or academia or administrators of private wealth.

I do see the necessity of production of necessary goods, the necessity of sanitation.

Let's worry about getting women into equal positions before we worry about more freedom for all. As various movements have discovered already, more freedom for all has seldom really meant women.

Let's get a piece of the pie that middle-class women can tangibly get within this country, within this system—and later when we have all those middle-class advantages we'll help those poor unfortunate others. Promises, promises. I think we must at least acknowledge one probable effect. If women hold equally with men those positions of power, they become half the power structure that must be fought by working and lower-class women. The commonness of women's oppression, tenuous economically as it is now, would become unrecognizable. I'm not sure how much it's worth but it has meant something to identify with other women, to identify with our position of powerlessness. With this shorn in half so blatantly, women as a class will be little more than a joke.

Many middle-class women are off and running now because they've got the chance—look at your local newspaper for their success stories. They don't have to listen to lower-class women and most of them won't. If they're achievers, they'll go to law school, med school, grad school, ad nauseam. If they're revolutionaries, they'll split for a caravan around the country. But they won't do anything to change the everyday reality, the everyday hassle, the everyday cruelties that face working and lower-class women. They can get the change they need and the approval of their middle-class counterparts without changing the reality of a single lower-class woman's life.

CAMBRIDGE—A yearlong feminist studies program organized around seminars and culminating in an M.A. is being offered this coming academic year at Goddard College. The seminars are in the fields of feminist history, cross-cultural studies of women, child-rearing and socialization of children, women and the media, women and the law, economics of women's oppression, male sex roles, and feminist psychology. The child-rearing seminar is open to men and women, the male sex roles seminar open to men only; and the rest of the seminars are open to all.

Additional seminars may be included if there is demand for them.

Tuition will range from $1800-$2000 with a few partial scholarships available. For those who don't want a degree but want to spend time working on a seminar, there is no charge.

Certainly lower and working-class women cannot afford to pay $1800 or $2000 to supposedly learn about themselves in the propaganda machine of corporate America. They can, of course, take the courses for free, but then they don't get the rewards of that education (jobs, money) because, after all, they didn't pay for it. That's what it has always been about. But these comments are superficial and there is so much more to be said about what part academia plays in American society. Education in this country, as far as I can see, serves to uphold the middle-class ideology and to train people to continue to uphold it.

And a last word to the bitch who wrote in another midwest newsletter:

I believe all women have common concerns at heart. There is a universality of emotion and experience that draws us together whether we are stuck with the label upper class, lower class, radical, conservative, black, white, professional or on and on ad infinitum. All of us are concerned with equal pay for equal jobs. Many of us are nauseated by advertisements that make us look as if our lives revolve around furniture polish, men's egos, or feminine deodorant spray. I believe that women will never become politically or even personally effective as long as the media continues to portray us as a gathering of homosexuals and emotional cripples: dirty, screaming, close-minded and "unfeminine."

No woman was "stuck" with the label lower class. It has a meaning and a reality for every lower-class woman's life that you will never understand, and one that I'm really finally beginning to understand. The lower class is no accident. 'Equal pay' and concern with your image on the media are your way of saying "give the bright middle-class woman a chance." That's your problem. You, and everything you stand for, are my problem.