mother’s  
manifesto  

Mystification of Motherhood  

Motherhood is a mystique. It fails to separate the biological  
function of delivering a child from the social function of care  
and socialization. The sexual double standard reappears in child  
care: men threatened with the responsibility simply leave the  
scene - sometimes physically, sometimes mentally. The woman is  
left with the burden. Abandonment of children by women is seen  
as an unnatural, monstrous act. Men abandon children regularly  
without comparable social disapproval. After birth a child takes  
on a life of its own. Every function necessary for its survival  
and growth can be performed by any competent adult.  

On Her Own  

Those who assume the motherhood role are systematically excluded  
from employment and participation in any organization or institu-  
tion outside the home. These organizations, precisely because  
mothers are an insignificant portion of their membership, are un-  
aware of (or can ignore) the problems of child care. Thus, the  
exclusion of mothers is self-perpetuating.  

How are women with children kept outside the mainstream of society?  
Children need constant care. When the woman wants to do something  
else, a substitute must be found. Lack of free, 24-hour child  

care centers bind women to their children. This lack of facilities  
is most serious for women who care for very young children, or  

who cannot afford a babysitter, or who live alone. Even in co-op  
day care centers, where theoretically there exists an awareness of  
the need for child care to liberate women, membership has argued  
for the exclusion of families with diaper-aged children. Take-  
home pay for most jobs open to women, already low to begin with,  

is decimated by babysitting fees. Even when other adults are in  
the household, they seldom provide reliable relief.  

Another and more subtle way women are excluded is through sched-  
uling of activities. NUC, for example, (this organization is only  
typical...most follow the same pattern) arranged as many as four  
meetings a month at 2-tavern between five and seven on Friday  
evenings. Not only was no child care provided, but the time in-  
terfered with such routine tasks as providing meals. Those who  
can afford them argue for babysitters: one day care co-op scheduled  
six parent meetings with no provision for child care. With baby-  
sitting, both parents could attend; without it, only one. Obvious-  
ly those who hired babysitters acquired more control.  

This is a common syndrome which eventually restricts membership  
and control to childless, moneyed, and male people.  

Yet even when child care is made available for meetings, this is  
only a minimal attempt to rectify the problem. What of meetings  
and events scheduled late, or which run to late hours? The child-  
less membership does not get up with the children.  

Mothers can never participate fully when commitment requires  
energy beyond meeting attendance. ALL major time commitments  
exacerbate housekeeping and mothering tasks. When the woman has  

a job outside the home (dealing with welfare is a job) the problem  
is compounded.  

Finally, guilt paralyzes most women once they take a step away  
from home. Children cry, dishes collect, and she wonders if she  
is doing the right thing. If no one is there to say yes and give  
support, she will decide No on her own.  

| I am a mother  
I am a mama  
I am a mama  
I am a mama  
I am a mama  
I am a mama  
I am a mama  
Janice McKewn - Lawrence, Kan  

Vol. 3 No. 2 and No. 3  

Nuclear Family  

What keeps women tied to their biological children? The nuclear  
family. As long as it is the dominant social and economic unit,  
women will remain enslaved to the motherhood role. At present  
each female is personally responsible for the consequences of her  
biology. Each must negotiate the situation of pregnancy with a  
single male (father, lover, husband) or a male institution (adop-  
tion agencies, welfare).  

Pregnant women, if not fired outright, are discouraged from work-  
ing. Teachers in Iowa are retired at their fifth month. Then  
they are rehired (at one-third pay) as substitute teachers until  
delivery. Welfare women must often work for unscrupulous people  
at below minimum wage. The pay loss is compensation to the em-  
ployer for the "favor" he does her of not reporting the wages to  
the welfare department. The effect of such treatment is to drive  
women to be dependent on the greater economic security of males.  
She stays home while he goes out to earn. He is rewarded for  
working with money, and gains power and prestige. She engages in  
unpaid labor - averaging 99.6 hours per week.  

This workload is more than double that of the male.  
Nuclear Family II  

The woman left in her house with her children has no power to ne-  
gotiate the terms of her 99.6 hour job with other adults. Her  
singular responsibility for children leaves her in a position  
where she can be counted on to work when others prefer not to.  

The welfare of the children urges her to participate in this ar-  
rangement, though it is physically and emotionally damaging. The  
situation is not better in most collective living arrangements,  
where supposedly the child care is shared. The attitude remains  
that the mother has ultimate "say" and responsibility, with no op-  
tion to neglect "her" duties.  

Society provides one major alternative to marriage for economic  
security: remarriage. Even following the rules of the situation,  
this is difficult. Thus, alimony and ADC, pittance that they are,  
hold the survival line for families not headed by a male. Until  
all women have employment at decent pay, the begging, pleading,  
and threatening for this survival money will remain and grow as  

an economic institution.  

Economics  

Exclusionary practices result in loss of basic learned and social  
skills - consequently women lose the ability to earn an adequate  
salary. Projecting personal rather than social responsibility  
for children maintains the oppression of ALL women. All are  
treated as potential mothers who must be supported by men. This  
circumstance is an excuse to keep women out of career-producing  
areas of education, to employ them marginally, and to pay them  
minimally. Until economic realities are dealt with, demands of  
women will be met only under conditions prone to co-optation.  
Paid maternity leaves, 24-hour child care, salary supplements  
for child care, paid time off to work in day care co-ops: these  
demands fall in this category.  

Continual dependence on others results in loss of control over  
one's own life; little opportunity for growth; and a sense of fu-  
tility and valuelessness in activities. Gay mothers cannot and  
do not rely on men but on other women for support, when possible.  
Often gay mothers are forced to rely on welfare, and must "pass"  
as straight.  

Even experience with and ability to care for children is consid-  
ered of little value. Pediatricians, specially trained teachers,  
child psychologists - all who generally have little experience  
outside a specialized area, are looked to as authorities on the  
subject.  

Nuclear Family as economic  
and social unit  
+ Economic power invested  

in men  

= Women personally re-  
sponsible for children  

Who Owns Children?  

The nuclear family as the basic economic unit is the precondition  
for the belief that children belong exclusively to the family,  
that is, the property of the male and the responsibility of the  
female. In divorce cases, the child becomes the property of the  
state and is given over to the custody of the mother. As male  
property, both female and child take his name.  

Women are encouraged to measure their success in life through  
their responsibility for children. It is no accident many of  

them try to live vicariously through their children (or through  
the more powerful husband.) But if mothers fail in child rearing,  
the community also fails. It is the community, not the individual  
women, who reaps the benefits of a successfully “raised” child.  
Societies need children to carry on culture and work. The male  
social order needs the fruits of, but does not want to tend, the —  
growth of children. Women are persuaded and coerced into the job.