When we saw an article by Rita Mae Brown in the latest issue of  
Off Our Backs, we were delighted. Delighted because she has always  
been strongly feminist and woman identified, but also because this  
particular article was a questioning of the Anti-Imperialist  
Women's Movement—a political direction that we have always quest-  
ioned in AIAW.  

During our discussion on whether to reprint it or not, we all  
admitted feeling a little hurt and slighted that she had not thought  
to send the article to AIAW. We knew very well, however, the  
reasons: 1) Rita Mae Brown is from the East and most people in  
the East wouldn't think that the Midwest (if they ever do think  
about the Midwest) has heard of Women's Liberation and therefore  
probably don't know about Ain't I A Woman? 2) If they have heard  
of AIAW then they probably don't read it. 3) And if they read  
it, they probably don't listen to what we are saying. In other  
words we are invisible. We certainly were invisible to Rita Mae  
Brown when in the article she accuses the Women's Press of slight-  
ing the less glamorous issues such as lesbianism, class and race  
in the face of the easily handleable topic of anti-imperialism.  

We began in our first issue thinking about lesbianism and we are  
still (turn to pages 6-7). We have continually shunned male poli-  
tics and instead have devoted our time to analyzing classism and  
racism in the Women's Movement and struggling to rid AIAW of any  
such bias. In other words we have painstakingly begun the task of  
analyzing female culture and the Women's Movement and what direc-  
tion both should go. We reprint Rita Mae Brown's article because  
we feel it is another small step in that analysis.  

Rita Mae Brown's criticism of the women's media in regard to the  
issue of lesbianism will continue to be valid if papers that do  
consistently deal with it, such as It Ain't Me Babe and Ain't I A  
Woman?, are ignored. Most of the feedback we've gotten regarding  
our continual struggle with that issue has been negative, and some  
encouragement from people like herself who agree with us as to its  
importance would help keep us going.  

None of the writing we have done on lesbianism has been reprint-  
ed. Ironically, we have only had one article we've done deemed  
good enough for reprint by eastern and western newspapers. It was  

our Men's Page (predictable) containing things for men to do to  
raise their consciousness. It was probably the most frivolous  
thing we have ever done and definitely the worst politically.  

Be local and serve the needs of your women  
if you want to touch their lives. If you  
carry articles of international feminist  
events, be sure to help your readers see  
how this affects their own lives.  

III: LESBIANISM  

Before our movement can advance as a  
political force with a coherent women's  
ideology (not something borrowed from the  
male left) we need to completely analyze  
lesbianism. This is the touchstone of our  
self-image, the mirror of our oppression  
and is such an intense experience that it  
cuts across racial and class barriers.  
Living communes hinge on this issue as  
does all subsequent feminist analysis of  
sexism.  

Lesbianism is the one issue that deals  
with women responding positively to other  
women as total human beings worthy of total  
commitment. It is the one area where no  
male can tread. It is also the one area  
that demands deep self-criticism. To hide  
from this question is to hide from yourself.  
To hide from this question is to doom the  
movement to a pale imitation of existing  
leftist ideologies—ideologies that may  
have served the needs of dedicated men in  
Russia in 1917, in China in the 40's, but  
which cannot and do not serve the needs of  
women.  

Lesbianism is important structurally  
because confronting it will help us develop  
techniques we can use to deal with other  
differences. Every woman can confront the  
issue of lesbianism because she has the po-  
tential to be a lesbian. It is more diffi-  
cult to confront class and racial differ-  
ences because there is not that commonality.  
One does not transcend race and class—you  
can only come to a clear understanding of  

those differences in your own life and then  
use that understanding in conjunction with  
women from different classes and races to  
build a solid politic. Lesbianism is the  
great gut issue, it touches every one of us.  
If we learn how to deal with such an ex-  
plosive issue constructively (which we are  
in the process of doing) then we will have  
the tools to deal with the other two ex-  
plosive issues: Race and Class. Lesbian-  
ism will provide us with the individual and  
group skills for constructive confrontation,  
for struggle, for progress. In other words,  
we need a foundation to build our house up-  
on and this issue gives us our ideological  
and technical foundation. We cannot unify  
unless we deal with this issue first.  

Those three steps make up what I see  
as the first phase toward seriousness and  
toward real change in the lives of all wo-  
men. Many of us can see beyond this first  
phase, but we must accomplish these goals  
before we can move on. They aren't easy  
goals, maybe that's why we are tempted to  
concentrate on distant places. The first  
step involves nothing less than meeting  
the survival needs of all women. But we  
must do this or the Women's Liberation Move-  
ment is destined to stay a white, middle  
class, heterosexual movement—physically  
and psychically. If you want to see what  
comes of that, visit the Women's Party at  
144 Constitution Ave., Washington, D.C.,  
the graveyard and the shrine of the last  
great wave of white, middle class, heter-  
osexual feminism.  

To advocate other goals at this time,  
like worldwide revolution is to slip from  
the serious and pragmatic to the imag-  
ined and fantastic. We can have women  
united across the globe but we must start  
somewhere and that somewhere is with the  

abovementioned measures, unglamorous though  
they may be. If we do not commit ourselves  
to this serious work, if we indulge our-  
selves in “right on" rhetoric, we create a  
preposterous lie and its twin, cynicism.  
The only people capable of living with that  
kind of unreality will be our self-ordained  
leaders who have need of the illusion to  
inflate the ego, who have need of the lit-  
urgy for a grim, old form revolution and  
its heavy death wish. We must begin to  
achieve concrete results with our energy or  
we will, as a movement, lapse into disbe-  
lief in our own capabilities and our po-  
litical effectiveness will be limited to  

a few, self-indulgent media stars trotted  
out by the male establishment in an orgy  

of tokenism.  

We must begin to achieve these con-  
crete ends in order to test ourselves. We  
will learn a great deal from these early  
projects—self-reliance, pride and organ-  
izational skills. If the management of  
the state were in our hands tomorrow we  
would not be ready for it. We must train  
to handle political responsibility for our  
own lives and other lives through these  
kind of outreach projects. You learn by  
doing. Do it. We will all do it together.  
This first step is the hardest because be-  
cause we have so few models or examples for  
it, another reason why it is so crucial.  

So we have a lot to learn from a visit  
to Hanoi, we learn we have to come home to  
Hoboken. Let's take ourselves seriously  
and seriously support our sisters in Viet  
Nam who do believe in us. Let's begin the  
slow and tedious labor here in our own  
backyard that will eventually change the  

World by Rita Mae Brown  

Page Eleven