SS QAO OTS >>

It seems that the confusion we are experiencing as to our capabilities at political class analysis and direction as a collective was predictable some time ago. Therefore, our present attempt is good, I think, because we need to keep our goals, audience, and political theory clear and in mind for every issue of the paper.

When we first discussed class (since I've been back) I didn't feel an immediacy or much identification. From listening to the discussions we've had, a more precise picture has come to focus to help determine class:

We mostly define our class by our class origin, or what class our parents belonged to. This seems valid to me since the argument that, "I've led a different lifestyle than my parents," is only saying that she had the option to do that—which is an option the lower class woman does not have. Because of this definition, I am confused as to my class background, since my parents grew up and lived part of their lives in an isolated, religion-oriented, socialistic society.

The level of concern we feel for survival necessities also demarcates our class. By economic class lines, it is obvious that money buys the life necessities and leaves the option for concern with purchasing automobiles, clothes, education, relief of liberal guilt through ‘charitable’ contributions, insurance against poverty from a ‘disaster,’ etc. Because of the communal equality standard, my parents never lacked a place to live (provided by the community) or food (provided by the community in the way of a job guarantee after the '30s) or medical coverage (provided by the community). Yet economically, I have, and my parents have, always been in constant anxiety about lack of money, a pressure brought on by the influx of capitalism into our community.

Work as a necessity or an option has been suggested as a further guideline to determining class. Who has the option not to work? The woman whose parents give her money, clothes, education—financial security has that option, not the woman whose parents give her only non-material support to make it on her own. Since 14, I've never felt I could get by without working.

Values cannot clearly identify class. Because of successful propaganda methods, status-symbol values permeate and are responded to in some way in all classes; therefore, the use of values doesn't seem totally accurate, except possibly to the extent with which they can be utilized by middle and upper class and not so much by lower class women. I've felt pressured to get an education (college—it's the only one recognized) but neither my parents nor I have money to pay for it. The wish my parents have expressed to me since I was very young is that I should find a secure job and work.

More honest discussion of class is necessary before I can feel that I understand even a few of the implications of class dynamics operating with counter-revolutionary impetus in relationships.

Besides class, I feel AIAW needs to deal with her communication effectiveness and audience.

What can I say that hasn't already been said about our commitment to evolving a class consciousness in the AIAW collective and attempting to relate that to the women's movement, given our similar (middle class) background? It will be a hard struggle and we may find that our perspective is necessarily limited at some point. I hope when we get there we will be aware of it and be able to make the politically correct decision about what to do—like stop publishing, or else realize what the limits of what we can deal with are.

The other hope I have is that we will be struggling to put whatever class consciousness we can achieve into some active practice, in AIAW of course but also in our personal lives and the ways we relate to WL projects such as the Women's Center. I see the responsibility of middle class women to point out what classism we are able to see as a real moral/political imperative both in our own lives and the work of others.

We have stated repeatedly that we know AIAW does not relate to third world women, and are acutely aware of the racist nature of that and the entire women's movement. Politically, this appears to me to be the most difficult problem to deal with, let alone resolve. I know I have no answers myself, and we haven't really spoken to this problem in the paper.

Generally, I have a lot of commitment and energy to give to the life of this collective and newspaper.

When we critiqued the last issue, Rachel said that it seemed to her that most of the articles came from outside the collective like this \ «. That's probably happened in other issues, but the last KR issue, in particular, seemed hard to get a hold on. I think it was hard to get in touch with the collective philosophy, or energy behind the paper because the collective itself was in a state of flux, with one member leaving and two more on leaves of absence.

It's the idea of collectivity that I want to focus on. Where is AIAW now? There's the old guard—6 experienced members, 2 of whom are leaving soon and another on a leave of absence, and 3 new members. And though we 3 had related to the collective before joining it, it's a whole new ball game to be in it and I think that's why I'm having such difficulty thinking about a direction for the paper. I think we have to determine what we are before we can go anywhere. My conception of collectivity is not to mold all of us into one brilliant thought process, but I just can't think about direction until I feel more comfortable/collective as a collective member.

Ways to feel that—do more things as a collective (retreats; relating (reacting) to the Women's Center); some of this will come from shared tasks working on the paper and some will come from discussions at meetings. I think it's exciting actually. I'm not worried about it, just impatient.

Dilemma—how to struggle with class without having Kate and Jody become resident working class women, thereby laying all our middle class guilts on them to gain absolution. There are some class topics that should be worked out among middle class members only. For instance: talking about our new classism revelations, "I did this most classist thing today...." We need to talk about our classism but I don't think we need to impose it on the working class women of the collective.

Facing Middle Class

Now that we've become aware of the fact that the women's movement has had a lot of middle class influences, it seems that we are going to have to deal with that hassle in material ways—not just talk about it, but consider class consciousness as a priority in what we write, the issues we take action on, and in our lifestyles.

I've been thinking a lot about how to make myself more aware of what my white middle class background has done to me and how I can relate to a revolutionary women's movement in a constructive, serious way. Much of the present women's liberation movement remains a liberal reformist force that is trying to make middle class women as equal and as comfortable as possible in a capitalist country.

Those women who are seeing that a class struggle is essential to a feminist revolution are going to have to build the movement along strong class and anti-racist lines. It's difficult, at this point, to see exactly how white middle class women can do that. Hopefully, we'll be able to ally and work with black and working class women to understand more of what needs to be done. But there will always be a question in my mind about whether those women will ever choose to work with us on any mass level. Because of the options middle class women have, the mistrust lower class women have is justifiable.

Mostly I've been trying to figure out how I could deal with being middle class now. Specifically, how I can live without exploiting other people by using my middle class privileges, but at the same time, using all the resources available to me and sharing them with the community. One thing that should be said is that we must be honest in confronting each other when we see classist behavior or attitudes.

Several years ago, as I started becoming aware of the shit that was coming down all over the world, I started rejecting the whole middle class trip. I quit college, stopped getting money from my parents, and got temporary jobs to support myself. I went through a time of thinking that all straight jobs were worthless and counter-revolutionary. My rejection of training for any of those jobs was a really middle class decision.

It's absurd to reject a job that brings in money that can be used in good ways.

On the other hand, I'm still into thinking about certain jobs and particularly, elitist professions, that can bring in a lot of money (law, medicine, etc.) but are so likely to co-opt you that they should be rejected. Also, there are some jobs that are so directly exploitative that they're beyond tolerance. (My last statement sounds a lot like, "I don't want to get my hands dirty," a choice a lot of people don't have.)

When people are earning more money than they need, then the excess money should be made available to people who need it. Exactly how this sharing can be done is still a big question. If the people with money can arbitrarily give it away, then they will still wield a great deal of power which is a bad situation. The money should be given to people and projects needing it most. It has to be made available in a way which will provide them with the most economic security (regular amounts of money that can be counted on) and the least strings attached. Hopefully, the decisions and arrangements can be made collectively by the community. It seems to me that defining the community is going to be one of the most difficult things to do.

As far as a more wide range perspective, I think we're going to have to carefully consider everything we write about and work on in the women's movement. We have to look at exactly what material benefits our actions and politics have for lower and working class people.