from Edmonton  
to Iowa City-- and Back  

We are Sibylline House--four women,  
one of us seven years old--in Edmonton,  
Alberta. We have been building a strong,  
stable women's house. Struggle! is com-  
ing out of ideas that we have evolved  

through building our house, reading women's  

papers, and being with women. Now we  
want to share some of those ideas, so  
here they are. We would appreciate it if  
our articles were only reprinted in their  
totality and were not quoted out of context.  

We have been distressed lately at some  
of the attitudes we have been picking up on  
from the women's papers we receive. The  
things we disagree with are (1) that middle-  
class is being equated with reformist and  
that middle-class women must either deny  
their class background or resign them-  
selves to being reformist, (2) glorification  
of lower and/or working class, and (3)  
that distinct class lines and a pure Marxist  
analysis fit a contemporary North American  
revolution.  

“(1) We consider it a basic principle of  
revolutionary politics that every woman  
work out of her own experience, which  
includes class background. This does not  
mean that we maintain the values of that  
class, but that we accept our class back-  
ground and with this consciousness, work  
with women of a similar background for  
the revolution. I guess what we are trying  
to say is that we cannot deny or negate our  
class. Middle-class women cannot and  
should not try to become working-class.  

Implied in that last statement is the  
fact that we (middle-class women) have to  

acknowledge the privileges of our class  
and use them to oppress working-  

class women. On the other hand, let us  
not guilt-trip middle-class women into  
denying their oppression. We disagree  
with the assumption that since we are  

*  

When we received Struggle, we knew that we wanted to respond  
first, because we disagree with their interpretation of  
the kind of class analysis that we're doing; second, because we  
disagree with their analysis; and third, because we're a predom-  
inantly middle-class collective, we feel a responsibility to deal  
with the classism we find in other middle-class women as well as  

primarily a middle-class movement  

that we are reformists. Being middle-  
class women does not exclude us from  
developing a revolutionary women's con-  
sciousness. "More oppressed than thou,  
therefore more revolutionary" is not the  
rule of political consciousness. If we  
don't have a responsibility to our middle-  
class sisters then we might as well forget  
sexism and only fight classism.  

(2) Glorification of the lower or working  
class is a case of mystification or false  
consciousness. Class consciousness  
entails the recognition that lower-class  
women have had a lot of shit laid on them  
to keep them from becoming integrated  
human beings. This does not mean that  
middle-class women are any more together,  
but they have had more opportunities to  
engage in human creativity. To glorify  
working-class jobs seems dangerously  
close to supporting a capitalist class  
society and denying the working-class  
alienation.  

We cannot argue that virtue or  
righteousness is more in the working  
class than in the middle class. It is a  
point of departure from the real issues--  
what are middle-class values and lower-  

class values and what is the relation be-  

tween middle-class and lower-class women  
in the movement? We seem to be caught  
up in accusations and confrontations when  
we should be struggling with each other.  
(3) It is not possible for us to draw  
distinct class lines in North American  
society. Undeniably there is a span of  
class, but it is impossible, taking into  
account all the variables in this society,  
to draw distinct class lines. Each per-  
son's main group identity lies in different  
groupings than class--black, woman,  
native, etc. This is one of the reasons  

*  

idea,  

is class chauvinism.  

liberal white kids went South to free the blacks  
but it's merely that--an idea that sounds good.  
can't/won't free the blacks, and middle-class women can't/won't  
make a revolution for the people they oppress.  
in the world won't change that reality.  
"Lower-class women have had a lot of shit laid on them to keep  
them from becoming integrated human beings."  
to say what constitutes an integrated human being? That really  
And, anyway, the kind of person who can be  

that a Marxist class analysis does not  
work here/now. Our analysis must work  
in reality not in our heads. Beyond this  
very practical problem, we must also be  
willing to examine the Marxist class  
analysis approach to revolution very  
carefully. A revolution in the 20th cen-  
tury, at any rate, cannot be based solely  
upon the basic needs of the lower class,  
for those needs can be filled by other  
means than a socialist revolution. A  
revolutionary vision of a free society  
requires a revolution based upon the need  
for freedom, which can be more clearly  
felt once basic needs are satisfied. We  
do not mean that lower-class issues are not  
an important part of the revolution, but  
that lower-class issues are not the only  
issues that are revolutionary. Class is  
one of the problems that exists in the  
women's movement. But class is one of  
the issues that can be dealt with within  
our movement; it should not be a hostile  
split. Lower-class women working from  
their experience in a revolutionary way  
and middle-class women working from  
their experience in a revolutionary way  
need not oppress each other. Middle-  
class women must learn not to oppress  
lower-class women, and lower-class  
women must not guilt-trip middle-class  
women. But if we are not attempting to  
do each other's work, we are much less  
likely to oppress each other.  

The issue is not too different from the  
gay-straight issue and the Canadian-Amer-  
ican issue--both of which can be dealt with  
within the movement, rather than splitting  
the movement through hostile confrontation  
politics directed toward each other.  

We are looking forward to some  
response to our ideas, and will be sending  
more as we get them out.  

*  

felt like a nice  
Whites  

All the "right ons"  

Christ, who are we  

integrated into a society that bases its philosophy on the idea  

Obviously one which ides  
creativity."  

oppress them.  
earn from work-  

creativity.  

that money is more important than human life, a society based on  
racism, sexism and classism, a society that systematically ex-  
cludes those without power (money), anyone who's integrated in  
this shitpile must seriously question the privilege that brought  
about this state of integration.  
people in this society are in jails and mental institutions.)  
Middle-class women "have had more time to engage in human  
Says who?  
probably your husband) on a $199 ADC check is one of the most cre-  
ative things a human being could do.  
as a consciousness-raising group.  

(Maybe the only "integrated"  

Supporting yourself, two kids, (and pro-  

It's at least as creative  
Being a street kid takes human  

The very act of living in a society that constantly  
tells you (via TV, magazines, advertising) that you're shit if  

Why should working-class women trust us anymore than we trust men?  

The women of Struggle say that "we (middle-class women) have  
to acknowledge the privileges of our class and not use them to  
oppress working-class women." That's a contradiction. Our priv-  
ileges, and the way we got them, are oppressive. It's not the  
kind of thing that you can simply acknowledge and then go on your  
way. What middle-class women cannot get into their (our) heads is  
that we'll pay for living so well for so long. Do you think we've  
all been treated so well by this society because we're inherently  
better than working-class people? We have participated in the  
capitalist society, we reap its benefits, and our continued parti-  
cipation perpetuates it. There's no other way to look at it. And  
we'll have to pay for our privileges.  

"'More oppressed than thou, therefore more revolutionary' is  
not the rule of political consciousness." The needs of the last  
shall come first. That seems to be the point. If a revolution  
does not include the most oppressed, if it's not made by the most  
oppressed, if it's just some concept that exists only in the heads  
of middle-class women, then it's not a revolution at all. It  
feels like a nice idea, like Mississippi Summer when all the  

Page 2  

rock music festival promoters do.  

What's the difference?  

with non-productivity.  

Volume 2 4  

you don't have money, is a supreme creative effort and working-  

class women do it every day.  

One point about glorifying jobs. Waitresses, janitors, maids  
and clerks don't make their living directly off the flesh of other  
human beings, like stockbrokers, executives, factory owners and  
So in that sense, working-  
class jobs should be glorified.  

Struggle women are upset with being "caught up in accusations  
and confrontations when we should be struggling with each other."  
Isn't it just that our middle-class "sen-  
sibilities" are offended by raised voices and anger? We've got  
to get the pigshit out of our heads that equates confrontation  
Of course there's anger. Of course mid-  
dle-class women will be confronted. But we can't just say "Sis-  
ters, let's join hands and discuss this rationally." The anger  
is real and justified and we've got to deal with it and listen  
to it and change. That's the rub. We're so fucking smug about  
this "revolution" that we're making that we can't stand the heat  
and the criticism. One thing is for sure--the revolution can go  
on without us.