Don't Go

The individual function improvement rate was 72%.  
Did God, blameless, These findings have never  
been refuted; subsequently, later studies have  

confirmed the negative results of the Eysenck  
study. (Barron & Leary, 1955; Bergin, 1963;  
Cartwright and Vogel, 1960; Powers and Witmer, 1951)  

"What's so wrong with that?"...  
The whole argument that I should be  
fit into society assumes that it is me  
who has the problem and not society.  
A sane society is one which keeps  
people starving, homeless, and out  
of work? Well, it took a long time  
to realize that such a country, and  
its people, is very maladjusted.  
Unfortunately, I didn't know this.  

I swallowed the psychiatry line,  
hook, line, and sinker. I felt that I was the  
only one and it was the worst kind of  
suffering because it was inside my head and  
I could never get away from it. I would  
be just crying inside and everyone  
around me would be doing what they  
usually do and even smiling sometimes;  
I couldn't stand it! I wanted to scream  
at them for not being aware of how  
absurd their happiness was next to  
my pain. I would go up to my friends  
and sit there wanting to put my head  
in their lap—to be comforted and  
escape from it for just one minute. But  
of course I couldn't. I couldn't  
escape the guilt.  

The work strengthened  
personal change.  
This profession  
confronts  

The validity of the entire profession as it exists now may be  
questionable.  

My personal experience with  
counselors, a psychiatrist, and  
psychologists (male and female)  
lasted seven years. Their influence  
on me couldn't have been as  
great as they intended, or I  
wouldn't be writing this for a  
women's liberation paper and  
have the politics that I have.  

I did find out some things about  
my feelings and how to deal  
with them more honestly (with  
my two-year, female therapist).  
I like that that happened.  

It's had an effect that I'm com-  
fortable with on how I relate to  
people...mostly women, because  
I like to relate mostly to women—  
which caused these symptoms.  

It's good for people to sit  
in judgment of others, to mani-  
pulate feelings, to affect  
that I was sick, that I was going  
through a change of personality, to act as  
if I needed help, that I wasn't normal.  
Being freaked out by that. By studying  
the behavior of rats, and worse:  
I was never convinced—  
by studying the behavior of their persuasive  
methods.  

All year I worked to improve my con-  
cept of men. I went out with guys and  
fellow Americans, they think  
were so boring. I was even considering  
marrying one to complete my  
life. I never paid anything. I ne-  
ver married. I lost my temper a  
lot. I was frustrated a lot.  
I talked and I listened and  
I learned about "individual adjustment." Thank goodness I did  
not because I was thinking of it just  
so I could once and for all be done with  
this problem.  

One of the reasons that that year  
was so painful was that although  
my mind had been co-opted in  
desiring to become heterosexual,  
my feelings were elsewhere. In May I fell in love  
with a bass player who lived in the  
dorm with me. She and I were worried  
about what the shrink would say when  
I confessed, but he surprised us by  
declaring that it was all right to have  
interspersed homosexual relationships  
just so long as I continued along the  
Heterosexual Way. Anyway, the time finally came when he felt I was well on my  
way to being normal; he patted me on  
the head and sent me into the world.  
That was that. Once I got out, I real-  
ized how ridiculous it had been trying  
to be straight in a crooked world.  

Psychologists and psychiatrists used to speak truths to  
me. Now I hear their rigid, socially-  
condoned attitudes that are based on and reinforce  
present inhumane attitudes and actions.  
Psychologists and psychiatrists  
used to look like saviors to me.  
Now they appear to be pigs, per-  
petuating the values and standards of this  
Fascist, racist, imperialistic country.  

The grossly counter-revolutionary goal of this  
profession is to help the individual  
adjust to society and to cease making waves!  
And to do this, they treat the  
individual...to treat the in-  
dividual as a guilty, suffering,  
maladjusted freak.  

Obviously, those who received  
treatment, psychotherapy, the improvement  
rate was 64%; and of the patients who received  
no treatment at all, the improvement rate was 44%.  
When responsibility is placed on the individual, the society  
does not change.  

Women?  

The psychiatric establishment cannot help  
someone's being.  

The grossly counter-revolutionary goal of this  
profession is to help the individual  
adjust to society and to cease making waves!  
And to do this, they treat the  
individual...to treat the in-  
dividual as a guilty, suffering,  
maladjusted freak.  

Obviouslly, those who received  
treatment, psychotherapy, the improvement  
rate was 64%; and of the patients who received  
no treatment at all, the improvement rate was 44%.  
When responsibility is placed on the individual, the society  
does not change.  

Women?  

The psychiatric establishment cannot help  
someone's being.