Somehow  
We  

Survive  

Photocell/Clara Gutsche  

When I was a child I always dreamed of getting married and  
having a family of my own. My friends and I would sit around for  
hours talking about the way we would cook, clean, wash and take  
care of our homes. I would say that my children would be raised  
differently because I would not beat them the way my parents beat  
me, and that I would be good to my husband no matter what he did to  
me and never leave him. There wasn't much to look forward to in  
life for my girlfriends and me but to hurry up and get old enough  
to get married and have children like our parents did. I was al-  
ways a sad child with no one to comfort me when I cried or was sick.  
I was anxious for someone to love me. But nobody had time for me.  
Some nights I would stay up for hours thinking of how I wished I  
was 18 years old so I could do what I pleased.  

I have five sisters and two brothers. We were raised with our  
mother, no father. My mother came to this country from Puerto Rico  
when she was very young. About fifteen years ago she started to  
get asthma so I and my older sister did everything in the house.  

As soon as we got out of school, we had to hurry home to take care  
of the smaller ones. My biggest sister finally got married and I  
was left with all the responsibility in the home. I had to give the  
children breakfast, dress them and send them to school. After  
school I'd rush home to clean, cook, and do everything a housewife  
is expected to do.  

So you can see it was no fun being single. I only had two  
nights a week when I could go out--Tuesday and Saturday from six to  
ten. And all I wanted for those nights was to see my boyfriend.  

If he didn't come, I didn't go out at all. I didn't have much of  
a chance to go out with girlfriends because they all had chores to do  
at home too, and it seemed we never had a time when we were all  
free. My fun in life depended on my boyfriend. Sometimes he didn't  
come around, and those were miserable times for me. I would cry for  
hours about him. My boyfriend was the leader of the Purple Knights,  
a street gang around the community. He was considered a big man  
around the neighborhood. Nobody bothered him--he was respected. I  
knew I wanted to marry him because when I was out with him I felt  
like somebody. But I didn’t realize that the reason was that I  
just wanted to leave my family because I was unhappy with them.  

I did want to graduate from high school. I was the only one  
in my family so far to do that. The only other thing I wanted was  
to be with my boyfriend. I loved him. Looking back on it now, I  
see I looked to him for escape from my problems.  

When I was seventeen, I became pregnant. I was happy about  
this, because my stepfather, who was a very religious man, had  
prophesized that I would never have children. I really believed  
him, so I didn't use any birth control--besides I didn't know where  
to get it. When I found out I was pregnant, I was scared that he  
wouldn't marry me. At that time, so many girls I knew got involved  
like this and then no one would marry them.  

When I told my boyfriend I was pregnant he said to me, "I'll  
marry you, but I'll make a terrible husband." I thought I could  
change him. All women think they can change men, but somehow we're  
the ones who get changed.  

We got our blood tests that day, a Tuesday, and Sunday we were  
married. I was afraid for my mother to know I was pregnant--that  
had already happened to my older sister. I thought I could give  
my mother some satisfaction by my getting married.  

Marriage was such an important thing.  
If you got married, you were considered a decent girl in the eyes of the community.  
If you got married, you made the whole block happy.  

The first year, we lived with my mother. We both worked and  
each brought home $44 a week. I worked in a factory--what a hor-  
rible job that was. He was a stock boy at Best and Co. At that  
time he felt he had a good job. I felt lucky to have married him.  
A lot of my girlfriends liked him, too, and I felt I had won the  
competition for him. He helped a lot when the baby came. He would  
change him and feed him. In fact, sometimes he would fight with me  
about it--he felt that the baby shouldn't have to cry for food, that  
he should have everything he wanted. We left my mother's house be-  
cause my brother built a pigeon coop on the roof and the roof fell  
in--it was such a run-down building. It could have hurt my son.  

Page 10  

Soon my husband started to feel that he should have a better  
job. He had been very respected and a leader in the neighborhood,  
but when he went to look for jobs, there was no respect for him.  
He wanted to be a boxer and he was very good at that. He won a lot  
of fights and he was supposed to be in training. I tried to help  
him, to fix the right foods for someone in training and I wanted  
to watch him fight. But he wouldn't let me--he was afraid for me  
to see him fail. It was hard for him to get another job because  
he couldn't read and write--so he couldn't fill out the applications.  
He couldn't earn enough money to support us and he was losing my  
love. He started drinking and playing cards or basketball on the  
block all day.  

Meanwhile, I was working as a waitress at White Castle res-  
taurant earning $63.00 for six eight-and-a-half hour days a week.  
By the time I had paid my sister-in-law $15.00 for babysitting,  
$70.00 for rent, and $15.00 for groceries I didn't have a penny  
left. I would come home after being bothered by rude people at  
the restaurant all day long, and I had to start to cook, clean,  
diaper, wash dishes, etc. I went to sleep so exhausted that I  
didn't want to be bothered with anything. I told my husband if he  
wasn't going to work he should babysit for me and do things around  
the house. He refused.  

I knew I had to do something and do it right away. One day he  
left as usual to hang out down the street and I went to my sister  
to ask her to lend me money for an apartment. After looking for  
two days, I found one and I moved. My baby was then two-and-a-half  
and it was hard for me to find a babysitter to take care of him  
while I worked. So I left him with my mother and picked him up on  
weekends. I worked like this for about three months, but I missed  
my son a lot so I decided to go on welfare. I had to lie to them  
and tell them I was pregnant again.  

My husband started using drugs when I left him.  

We changed our lives when we left each other. Sometimes I went out and got  
drunk because I didn't think I had much to look forward to. I am  
sure that if we had stayed married, I would be in a mental insti-  
tution. Pretty soon I decided to get a job again. I hated welfare.  
I looked for a secretarial job because I knew how to type. They  
gave me tests and I passed them--they said they'd call me. They  
never did. At another place, they asked me if I was single. I lied  
and said I was and that I had no children. They said they'd call  
me. They never did. I never forgot those people who refused me  
jobs. So many people screwed me up. Finally, I got a part-time  
waitress job. I ended up doing more than waitressing--I was hand-  
ling legal documents and taking care of money and stock. Even  
though I was paid only $1.25 an hour, I learned I wasn't stupid, I  
could handle a lot. I even thought I could have run my own res-  
taurant.  

When I was sober, I would think what I am going to do with my-  
self? What's going to happen to my son? My biggest worry was that  
what happened to me would happen to my son. I wanted to look at  
life differently. This is when I began to change my life. I went  
to Hunt's Point Community Center. They said they had a job for me  
in the Women's Talent Corps at the College for Human Services. This  
is one of the many programs that are opening up in New York City for  
poor and minority-group women. It trains us to be "para-profession-  
als"--assistants to teachers, lawyers, etc. There are a lot of good  
things about these programs. I was with other women like me. All  
the women in the program had children, we were all in the same bag.  
We had all gone through hell. We went to classes three days a week  
and the other two days we worked, mostly in the public schools as  
educational assistants. But we found after we had finished the two-  
year program that it really didn't change our lives very much. We  
still had children and no one to take care of them. The only kinds  
of jobs we could get didn't pay enough to live on. The only way  
that training was worth something was to go on and finish college.  

Ain't I