Donching oh hy \Women i

My last encounter with rampant anti-
lesbianism occurred three years ago,
when after I had parked my motorcycle
at a hamburger stand, a drunk young
man who did not like the way I looked
came up to me and called me a queer;
and when I failed to respond, he broke
my nose.

The threat of that kind of physical
assault had hung over me for years. As
a young lesbian, short-haired and defen-
sive, I slouched through many rainy and
half-drunk streets trying to figure out
who I was. At that time, every catcall
or muffled insult sounded like the
prelude to a gang-beating - my world
was full of angry young men on street
corners. And late at night I sometimes
fantasized armies of heavily armed lés-
bians, ready to help me beat them back
in black boot military fashion.

So when finally, the real fist from
the real drunk young man's anger hit my
face, it wasn't as though I had never
prepared for it. But during the period
between those violent fantasies and the
actual punch, I had changed my hair
style and appearance to the point of
not being readily recognizable as a
lesbian. Essentially I looked like any
other woman, except I drove a bike.

The crazy guy was completely out of
date - I'd been all set up for him
eight years before that, so why did he
wait until I'd gotten almost "respect-
able?"

Now, in retrospect, I believe he was
not so much punching out a lesbian as
he was punching out a woman who was
carrying a motorcycle helmet. He didn't
give a damn about my choice of sexual
partners or whether I did nasty things
in bed; what upset him was my intrusion
into two of his manly territories:
machinery and action.

I had antagonized him, not as a
pervert but as a somewhat liberated
woman - capable of acting and thinking

Woman-identified woman means

I have a preference about

who I share the shit with.

You're so strong you can take any shit that comes along

A WOMAN?

on my own - and that's what he'd been
taught to react violently against.

The straight women involved in the
women's liberation movement are begin-
ning to face various degrees of this
same blatant chauvinism from men:
the hostility that lesbians have known
about for years. They also are begin-
ning to understand the enormous isola-
tion that women - all women - are
subjected to: isolation from each other
because they have to compete for men's
attention (whether he's a husband or a
boss) - isolation from activity (men
do things while women sit and watch);
isolation from decisions (women are
told they are stupid and undependable);
and isolation from knowledge (men
gladly tell other men how the plumbing
or the car works, and what keeps sus-
pension bridges suspended.)

The lesbian solution to a male
dominated society had traditionally
been to "pass", to hide - to pair off
with a lover (if she's lucky) and to
surround herself with a few safe friends
and let it go at that. This double
life is so agonizingly schizophrenic
and lonely it's a wonder we didn't all
go mad long ago.

Straight women, as they begin to
unravel the extent to which women are
cheated and wasted in this society,
are finding a better solution - the
exact opposite of isolation. By band-
ing together in small groups, they find
they can develop strong supportive
voices for themselves and each other,
to help confront and change male atti-
tudes toward them.

In this process, one of the problems
they are going to have to think about
is the fact that many men accuse them

COME OUT OF THE CLOSET

BEFORE THE DOOR IS NAILLED SHUT

If there's that many of us on the same crazy —

we're gonna do more than take over an asylum.

THE MAN'S PRACTICE

of being lesbians, just for taking part
in the women's liberation movement, and
for starting to think and act for them-
selves.

If ever there was a chance for a
group of lesbians to talk openly, to
teach straight women and learn from
them and to begin to break down some
of the myths about us, it's surely in
these women's groups.

Because the women's liberation
movement is still unstructured and
democratic, and so loosely formed,
in fact, that no one even knows how
many groups there are, it is possible
to be completely open and still anon-
ymous.

Small groups of women meet once a
week. Because the groups are small,
it's easy to relax and get to know each
other quickly.

It's been a long time coming, but
if a change is going to come, now is
when to begin it. My present fantasies
are of an army of lesbians, heavily
armed with information and support from
each other, launching a real attack
against male chauvinism and anti-homo-
sexualism, by exchanging information
and moral support with heterosexual
women. Let's get to it.

WILLAMETTE BRIDGE/LNS

One never knows But many do

THE MAN'S THEORY

However, there are some trends

in the Women's Liberation Move-
ment, such as separatism, which
tend to reinforce false divisions
among people. These trends are
based on an incorrect awareness

of oppression: The belief that men,
as men, and not the system, is
the oppressor. Those who benefit
from the inequality and exploita-
tion in the present social system
are not all men but a tiny minor-
ity of men and women. The "man
is the oppressor" line has the
dangerous possibility of becoming
a self-fulfilling prophecy - if men
are treated as the enemy they may
become so, and the needed revo-
lution will be retarded or even
diverted into sexual, rather than
political warfare.

Alone again

I started walking, was hassled three times in the next block, decided I couldn't hack it, and hailed a cab. Emergency-depression-economy-splurge. Settled in. Whew. But the driver had seen my WL button, Oops. All the way home, he proceeded to tell me how abor-
tion was ok for them nigger and spic broads who breed so much, but,
no good for nice white girls like me. Soon I was shouting at him.

At the end of the ride, he told me calmly that if we women really pushed "this liberation thing" men like him were going to start killing us, literally. "You think you know male violence--you ain't seen nothin' yet. These rapes and beatings are going to soar, baby.

You can't tell me I'm not a king in my own home and get away with it." I told him I was studying karate, as many other women were, & here it comes.

November 20, 1970

we'd take a few of them with us if we had to go,