Another reason for the way I feel about daycare is that I've

their heterosexual relationships. I, as a gay woman who doesn't

HATE DAYCARE AND THE

REVOLUTION AND KIDS' OPPRESSION,

AND SPECIFICALLY AT THE END AS
A REPLY TO THE ARTICLE BY A
MIDDLE-CLASS MOTHER WHOSE
AGE AND SITUATION MAKE IT IMPOSSIBLE

I'm a fourteen-year-old working-class dyke, and I hate day-
care. That's how I've always felt about it and I always fucked it
off until just a few months ago when I moved into a community
where the daycare issue was real heavy. I started doing daycare
only because I knew that if I didn't do daycare I would get shit
from every woman in the community.

It took me about a month before I started realizing my res-
ponsibilities towards other working-class women, especially the
gay feminist working-class women in my community, but I still
hate daycare.

When I do daycare, I try to look happy about it and try to
think up things for the kids to do. You might say that is hypo-
critical of me and that I should be honest with the kids. Being
honest with kids is important, but what are you supposed to say?
I hate watching you? I suppose I don't hate kidcare, period, but
doing it for 10 or 15 kids at one time with only one other vol-
unteer can really be a drag sometimes. I really think it's fucked
up to hate daycare, but watching one kid at a time is easier for
me, and more enjoyable. But I am committed to struggling and want
to get into daycare more.

I try to look at the bright side of things, like I live in a
fairly small city, and there's not a whole lot to do, and it takes

want kids, am offended by their heterosexual practices and com-
mitments.

What I want to see is free daycare everywhere for women and
their kids. Like, my mother has to take her youngest kid, out of
six, to work with her every day from early in the morning until
late at night which isn't fair to her or him. And she has it
pretty good, because she works in a place where she can depend on
others to help her, and she won't lose her job. In most cases it's
no job or high babysitting rates.

I think it's real important and necessary for women to be
confronted about the daycare issue because that's the only way
that anything is going to happen with daycare. That was the case
with me and others in this community. Where I grew up there wasn't
any free daycare, or anything near free. My mother shelled out
eighty bucks a month for my little brother alone. That's not
counting all the money she dished out for the rest of her six kids.
Or for the food she bought, or for the clothes she bought, or for
her own labor! Skilled workers get paid for the labor they put out
besides charges for parts, etc... and if my mother had been paid
for her 19 years of labor she would be set. Instead she got SET
six times.

When I grew up I hated babysitters and school because it
meant being around perfect strangers. I understand how kids get
freaked out about being around strange people that change several
times a day, and I think it's good for kids to relate to a group
of women, and bad to be dependent on one, like a mother. They
should be able to relate freely and not be controlled by the
mother.

We women are still the ones responsible for daycare, and
that's real shit, but if I had a kid I wouldn't want a male to be
caring for her because at this time there isn't one single male
who I think is responsible enough to not fuck her head up and give
her any bullshit lines. I'm not trying to hide the real world from
kids, but we're all around these fucked up people enough and when
kids go to public school they're going to get enough bullshit and
enough lines to last them till eternity. And also they need a pol-
itical consciousness, too, and they should get it early. They'll
need it to fight off the crap that'll be coming down on them. I
want kids to be struggling to become fighters for liberation. Kids
are sick of taking shit and pretty soon if we get our shit toget-
her it's gonna come tumbling down and people better realize it
fast. I have this vision of a revolutionary class of kids and
blacks and dykes and mothers and everybody that's gonna be TOOOOO
MUCH!

And I don't want to hear anybody who's not a kid, even oppre-
ssed mothers, tell about my oppression. I can’t get jobs, I can't
go to bars, I can’t even hitchhike, I can't drive. I'm controlled
by the snap of a finger, a signature on a paper, and the point of
a gun. And that's only a PART of my oppression. Not one word in
the "adult" article on children's oppression speaks of MY opp-
ression, as a 14-year-old dyke, trying to live independently. Any
adult who wants to write about kids' oppression better come to the
kids to find out, and we want every bit of the royalties, sweetie.
And I won't talk to men who come around, I'm a child, honey, and
I'm a WOMAN. AND I GET OFF ON IT!

Right now daycare is really important to me, but I still hate

up a lot of my time. And there's usually some neat women volunteers around to talk to.

now. THE END.

...it is hard to face things like being

Pregnant by yourself.

Finding out you are pregnant when you
are not married is one of the most fright-
ening experiences a girl could ever go
through.

I am an unwed mother. My son is one
year of age now and I would like to express
to the readers some of my feelings throughout pregnancy.

I was 16 when I got pregnant and I had
no real parents to turn to. I went from
foster homes to other ones. The father of
my child wanted to get married but my fear
of divorce pretty much set us on two sepa-
rate paths.

I never had the problem of telling my
parents as I have already explained. But
I had sisters to tell and to me it was a
very hard thing to do. Mainly because I
had no idea how they would feel towards
me (although that really made no differ-
ence). But it is hard to face things like
being pregnant by yourself.

Throughout my pregnancy I had people
telling me to give my baby up. He would
have a better home. He would have both
parents and that I couldn't take on that
much responsibility by myself. I also had
people telling me to keep my baby. He was
my own and it would hurt me mentally if
I were to give him up.

Having all these suggestions being
pushed on you at this point is very hard
on a person.

I lived in a house with a family while
I was pregnant as I had no money. I helped
clean house and that paid for my room and
board. I ended up getting well attached
to the family and they pretty well helped
me make my decision.

The thoughts that so often entered my
head during this time were -- could I
handle the responsibility of a baby? Would
I be put down by people? Could I love my
baby without feeling a resentment toward
him because I would be more tied down?

Illegitimate children are pretty well
accepted in today's society but there are
still a few people who frown on me. Who
think I am taking on too much. Not too
many people, but those who do really don't
know me or my son.

We are both happy and I have never re-
gretted keeping him. There are times when
kids get on your nerves and I go through
those times just as every other parent
does. But that is to be expected. Kids
won't ever change -- I'm sure I did the
same when I was small.

It costs me more to live, keeping my
son, but I realized it would before I ever
gave birth to him.

I feel that if more girls were given the
choice to keep their babies or give them
up without being pushed one way or the
other -- whether they are married or not --
things would work better for the girl as
well as the baby -- because she would have
made her own decision and therefore would
not have such a resentment towards her de-
cision.

I am very happy with my decision even if
I still am considered young. Age really
doesn't matter. It's how much love you have
to offer and I feel I have more than
enough for my son.