IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

NOT EVERYBODY

DOLORES CARRILLO

We Mexican Americans are always turned down and told they are not hiring, and the people in the plant say they are hiring. We go and put in our applications and they don't hire us. The unemployment office sends us to Oscar Mayer's and we never get called. They don't care whether you've got a green slip or not, they don't call you. I've got people who know how to do that kind of work. They've worked in Chicago, and they've got their little union books, they belong to the union, but they still don't call them. These people need jobs.

They don't have any jobs now. They go all over Davenport and nobody gives them a job. So when the unemployment office sent me to Oscar Mayer, they gave me a green slip and they said "Dolores, this is a sure thing,” and like a big fool I came over here believing them, and they still didn't call me. I know how to do that work.

But they've got to give you a finger test, they've got to give you a written test.

Why:

Let me tell you something, if I give you that finger test, you won't pass it. They don't need that to get into that plant. You don't have to write nothing. Because of the fact that when you take a finger test in front of lots of people, there's about 20 people in the room when you take that test, the man looking you straight in the face, you aren't going to pass it. And whether you passed it or not, he can tell you you didn't. I know I passed it. He told me I did. And am I in Oscar Mayer's? I'm outside looking in. Well, I just finally got tired of it and I said "I'm going to do something about it.”

Ramona Castenada came here three years ago with 10 years experience working in meat packing in Chicago. She went down and showed them her union book and applied for a job and she wasn't hired. Another boy came from Chicago with four years experience and he applied for work there. Two days later they hired a white boy just out of high school. What the heck did he know about cutting meat? The union man said, “Well, you've got to prove it, give me their names." So I did. Then he said he knew the personnel manager wasn't prejudiced. I said, "If you don't call that prejudice I don't know what you call it." He said he didn't know.

They have this MA5 program. 18 blacks, maybe 20 whites. This old lady was the first name on the list. They hired her. Eight Mexican-Americans signed up and not a darn one was hired. I told him about it and he said he didn't know nothing about it. He knows.

But I'm out here every day, every day wondering, am I really going to get some place? Can I stop to think, maybe I will,

There are 3,000 Mexican-American people living in the Davenport area, mostly scattered throughout the inner city. Most work in foundries. That's the natural order of things. Women like Dolores Carrillo live on ADC because they have no alternatives. It takes real work to live on ADC--$300 a month for you and 5 kids. People like Dolores (black, brown and white) are made to spend time going to unemployment offices, knocking on personnel manager's doors, being put through meaningless tests--working, working, working just to get a job. One is immediately struck with the vitality and awareness of Dolores and the irony that she's not qualified to pack meat. What kind of society so wastes the productive energy of its people? A society that says there can't be work for everybody and still maintain a rising rate of profit.

And always people are told they just don't understand.

What doesn't Dolores understand? That when union/management (they often look alike) says “we may interview 1600 people and only hire 50 of them," they're not ashamed. They think they've answered the question, why no work for us? When she describes the meaningless testing--the finger test, the Wunderlich test, the personal interview--they say "we can't do anything about that." That when she points out that people who can't speak English still have to eat, they nod and babble about communication. That everywhere she goes there are white faces so certain of their natural superiority and natural assumption of power. White faces that claim friendship and understanding and a desire to “help” at the same time they're ordering the brown hands to open the windows, to run the errands. That's just what happened at a meeting with union officials of the Amalgamated Meat Cutters and Butcher Workmen (AFL-CIO) in Davenport.

When we put some white faces on the picket line in Davenport, two weeks after picketing began, suddenly the union men wanted to talk. The talk with union representatives reproduced on this page speaks for itself. Dolores speaks for herself on these pages, too. A group of some 30 people is picketing with Dolores in Davenport. They want support in their picketing of Oscar Mayer and other factories, in leafletting downtown and in their boycott of Oscar Mayer products. Contact Dolores in Davenport or Women's Liberation in Iowa City.

The inevitable economic squeeze that is hitting blacks, browns, women and poor people hardest as Amerika tries to subdue the third world in Southeast Asia is having an unintended effect. One WL member put it well at a rally recently:

“The Third World is Getting Bigger All the Time." She was talking about the third world of people who don't fit into the economic or social system of capitalism, the people who have always been the source of cheap labor. We have become aware of experiments like Cube where people are working to build a socialist society, where housing and necessities are free, where day care is provided free and a woman doesn't spend most of her productive labor just trying to provide for kids, where no one earns much more than anyone else, where meaningless bureaucratic jobs are eliminated, where there's a real chance for freedom someday because the amount of profit gained off the labor of others is not the measure of a person's worth.

The way I started is because I had a dream one night that we were nothing but little stones laying on the street, laying on the sidewalk, laying out in the grass, and once in a while a big factory would come by and pick up one of these little stones and give them a job, and the rest just laid there, never got picked up and got a job, never got called in to apply for a job, or never got noticed at all. So after I had this dream I said, "I'm going to help these people, and I'm going to help myself." So since I had that dream I thought I would name these people out here every day "the neglected stones."

I was born here—just like my two daughters who graduated from high school. We stuck their applications in the post office, the arsenal, the telephone company, in many different places. They're not hiring, they say.

"Well, what's the use of going to school if you're not going to get hired? I've got three kids left. Do you think they're going to finish school? They say, what's the use, they ain't going to get a job anyway. So I'm going to have to fight after them. My daughters went to school, but they went for nothing. This town just don't want to hire Mexican-Americans. The way this Oscars is, that's the way they are all over.

A man from the union came out here and said, "how can we hire these people if they can't speak English?" Very easy, that's no excuse. The people in there can teach them the jobs. They’ve got some Mexican-Americans in there who have been working 22, 23 years. They can teach the people out here.

You can't eat if you don't know English in other words.

They say they've hired 3 Mexican-Americans in a year. What is 3 in a year, when you can go yourself to the unemployment office and find out how many blacks and how many Mexican-Americans they've referred to Oscar Mayer's.

I'D LIKE PEOPLE TO BOYCOTT OSCAR MAYER'S WIENERS AND MEATS. THERE'S OTHER BRANDS THEY CAN BUY BESIDES THIS BRAND AND THAT WOULD BE A BIG HELP TO US, IT SURE WOULD. THEN THEY WOULD THINK THE PEOPLE ARE FOR THEM, WE MIGHT AS WELL START HIRING THEM. BUT, AS LONG AS THEY BUY THEIR PRODUCTS THEY AIN'T HELPING US ANY.

TALKING UNION: or The Union Makes Us Strong Fingers

Following are quotes from the union man:

They use a dexterity test on all women, all production women. And as we are told, this I know for a fact, the jobs that the women do require fast hand and finger movement. They give dexterity tests to men if they're going to work in the same area that the women are going to work. . .most of the dexterity tests are given to women, yes. Men do not work on those jobs. The men CAN work on those jobs if they're in there, they're allowed to take any job in the plant. . .those gals, uh, people make in excess of $4.00 an hour. .

No, I don't think a dexterity test is discriminatory. Let me explain why. I can't say for sure that it's not discriminatory, maybe my idea of what's discriminatory is wrong, but I don't think it is. Almost all of those jobs that women do on the sliced meat line, they are incentive jobs, they're fast finger jobs. If the people do not have fast finger dexterity they can't keep up on the job. People who have good finger dexterity, it's not very hard for them at all. . . Women are much better with dexterity than men are. See, very few men can pass that finger dexterity test and they don't work out well on those jobs. . . They're NOT women's jobs, they're just jobs that women adapt to better than men, because women are more dexterous with their fingers. As I understand it, they are more dexterous with their fingers than what men are. Scaling and bacon, assembling of luncheon meats, most of those jobs are filled by women, because of their dexterity.

Stewards? I don't think there's one woman steward at this time. Not one. But we have had women stewards. It's very difficult to keep them. The women feel that "I have a hard time in working with men and taking care of these types of problems." Because we have no women foremen.

Remove the dexterity test? That is not within our power within the contract. We can't set hiring practices. . . Well, it's within our power to negotiate anything that an employer would be agreeable to put into a contract. As long as it does not conflict with the law. We are restricted by the law on many things. We have nothing to do with hiring. The law says—the law, mind you—says we cannot have anything to do with hiring.

You say put those people who can't speak English on the line with Mexican-Americans in the plant. Well, the company can't do that in some instances. We have a system of seniority and job rights. Seniority is what dictates where someone works. . . Seniority is the foundation of our union and we're not ashamed of it. We're proud of it. . .

We have nothing to do with hiring. The law says—the law, mind you—says we cannot have anything to do with hiring... .

I just wanted to talk with these people and see if we could help. To answer any questions they might have about the union.

(Final Chorus: How Taft-Hartley created the dictatorship of the proletariat.)

We have nothing to do with hiring. When you had a closed shop, the union had something to say about hiring. (Union membership of production workers at Oscar Mayer is 100%.) The Taft-Hartley law eliminates the union power to dictate who shall be hired. We are employees of those 1500 people. (400 women, 91 blacks, 18 Mexican-Americans) We are not free to do what we think in our own minds. We do what the people who hire us dictate us to do.