RRA KK IK I RREER ERE BER IRERREEERIER FRR ERE ERERE

WY \y MURDER

THE LEADING CAUSE OF CHILD DEATHS FROM BIRTH
TO PUBERTY IS "ACCIDENTS", SHIT, THEY AREN'T
“ACCIDENTS"...THEY'RE MURDERS. IN NURSING SCHOOL
WE WERE TOLD THAT AROUND 50% OF THESE "ACCIDENTAL"
DEATHS ARE BATTERED CHILDREN...THE POLITE WAY
OF SAYING THAT THE LEADING CAUSE OF DEATH IN
YOUNG PEOPLE IS MURDER BY THEIR PARENTS.
"ACCIDENTS?" GODDAMMIT, YOUNG PEOPLE'S BONES
ARE FLEXIBLE...THEY DON'T BREAK EASILY- THEY'RE

‘ALMOST LIKE A WAD OF CUSHION... ; pectce

x Bes
HIRI IK AIK IA IRE IA IRIE IRE RAsper Susie. wine

The above article appeared in the last issue of Spectre, a
women's newspaper out of Ann Arbor. It was included in a discus-
sion of age chauvinism and the oppression of children by parents
and the family. The women who wrote the article certainly had va-
lid points to make about child abuse. It's true that children in
our society are viewed as property and are treated as "not quite
human beings". I agree with those criticisms and I think we should
be working to develop new ways for children to live and to live
with children through collective child rearing, day care, etc. But
there were several things that were not discussed in the Spectre
article that I believe should have been included. The charge of
parents with the murder of children made me quite angry.

It's just impossible to deal with child abuse and the oppres-
sion of children with such simplicity. It's very easy for people
who don't spend a great deal of time with children to talk about
what to do and what not to do with them. Women who are alone with
their children for huge stretches of time cannot be expected to be
patient and unoppressive. Living with children, when you're a wo-
man in a traditional nuclear family with no help in child care, is
very hard. It's enough of a hassle that women do hit their kids, lock
them in their rooms, stick them in their cribs when they're not
sleepy, and sometimes fatally injure them. Being a parent, especial-
ly a mother, in a poor or working-class family is as oppressive to
the adults as to the children. Most women have no day care, little
or no money to pay babysitters if they need or want to get out of
the house, and most likely didn't have much choice in the decision
to have children (given the expectations of society, birth control
effectiveness and safety, and the availability of safe abortions.)

The article was right about one thing--child abuse is not an
accident. It's a direct result of most women having no control over
their lives.

PARENTS
ana

SISTERS
and

BROTHERS

I have eight sisters and brothers, all younger than myself. My
parents are working-class and have always had a lot of financial
difficulty. My father's different jobs have never amounted to much
and my mother has been helping to support us for about fourteen
years, the last six of which have been mainly her responsibility.
She's not very strong, and her married life has been very hard on
her. My parents have always used corporal punishment, and in my
father's case it has almost always been harsh and abusive. He's a
large man and he's been a bartender and a bouncer for about twenty
years. He increasingly uses extreme force, even on the youngest
children. We are all used to being beaten and struck with belts,
broom handles, shoes, two-by-four boards, and even the telephone

receiver. He punches us with his fists, throws us against walls,

and kicks us brutally. Since 1965 I have been through countless
social workers and two psychologists who always told me that my
father needed help. My father said I needed the help and he re-
fused to see them. I had always been blamed for most of the prob-
lems in our house. I was the greatest financial hassle and I
taught all my brothers and sisters every bad thing they knew. Al-
though I was constantly reminded that I would never be missed, I
was never allowed to leave for a foster home, and I was too young
to be taken out until college. So the counselors and workers gave
me the help (including Vocational Rehabilitation money for school)
to keep me from offing myself or getting into trouble with the
law. THANKS FOR THE HELP MOTHERFUCKERS, CHILD FUCKERS.

As a child I was constantly angry and miserable. Quite often,
especially in high school, I had the most desperate aching depres-
sion about living with my parents. They hated me, and what problems
they didn't know about, I didn't want them messing with. There was
no privacy in our home, children were mindless and inferior. We
felt like properties, liabilities, and our usefulness (or bother-
someness) would end at age 21, if not sooner. I'm responsible for
you until you're 21, and until then you'll do as I say. I don't
have to give you reasons for anything, this is my home, not yours.
My parents used outrageous threats to maintain order and displayed
little tenderness in dealing with us. I'll love you when you learn
to happiness. All you need in this world is a roof over your head
and three squares a day. Are your clothes ragged? Don't you eat
well enough? You have nothing to complain about. And when we
weren't satisfied to be alive we heard about rich kids whose money
will never bring them happiness. Those people have everything in
the world and yet they have nothing. Actually, although there were
always money problems and we always heard about them, we somehow
thought that we really weren't poor. My parents now have a color
television, two cars, a big enough house, and lots of furniture.
But they also have no savings accounts, three mortgages, little in-
surance beyond health and hospital, and tremendous debts. All they
own is their children.

The children in our family are pretty sad humans, we feel per-
secuted and abused, and we are all highly defensive. Our lack of
self-worth has manifested itself in different ways. Violent tem-
pers, tendencies to be dishonest to protect ourselves, and cut-
throat to shift punishment on other children. In high school I
had some fairly right-on teachers who helped me like myself a
little and it went to my head for a long time. The alternative to
being on the bottom was being on the top. But all my fantastic tal-
ents didn't mean shit to kids who could use class insults against
me, or to teachers and administrators who thought I was full of
shit anyway. I was a trouble-maker, but not in the traditional
sense. I didn't really break rules, but I challenged a lot of teach-
ers and was brassy and arrogant, enough to warrant secret confer-
ences about my potential political danger. Some of my other sisters
are going through the same thing because they've been able to gain
recognition and popularity. My sister who's 17 is the only exception
so far. She does poorly in school and we've treated her terribly to
make us look good. She retaliated by pleasing our parents and rat-
ting on us. They praised her and we hated her all the more. She is
the most like our father now, out of desperate defensiveness. She
also has had responsibility for the youngest children since she
was fourteen, being the "domestic" daughter. She's been my parents'
greatest "success."

I know my parents feel hopelessly useless at times because they've
failed to be the parents they wanted to be. Where did we go wrong?
We've done what we thought was right. Other people's kids don't act
like you do. They've oppressed us horribly, but they've been victims
too, especially my mother. She always treated us better than our
father did, and often ended up in the middle of raging feuds. Being
Catholic and relatively straight-laced, she accepted thirteen preg-
nancies, nine of which produced a burden she should never have had
to bear. She had no option but marriage and her ties to my father
seldom allowed her to really stand up against him for us. But she
never sold us out without feeling bad about it and trying to help
us later. Too many times she forced us to accept bullshit about the
Church, and a woman's role, but she wasn't meek and she didn't like
rich people and she always discouraged us from making middle-class
friends because she knew we'd get hurt when we finally got slapped
with the differences. Stick with your own kind. Those people are
out of your class, and they don't care about you. You can't be like
them and you'll just get hurt. Who wants what they have? She'd
often tell us something about Jesus saying that the rich man trying
to get into Heaven is like a camel trying to get through the eye of
the needle. Fuck Jesus, but fuck that rich jerk twice. My youngest
sister in high school is a class officer and is quite popular. She
hangs around with middle-class kids and breaks her neck to dress,
act, and be like them. She can't understand why my mother is so
adamant about keeping her away from them and considers herself to
be quite oppressed. In a way she is, because my parents are so
frightened of what she may become (like pregnant) that they re-
strict her to the house for months for slight infractions. Some-
times my father goes into a rage and beats her up very badly and
tells her that he's "not about to have another one like the oldest
around." But I think class objections like theirs are valid, and
although my sister is really suffering now and I wish they'd stop
their tactics, I think she'll have a good class awareness.

For half of her marriage my mother spent all her time with five
of us at home. She had a lot of work to do and we really weren't
old enough to help. The pressures of money hassles, a weak body
that was constantly sick and/or pregnant, and so much work caused
her to have a nervous breakdown and physical collapse when I was
five. While she was ill we had our first taste of life without
mother and constant exposure to our father. When he had to share
the responsibilities my mother faced alone with my aunt and a day
babysitter he became enraged to the point of nearly killing us. One
day when he was mad he started mumbling about taking us to differ-
ent towns and leaving us there, or depositing us outside the orph-
anage in our town. He wasn't working, so there was little money,
and the strain my mother always faced nearly made him flip out. One
of my greatest fears from being a child was the thought of losing
my mother permanently. After she started working things were always
like that horrible time. A year ago she nearly died and my father
told my sisters and brothers that if she died it would be their
fault. I hate my father for saying things like that, but I hate
this society most of all for forcing human beings into such frantic
states of mind. Parents do oppress children, but who can be expect-
ed to handle themselves in this society in a powerless position
like poor and working-class parents, let alone be responsible for
nine other human beings, or even one, all alone? My parents are
greater allies to me than all the rich, middle-class people I went
to school with, and at times I can't help not trusting people with
more power to control their own lives than I may ever know. Having
choices in these times means someone else doesn't have them, and I
am determined to destroy that condition with all the strength my
parents and sisters and brothers have had to give in heartbreak

and suffering.