There never was any talk of divorce be-
tween my parents -- I think they both like
and/or need the relationship they have. My
father is the decision-maker in every im-
portant way, though he always discusses
things with my mother because she supports
him completely. They both finished college
(their families have been middle class for-
ever) but my mom was a home ec major and
my dad was in engineering, so there's no
role competition between them.

I've been trying to figure out the val-
ues I got from my family -- where I learned
to measure my self-worth. My school work
was always praised and I learned to be a
very high achiever. The rewards I got were
never money or privileges but the knowledge
that my parents were proud of me, they ap-
proved of me, and therefore I was a good
person. What knowledge I learned in school
was important not because I was smart and
therefore good, but because my parents
(especially my father) were gratified and
they judged me good.

The pattern established led me to look
for my self-concept in the opinion of oth-
ers -- first my father, and later other
people I respected. So the value I learned
overwhelmingly was to earn justification
through personal relationships...not, of
course, self-directed relationships because
I always granted the other person the power
to set my goals and evaluate my progress.

It's amazing how much like my mother I
am in that way. The reason such a discovery
is surprising is that I identified so
strongly with my father during most of my
life. I was a whiz in math and science,
never did artistic stuff which my mom was
really talented in. Although both parents
praised me I knew it was daddy who set the
criteria.

The reason my growing up failed to go
smoothly is that I'm a girl. I never lo-
cated the contradiction between my father's
encouragements and notion of what I should
be with what he valued and needed in my
mother. He wanted me to be "independent,"

perspective *

recollections from

yet obviously his happiness depended on a
woman who deferred to him consistently.
How could I do both?

I tried to though. When I was a sopho-
more in high school I started going with
this boy who had a lot of the surface con-
fidence of my father. Although he wasn't
as smart as I was in school, he knew a lot
more about emotional and psychological
competition than I did. We developed a re-
lationship that, by the time we were sen-
iors, we were convinced was the ultimate
in maturity and love. He dominated me with
loving care and every emotional recrimin-
ation in the book. I was blissful.

My parents hated him. I couldn't under-
stand it. But it wasn't until just recent-
ly that I realized my confusion came be-
cause I was being criticized for being in
a relationship that exactly echoed my par-
ents'. By extension daddy’s criticism im-
plied that he needed a submissive woman,
but he didn't value one. I felt the im-
plied disrespect for my mother, but again
couldn't name it. To protect myself I put
my mother down in my own mind (though I
didn't get out of my destructive affair
until I was a sophomore in college).

I'm not sure about this, but maybe my
mother hated my relationship with that boy
so much because she knew how much I'd lose,
and she sensed that I could learn not
to have those self-limiting needs that she
accepted in herself.

It's really a fantastic feeling to real-
ize you don't have to despise or pity your
mother. I don't know if it's a pattern, but
a lot of women I know have said that when
they were a few years into their 20's they
suddenly began to understand their mothers
and the many ways they are like them, and
not have to reject that.

New

When I was a kid, my Mom used
to say that as soon as she was able
(that is, when we were through high
school) she would take the dog, and head
for Reno. A couple of years ago, what
she was saying was that if she had to
do it over again (get married), she
didn't think she would.

I think she was fearful for us

would be repeated. One way for at least
part of that to change was to be finan-
cially independent. I never can recall
hearing much about a career, just the
absolute necessity of a college degree,
(‘they can take away everything', my

"but your education').

I think all the values I got when
I was growing up were defined by my
Dad. It wasn't complicated, what men
did was justifiable and logical; what

while I would take something like a

physics course to please my Dad, if

I did well in it, it was put down. 
It must have been one of my smart-

ass periods, I can remember my Mom

saying something like who'd think such

It took me a while, I'm afraid to say,
to see what she meant. How she kept her
image of herself intact, I don't know.

girls, perhaps afraid that her situation

mother who never had anything would say,

women did was neither. So on the one hand,

a smart girl could have such dumb parents.

Volume L Number 17

The hardest lesson to unlearn has been
the one about deriving my self-concept
from the judgments of people I respect
and want to love me. Approval and love
have been directly connected in my mind
for so long, and approval was always on
the other person's terms. The smallest dis-
approval meant loss of love through rejec-
tion, and I feared that because if I wasn't
loved then I didn't deserve to be loved: I
was a bad person. One of the reasons I got
divorced was that I knew I could never
learn to deny my husband the power to judge
me, even though the judgment I inferred
was often in my own head. The pattern was
so well established that I knew I couldn't
break out of it in the context of that
relationship.

It's true that being part of that
family wasn't easy for anybody, but I
do think that the women in it suffered
the most. I never could laugh at myself
because I never saw that kind of joking
done with any kindness. And that was a
lot of the humor that existed: putting
people into a bind, and then laughing
at them.
In spite of my 4 years of math, and
doing well in it, I never thought I had
any aptitude for it; what I thought was
that I was just good at memorizing form—
ulas. It wasn't until a year or so ago
that I realized that I could understand
some things about math and statistics.
Women weren't supposed to really under-
stand, or be good at it.

It's funny, the other thing I thought
I wasn't good at was getting along with
people. With good reason -- all I
remembered how to do was bicker. Even now
I tend to criticize instead of discuss.
My thing was that I'd have a few close
friends; you had to really know me to
like me. What took longer was realizing
I could respect women, one, then two
or three. Even that was ass-backwards.
It's one thing to respect women by
male standards, but to understand how
women's place is intertwined with women's
image, and see that in women you know,
is easier said than done.

Ain't I