The Chicago Women's Liberation Union  
is an organization of women who see the  
oppression of women as a significant  
crippling factor in our lives and the  
lives of other women, and as part of the  
generally oppressive socio-economic sys-  
tem under which we live. We have united  
to struggle against our common oppres-  
sion, as well as to join in the fight  
against the oppression of others. The  
CWLU is composed of chapters of vary-  
ing types in the Chicago metropolitan  
area, and functions through a steering  
committee composed of one representative  
from each chapter. The CWLU is con-  
sciously attempting to develop a humane  
non-manipulative organization; in prac-  
tice this means that we are attempting  
to function through a democratic, decen-  
tralized structure in which all chapters  
are consulted on policy decisions. The  
CWLU office is staffed by two unpaid,  
nearly full-time women plus volunteers  
from the chapters.  

The Union has a number of important  
functions. One is that of facilita-  
ting communication, both in the city  
and nationwide, by means of the Union  
Newsletter and of the information ex-  
change occurring through the office.  

It serves as a mechanism by which  

ideas and resources from groups across  
the city can be pooled to work on  
common actions and new analyses. It  
provides a central place to which in-  
terested women can be referred and  
through which new groups can be organi-  
zed. The Union also provides a mechan-  
ism for meeting certain demands in a  
unified way, such as requests for  
speakers and requests from the mass  
media for interviews, etc., which are  
dealt with through the Union Speakers'  
Bureau and media committee.  

Union chapters are varied in nature,  
including neighborhood organizing pro-  
jects, personal discussion groups, study  
groups, and other types of action  

groups. Chapters have virtually total  

autonomy in their actions, and thus  

may choose to carry out activities on  
their own, to cooperate in Union-wide  
projects, or to do both.  

Women's liberation groups have been  
meeting in Chicago for approximately  
two and one-half years. Out of the  
experience of groups meeting in rela-  
tive isolation from each other and  
attempting sporadic cooperation on  
specific actions or projects came the  
general feeling that a city-wide organ-  
ization was essential to facilitate  
communication and cooperation. A con-  
ference and a series of mass meetings  
were held this past fall, leading to-  
ward the ultimate founding of the  
CWLU.  

Membership in the CWLU is open to  
all women agreeing with the substance  
of the Union statement of principles.  
Members are encouraged to affiliate  
with existing chapters or to create  
new ones in the belief that group  
work is more beneficial than work in  
isolation, but one can be a member-at-  
large if she so desires. Work with the  
WLU is NOT limited to members; non-  
members are welcome to work with the  
Union and the chapters on actions and  
projects, and are invited to get in  
touch with the chapters (this can be  
done through the office). Membership  
building is not a concern of the Union;  
reaching out to women is. Dues are not  
assessed on Union members, but members  
are encouraged to give whatever they  
can afford. Contributions from non-  
member supporters are welcome.  

The CWLU believes that people are  
oppressed by the economic and political  
institutions of contemporary American  
society. This oppression is felt around  
us every day: through the war and the  
involvement of big business all over the  
world; through the state, which pours  
the resources of the people into pro-  
tecting those business ventures through  
foreign aid, military expenses, and gov-  
ernment contracts, while the basic in-  

stitutions of American society—health,  
education, transportation, welfare—  
decay; through the deterioration of  

the environment caused by profit-dominated  
corporate policies; through the  
discriminatory practices which cause  
suffering for blacks, Puerto Ricans,  

the aged, women, American Indians, and  
other segments of the American popula-  
tion. This oppression is exercised in  
numerous ways, some of which affect  
women in particular.  

Although capitalism exploits virtu-  
ally the entire work force in one way or  
another, women form one of the major  
oppressed work groups. Women are hired  
for the lower skilled, lower paying  
jobs and are promoted less often than  
men, often standing by while less  
qualified men are promoted over them.  
Women seldom reach policy-making  
positions, and in fact are often  
systematically excluded from them.  

At all levels, women are often paid  

less than men for the same work, some-  
times through the device of having two  
job classifications for the same work.  

In the family, women are oppressed  
by the role of wife and mother. Women  
are expected, whether they have an out-  
side job or not and whether they have  
one child or five, to be entirely re-  
sponsible for the cleaning, repairing,  
cooking, shopping, washing, ironing,  
health, education, and child-care for  
their family. Whether they actually do  
the work themselves, are expected to  
hire and supervise others, or whether  
their husbands "help out," the primary  
responsibility remains theirs, and  
problems or crises are left to them  
to deal with. What this means is that  
tremendous amounts of socially necess-  
ary labor is performed free by women  
who are unpaid and unrecognized. It  
also means that children often don't  
have the chance to benefit from any  
intensive contact with men, and that men  
are deprived of significant contact  
with their children.  

The present family pattern, in con-  
junction with discrimination against  
women in the labor force, also penal-  
izes women economically. If a married  
woman chooses to work, she must either  
do all or almost all of the housework in  
addition to her outside job, or must pay  
out of her (already low) wages to have  
part or all of that work done. If she  
has children, the costs of child-care  
must come out of her earnings, and she  
must face the problem of inadequate and  
expensive child-care facilities. Women  
with children who, through divorce,  
widowhood, or whatever, must support  

both themselves and their children face  

even greater difficulties in surviving.  
(continued on page 5...)  

Vol. | No. 3  

The Chicago Women's Liberation Union  
has been working since the first of  
the year to open a free women's health  
center. Part of the services offered  
will start the first of August; other  
things will follow as community support  
and funds are built up.  

The center (not called a clinic for  
licensing reasons) will open with a  
series of informal educational meetings  
covering six general topics: (1) Sex  
education for teenagers, (2) Infant  
care, (3) First Aid, (4) Nutrition and  
diet, (5) Preparation for childbirth,  
and (6) Female physiology (including  
birth control and VD). All of the  
people organizing the classes are nur-  
ses, public health workers, medical  
technicians, or nursing students. The  
class leaders have been working with  
groups of six to eight women from the  
Union to plan the course and to teach  
them to be teachers. Each class will  
meet four times a month, on the same  
day of the week, and then the 4-week  
series will start over again the  
next month.  

We expect other groups to develop out  
of these broad classes, and will help  
women from the community set up other  
classes to meet their needs.  

As we have been lining up these meet-  
ings, we have been recruiting other  
people to volunteer medical services  
for when other parts of the center  
open. We have about ten doctors willing  
to give between one-half day and a  
whole day each week. Some are women,  
some are men; about half are gynecologists.  

The medical services we will offer  
are pregnancy testing, VD testing and  
treatment, diagnosis and treatment of  
other vaginal infections, routine pre-  
natal care, practical lessons in natu-  
ral childbirth, routine infant immun-  
izations, and abortion counseling (not  
advertised as such). We have located  
a hospital and a laboratory which will  
serve as back-up institutions, taking  
patients we can't help. Another impor-  
tant function of the center will be to  
provide patient advocates—women who  
help other women cut through red tape,  
find out what services are available  
elsewhere in the city, and actually  
help them to get them. Legal and fi-  
nancial advisors will be available, too,  
working with the patient advocate. This  
alone will make the center radically dif-  
ferent from all the city clinics.  

We are working on getting large  
grants from corporations, foundations,  
and churches; and this, as usual, is  
proving to be the hardest part of the  
work. We have had to write and re-  
write proposals to iron out our vague  
points and polish everything up to meet  
incredibly high standards of superficial  
perfection. We have had to bull-shit  
a lot, which is an interesting experi-  
ence when you’ve spent long months or  
years trying to get that tendency out  
of your system. So far we have a guar-  

antee.