To Commit Herstory

Women, those who were fighting for the real (white male) revolu-
tion. The realization hit us that our oppression and liberation
was peripheral to the things our "brothers" talked about and did.
The reality of our lives was peripheral to their revolution.

And we began to realize we could not trust them to fight for
anyone's liberation. They exploited women in their daily lives.
Mike Abeles could fuck a 16-year-old virgin, give her the clap,
not tell her, and leave her. And he couldn't understand what he
had done: "I don't see how you can be oppressing someone when
you're socking it to them." And Chip Marshall was only a little
more sophisticated in his approach. When asked what male chauvin-
ism was about, he responded, "It means you don't treat your girl-
friend like a sexual object." Jeff Dowd could threaten a woman:

"You bitch: I'd like to smash your face in. You're not oppressed.
Men are oppressed. We're the ones that are dying in Vietnam and
rotting in the jails."

We were forced to use the oppression of black people in explain-
ing our own to movement men. But we began to see that although
they responded to that analogy out of liberal guilt, they did not
understand oppression. They understood power. It was their know-
ledge of the power they had over other people that sustained their
egos and drove them to action.

By April, anti-male leadership grumblings increased, "sec-
ondary leadership" began to emerge. Lerner and Sundance men chose
certain men as protégés and fucked selected women into leader-
ship positions.

Then the conspiracy busts for TDA came down. And the second
level leaders swaggered and jived as best they could, trying to
make it in the movement. One of the macho men's protégés, Rick
Alba, who was later to become the Sky River big schtick, did pages
of research on employment at Boeing for an anti-war demonstration
there, and presented it to the SLF. Surprise. Not a single fact
about black or women workers.

Many women refused to go to the Boeing event; it was just
another male-defined, male-led demonstration. Those of us who did
go supported one of the women on tactical leadership when she re-
fused to give her speech after being totally ignored by the male
leadership. Afterwards the female exodus from SLF began in
earnest.

But a few days later came Cambodia, Kent State, Jackson State,
Augusta. Everyone reached the point of freaked-out suicidal
hysteria we'd been headed for, with the SLF heavies still managing
somehow to define the only proper revolutionary response: stupid,
ineffective, "militant" actions in which women were ordered into
the front lines and were used as cannon fodder for the Revolution.

After the strike, many more people left SLF: some disgusted,
some burnt out, some resolving never to be used again. We'd come
to realize exactly what Chip Marshall meant when he said, “In a
revolution, people have to be manipulated."

During the summer we were forced to deal with SLF only twice:
once to stop them from claiming a women's center some of us had
set up, as an SLF project; and a second time to stop Jeff Dowd
from handpicking people to represent Seattle on a "youth culture"
trip to Cuba. We read disgusting articles which offered the near-
ly defunct SLF as the answer to a fragmented left.

But many other people had come out of their "revolutionary"
trance. The feeling was growing that SLF - and most of the move-
ment - was merely a degenerate form of what it claims to be attack-
ing. We tried to get in touch with our feelings and the reality
of our lives: to live as human beings and do our work.

Then came August and Sky River. The reaction of the women's
movement to the festival was varied. We were appalled at the
arrogance of sponsoring any rock festival after Altamont, and
especially at SLF's extravagant claims for it. We doubted they
would be able to ejaculate politics into the youth culture whose
worst aspects they had hyped as revolutionary.

But after being assured by the Hydra collective (who undertook
the festival's sponsorship) that "of course they were against
‘male chauvinism' - this was a political event” and that there
would be adequate food supplies, sanitary facilities, and pro-
tection, some women decided to go.

Then we heard about the gang rapes. And the reactions of the
men: "Well, it depends on the circumstances, but I never saw any-
thing wrong with a little fucking, myself." Abeles was not alone
in thinking the horror of Sky River for women unimportant. Most
of the men brushed it off: "I don't believe there were any gang
rapes..." "the women got what they deserved."

We had tried to render SLF irrelevant. But what it did was
still affecting us as women. We knew who had the power in SLF,
we knew who had been most responsible for creating an atmosphere
in which rapes could occur and be condoned. That knowledge
shaped our decision to denounce those men: Mike Abeles, Rick
Alba, Jeff Dowd, Joe Kelly, Chip Marshall, Michael Lerner, and
Bobby Oram.

We cannot be expected to tolerate the existence of a movement
which is oppressive to women, merely because it is packaged and
sold as revolutionary. It is not enough for us to build an alter-
native to it. What its leaders do still affects us as women.
That is why we felt it necessary to expose the basis of their
power and attack their use of it.

Both the denunciation itself, and this statement were done with
the full awareness that five of the men named - Abeles, Dowd,
Kelly, Lerner, and Marshall - have been indicted on federal
conspiracy charges for TDA.

Although we cannot support a defense based on macho jive nor
an attempt to use this trial to recruit people into a sexist
movement, we will support an honest defense.

A Woman? Oct. 9, 1970

The defense of the Chicago Conspiracy was based on making move-
ment stars into superstars. Because of their prominence in the
movement it was possible to rally support on that basis. The
Chicago Conspiracy were not convicted on the conspiracy law and
there has been no precedent set on its use.

The Seattle defendants do not have the movement status of those
men, and a defense built on that basis will undoubtedly fail. But
more importantly, such a defense does not make clear the real

dangers of the conspiracy law. What should have been done in
Chicago and what must be done in Seattle is to build a defense
based on the repressive nature of the conspiracy law, not on the
personalities of these defendants.

We feel that an honest defense is necessary. If there is any
hope for that at all - or for an honest Seattle movement - this
action may have cleared the way for it.

Love and Power to our Sisters,

Anna Louise Strong Brigade
Fanshen
Many independent women

“Sisters,

If you could stop a lie in Seattle, maybe we can
help to stop it across the country.

Yesterday we received a package from Liberation
News Service containing one of those expensive, multi-
colored leaflets from SLF, which informed us that the

27 collectives in SLF were responsible for day care

centers, and a women's center among other things.
(Strange that their program demands don't say anything
about women or speak to any of the special needs of
women?)

The movement press will have to stop functioning in
the same way as the establishment press-- only as much
truth as the people can bear. Maybe they should realize
that we're not going to shut up, that we're going to
spread the truth about women and about those things
that happen to us and they're just going to have to
come to terms with it or be left out of our revolution.

The movement press is going to have to stop function-
ing as a degenerate form of what it claims to be re-
placing--packaging and selling as revolutionary those
things which degrade and destroy women in the same
ways and with the same arrogance as the male-dominated
power structure. We think that anyone who wants to sup-
port an honest defense in Seattle should support our
sisters in the collectives:

THEIR ADDRESS IS:
Fanshen, 2339 Boylston East, Seattle, Washington 98102

Page 3