aT SAY? agS PRISE (jechanges

The author of this article is halfway across the country from the paper, and that
makes for a bad situation. She just sent in some last minute corrections, and her
politics have changed enough that we felt we had to print them but we had just about
finished the issue. So here are her inserts, explaining her change of politics. We
regret that they couldn't have been added to the article itself.

FIRST INSERT: Page 6, bottom half of column 2. 'The other thing I want to make clear’
down to 'Now with that set of politics in mind' should be scratched and the following
should be added:

The other thing I want to make clear is that I believe that anti-Semitism is an
oppression that in some ways defies traditional categories, but which combines ele-
ments of racism and religious persecution. The Jews are a people. Although we come in
every color and class, our history is one of fighting and surviving a vicious speci-
fic long-ranging hatred, experienced by no other people in the world other than, per-
haps, the Gypsy people. Those of our people who are third-world -- black, Asian,
Semitic -- additionally suffer skin-defined racism from the white people of the world.
But those of us who are Ashkenazic -- European white -- also suffer at the hands of
the Aryans.

Both religious persecution and racism are used as excuses by anti-Semites for
screwing us. In 1492 King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella ordered all the Jews who had
been living in Spain for many generations to get behind the state Christian religion
or to get out. In that one moment 700,000 Jews had to split quick. The guise was re-
ligion but the reality was more, since it was not only the even believing
Jews who had to go, but all Jews as defined by blood. In 1939 Hitler began his geno-
cide of our people because we were an "inferior race." Under the mantle of race dif-
ferences the Jews were exterminated. Not only Jews of color, but also the white,
blond-haired, blue-eyed versions. Foolishly, many Jews of Nazi Germany tried through
conversion to Christianity to escape that fate and they could attest to the fact (if
any were alive) that devout even fanatical Christianity does nothing for a Jew if she
is born of Jewish blood.

So no matter if it comes down as a religious or a racial matter. Neither factor
adequately defines either the basis of our despised status or of our Peoplehood. It
is something more than both: a shared history, a shared flight, a shared struggle.

We are a people many of whom share a common culture, a common religion. But even
if you are a hippy eastern meditation freak, if your mother was Jewish you're going
to get wiped during the same pogrom that gets your mother's rabbi. No matter if you
haven't been in a synagogue since your brother's bar mitzvah. No matter that you are
a communist atheist. If your blood is Jewish, you die as a Jew.

SECOND INSERT: Page 7, column 3, after the first three lines and before the para-
graph that begins 'Being in San Francisco...' Nothing is omitted.

But the Christian religious fanatics of 1973 are nothing compared to their more
political brethren who have surfaced now in 1974. The Nazis. Under the name Nation-
al Socialist White People's Party, the Nazis have picked San Francisco as the city
to focus their seemingly new-found energies upon. They started turning up several
months ago when we first saw a blurb in the paper with a picture of a party higher-up
who had been transferred to S.F. to begin really building up the National Socialist
White People's Party (hereafter referred to as the Verywhite Party) because they felt
that this city was ripe for their kind of politics. They cited the militant third
world communities and the hippies and decadents (read: homosexuals) out here who are
giving decent white people a hard time. He further stated that things looked so good
that they planned to run candidates in the next election and they had serious hopes
for victory. Said the white man, for every member willing to identify himself as a
member, there were at least 100 more less vocal folks. And I'm sure he was not over-
estimating.

Since that time, the fascists have moved, with frightening frequency, to the
front pages. The S.F. School Board has been having open meetings to air the question
of busing school children. At the first meeting that the Verywhite Party turned up,
in full Nazi uniforms with swastika armbands, a politically active black woman
teacher, Yvonne Golden, was at the microphone. When the fascists, with their line
"Boating not busing" (to Africa, we assume), began disrupting with their racist
jive, Ms. Golden asked that the people escort these fools so they could continue with
business. The fascists attacked their escorts violently, the police arrived, and sev-
eral people were arrested. None of the fascists, mind you, but a number of radicals
there to support black rights. A week later, an indictment came down citing Ms. Gold-
en with attempting to foment a riot!

At the next meeting, while a Nazi was on the mic spewing his bile, a member of
SDL jumped up to cry "Never Again." He was arrested. They have since appeared at
another meeting where their pictures were taken for the front page: 4 men and 1 wo-