REPRESSION IN THE SOUTH

was presented by the U.S. had been draft-
ed weeks before the outbreak of war on
June 25. But another major war in Asia
had already started.

In quick succession, Truman sent thou-
sands of additional ground troops, bombers,
and warships to Korea, and declared that
the U.S. would patrol the Straits of For-
mosa (over 700 miles south of Korea) to
“neutralize” the area.

In the face of such a huge attack, the
inexperienced DPRK army with the aid of
Chinese troops (who had entered the war as
MacArthur's forces threatened to invade
China itself) held the enemy to a stale-
mate. With the country in ruins and hun-
dreds of thousands of people dead or
wounded, the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea signed an armistice with U.S.
and Rhee government representatives on
July 27, 1953. For the Koreans their
great ordeal was a victory: the Korean
War was the first time that American im-
perialism was stopped in an attempt to
conquer new territory.

In the seventeen years since the Armis-
tice was signed, the U.S. has strengthen-
ed its control over the southern part of
Korea. Syngman Rhee's fascist regime was
finally overthrown by a popular uprising
in 1960, but a year later, through a mili-
tary coup that was openly supported by
the U.S. embassy, the smarter, younger,
and more ruthless Pak Chung Hee was put
in his place. Since then, the 60,000 U.S.
troops in the South have been supplied
with tactical nuclear weapons, the 700,000-
man army of the Pak dictatorship has been
outfitted with all the newest military
equipment, and U.S.-armed reconnaissance
planes and boats invade DPRK territory
regularly. Both the Pueblo incident in
1968 and the shooting down of the EC-121
spy plane in 1969 point up the continuing
aggression of the United States against
Korea. And every such incident brings
the outbreak of another Korean War closer.

Premier Kim Il Sung of the DPRK has
frequently presented peace plans to Pak
and his American supporters. The only
barrier to progress towards reunifica-
tion is the continued presence of U.S.
troops on Korean soil. Without these
troops, the unpopular Pak dictatorship,
like the regimes of Thieu and Lon Nol in
Southeast Asia, would soon fall to the
power of the majority of the people of
the country.

¥ ¥

Twelve and a half million Koreans to-
day are independent, healthy, well-educa-
ted, well-clothed, well-fed and are work-
ing hard to build a technologically ad-
vanced society that will benefit them
and everyone else in the underdeveloped
world. They live in the mountainous
North, in the Democratic People's Repub-
lic of Korea.

At the end of the Korean War, in 1953,
over 80% of North Korea's economy was in
ashes. The population of the North was
faced with the monumental task of building
a strong economy and a just society prac-
tically from scratch.

Though less than one-fifth of North Kor-
ea's land is fit for farming (as compared
to most of the South), the North is rich
in natural resources. Determined to con-
struct factories and farms that would be-
long to and benefit themselves and not Chi-
nese, Japanese, or American invaders, as
in the past, the people of the North began
to forge a future out of their natural re-
sources.

In the first ten years after the end of
the brutal war, the average rate of growth
of industrial production in the DPRK was
34.8%, probably the highest rate of any
country in history. As the base of steel,
coal, and hydroelectric facilities grew,
so did the entire economy, despite the fact
that over one-fourth of all investment has
consistently had to go to pay for the de-
fense of the nation against another full-

A Woman? August 21, 1970

scale attack by the United States and its
pet dictatorship in South Korea.

What makes the Korean miracle so much
more phenomenal and increases its relevance
as a model for other underdeveloped nations
is the principle of independence and self-
reliance that the North Koreans have fol-
lowed throughout their climb upwards. The
Korean term for it is Juche (pronounced
chew-chay).

With the enthusiastic application of
Juche, the North Koreans have made their
small country over 95% self-sufficient in
industrial products and completely self-
sufficient in agricultural goods.

Kim Il Sung and the 1,500,000-member
Korean Workers Party have not promoted
Juche just to build big machines or to
help future generations. The benefits of
this new industrial power are being reaped
right now. North Koreans have one of the
best health systems in the world, provided
free of charge. Farmers who before 1953
were victims of the unchanging drudgery of
most Asian peasants now live in cooperative
villages, each of which has its own nur-
series, libraries, hospitals, schools up
to the college level, and cultural centers
which distribute books and papers, show
films, and provide space for cultural and
political meetings.

Per-capita income for a North Korean in
1967 was nine times greater than immedi-
ately after liberation in 1946. And a worker's
wages go much farther in the DPRK of 1970 --
rents are negligible in the newly built
houses which are being constructed at a
rapid speed, rice and other foodstuffs are
sold at very low prices; and fuel, electri-
city and water are supplied for less than
half the cost of producing them. There
are no taxes in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea.

But economics forms only the base,
though the vitally necessary one, of the
socialist revolution in North Korea. Hav-
ing been the victims of savage aggression
by imperialist powers throughout their
history, the Koreans are busy getting ready,
mentally and physically, for the next at-
tack. The Korean People's Army is fairly
small, but it is trained to be what the
North Koreans call a "cadre army." In
addition to the regular armed forces, al-
most 2 million North Koreans are mobilized
into the militia.

Furthermore, the North Koreans are in-
ternationalists. They follow closely the
struggle of their brothers and sisters in
the Indochinese countries, and have warm
relations with both the Cubans and the
Chinese. In the squabbles of the world
Communist movement, the DPRK behind Kim
Il Sung has managed to stay friendly with both
Peking and Moscow. Juche also operates in
external affairs: the Koreans have shown
the tremendous success of their revolution
and feel no need or desire to follow obe-
diently behind policies set by the leaders
of another socialist country. This inde-
pendence makes the North Koreans all the
more able to play a significant role in
the world revolution as it progresses.

kK

South of the famous 38th parallel, on
the broad flatlands which stretch almost to
touch Japan, 28 million Koreans live, strug-
gling to survive in a society where most of
the property is owned by Americans and by
a few very rich Koreans. In South Korea,
unemployment averages about 20%, and 62,000
American soldiers have the run of the coun-
try in the name of South Korea's "security."

The corporate press in the U.S. which
has consistently blacked out all news of
North Korea's great successes, also lets
very little leak out about the situation in
South Korea. There is good reason for such
a vacuum of information about the South:
the reality, if truthfully portrayed, would
show up "our free world ally" to be an Am-
erican economic colony run by a military
dictatorship to the detriment of its people.

The southern part of the Korean penin-

sula has always been the granary of the
country. The land of South Korea is still
owned by a tiny elite of rich Koreans and
by a growing number of huge American cor-
porations, but now the granary's supply has
not kept up with the growing needs of the
population. In 1969, more than a million
tons of grain had to be imported to South
Korea, and it is not likely that this prob-
lem will lessen. Without full-scale mech-
anization and collectivization of agricul-
ture, the food-producing sector of the South
Korean economy will remain a throwback to
feudal times.

The only part of the economy that is
really progressing in the South is the one
that contributes almost nothing to the de-
velopment of the country. More and more
American electronic firms like Motorola Co.
are setting up plants to take advantage of
the most abundant "natural resources"
around -- cheap labor. As more and more
foreign manufacturers like Motorola are
attracted to South Korea, the country's
"growth rate" on paper will continue to
rise, without helping the people of South
Korea at all.

Most South Koreans don't realize what
their sisters and brothers have accomplished
up North. Lack of medical care, run-
down housing, high unemployment, and a
cheap plasticized American culture design-
ed to please the occupying American troops,
State Department officials, and traveling
businessmen, all seem unchangeable facts
of life to the large majority of the South's
inhabitants.

And to ensure that the truth about the
North will not be found out, South Korea's
dictator Chung Hee Pak has had hundreds of
repressive laws passed which make the ad-
vocacy of any contact with the North or of
reunification punishable by sentences
ranging from five years in prison to the
death penalty. In addition, all the mass
media are strictly censored, demonstra-
tions against the government or its Ameri-
can friends are banned, and the mildest
protest runs the risk of being branded as
"acting in the interest of anti-state or-
ganizations or communist circles outside
the country."

The picture is grim, but there are grow-
ing reasons to be optimistic. Of the over
500,000 Koreans who live in Japan, three
times as many belong to the pro-DPRK poli-
tical association than belong to its rival
pro-Southern organization. More and more
South Korean army soldiers are deserting
in Vietnam and being repatriated, at their
request, to the North. And a revolutionary
struggle in the South has begun in
earnest. The South Korean Revolutionary

Party for Unification (RPU) which has been

in clandestine formation in parts of the
country for the last decade, has recently
published a manifesto and program, calling
for an armed struggle to overthrow the Pak
regime in order to build one socialist soc-
iety in a reunited Korea.

It is crucial for Americans to realize
that events in Korea could heat up again
at any moment. Pak and his American advi-
sors are starting to feel the pressure of
resistance to their domestic policies in
South Korea, and they may think that a few
air raids into the DPRK (disguised as an
"invasion from the North") would be just
the thing to get people's minds off their
poverty and the high rate of unemployment
in the South.

The people of the DPRK by no means want
another war which would devastate their
country again, wiping out the beautiful
gains of the last 17 years. But they know
that the only way to keep war from break-
ing out is to show Nixon and Pak that they
are ready to fight to defend themselves if
attacked. Kim Il Sung, along with more
and more Koreans in both halves of the
country, realize that "Unless the state
and social system of the United States of
America undergoes a fundamental change,
the policies of U.S. imperialism can never
change all of a sudden from aggressive ones
to peaceful ones...."