some thoughts on lesbian literature

ful. It is a historical novel based on the true lives of two pion-
eer women who fell in love and struck out on their own to settle
and farm in upstate New York. In a sane society the book would be a
standard for junior high libraries (where teen romance books are at
their most cloying and depressingly male-identified.)

The next books I read were The Price of Salt and The Well of
Loneliness. They're out of two different eras and are both pretty
bad, although The Well is redeemed I suppose by being the "classic
lesbian novel" (1928). The Price of Salt is a melodrama about soci-
etal persecution of two women as a result of a child custody fight
between the older woman and her former husband. (The one redeeming
aspect of the novel is that the two heroines finally make love,
after half the book is over, in Waterloo, Iowa.) The depressing as-
pect of the books is their sociological message: lesbians have a
rough life, but they're people. We've all been through some varia-
tion on that movie before, so there's little to learn on a personal
level. But a lesbian has so few positive models to relate to that
she takes what she can find to enjoy in literature.

But since I read Violette LeDuc's autobiographical novel La Ba-
tarde (in English by Dell) I really am excited about the possible
vitality in a novel of lesbian experience. The best way I can ex-
plain the difference between her book and the others I read is to
say that her lesbianism and the validity of her whole psychic na-
ture is a basic assumption in her story. As a result the book is
deeply personal.

Until this year I had never read any lesbian literature - books
or stories written by women about lesbian experience - except the
poems of Sappho, which I treasured, memorized, and made a little
hand-lettered book of for the woman I loved. I had read some books
by male authors that touched on gay experience, and although they
weren't very satisfying, they intrigued me because I knew of no-
where else to find fictionalized accounts of the feelings I had. So
I read what I could - from D. H. Lawrence's The Rainbow and The Fox
to The Story of O by Pauline Réage (who may not be a woman but prob-
ably is). But these were slight help and, as I said, unsatisfying
because they never rang true to me. Of course - they were written
by men or served heterosexual needs.

The first contemporary lesbian poetry and true accounts of gay
women's experience I ever read were in AIAW's first issues. It was
a shock to read such honest and beautiful statements of the kinds
of feelings I'd had for years but always kept hidden. Even though
many of the experiences recounted were different from mine, I was
compelled by them because they amplified so greatly my own self-
understanding.

Finally I became acquainted with people in the women's community
and heard about novels that really dealt with lesbian experience.
The last gay novel I ever read was A Place for Us, which is delight-

LM Towe City |

on 3 West Market Street. Too new to even have
a phone yet. Needs setting & furnishing now -
will need people & ideas after that. Needs
people for painting part too.) Hope to have
a Women's Health Information Center, classes in
basic survival skills (self-defense, plumbing,
carpentry, automotive mechanics) as well as in
Women’s anatomy & socialization, a liberation
library, legal information & abortion referrals,
beside being a meeting place or just a place
for women to be together.
for info, offers of help and/or goods

call gratefully at 4-5 pm.

SR ESSseseseses cocsescscecs

That man over there says that a woman

Ain't I a Woman is published
needs to be lifted over ditches and to have the
best place everywhere. Nobody ever
helped me into carriages, or over mud
puddles, or gives me a best place...

And ain't I a woman? Look at me.

Look at my arm! I have plowed and
planted and gathered into barns, and no man could head me.
And ain't I a woman? I could work as
much and eat as much as a man when I
could get it, and bear the lash as well... If your group wants to receive
Ain't I a Woman?, you > . $ 0.50
And ain't I a woman? I have borne bundles of
thirteen children and seen them most all sold off into slavery. And
when I cried out with a mother's grief,
none but Jesus heard...
I will add with a SPECIAL..... ..-Complete volume of AIAW- issues #2-17 for $2.75
(institutional price is still $20.00)
SOjourner Truth, Sojourner Truth: Speech before the Women's

“THE LIBYAN SIBYL.” Rights Convention at Akron, Ohio in 1851.

Page 2A. Volume & Number d. Ain't I a Woman?