“FREEDOM"

Does censorship really "suck shit?"  
What exactly do we mean by "censorship?" Is it bad in any form and in every context? Is Free Speech one of our most important issues?

"Censorship" of a newspaper usually implies one or two people at the top of the staff hierarchy - usually a male editor - making decisions as to the content, length and style of what goes into the paper. We need not go into why this kind of censorship is shitty. What is the alternative, though? Ptero's alternative was to allow every individual a certain amount of space to put in whatever she or he wanted to. No censorship, obviously. Why, then, did we and most other Ptero staff leave it to form another paper (High and Mighty)? Because what Ptero had become had completely negated anything good about its “open" and "uncensored" policy.

Any staffer had the "right" to put in anything he wanted, no matter how sexist it might seem to the women on the staff, and no matter how contrary to the basic political beliefs of others on the staff. In other words, complete "individual rights” imply the right to screw other individuals. Isn't this one of the worst aspects of our capitalist society, where any one person has the "right" to exploit many other people? Because Ptero was busted so often for pornography - hardly an issue worth getting busted for - we were denied the opportunity of regularly presenting our political views.

High and Mighty was conceived as a paper with a definite political goal - above and beyond simply "freedom of speech." It operates on the collective principle. This means that each staffer has an equal position on the paper - everyone types, lays out, writes, sells, makes coffee. Usually "censorship" as such has not been a problem: if there is any question of cutting out an article, or editing one, it is usually because of space problems. The cutting or editing is based on the relative importance and timeliness of the articles in question. There are qualitative judgments made about what goes into the paper, however, because we do have political standards - our politics are, after all, the basis of our paper.

The reason we have gone into the Ptero - High and Mighty conflict is because we feel that the question of the individual versus the collective is an issue crucial to the Women's Movement. We are trying to destroy elitism and hierarchies; we are trying to create a truly egalitarian society. In order to do this, we must work through - we must live in - structures that are free from traditional roles, whose forms are in themselves non-hierarchical. The best way to guarantee true individual freedom - freedom that cannot be used to screw other individuals - is through the collective.

Within a collective, it is necessary for every member to attain all the necessary skills to keep the collective functioning. Only in this way can we stop depending on a few elite leaders to make our decisions, to control our lives. This is especially important to us as women, since it is we who have always done the shit work, and have not been involved in making decisions because we lack the skills and confidence to do otherwise.  
POWER TO OUR FEMALE LIBERATION MOVEMENT!  
POWER TO ALL WOMEN!

Sally Hamann  
Mim Desmond  
Former members of Ptero staff; presently working on High and Mighty; members of Grinnell Women's Liberation.

git out on the back porch

and cry, cry bitter tears

cause you've been screwed again

cry because you don't have a choice left

it happened again and it will happen forever

you can't get around it, it always will happen

cry because there's no way you can stop it

cry, cry, cry, cry, then cry

because you've been fucked again and you haven't a choice left

it doesn't even hurt in the same way

before it was you, only you that was messed up

now it's not you, it's you and him

you've been a fool, while he's been killing you

you have to hate him, that's the problem

you have to hate them and you don't have a choice left

you hate your mind cause it makes you see it

if only it were possible to get fucked and not see it

cause your world gets smaller when you don't have a choice left

your only choice is to fight them, not trust them

but it hurts to fight those you would like to be

but don't cry now, you haven't a choice left

it happened before, it will happen again

but you're not the only one who has been fucked for ages

so join with them, there's only one way to stop it

now cry, cry, cry, cry: Then fight together

you have to fight now cause you haven't a choice left

--Sally Hamann  
Grinnell WLF

THIS PAGE IS FROM THE GRINNELL  
WOMEN'S LIBERATION FRONT

dulylo 1970

a Woman? It's

We feel it necessary to make clear the fact that the statement of the Grinnell Women's Liberation group in support of the Playboy Ad was not necessarily in support of either Ptero or Nola Express. We don't consider the Nola Express to be the People's Press; thus, we think the ending slogan ("Support the Nola and Power to the People's Press!") of Cry's article to be misleading and contradictory. We as individuals are very much opposed to both papers as they presently stand. Both papers contain material that we consider degradingly and disgustingly sexist.

- Bebbie Boardman, Toni Grandmill, Jerry Clifford, Mim Desmond, Sally Hamann, Ann Hussey, Susan Preston.

BYWLF CONFERENCE  
Grinnell College November 13, 14, 15

Please write any ideas you have for speakers, workshops, structure, non-structure to:

Grinnell WLF, c/o Toni Grandmill  
Grinnell College  

Grinnell, Iowa 50132