OW LOVING WOMAN

Since I have been "dealing" so well and
so fast with so many ideas that grow within
liberation, I felt that it would be easy
to write an article for AIN'T I A WOMAN on
the woman identified woman in relation to
myself.

It's been a week since I first began to
mull over my "assignment." During the
week, I talked with gay and straight women,
discovering that I have not dealt so well
and so fast with this particular aspect of
myself. The fact that I consider a part
of me as gay does signify, at least, an
acceptance of my bisexuality. I do not
want to reject it, but I am not yet sure
how to handle the acceptance. I have many
fears about homosexuality that I am still
unable to articulate, especially to gay
women.

I am not sure what a gay woman expects
of me. I have felt during certain conver-
sations that I cannot be fully accepted
unless I am gay; that my politics are in-
sincere because my life still includes men.
And yet, there is a gay woman who has
taught me to separate myself from the man
and learn acceptance without him. This
woman has not asked anything of me except
that I be integrous to my own self. I love
this woman and in this way I can feel my
gayness.

Whether or not I will ever relate in a
physically intimate way to a woman remains
to be seen. At present, I have such strong
feelings for so many new women—a vitality
runs through me; and if this feeling is
sexual at its core, then I am glad. I
find myself relating to individuals and
not to stereotypes of gay women. Perhaps
my intellectual gayness will bring me to
a physical relationship because politically
I find males being discriminated out of my
life. Tomorrow is insecure.

My doubts have stemmed from the fear
that the "homosexual world" will be very
much like the "heterosexual world" in which
I live. I have experienced "male oppress-
iveness" in women and maybe that is because
all of the "pigshit" is hard to eradicate
and all of us tend to rely on the roles
that society gives us or tries to keep
from us instead of the people that we
really are. I can empathize with that but
I cannot handle it because that pigshit is
what caused me the pain in the first place.

I am also influenced by the beautiful
relationships. I see that gay alliances
do not necessarily hinder other alliances.
I love a woman who is involved in a gay
relationship and yet I find more love than
I thought possible returned. And I, in
turn, feel no possessiveness towards her.
It is so liberating to like the responses
that come out of one's self.

I have other positive feelings about
gay women. They seem to examine their
motives and feelings more closely than
heterosexual couples. After all, there's
more at stake. There isn't any institu-
tion such as marriage to fall back into
where one can always act as one is "expect-
ed" to.

Finally, because gay women seem to trust
each other in important ways, I, too, have
learned to trust women. Such strength, I
have cleared more shit out of my head that
I had filtered through a man's mind than
seems possible. Because I have a clearer
sense of where I'm going I have come to
understand the power of patience. In the
future I may meet a woman with whom I may
learn to be gay through the love I have
learned to give and accept on the basis of
that specific individual.

And I guess that's where I am right now
—whether heterosexual or homosexual, I am
searching for an honest, intense, impor-
tant relationship. This union may be with
a woman because she is a woman and has my
consciousness within her as I have hers
in me.

What I fear is being rushed. I have
come so far so fast that I must give myself
the time that such heavy thinking and feel-
ing requires in order to make it real and
not just a novelty. I don't want being
gay to become something I do because it's
“right on."

Thank you, beautiful sisters, for your
support. I am beginning to share your
sorrow and your joy and perhaps someday
your touch?

Undiscovered,
every sentence
your mouth eats
escapes

into itself.

You give me nothing
to hold

in my hand

but my fist opens
with the pressure
of you.

Every second

is victimized

by possibility.

I speak with certainty
yet I am humbled

by ineffable acceptance

of your body; your words;
sharp swift flak

of intangible flesh startle
me as your body

does not.

I push at walls
straining with
transparent joy:

I like that in myself.
The wisdom: you

are friend, secret lover,
enough as one,

maybe two.

Vol. 1 No. 1

Ain't I

How do you feel when your best friend
reveals her homosexuality to you? My first
thought was “At last it's out. What a
relief," for we'd been waltzing around the
topic, both in some discomfort, for six
months or more.

My second thought was to set Carrie's
mind at ease because I knew how difficult
this was for her to tell me. (The setting
for this conversation foretold the problems
we would have later on: we were in my
room, lying on separate beds, facing away
from each other.) Anyway, I said, "Carrie,
there's nothing in the world you could do
that would make me stop loving you." Which
is not exactly dealing with her homosexual-
ity. (And since when does the love you
have for friends depend on what they do,
for God's sake?) So, one confrontation
avoided; that confrontation being one with
myself. What is homosexuality? How do I
feel about it? How will it affect our
relationship? How do I react to it? We
didn't talk about any of this. I was
afraid to.

We didn't see each other after that be-
cause Carrie went back to Iowa, but during
that summer we decided to room together in
the dorm the next semester. This didn't
bother me for a number of reasons: I had
never felt physically threatened by Carrie,
I knew she wasn't involved with anyone at
the time, in my usual naive way I expected
to graduate in February and, most impor-
tant, I loved and trusted her.

In other words, I expected to spend a
nice, quiet semester living with my best
friend who just happened to relate physi-
cally to women. What's the big deal?

The big deal was that the first month
of school she fell in love with Alice and
my whole world just fell in. I was appalled.

I was shocked, I was disgusted. Of course
I didn't verbalize these feelings. I just
got quieter and quieter, bitchier and
bitchier, until I didn't really care
whether we were friends or not. I was ac-
tually thinking things like "She just
seduced this innocent younger woman, took
advantage of her." These were the kind of
thoughts I was having about someone I loved
and trusted deeply.

By mutual consent we decided that if
any of our friendship was to be salvaged,
we had to get away from each other. (Actu-
ally, I had to get away from her. She was
getting along fine; I had the problems.)

She moved out of our room and into a
room with Alice on the floor below me. If
this had been any other friend but Carrie
I would have said "So long and farewell.
You're not worth the pain I'm in.” But I
loved her and wanted and needed her friend-
ship and so we continued to see each other.

Our separating was a good idea because
it gave me a chance to get used to a new
world without feeling pressured by time
and space. I began to see the rightness
and healthiness of their relationship and
the other Lesbian relationships I was
allowed to see. I felt comfortable
enough, eventually, to be able to examine
my initial reactions and face the threats
I so strongly felt.

So let me deal with those threats now,
three years later. Understand that I'm
as honest as I'll allow myself to be and
no more, and that I'm only able to put pen
to paper because of you. I'm afraid but
I'm not as afraid as I used to be.

I was threatened because Lesbianism
was a totally new concept, or at least the
things I knew about it society had taught
me; hence my initial revulsion, disgust.

Vol. No. 4

Society is not a good teacher. So I went
to the library. (Yes, I really did.)

The books used words like "sickness" and
"unnatural." No help there. (Political
lesson #1: Books reflect the society and
its sickness.)

Another reason I was threatened was
that I was jealous. Right. I was afraid
of losing someone dear to me. She seemed
always to be in her room making love and
I seemed always to be standing outside
her door wondering whether to knock or
not.

But the most threatening thing about
Carrie's Lesbianism was how it reflected
on me and my sexual orientation. Am I a
Lesbian? The point is that I thought
there was an answer to this question and
I cared what it was. I didn't want the
answer to be "yes."

Today, three years later, I don't
think the answer matters to me personally.
Politically, I have selected men out of
my life, almost without my being aware of
it. I always enjoyed sex with men but
since I don't know many men anymore and
since I've come to realize that there
really is no such thing as an "apolitical
fuck," (credit for this concept duly
given to the first Women's Liberation con-
ference I attended last year) there are
very few men on my list of people to whom
I go for love and support. So be it. This
list is heavy with women—straight women,
married women, Lesbians, women. Non-
threatening, non-judging, supportive women.

So that's how I came from that empty
place to this incredibly crowded one—
crowded and noisy and nearly bursting with
love for all of you. Oh, there are tears,
and sadness, and doubt and loneliness. All
of this, and more. But I have the keys
now. Time, love, and you.

Page Seven