continued

4aom page a

My first reaction to the ideas in Struggle! is that anyone who
thinks the middle-class can make a revolution that will benefit
anyone but the middle-class is a reactionary who doesn't deserve
to be struggled with. Let them tell me what they've done lately,
but I'm not interested in continuing dialogues to assure
middle-class women that they're coming up with a good analysis.
And I think many women have stopped trying. And I don't think
those women can be accused of not struggling—in most cases they've
simply given up on wasting time and energy on a hopeless case.

The ideas in the article bring to my mind so many useless,
painful attempts to tell middle-class women to get off their
asses and get some of the middle-class shit out of their heads—
to stop thinking that lower-class women want to make them feel
guilty. A guilt-trip is something middle-class women can afford
to engage in. It means that when they realize the objective place
they hold in a class system instead of trying to do something about
that system, they claim they had nothing to do with setting up the
system, then they blame lower-class women for making them feel bad.
To these women a guilt trip is equivalent to not having money or a
job or a decent place to live. How absurd.

Only a middle-class woman would think you can separate a fight
against sexism (or racism or imperialism) from a fight against
classism. How does one fight "only classism"? This split that
exists in the heads of middle-class women does not exist in the
reality of lower-class women's lives. If middle-class women see
that sort of split, let them do whatever they want to, but don't
let them kid anyone about the revolutionary nature of their acts.
It's a pity middle-class women don't want to negate that class,
because that's exactly what we have to do, in the same way we have
to negate the center of imperialism. We can't simply resolve to
not oppress other countries and recognize our privileges—everyone
always told us we had it good in the "land of the free and the
home of the brave."

How can a middle-class woman acknowledge her privileges and
not use them to oppress other women? That's an issue, "What are
middle-class values and lower-class values" is no issue. Only
middle-class women who think of lower-class women as some kind of
weird creatures from another planet could think of that as an issue.
Only a middle-class woman could call a source of oppression a
"variable" and think that's reality. What reality is there in
talking of people in terms of "main group identities" as if that
were something like putting on a hat or deciding to go to a movie.
(Whose main group identity would be white, man, non-native, etc.
in that sort of thinking?) Being black, a woman, a native is
a source of oppression and that's the significance of those
groups have been consigned to a class category—the lower class
and powerless—because of their "group identity."

A middle-class revolution is a contradiction in terms.

An example of the “class consciousness" of middle-class women
is perfectly stated: "Class consciousness entails the recognition
that lower-class women have had a lot of shit laid on them to
keep them from becoming integrated human beings." (Isn't that
what all middle-class girls learn—that at least they have their
class status to cling to, that they should be nice to those poor
unfortunates who don't have as much as they do, but for God's sake
don't try to become one of them or have too much to do with them.)

I shudder to think of how unintegrated the women of Vietnam,
of Latin America, or Africa must be. The very assertion that
middle-class women have the "vision of freedom" and insight to
make a revolution is reactionary. I've seen that vision and
I reject it because I don't choose to lay down in shit. That's
what I think of those humanly "creative" acts of middle-class
women who can't understand that most everything they say and
do “glorifies” the middle-class which is the real upholder of
this system. How can we possibly resolve class within the
women's movement when the first reminder of their class privileges
sends them into fits of concern that we might "glorify" the working
class.

Middle-class women had better look at their self-centered
ideas about "class consciousness" and class. They'd better look
at the opportunities they've had and the lives they lead as making
them handicapped from becoming revolutionaries and get rid of
whatever ideas and possessions that uphold the class system.
They'd better be able to understand that working-class jobs are
more valuable as socially necessary labor than most of the jobs
they do. They'd better stop seeing middle-class unused labor as
wasted but working-class labor as expendable. They'd better discard
those slogans (equal pay for equal work, a waste of woman-power)
that are used to benefit only the middle-class. If what
we want is available only for middle-class women, if the jobs we
want are all middle-class jobs, if the rewards we want are all
tokens of the middle-class, don't dare to call that revolutionary.

I really choke on the term "contemporary North American
revolution" because so much of the confusion we feel is used
to make us think of ourselves as unique, as the ultimate in
revolutions, as having transcended the problems of other poorer,
"backward" places, as the most revolutionary and conscious of
women. None of those things is true.

I left Iowa City with the idea of perhaps not returning because
possibly I could find work in another city and probably because living
in Iowa City where jobs are few seemed an indulgence I couldn't
afford, especially after my living collective ended.

Before I left town people were genuinely concerned with the
issue of class and what they should be doing—what actions would
speak to the inequity between women due solely to economic
class. Mostly our discussions centered around the necessity for
middle-class women sharing their resources with working and
lower-class women. There is a lot to be said about that, and I
don't want to be misunderstood in matters so dear to me like
accepting the excess funds that middle-class women want to
unload. And they actually should unload them or someone will
get it together to rip them off. Still the problem of excess belongs
to those middle-class women. It's a problem I cannot
relate to and I don't think it speaks too directly to the problems
of working and lower-class women.

I've been thinking of this lately in the context of my personal
dilemma of whether to stay in the city or move back to Iowa City
and have realized that I can only think of going back because I
know and have worked with middle-class women there who,
because of probably a combination of guilt, responsibility and
political conviction can help me out materially. Despite how I
feel personally about that (sometimes guilty, dependent, inferior
and angry at the position I am in and the timidity it requires),
it's an option most people don't have.

A woman who has no independent wealth or no rich friends or
no middle-class lover cannot consider moving to an area where
she cannot find a job. But Iowa City is a real nice place to live.
It's clean and pretty and the pace and size of the town are a
relief to anyone used to a city. But Iowa City systematically
keeps poor and working people from entering or staying in that
community. There are no jobs and no possibility of getting
welfare unless you have children and can get ADC. Probably
it's like any other clean, livable place in this country—it is
reserved for those with money.

The cities are for sure the ghettos of the poor. Jobs may not
be plentiful or one can't be selective, but there are jobs so women
can earn some money which, of course, will be eaten up by out-
rageously high rents for slummy apartments. After buying food,
no more bread till the next paycheck and you're stuck in that city
and that crummy apartment for as long as you live, dreaming of
places like Iowa City where I lived with help from my rich friends.
Well, nobody ever really believed in the American dream.

The differences between living in the city I now live in and
Iowa City are shocking to me. After two years of comfort I re-
member how there is no surplus of material goods in a city.

In Iowa City there was always furniture and appliances other
women didn't need, a couch someone wanted to get rid of when
they moved. I guess I really got in on the collectivity of the
privileged. But here if someone needs a table the chances of
getting one laid on you are slim indeed.

I should at this point define the perspective I am writing from
which is that of a working-class woman who has no independent
means of support, who managed to live a middle-class life in a
middle-class community for a couple of years and now is in a
city in a not middle-class community and relating to other women
who have to hassle to survive. I realize that there are most
certainly middle-class communities in this area but I have no
connections to be allowed to float into them—which makes me
flash on how I achieved the middle-class existence I floated into
in Iowa City. I came there with a perfectly acceptable middle-
class, heterosexual label—student wife. That label got me a
job in the university and indirectly gave me introductions to my
better endowed sisters who supported me. My label now is
working-class dyke and that gets you nowhere.

I guess I think the direction women should be taking is to
examine their communities. In this case, Iowa City and from
there perhaps it will become clearer what we should be doing—
what direction we should be going. It appears that to deal with
class adequately we must start fighting to open up that community
to those women who do not have extra wealth. That implies
fighting for housing and jobs for women who must support themselves.

There are obvious problems.

There is no invisibility in that small a community (about
50 thousand people—20 thousand of them students). Can you see
anyone walking around downtown? Any political involvement
makes a woman well known and therefore easy for the community
to starve out, which is the weapon such communities use. And
the town is full of middle-class women who could and will easily
grab any of the advantages (jobs/housing, etc.) that we might win.

The best way to deal with class in that town may be to get out
of it or level it. Probably in reverse order.

(9 November '73)