We first decided to try and write an article on our living  
collective because it seemed important to us that our experiences  
be communicated and analyzed in some way. We all feel that women  
have to learn to live together and support each other and we  
thought some collective effort at describing our collective and  
the problems we had to (or still have to) solve would help other  
women. Only three women out of the seven now living together  
wrote articles and although all seven of us have discussed the  
articles it still is not a complete picture. More importantly,  
there is so much we have not mentioned at all. We haven't really  
talked about the political work all of us do or fully described  
our relationship to women's liberation groups in Iowa City.  

After examining our articles it was noted that we sounded  
more like Marxists than feminists because we dealt so heavily with  
the economics of our collective and almost totally ignored the  
feminist haven—the sub-culture that had grown. It is so much  
easier to speak in economic terms. Our culture is still so new,  
so much a feeling. Also in trying to analyze things which have  
happened we tended to dwell on the problems and hardly any of  
us mentioned any of the really nice changes, really nice experiences  
that happen within and because of our Amazon ghetto. What  
we have written we think describes some aspects of living together  
that are important but we plan on writing more in a future  
issue to deal with what we have omitted—what is particular to  

When we first decided to form the living  
collective we thought in terms of finding  
ways to live together that would be better  
than ways we all were living individually  
or in twos. So many of the things we deci-  
ded to do were solutions to the problems  

caused by the way things were then done.  
For example, by eating communally and shar-  
ing the tasks involved in food preparation,  
each of us could only have to cook once a  
week, we could eat better and cheaper, and  
be relieved of much of the labor we each  
did preparing meals and washing dishes for  
ourselves. Similarly, by pooling our money  
resources not all of us would have to work  
at jobs we hated; we could equalize econo-  
mic privileges to some extent, and people  
would have time to do political work. It  
isn't really a question of whether these  
solutions worked or not that caused prob-  
lems in living together. What I think we  
discovered instead were new problems.  

The solutions we worked out to old prob-  
lems to some extent did work and to a great  
extent old problems were solved. But by  
creating a new space, by going on to a dif-  
ferent way of living we encountered not  
happiness ever after but a set of new prob-  
lems to struggle with. This was perhaps the  
thing most misunderstood by ourselves and  
women outside of our living collective.  

We would look at our situation and think  

we had done all this to correct problems  
and yet we still had problems. We and those  
outside of the house saw our problems as  
evidence of failure instead of seeing them  
as new problems to deal with, new problems  
that could only have been recognized in new  
situations. Unlike the problems we were  
familiar with all our lives, the new ones  
could not be dealt with in old conventional  
ways.  

In the situation we created for ourselves  
we all in some way experienced real changes  
in our time and responsibilities. Many of  
us had more time because some of us no long-  
er had to work, some of us didn't have to  
spend the amount of time at housework as  
we had before, by pooling cars many of us  
had transportation available that we hadn't  
before, etc.  

For some women, those who continue to  
work or go to school or both, experienced  
a decrease in time because of the new de-  
mands of collective lifestyles (re-arranging  
ourselves). Emotional traumas, everyday  
hassles and such were increased by the  
number of extra people each of us were rela-  
ting to. Our responsibilities also changed  
drastically but in a nebulous, undefined  
way. Suddenly we had a responsibility to  
take care of each other, a responsibility  
to everyone else in the house, a responsi-  
bility for their financial and emotional  
security. These responsibilities, always  
spoken of in either idealistic or fairly  
nebulous terms, were hard to deal with  
'cause there were no societal standards or  
conventions to use as there are in respons-  
ibilities to your job, nuclear family, etc.  
This vaguely defined responsibility caused  
all of us to sometimes feel guilty, some-  
times feel very let down, or confused as to  

what people expected of us or what we could  
expect from them. How much of this could  
have been avoided none of us know. Ventur-  
ing in a new lifestyle has to be somewhat  
ambiguous but we could have perhaps tried  
to define responsibility more clearly.  
Doing this would have probably kept us from  
being as idealistic as we were. Somehow if  
we had spelled it all out, we may have  
known immediately that we couldn't expect  
as much of each other as we did.  

The changes we went through with time are  
really interesting. I personally experienced  
more time and that caused problems in sched-  
uling myself to be somewhat productive. I  
found that I had more time spent on person-  
al relationships and emotional problems. I  
found it hard to handle dealing with things  
like this at a high intensity. But, that  
probably happened 'cause I had the time to  
let it happen and 'cause I was relating at  
a deeper level to more people than before.  
I always spent as much time as I could on  
personal relationships but never had enough  
time to really get all wrapped up in them,  
analyzing people's actions, interpreting  
and reinterpreting at all levels—'cause  
I always worked, I always thought people  
all hung up like that were crazy—never  
realized probably everyone does it when  
they have the time, e.g. housewives all  
wrapped up in family relations.  

The changes in time we experienced were  
pretty determined by outside material con-  
ditions, e.g. who could get jobs and what  
kind of jobs. I think we have to be able  
to live collectively, support each other  

to be able to change those conditions.  
Consequently we must find ways to utilize  
extra time, ways of changing our heads as  
to what labor is prestigious. We can now  
all agree that things would be better if  
we all had part-time jobs but that isn't  
really feasible, as it is important that  
we find other ways to deal with the con-  
ditions we have no choice but to live with,  
without letting them destroy us.  

One mistake we made was in defining the  
responsibility we had to each other. We  
seemed to waver between the priority of  
caring for each other and the priority of  
being responsible for W.L. in Iowa City.  
Once we started to realize that we had to  
make our living situation bearable for our-  
selves, the house was happier and our re-  
lationships to other W.L. members improved.  
This meant sometimes saying no to crashers  
when members of the house felt they  
couldn't handle having extra people around,  
and not having as many meetings here, and  
being honest with outsiders about the  
problems of collective living and about  
our first concern being the well-being of  
collective members in all matters concern-  
ing the house and its relationship to W.L.  

Despite all I can say about the hassles  
of collective living, it by and large has  
been a really good change for me. I have  
related to more people than ever before,  
have learned to love and trust more women  
and realize I am no exception, not alone.  

I now have an optimism about women working  
together that I never had.