My physics teacher told me that  
Women's Liberation would ‘pass as an  
issue in two years when enough people  
were put out of work. I got mad and  
told him I didn’t care about the Uni-  
versity community and its layoff pro-  
blems, (mostly men anyway). He said  
I was a middle-class woman who had  
“the time” to worry about women's  
rights, (as opposed to women on farms  
who are laboring from morning till  
night, not noticing their oppression  
he says)- I was going to hit him then.  
He is subtle, chauvinistic, he makes me  
fall apart because he is totally  
oblivious to the issue.  

A feminist perspective is unreal to  
me in the university community because  
everything here is male-identified.  

My teacher believes it's the wife's  
fault since she lets her husband sup-  
port her and where do I go from there-  
he doesn't understand statistics and  
why defend myself to him- except that  
he gets me into a rage, by his naivete  
about my power, which seems non-existent  
until I take his wife from him.  

I am so mad at men who leave their  
wives after draining all their beauty,  
and leave their daughters deserted.  

Men who call homosexuals pansies for  
fear of their manhood and how much  
“fucking" you can do in one evening  
or whether you can "make it" with your  
friend's woman. The world of men is  
disgusting and I have no sympathy for  
any man, for any reason.  

I am a woman. I have no desire  
to be a man. I want a revolution of  
women leaving their men, of women  
loving other women, of women really  
castrating their men (since manhood  
seems to be determined by sexual  
prowess). Of beautiful women. I want  
to be strong enough to believe I can  
leave the man I live with. That the  
woman I love will stop laying her ideals  
of love determined by a male relationship  
on me. I want to eliminate men, because  
they are murderers and destructive and  
fucked up. I want to eliminate men be-  
cause of how misused and misguided my  
self-conception was, due to my definition  

of myself as a woman in a man's world.  

I hate men for making my friend want to  
leave WL because we women are not yet  
strong enough as a group to give her the  
strength and support she needs, to stand  
with her, to not want reform but revolution,  
to be willing to change our life-styles.  

I'm mad because I still tell of my  
oppression instead of acting, instead  
of killing them even if it's one by one.  

I'm mad because every time I become  
a person (woman) some man tries to make  
me, like I was something to conquer (I  
suppose dreaming of the days when the  
white man conquered the world). I'm mad  
because men rape women all the time yet  
call something "prostitution" and make  
it punishable by jail. My revolution  
is one where women rise up and kill  
men, for all the murders they have per-  
petrated, for every insult, for every  
hurt.  

My problem in making an objective  
analysis is that I excuse some men for  
their piggishness, when they are all  
responsible. I see women being treated  
as a class, and I must make myself see  
men that way. Of what possible use are  
men? We can reproduce without them and  
can achieve sexual pleasure without them.  

History is man and his misuse. Future  
is woman and her power. I think my sisters  
are tired of the phrase “sisterhood is  
powerful" because they haven't seen  
it demonstrated. I think the time has  
come for each of us to take a part in  
the destruction of our oppressors,  
thereby destroying the system that keeps  
us there. The time has come to be really  
powerful- by destroying the fathers who  
are fucking up their children, the  
husbands their wives, the brothers  
their sisters.  

Sisterhood is not just a social  
gathering, but a political force, that  
we are willing to use our bodies to  
free ourselves, to free our sisters  
from the prisons where men put them.  
Women's Liberation means the destruction  
of the power of men. Women's Liberation  
is the only revolution that is mean-  
ingful to me because only in the world  
of women can I exist as a whole person.  

29. JANUARY 1971  

"Diary of a Mad Housewife”  
seems to be another example of a genre  
of movie-making where men try to show  
what it's really like to be a woman. I  
realize that a woman had something to do  
with the adaptation, but she must have been  
trying to please the male audience which  
backs the film. After all, to see Carrie  
Snodgrass up there on the screen, suffer-  
ing so, in her chores of being a slave  
to her husband and children, crying out  
to be loved, yet not once did the film-  
makers ever show the politics behind  
her enslavement. That they never did  
portray her as a person I object to, as  
a person by herself, for herself. I object  
to filmmakers using women (though it should  
not be surprising since they are men, and  
the art world is no different than the  
real world). What this film was about,  
in fact, was the subtle reaffirmation that  
there is such a thing as an ordinary house-  
wife, who is content or discontent with  
her role as a housewife, but is really  
not suited to be anything more than an  
extension of a man. I objected to every  
insinuation that this movie, which defines  
women in masculine terms, was to be taken  
seriously by me. What it seemed to be say-  
ing was - yes, women are difficult to handle  
but if you play to their prince-in-shining-  
armour mystique or their sadistic-male-  
fantasy hang-up, they can be satisfied.  
I resent that they played upon that part  
of myself that is idealistic and made it  
into something that is petty and stupid  
(as all real emotions are, defined by men).  
I think I also felt betrayed, because  
I was led to believe that this was a movie  
about women and though I should have known  
better, I let myself believe that this one  
was different. I'm sick of all this  
pseudo-serious understanding by men of  
“our problem" in the form of art, of the  
misinformation it offers, and that it  
gives women the image of a Carrie Snodgrass  
to identify with so  
their problems are not politically motivated  
but personally caused.  

that they will think that