Woman?

Reprinted from  
Notes From The Second Year  

Perhaps the most widely accepted tenet of move-  
ment ideology, promulgated by many leftist think-  
ers, notably Marcuse, is the idea that we are psy-  
chically manipulated by the mass media to crave  
more and more consumer goods, thus powering an  
economy that depends on constantly expanding  
sales. It has been suggested that this theory is par-  
ticularly applicable to women, for women do most  
of the actual buying, their consumption is often  
directly related to their oppression (e.g., make-up,  
soap flakes), and they are a special target of adver-  
tisers. According to this view, society defines  
women as consumers and the purpose of the prevail-  
ing media image of women as passive sexual objects  
is to sell products. It follows that the beneficiaries  

of this depreciation of women are not men but the  
corporate power structure.  

The consumerism theory has not been subjected  
to much critical debate. In fact, it seems in recent  
years to have taken on the invulnerability of reli-  
gious dogma. Yet analysis demonstrates that this  
theory is fallacious and leads to crucial tactical  
errors. This paper is offered as a critique of con-  
sumerism based on four propositions:  

1. It is not “psychic manipulation” that makes  
people buy; rather their buying habits are by and  
large a rational self-interested response to their lim-  
ited alternatives within the system.  

2. The chief function of media stereotypes of  
women is not to sell goods but to reinforce the  
ideology and therefore the reality of male suprem-  

acy—of the economic and sexual subordination of  
women to men, in the latter’s objective interest.  

3. Most of the “consuming” women do is ac-  
tually labor, specifically part of women’s domestic  
and sexual obligations.  

4. The consumerism theory has its roots in  
class, sex, and race bias; its ready acceptance among  
radicals, including radical women, is a function of  
movement elitism.  

First of all, there is nothing inherently wrong  
with consumption. Shopping and consuming are en-  
joyable human activities and the marketplace has  
been a center of social life for thousands of years.  
The profit system is oppressive not because rela-  
tively trivial luxuries are available, but because basic  
necessities are not. The locus of the oppression  
resides in the production function: people have no  
control over what commodities are produced (or  
services performed), in what amounts, under what  
conditions, or how they are distributed. Corpora-  
tions make these decisions solely for their own  
profit. It is more profitable to produce luxuries for  
the affluent (or for that matter, for the poor, on  
exploitative installment plans) than to produce and  
make available food, housing, medical care, educa-  
tion, recreational and cultural facilities according to  
the needs and desires of the people. We can accept  
the goods offered to us or reject them, but we  
cannot determine their quality or change the sys-  
tem’s priorities. In a truly humane society, in which  
all the people have personal autonomy, control over  
the means of production, and equal access to goods  
and services, consumption will be all the more en-  
joyable because we will not have to endure shoddy  
goods sold at exploitative prices by means of dishon-  
est advertising.  

As it is, the profusion of commodities is a  
genuine and powerful compensation for oppression.  
It is a bribe, but like all bribes it offers concrete  

August 21, 1970  

benefits—in the average American’s case, a degree of  
physical comfort unparalleled in history. Under  
present conditions, people are preoccupied with  
consumer goods not because they are brainwashed  
but because buying is the one pleasurable activity  
not only permitted but actively encouraged by the  
power structure. The pleasure of eating an ice cream  
cone may be minor compared to the pleasure of  
meaningful, autonomous work, but the former is  
easily available and the latter is not. A poor family  
would undoubtedly rather have a decent apartment  
than a new TV, but since they are unlikely to get  
the apartment, what is to be gained by not getting  

the TV?  
Radicals who in general are healthily skeptical  

of facile Freudian explanations have been quick to  
embrace a theory of media manipulation based  
squarely on Freud, as popularized by market re-  
searchers and journalists like Vance Packard (Mar-  
cuse acknowledges Packard's influence in One Di-  
mensional Man). In essence, this theory holds that  
ads designed to create unconscious associations be-  
tween merchandise and deep-seated fears, sexual de-  
sires, and needs for identity and self-esteem induce  
people to buy products in search of gratifications  
no product can provide. Furthermore, the corpora-  
tions, through the media, deliberately create fears  
and desires that their products can claim to fulfill.  
The implication is that we are not simply taken in  
by lies or exaggerations—as, say, by the suggestion  
that a certain perfume will make us sexually irre-  
sistible—but are psychically incapable of learning  
from experience and will continue to buy no matter  
how often we are disappointed, and that in any case  
our “need” to be sexually irresistible is programmed  
into us to keep us buying perfume. This hypothesis  
of psychic distortion is based on the erroneous  
assumption that mental health and anti-materialism  
are synonymous.  

Although they have to cope with the chicanery  
inherent in the profit system, people for the most  
part buy goods for practical, self-interested reasons.  
A washing machine does make a housewife’s work  
easier (in the absence of socialization of house-  
work); Excedrin does make a headache go away; a  
car does provide transportation. If one is duped into  
buying a product because of misleading advertising,  
the process is called exploitation; it has nothing to  
do with brainwashing. Advertising is a how-to man-  
ual on the consumer economy, constantly reminding  
us of what is available and encouraging us to in-  
dulge ourselves. It works (that is, stimulates sales)  
because buying is the only game in town, not vice  
versa. Advertising does appeal to morbid fears (e.g.,  
of body odors) and false hopes (irresistibility) and  
shoppers faced with indistinguishable brands of a  
product may choose on the basis of an ad (what  
method is better—eeny-meeny-miny-mo?), but this is  
just the old game of caveat emptor. It thrives on  
naiveté and people learn to resist it through expe-  
rience.  

The worst suckers for ads are children. Other  
vulnerable groups are older people, who had no  
previous experience—individual or historical—to  
guide them when the consumer cornucopia suddenly  

developed after World War II, and poor people, who  
do not have enough money to learn through years  

of trial, error and disillusionment to be shrewd  
consumers. The constant refinement of advertising  
claims, visual effects, and so on, show that experi-  
ence desensitizes: No one really believes that smok-  

By Ellen Willis  

ENZYME Power  

ing Brand X cigarettes will make you sexy. (The  
function of sex in an ad is probably the obvious  
one—to lure people into paying closer attention to  
the ad—rather than to make them “identify” their  
lust with a product. The chief effect of the heavy  
sexual emphasis in advertising has been to stimulate  
a national preoccupation with sex, showing that you  
can’t identify away a basic human drive as easily as  
all that.) Madison Avenue has increasingly deempha-  
sized “motivational” techniques in favor of aesthetic  
ones—TV commercials in particular have become  
incredibly inventive visually—and even made a joke  
out of the old motivational ploys (the phallic Vir-  
ginia Slims ad, for instance, is blatantly campy). We  
can conclude from this that either the depth  
psychology approach never worked in the first  
place, or that it has stopped working as consumers  
have gotten more sophisticated.  

The argument that the corporations create new  
psychological needs in order to sell their wares is  
similarly flimsy. There is no evidence that propa-  
ganda can in itself create a desire, as opposed to  
bringing to consciousness a latent desire by suggest-  
ing that means of satisfying it are available. This  
idea is superstitious: it implies that the oppressor is  
diabolically intelligent (he has learned to control  
human souls) and that the media have magic pow-  
ers. It also mistakes effects for causes and drasti-  
cally oversimplifies the relation between ideology  
and material conditions. We have not been taught to  
dislike our smell in order to sell deodorants; de-  
odorants sell because there are social consequences  
for smelling. And the negative attitude about our  
bodies that has made it feasible to invent and mar-  
ket deodorants is deeply rooted in our anti-sexual  
culture, which in turn has been shaped by exploitive  
modes of production and class antagonism between  
men and women.  

The confusion between cause and effect is par-  
ticularly apparent in the consumerist analysis of  

women’s oppression. Women are not manipulated  
by the media into being domestic servants and  
mindless sexual decorations, the better to sell soap  
and hair spray. Rather, the image reflects how  
men in a sexist society force women to behave. Male  
supremacy is the oldest and most basic form of  
class exploitation (cf. Engels, Origin of the Family):  
it was not invented by a smart ad man. The real evil  
of the media image of women is that it supports the  
sexist status quo. In a sense, the fashion, cosmetics  
and “feminine hygiene” ads are aimed more at men  
than at women. They encourage men to expect  
women to sport all the latest trappings of sexual  
slavery—expectations women must then fulfill if  
they are to survive. That advertisers exploit wom-  
en’s subordination rather than cause it can be clear-  
ly seen now that male fashions and toiletries have  
become big business. In contrast to ads for women’s  
products, whose appeal is “use this and he will want  
you” (or “if you don’t use this, he won't want  
you”), ads for the male counterparts urge, “you too,  
can enjoy perfume and bright-colored clothes; don’t  
worry, it doesn’t make you feminine.” Although  
advertisers are careful to emphasize how virile these  
products are (giving them names like “Brut,” show-  
ing the man who uses them hunting or flirting with  
admiring women—who, incidentally, remain decora-  

tive objects when the sell is aimed directly at men),  
it is never claimed that the product is essential  

to masculinity (as make-up is essential to femininity),  
only compatible with it. To convince a man to buy,  
--con't on page 12  

11