Chass in. the P.  
oe  

boty Bi  

Your love is like a ball (Chain)  

I am an outreach worker in a government  
sponsored community action program. It's  
my job to find the poor of this county,  
tell them about the services available to  
them and when asked, act as their advocate  
in dealing with other agencies. A good  
job for a nice middle-class, socially-  
concerned, self-styled radical woman,  
right? Wrong. The job is inherently  
classist and in doing the job I have per-  

petuated that classism, albeit, unknowingly.  

(That's one of my white, middle-class  
privileges--I can be a classist, a racist,  
a homosexist unknowingly. I am allowed to  
"discover" oppression but I don't have to feel  
it, just perceive it intellectually. That  
is the trouble with whites in the black  
movement, men relating to women's libera-  
tion, or any group relating to a politics  
with which they have no experience. You  
always have to sit down and take your pol-  
itical pulse and ask yourself, “Am I the  
oppressor?" Blacks don't have to do that.  

Last June I applied for a job as coor-  
dinator of Action Studies at the U of I  
and got it. Action Studies is sort of a  
free university within the structure of  
and funded by the state university.  

The office is run by a coordinator and  
a secretary. All the coordinators up until  
me had been men and all the secretaries had  
been women. At the time I came into the of-  
fice, the secretary, who was my age, had  
been working at AS for two years and knew  
how to do everything. She knew the proce-  
dures and channels for setting up courses,  
and about all university forms (there are  
thousands) and how to use them. I knew none  
of this so she taught me. Of course, the  
easiest part to learn was the prestige work  
of setting up courses. It took me six more  
months to learn about the voucher invoices,  
requisitions, local small order forms and  
which one to use for what. But isn't that  
the way it always is? The prestige work is  
the easiest by any standard of intelligence  
or skills. All it takes to do these jobs is  
PR and personality skills that only people  
of the upper classes have the opportunity  

to develop.  
Anyways even though I didn’t like it and  

tried to equalize things by learning her  
job, the time and work factors in the of-  
fice were often such that we couldn't af-  
ford the time for me to slowly and pains-  
takingly type out a requisition. The result  
was that because of this division of labor,  
we fell into a boss-secretary power rela-  

tionship.  
After about two months she had to leave  

and another woman whom I had known for a  
long time got the secretary job. We talked  
and agreed that since we both knew pretty  
much the same amount about how to run the  
office, were both women, and were both the  
same age that there was no good basis for  
either one of us being the boss and the  
other doing the typing. So because there  
was no one else who was immediately super-  
ior to us and controlled the office we de-  
cided to do away with the boss job and  

share all the work.  
It was pretty easy to initiate this be-  

cause we both were at the same low level  
of competence on running the office and  
could learn the work together and equally--  
both the prestige work and the shit work.  
We worked this way all year with only a  

few problems. It's amazing how powerful  
the labels are that are put on you and it  

with racism, women feel sexism in their  
guts and working class people must feel  
classism without having to think about it  
or even name it.)  

Back to the job. I found out early in  
the game that I wasn't just an outreach  
worker. I was the super-duper social-  
worker Jesus Christ savior of the poor  
people of this county, and besides that I  
got to wear pants and be the office radical.  
Put 'em all together and what does it spell?  
Co-option. I act as the rev-proof safety  
valve for the poor of Johnson County. When  
they've had it out with Welfare, or they  
can't make their rent or they're out of  
food, they come to me and my counterparts  
and we dig up the money, or smooth the  
ruffled feathers or get an extension or  
whatever. What we do is shield the enemy:  
put off the time when the poor will realize  
that the enemy is not their neighbor who's  
ripping off more food stamps than them.  
That is whoever put a price on food to  

MY  

“On  

was hard for us to quit thinking of our-  
selves as coordinator and secretary. Es-  
pecially when the structure of the univer-  
sity enforced it and most everyone that  
would come in (especially males) would re-  
late to us in terms of that hierarchy. The  
structure of the university was difficult  
to deal with because they require one per-  
son's name to be signed to all forms and  
letters and only invite that person to  
meetings with the deans.  

My job as coordinator was only a one  
year job and after about nine months it was  
time to begin thinking about picking a new  
one. The steering committee (10 people)  
which is the governing body of Action Stud-  
ies does the choosing.  

Sara-savage (the other office worker)  
and I (both of us are on the steering com-  
mittee) began to reminisce about the nice  
time we'd had working together and about  
how different it would be if they picked  
a man for coordinator -- the old order  
would be reinstated. We decided that we  
would ask the steering committee to make a  
policy that the office work be shared  
equally between coordinator and secretary.  
Well, we did ask and immediately realized  
the result had to be classist.  

Although everyone on the steering com-  
mittee agreed that it was a fair idea,  
their conception of how to do it was very  
different from ours. They immediately began  
to talk about how the name of the job would  
have to be changed from "secretary" to "co-  
coordinator" or something like that, how  
there'd have to be an ad in the paper stat-  
ing the qualifications and then an inter-  
view. Listening to them, I realized that  
the way the job was going to be publicized  
would eliminate a lot of women (if we can  
assume that only women consider secretarial  
jobs) from applying for the job. When you  
start calling it a high-fallutin job then  
women who think of themselves as only qual-  
ified to be secretaries will be afraid to  
apply. As they talked the two jobs started  
seeming more and more equal. They began to  
say that if the jobs are equal, our ad for  
secretary should state the same qualifica-  
tions as the ad for coordinator (which is  
billed as a big boss-coordinator job with  
qualities centering around PR etc).  

Sara-savage and I objected that adver-  
tising the secretary job similarly to the  
coordinator made it no longer a job a lot  

June 7, 197)  

Sponsored by Action Studies  

begin with.  

The point I'm trying to make is that my  
job has revealed a classism and a class  
arrogance in myself that I didn't know was  
there. The arrogance of believing that I  
can speak for the poor better than they can.  
The arrogance that comes from having power  
over people; a job here; a food order there  

all add up to power.  
I took the job for the money and also be-  

cause I thought I was doing something at  
least politically palatable. Well, I’m  
choking on the politics but the money still  
looks good. So what can I do? (You've  
heard that question before, right? It's  
always asked by some earnest person in the  
back of the auditorium. Asked of Third  
World people, asked of women. The oppressor  
asks it of the oppressed. It reeks of  
guilt.)  

What can I do?  
It's really not a question I can answer.  
Probably just shut up and listen.  

of women would apply for. There are few  
enough jobs around that women can get with-  
out Action Studies eliminating one of them.  

I'm really sorry we started the whole  
thing. Our intentions were good, but we  
were naive. We wanted to be fair to women,  
but the result was definitely more unfair--  
the elimination of a women's job. We were  
also naive about the structured-in class  
bias of academic institutions. One of the  
most classist ways the steering committee  
began thinking of the secretary job as it  
was newly defined was that the person had  
to have an interest in Action Studies,  
think of it as not just an eight-to-five  
job, be dedicated. All of that is middle  
class value that implies that there is  
something wrong with doing a job for money  
or needing a job because you need the mon-  
ey. It also eliminates the kind of woman  
who hasn't had the opportunity to see that  
an elitist thing like experimental educa-  
tion is something to be dedicated to.  

We argued and argued on that point and  
they just couldn't see it. Finally I real-  
ized that it was futile to argue against  
class bias here; it is built into the uni-  
versity. Every time I would say that re-  
quiring applicants to have special inter-  
est in the job biased our selection in fa-  
vor of middle class people, they would  
look at me and say, “That's unreasonable.  
The person has got to be interested." And  
they're right. Within the elevated context  
of higher education which deals with ideas  
and ideals and encompasses much meaningful  
work, suggesting that someone be hired  
just because they need a job, is unreason-  

able.  
I learned a lot by constantly having to  

accuse the steering committee of class bias  
and argue against it. I learned how hard it-  
is to always have to argue in defense of  
yourself; how committees like that must al-  
ways beat down working class people. It's  
too degrading a situation for anyone who is  
in that position of having to defend their  
dignity at every turn of the conversation.  
People who don't directly experience work-  
ing class prejudice should be the ones to  
point it out. If the women's movement is  
to become united along class, race, and  
sexual lines then it is up to middle class  
women to constantly root out class bias;  
white women, racism; and straight women,  

homosexism.