the viciousness of a class society goes. Some of the women there  
want to train in nursing but if you've served a prison term you  
can't become a Registered Nurse in this state. They in-  
tend to fight that and try to get that changed. Even so most of  
the women at Rockwell City serve terms of 18 months before parole;  
they would start job training or school a few months after they  
arrived there and nurses’ training would take at least two years.  
Some option.  

He mentioned that one woman was taking welding courses at the  
community college and he seemed pretty proud and happy that they  
had gotten her into a program that she had wanted. Later two other  
staff members were telling us about this cottage 2 woman who they  
felt was messing up her opportunity -- that she had really wanted  
to learn welding but was doing badly in it and hated it but had to  
finish the course before she could get parole. Their explanation  
of why she was having a hard time wasn't cruel but was pretty  
shallow. They chalked it up to her feeling unaccepting of herself,  
feeling unwomanly and unfeminine etc. etc. They wouldn't seem to  
take their analysis any further -- to see how her feelings about  
herself (an over-six-foot dyke it sounded like) were according to  
this society and the standards it imposes on women. They thought  
it would be helpful if they could have gotten her together with  
another woman welder they know who is little and petite and very  
feminine so she could see that doing that work didn't mean she  
wasn't a real woman. They didn't see the reality -- that a dyke is  
a real woman. They felt the problem was in how she viewed herself,  
not in how the world viewed her. In describing her to us and des-  
cribing how she felt about herself one of the staff members said,  
"Well, she's a stud." I was pretty shocked to hear that word. I  
don't think he thought he was being offensive. I think he thought  
he was stating a reality: I kept thinking of this far out big  
dyke having to go to those classes with probably all men who hate  
and despise her, facing the sexism and homophobia that must exist  
in the class, being a freak to them, fighting for her self-respect  
in a situation that could only eat away at it. The staff (one man  
and one woman) who we were talking to couldn't really understand  
that, not enough to be of any help or support.  

The staff woman was in charge of the work release program. At  
some time in serving a term you can apply for work release. That  
means you can work on campus when there are jobs opened or get a  
job in town and sometimes get a job and live off campus in a half-  
way house. Even if you can't find a job (which is probable) and  
you are qualified for work release, you have more privileges and  
being on the program brings you closer to parole. To get paroled  
you have to show you will be doing something -- school or work --  
when you get out. Since most prisoners couldn't afford school,  
they need a job to qualify for parole.  

I liked her. She was the only staff member we talked to who  
didn't have a college education. I think she had a nice attitude -  
almost identification with the prisoners. She talked about cot-  
tage 2 also and about how when she first started working there  
she was really intimidated by the women in that cottage. She  
said she used to like to go over to cottage 1 where the prisoners  
would sit down and talk to her and she could relate to them but  
the cottage 2 women would greet her with "What the hell are you  
doing here." She said that later she grew to really admire them,  
admire their independence and strength at doing things on their  
own, applying for jobs and things. At this point in the day talk-  
ing with her I was pretty exhausted and really depressed after  
listening to so many people rapping about their jobs, being so  
enthusiastic about liberal reform. I was finding it harder and  
harder to keep my mind in the necessary mindset of judging the  
prison within its realistic context of this society now, capital-  
ist, sexist, racist. To try to view it in terms of how it affects  
the prisoners there, how it would be hard on them, what they  
would have to stand up against, and also what could help them  
there -- what possibly could be done during their stay that would  
be of concrete help to them. The only thing I heard mentioned all  
day that seemed really helpful was a course the teacher from the  
community college was setting up that would inform the women of  
social agencies and government help available, what programs there  
were like food stamps and such, how to hassle with the bureaucracy  
to get them. Only in this obscene society would that information  
be privileged, would middle-class people know how to get that  
stuff a lot better than lower-class people. I never heard about  
food stamps or knew I was eligible until I was told by some middle-  
class students.  

Beside that course everything else seemed hopeless and I couldn't  
keep my mind from dwelling on the absolute necessity for a  
revolution after which the acts that those women are serving time  
for would not be crimes and/or would be unnecessary. I'm sure  
people aren't in prison for bad checks in China. I started drift-  
ing off to my dream world where the Fords and Rockefellers would  

A Woman ?  

11 February 1972  

be in prison if anyone was, not the woman we met from Davenport.  
No doubt about it -- the best prison reform would be a revolution.  

All in all I felt good about having visited the prison. I felt  
excited but I don't know why. I certainly couldn't say that pri-  
son is an exciting place to be. It seemed that way (exciting) to  
the staff because of their purposeful crusade of liberal reform  
but it couldn't be exciting to serve time there. Given the show  
the liberals put on for us, I didn't see much of the life the  
women there must live -- only the authority they must deal with.  
That would be hard for me. It would be hard to be guarded about  
your politics or your life in that atmosphere against the touchy-  
feely T-grouping authority there. And because of the leniency,  
because they don't hire unnecessary labor and don't seem to make  
the prisoners do too much, I could see going crazy from boredom.  
The conditions there don't seem cruel but it would be another  
story if you freaked out. They could send you to the state mental  
institution and the conditions there are probably not geared  
at giving you a positive experience like Rockwell City is trying.  
I imagine they could be pretty hostile if you didn't like the ex-  
perience they were breaking their necks to give you. After all  
they are trying to supply the best they know of, the closest that  
can be set up to a middle-class campus; and if you couldn't relate  
to that I could imagine them reacting to you -- an unthankful  
piece of poor bulldyke trash.  

The staff knows, I think, the futility of what they're doing.  
One staff member said he knew that the best a woman leaving Rock-  
well City could expect was to get married and be supported or she  
could expect to be back at Rockwell soon. But while she's there  
they're supplying her with a glimpse of how other people live and  
even if she buys it when she's there, when she gets out she'll  
soon learn it's a whole other ballgame. I doubt the women there  
are that oblivious to the contradictions and maybe that's why  
they're apathetic.  

I want to say that despite how liberal the place is and beside  
from what I felt about how badly that could affect you, prison  
would still be horrible and you'd want out. And also that their lib-  
eral and permissive authority is just another means of control. I  
think my excitement came from in a sense coming in touch with  
something that before had been an abstract -- an unknown that I  
feared. It wasn't as bad as I thought it would be and it wasn't as  
good either. But it did become real and not as frightening.  

I wake in middle-of-the-night terror  

next to the warm sleeping body of my lover  

yet alone in the conviction that I am in a prison cell  

shut away, suddenly, from all that makes my life.  

I sense the great weight of the prison  

pressing down on the little box of room I lie in  
alone forgotten.  

How often do women awake  

in the prison of marriage,  

of solitary motherhood  
alone and forgotten  

of exhaustion from meaningless work,  

of self-despising learned early, of advancing age  
alone and forgotten.  

How many women lie awake at this moment  

struggling as I do against despair,  
knowing the morning will crush us once again  
under the futility of our lives.  
And how short a step it is  
for us -- to the more obvious imprisonment  
of bars and concrete  
where our sisters lie  

alone forgotten.  

poem reprinted from:  

Ruchell Magee Defense Committee  
P.O. Box 5780  

Stanford, Calif. 94305  

Page 5