Under normal conditions the vagina, if left to perform its  
natural functions, will keep itself perfectly clean. The vaginal  
lining constantly secretes thin mucus which gently washes "foreign"  
material, such as menstrual blood, contraceptive chemicals, and  
semen, down to the vulva where careful washing will remove it. If  
this normal secretion is not removed from the foreskin of the clitoris  
or behind the labial folds there is a characteristic "vaginal odor,"  
which douching won't help.  

Sometimes douching is useful. On the last day of your period  
a douche will remove the remaining bits of menstrual flow and  
avoid a day or two of spotting, if you wish. If you are one of the  
women who develops a normal and healthy, but messy, copious mucus  
discharge at the time of ovulation, a douche will temporarily slow  
down the discharge.  

For douching an enema bag with a douche nozzle (which directs  
the water out to the sides against the vaginal wall) is best. Bulb  
syringes are less desirable because the water escapes at high  
pressure and does not deliver a constant flow.  

To douche, sit on the toilet with the bag at shoulder height.  
Warm water (not hot) or warm soapy water are fine solutions, but  
you can safely use mild solutions of drug store preparations if  
you wish. Insert the nozzle as far as it will go into your vagina  
and when the bag is about ¾ empty slowly start removing the  
nozzle so that the last of the water runs over the labial area.  
Rinse out the douche bag with warm water. You need not sterilize  
the nozzle. Your vagina is tough and usually resists infection  
very well.  

Vaginitis  

Your vagina is tough, but it can be messed up. Douching too  
frequently and taking large doses of antibiotics, among other things,  
can cause the yeast-bacteria balance in the vagina to be  
upset. The result, whatever the cause, will be a copious foul-  
smelling, irritating discharge which must be treated by a doctor  
who can tell whether the condition is caused by yeast or bacteria.  
Douching is futile as a cure but these ailments can usually be  
easily treated by means prescribed by your doctor.  

Another important reason for having a doctor investigate  
abnormal discharges, especially if they are accompanied by itch-  
ing, painful urination, and/or lower abdominal tenderness, is  
that these common symptoms are also the symptoms for gonorrhea. A  
smear test will give you a sure diagnosis.  

Cancer  

And now a plug for Pap smears. All women, beginning in their  
mid-teens, should have a yearly Pap smear. A smear of tissue is  
painlessly removed from your vagina and tested for evidence of  
preliminary cancer stages. It's very effective, inexpensive, and  
easy—well worth being able to treat cervical and uterine cancer  
early. Most doctors understand the importance of this health  
measure.  

You can get a Pap smear from a private doctor, or from  
Planned Parenthood as part of an examination for contraceptive  
pills. In any case you'll pay five dollars for the lab test, plus  
office call fee if you go to a private doctor. If you are a stu-  
dent, get your Pap smear from the student health center, even if  
you are going to Planned Parenthood for pills, so that you don't  
overburden PP facilities.  

At the time of taking a Pap smear most doctors will also check  
your breasts, your other most vulnerable cancer area. Ask him/her  
to do so if he/she doesn't as a matter of course.  

Go to a doctor immediately if you develop lumps in your  
breasts or abnormal vaginal bleeding. It probably will be some-  
thing simple, but you need to be sure as early as possible.  

Except for the section on cystitis (written out of the experiences  
of the females in our group), most of the other-than-local infor-  
mation for this portion of this article came from A Concept of  
Contraception, by Selig Neubardt, M.D. (Trident Press, N.Y., 1967),  
also in paperback as Contraception (Pocket Books, 95¢). It's an  
excellent and concise description of all forms of contraception  
(as of 1967) which includes much other useful information.  

This article was prepared by the Bloomington (Indiana) Women's  
Liberation Front  

“there is some shit I will not eat”  

America's food is full of shit.  
Like most of its products — war,  
systems of control, ideology, culture;  

The Man controls the menu:  
Delmonico steaks,  
steaks, lobster and  
scotch for the ruling class; a little  

--e.e. cummings, "i sing of olaf"  

State & Cambodia there was a cheaper &  
easier supply of heroin around college  
campuses and in big cities. I could  

The Man controls,  
detergents, cars, cigarettes, liquor,  
Coke, McDonald's hamburgers -- all  
full of shit. Talk is going round  
and round about additives in food --  
the additive in my food as far as I  
can see, is the MAN.  

Those into the freak-youth counter  
culture seem to think they have  
a line on what's safe to eat & how to  
get it. The Man has not only fucked  
up the food & told us it was cool, he  
has also fucked up the information  
as to what is good for your body &  
how to figure what to eat. He lies  
about nutrition & sells us shitty  
food. But the freaks put out with  
different (and believable) info on  
nutrition, then find how to get it  
by opening health food stores &  
organizing food deals — but all  
within the system. They still don't  
get rid of that food additive —  
what makes it all happen — profit,  
the Man's thing.  

The Man will allow heads to open  
health food stores. But the Man's  
media and official culture will ensure  
that the healthy food trip is tagged  
as a freak & liberal culture thing &  
therefore a middle-class limited side-  
show. It may become the "in thing"  
and all that shit. It will be com-  
mercialized to bits, probably, like  
most of the counter culture that is  
so within the capitalist system it  
doesn't necessitate revolution.  

Choice of food is part of culture  
or subculture, part of lifestyle.  
But it's the range of choice that  
profit controls. The media reinforce  
the limitations on lifestyles. For  
middle class people, it's a liberal  
thing to experiment. But, fuck it,  
poor people can't experiment. Rich  
white liberals can check out "soul  
food" but poor blacks can't check  

A. Woeman  

of everything on TV dinner trays for  
the middle class; brown rice and agid  
for the freaks; McDonald's hamburgers  
and polluted beer for the working  
class; and peanut butter & rotgut  
gin or heroin for the lower class.  
(Dope is in the class structure too.  
Where is that pure Sandoz LSD? I  
haven't seen it but I bet whoever has  
that control ought to die. And  
wouldn't the Man like to get the whole  
revolution on smack? Smack helped keep  
the ghettoes down for years. It was  
no coincidence that right after Kent  

related material:  
"I want to puke my guts out!!!!"  
-- Pat Edith  

I wish I'd never seen your face  
or heard your lying tongue, my lord  
or heard your lying tongue  
I would not be here eating this  
cold cornbread  
sopping this salty gravy my lord  
sopping this salty gravy  
--Appalachian folk song  

Heroin, be the death of me...  
Thank your god that I'm not aware  
thank your god that I just don't care  
'bout all the evils of this town  
and all the politicians makin’  
busy sounds  
and all the dead bodies piled  
on the ground  
and everybody puttin' everybody  
else down  
oh and I guess that I just don't know  
oh and I guess that I just don't know  
Heroin Heroin  
it's my life and it's my wife...  
--"Heroin", by the Velvet  
Underground  

go on about the politics of heroin but  
I feel that sisters are less suscept-  
ible to that trip, that it's really  
male-oriented. Other kinds of downers  
(tranquilizers, etc.) are pushed at  
women, though; calm, passive women  
are necessary to the Man's system.)  
Faced with all this crud in our  
food and stuff, some of us can make  
the choice to change our eating habits.  
But some of us want more choices than  
the limited pure food diet. Some of us  
can't afford the time to bake good  
bread and can't afford to buy any but  
cheap poisonous white bread. (Pure  

white flour, white sugar, white rice --  
there seems to be a connection. All  
are terrible worthless food.) Some of  
us have just made enough personal sac-  
rifices. I dig brown rice but I sure  
as hell dig lobster. And I'm angry and  
I won't forget it as long as Amerikkka  
makes me quite literally sick to my  
stomach. I could buy a Burger Shit  
meal, walk across the street to the  
bank and puke it on the bank president.  
Dammit, we won't eat brown rice  
forever! We want control over our own  
bodies and that means what goes into  
them too. When you feel like you ate  
something that disagreed with you, and  
you know what and who you disagree  

with, your gut reaction is a political  
analysis.  

This woman has the  
right idea:  
Head aches  
are caused by a  
supply to the brain, massage restores the circulation.  

Rub in rhythm with your pulse rate. Even  
scratching your head is helpful.