The Women’s Movement

It is now time for us to concentrate on putting a semblance of
order and discipline into our movement. By continuing to advocate
loose, uncommitted groups, we prevent real development of ourselves
and of our ideas. In an effort not to alienate the mass of women,
we have ended up appealing to laziness, fear, and dependency in
women. As a result, a spirit of conservatism is arising in the
Women's Movement. Rather than challenging ourselves and other
women to move out, to take risks, and to dare the impossible,
continued disorganization fosters a lax commitment, discouragement
and feelings of uselessness among women.

Organizations are essential to revolution:

Organizations provide concrete expression to women of a counter-
reality - a reality which challenges the assumptions and "truths"
of patriarchal culture. For example, it is asserted as "truth"
that women cannot function politically together, cannot by them-
selves develop and execute a plan of action—political action is
the sphere of men. An organized group of women, however, exposes
this "truth" as no individual by herself could do. The existence
of the group itself creates a reality in opposition to patriarchy
and people are forced to reinterpret their perception of the world.

Organizations create power by which we are able to challenge the
established order. They consolidate the strengths of individuals.
When people unite under common principles and act on those prin-
ciples, they create power.

It is now time to create many independent organizations, each con-
sciously developing its own analysis and strategy for change. They
must contain within themselves the seeds of their own expansion.
These groups are a transitional stage in the revolutionary process.
They will lay the foundation of a future larger organization which
will draw together many groups under common principles, analysis,
and structure.

The organizations we develop now must do the following:

These organizations must define common political principles and
the level of commitment that will be expected from each member.
Only by clarifying our politics can we provide the foundation for
a collective political analysis. A common commitment is required
to build the trust and security within the organization that are
essential to moving out and taking the initiative.

These organizations must develop theory out of which to act. Our
analysis must separate the bases of our oppression from its con-
sequences. Only in this way can we avoid the dangers of reformism
and opportunism within the Movement. Action which is separated
from a developing analysis of the whole runs the risk of either
betraying real feminist interests now or in the future, or of con-
suming valuable time on projects which haven't the potential for
effecting the necessary revolutionary change. Without a commit-

ment to feminist theory, we will be doomed to continuing sporadic,
unconnected action. Only a strong ongoing group can ensure that
every idea is developed and is incorporated into its analysis.

These organizations must provide leadership for our movement.
Gaining power for women requires taking the initiative. We will
never convince men to give up their power and they will certainly
not give it all up of their own accord. This leadership must be
collective leadership based on the common experience of theory and
practice.

These organizations must be a place for individuals to develop
the capabilities and skills that will be necessary in creating a
Feminist Revolution. These skills include the ability to speak
and write well, to create and explain theory, and to carry out
actions. Developing these skills is accomplished by both con-
sciously sharing knowledge and by participating collectively in
the process of social change.

These organizations must also build strength and courage in their
members and develop the ability of members to take the initiative
and provide leadership. To do this it is necessary to have the
kind of commitment that a serious organization demands of its mem-
bers. Moving forward and taking risks becomes possible when the
group can provide minimal security and an environment of support.
Only a clearly defined commitment of all members can assure that
support and security will exist when it is needed.

A Woman?

January 1972

These organizations must struggle to ensure equality among their
members. The dominant race, class, and sex retains the skills
and knowledge for maintaining power within its own group. A move
toward equalization is only possible when specific measures are
taken within the group to counteract these imbalances of power.
Such measures include a systematic sharing of skills, equally
dividing the tedious and creative tasks, control of who shall com-
municate with the media, and a move toward a sharing of incomes.
Only a group of people with a continuing commitment could effec-
tively attempt these measures.

These organizations will provide a basis for working with women of
different political orientations without compromising anyone's
principles. By clarifying our positions and acting in a unified
manner, we are able to cooperate, to make alliances, and to incor-
porate new members, while at the same time we make our own posi-
tion clear. It is no longer necessary to speak to the lowest
common denominator in an attempt to work with large numbers of
women. Developing and clarifying our positions also provides a
basis for women to decide if they wish to join a group.

This type of organization is bound to be met by criticism from
within the Women's Movement. The most common criticisms are
listed below:

“These organizations sound rigid and unfree. They do
not allow for freedom of choice or for individual ex-
pression."
This criticism has an obvious class bias. It comes from persons
who believe that it is possible to exercise individual freedom of
choice and control over our lives in this society. This is an il-
lusion voiced by upper and middle class women who can afford to
mistake impulsive spontaneity for freedom of choice. This miscon-
ception could not come from the lower class because they don't
pretend to have freedom of choice. They do what they must to sur-
vive. Individual expression and freedom of choice in a situation
where we have no power can only be tokenism because our possibili-
ties are limited. The only way to expand these possibilities is
to organize collectively. A woman may choose to go to medical
school, but unless she organizes women within that situation she
is forced to deal with the male educational hierarchy on their
terms. Organizations are a means of expanding our choices by de-
fining them collectively. The commitment and rules (freely ar-
rived at promises we make to each other) give us a confidence in
ourselves and each other and provide a free space where we can
develop ideas. Organizations allow individuals to create a situ-
ation where we can live out our politics. They create a collective
identity that gives us power.

"Establishing organizations on the basis of defined po-
litics fosters divisiveness and factionalism. Women should
be working together, not splitting apart on the basis of
ideologies."
This criticism denies the importance of ideological struggle in
the growth of our movement. We must recognize that there will
be internal struggles (disagreement and conflict) for as long as
we continue to grow. If we are to make intelligent choices and
if we are to learn from our mistakes, these differences must be
clearly articulated and understood. To call for unity with no
basis is like President Nixon saying that dissent against the war
is the single greatest obstacle to peace. Unity comes from the
clarification of our differences. It is only when we understand
our differences that we understand the basis upon which we are
unified. Only the struggle to resolve our differences will give
the movement direction.

“By setting standards for membership, organizations
are elitist, creating their own definition of who is
feminist or who is revolutionary."
This criticism does not recognize the necessity for people of
common political beliefs to form organizations among themselves.
One organization will not encompass all women. By defining the
political principles of groups, we clarify on what basis new
women are welcome. Thus, groups will always remain open to women
of similar beliefs.

Being organized is threatening. The force and direction that only
organization can provide are the very things that cause women who
are not organized to feel pushed. Many criticisms against the or-
ganized come from those who are unprepared. They obscure the is-
sue by accusing the organized of dominating, appealing again to
the lowest common denominator. Rather than making demands on
themselves, they require that no one assert herself. We must be-
gin to recognize this misuse of feminist egalitarianism for what
it is. It is good that organization forces the unorganized to
become organized.

The Feminist Movement has clearly arrived at a new stage in its
growth. It is essential that we recognize this stage as differ-
ent from earlier stages—it has different needs and therefore we
must develop different structures. We must at this time make the
creation of new structures our priority.

Written by Radical Feminist 28
Minneapolis, Minnesota

March 30, 1972