Things for Men to do:  
ES Gee et eae eee  

o WWCeoever volvo’, I need RO eS) \Neges are_ ons Qas’s ane omy  

yee ged egaske_  

Dig cover es yon cout qiv8 SomEouw else your privileges,  
Unk abeot cohih ayer fel uten por Leck a troman up and Daew,  
Tey Xco be emotional aves Some Ming close Xo By heb:  

Weact.  

Think twice before Agee tell g WON ah how Fo ron her movement  
Boy the 6é wns, Give one te your worth ¢ owe Ly your WF, and  
Sue te year cigter,  

Kol Q (ower leas ic + igen <sery Atixate Agere Si MAown eens venteetin tne ies Qa.  

Sttoro Wake the spa of & Calsaninena |  

vole Los glenra de yar art fer your sew 2... Your dong br  

Rewembec all the times wow Celt like crying whew et dod pond  

( : with ries ‘Loo wana.  

Discared urhat te tifr te called cmatonat wher yew  

—  

sense sgeseocing aeons foackin pee =9  

How many Times have you said my we fe"? ‘ng children * ”  
tie 3. wou heel ike wiewrusewere Ute avd.uemieteuoice  
a rc) J |  

ther with another woway e  
0. pasts? fel er Ao g p. esr Tah i sc ala aman!  

Andblet's put one lie to rest For are harmful to men) but those masters are  
all time: the lie that men are oppressed, not oppressed, Any master has the alternative  
too, by sexism--the lie that there can be of divesting himself of sexism or racism~- This space is for men who want to write  
such a thing as "men's liberation groups." the oppressed have no alternative--for they in our paper --sharpen your crayons  
Oppression is something that one group have no power~~but to fight. In the long  
of people commits against another group run, Women's Liberation will of course free  
specifically because of a "threatening" men--but in the short run it's going to  
characteristic shared by the latter group —- cost men a lot of privilege, which no one  
skin color or sex or age, etc. The oppres- gives up willingly or easily. Sexism is not  
sors are indeed fucked up by being masters the fault of women--kill your fathers, not aa rar ie  
(racism hurts whites, sexual stereotypes your mothers. ~—Robin Morgan  

4 Vo. 1, No. 5 Ain’T I