WARNING: To all those Jewish lesbians  
across the country who are thinking of  
splitting to San Francisco, renowned  
hotbed of gay life, DON'T. THIS PLACE  
AIN'T KOSHER!  

There we were, an integrated gang of  
working-class lesbians, living unhappily  
in Boston. After a visit one summer to  
S.F. it seemed like just the place to  
be: money seemed to flow, or at least  
no one seemed to have to work much...  
there were more girls’ bars in town than  
one could hit in a week of heavy party-  
ing... there was a Jewish lesbian collec-  
tive meeting weekly... there seemed like  
a lot of room to do all kinds of poli-  
tics.  

And we just weren't making it in  
Boston. The women's movement was so far  
gone that they had a Nazi on the coor-  
dinating committee of the women's center  
who waved "Mein Kampf" around. I was  
forced once again to do topless dancing  
to make a few pennies, an activity which  
is akin (but much more ominous) to being  
a gymnast in a toilet. Kathy Queer was  
festering at $1.65/hr at the YWCA, and  
even the fact that she brought out her  
boss couldn't hide the meager financial  
fulfillments. Claire had spent a couple  
of years looking for an alternate em-  
ployment opportunity to the fish factory  
in Provincetown with no success. The  
lesbian scene in Boston consisted of  
one schlocky bar which also served to  
house entertainment facilities for every  
local voyeur, pervert, asshole, and fool  
in town. Meeting new women was getting  
so tough that I was going out with a  

Catholic youngster whose overgrown  
cross would scratch my delicate bosom  
at night.  

So we packed up and fled out here  
with dreams of "being discovered" and  
"making it big" in the wide open west  
curdling in our brains. After 11 days of  
driving 13 hrs/day through the deepest  
South, passing so many billboards for  
Christ that Christianity seemed the  
whole reason for existence in the South,  
we finally arrived in San Francisco to  
begin the complete downfall of our  
lives, our hopes, and what few feelings  
of well-being this society had thus far  
allowed us.  

Before I go on to illustrate the at-  
mosphere out here that I find so re-  
volting, I want to run down my feelings  
about Christianity so that folks will  
know just where I'm speaking from. I am  
anti-Christian. I think that Christian-  
ity is one of the most evil and danger-  
ous phenomenons to infect society. I  
think that being pro-Christian has al-  
ways meant being anti-Semitic and that  
Christians have set up an us/them di-  
chotomy (in other words, it's either  
you or me, one of us has to go) which  

Jews and other non-Christians can't ig-  
nore. I myself accept it wholeheartedly  
because I think it's quite true. What  
Christianity has been in this world is  
something that I cannot and will not  
live with. It has been a consistently  
counter-revolutionary and anti-people  
force.  

Now I want to distinguish between  
Christian people and Christianity, be-  
cause there is an important distinction.  
Just like this country is an imperial-  
ist/capitalist nation doesn't mean that  
every person in it is a pig. The Viet-  
namese were always careful to distin-  
guish between the ruling classes in  
American government and the American  
people. And I want to make those divi-  
sions too, because Christianity is first  
and foremost an industry. And like any  
big business you've got your bosses and  
your workers. The masses of Christians  
are oppressed people whose lives are so  
fucked up by poverty and repression  
that the promise of heaven seems about  
the best investment they can make. When  
your life is hell and you are continu-  
ally frustrated in all your goals, work-  
ing towards another more ephemeral success  
(one which you won't know if you've  
blown until it's too late) seems the  
only alternative. The Christian ruling  
class feeds the masses to keep them  
rolling. For example, the Catholic  
Church has got to be one of the major  
landowners of Greece. Don't think that  
those popes and the boys that assist  
them (cardinals, bishops, etc.) could  
afford those fancy satin & velvet  
dresses without millions of collections  
from the laboring masses. Remember that  

The history of our people has been one  
of fighting and surviving heavy racism  
against us. We are perceived as and  
persecuted as a race by anti-Semites.  

Religion has nothing to do with it. All  
those Jews who tried to convert to es-  
cape the German holocaust during W.W.II  
can attest to that fact (if any were  
alive). If there is Jewishness in your  
blood, you are chopped as a Jew. No  
matter that you haven't been in a syn-  
agogue since your brother's bar mitz-  
vah. No matter that you are an atheist.  
If your blood is Jewish you die as a  
Jew. We are a race of people, many of  
whom share a common religion. We are a  
race of people many of whom share a  
common culture. But even if you are a  
hippy eastern meditation freak, if your  
mother was Jewish, you're going to get  
the screw during the same pogrom that  
gets your mother's rabbi. Because we  
are a race of people ALL of whom share  
the same history.  

Now, with that set of politics in  
mind, let me run down an example of the  
kind of welcome we received by our Cali-  
fornia neighbors. Shortly after arriving  
was the 25th anniversary of Israel and  
we heard all over the radio of a big  
fair to be held in celebration. Me and  
Claire, the other Jewish woman in our  
gang, took off to mix with our folks.  
The first booth we entered featured a  
giant Israeli flag with a big cross (as  
in, Christianity) superimposed on it.  

The people behind the booth were pass-  
ing out leaflets advertising a movie  
which they had made on Israel to be  
shown at their evangelical church. Evan-  
gelical, you remember, means pushy.  

Dear friend of the Kennedys, Cardinal  
Cushing? He was one of the biggest slum-  
lords in Boston. I think that most  
Christians are as oppressed by Chris-  
tianity as most non-Christians. The  
only place that we working-class Jews  
are in conflict with the working-class  
Christians is in the anti-Semitic edu-  
cation they receive and often adopt as  
their own.  

In our gang we have several ex-Cath-  
olics and they have really hipped me to  

the specific forms of anti-Semitism  
that they had shoved down their throats  
throughout their Catholic school educa-  
tion. They are taught a lot of crap  
about us "Christ-killers" and too often  
they never even meet a Jew until it's  
too late to counter their indoctrina-  
tion. What has to happen is revolution.  
Only a revolutionary perspective that  
includes anti-Christianity among op-  
pressed people of all religions can  
win.  

The other thing I want to make clear  
is that I think anti-Semitism is a  
form of racism. And Judaism is a race.  
Despite the fact that there are Jews  
of every color, Jews are a single race.  

They're the ones who are into pushing a  
conversion on all the rest of us heathen  
unwashed.  

Right away we were into a hostile  
confrontation and a bit confused as to  
who the hell this fair was for. We  
stopped one of the officials of the fair  
and his defense was that they wanted to  
allow for as “broad a range of parti-  
cipation as possible." I told him that  
his Jewish consciousness must be stuck  
in his wallet between his credit cards  
or something and that he was really  
going a little far in courting gentile  
approval.  

Figuring to placate us, he led us  
off to the Jewish Defense League booth  
where we figured maybe to get hipped  
to something, anything, radical going  
down at this affair. We were wearing  
our Jewish lesbian buttons (lavender  
women's symbol with a Star of David  
inside) and right away some punky JDLer  
asked if they were Jews for Jesus em-  
blems. The fucker didn't even recognize  
the women's symbol! After threatening  
the well-being of his genitalia, he  
readjusted his glasses and began to  
sweat. We told him we were Jewish dykes.