--con't from page 11

an ad must appeal to his desire for autonomy and
freedom from conventional restrictions; to convince
a woman, an ad must appeal to her need to please
the male oppressor.

For women, buying and wearing clothes and
beauty aids is not so much consumption as work.
One of a woman's jobs in this society is to be an
attractive sexual object, and clothes and make-up are
tools of the trade. The chief consumer in this in-
stance is really the man, who consumes woman-as-
sexual-commodity. Similarly, buying food and
household furnishings is a domestic task: it is the
wife’s chore to pick out the commodities that will
be consumed by the whole family. And appliances
and cleaning materials are tools that facilitate her
domestic function. When a woman spends a lot of
money and time decorating her home or herself, or
hunting down the latest in vacuum cleaners, it is
not ideal self-indulgence (let alone the result of
psychic manipulation) but a healthy attempt to find

outlets for her creative energies within her circum-
scribed role.

There is a persistent myth that a wife has
control over her husband's money because she gets
to spend it. Actually, she does not have much more
financial autonomy than the employee of a corpora-
tion who is delegated to buy office furniture or
supplies. The husband, especially if he is rich, may

allow his wife wide latitude in spending—he may
reason that since she has to work in the home she is
entitled to furnish it to her taste, or he may simply
not want to bother with domestic details—but he
retains the ultimate veto power. If he doesn’t like
the way his wife handles his money, she will hear
about it. In most households, particularly in the
working class, a wife cannot make significant ex-
penditures, either personal or in her role as object-
servant, without consulting her husband. And more
often than not, according to statistics, it is the
husband who makes the final decisions about furni-
ture and appliances as well as other major expendi-
tures like houses, cars, and vacations.

Consumerism is the outgrowth of an aristo-
cratic, European-oriented anti-materialism based on
upper-class ressentiment against the rise of the vul-
gar bourgeois. Radical intellectuals have been at-
tracted to this essentially reactionary position (Her-
bert Marcuse’s view of mass culture is strikingly
similar to that of conservative theorists like Ernest
Van Den Haag) because it appeals to both their
dislike of capitalism and their feeling of superiority
to the working class. This elitism is evident in radi-
cals’ conviction that they have seen through the
system, while the average working slob is brain-
washed by the media. (Oddly, no one claims that
the ruling class is oppressed by commodities; it
seems that rich people consume out of free choice.)
Ultimately this point of view leads to a sterile
emphasis on individual solutions—if only the be-
nighted would reject their “plastic” existence and
move to East Village tenements—and the conclusion
that people are oppressed because they are stupid or
sick. The obnoxiousness of this attitude is com-
pounded by the fact that radicals can only maintain
their dropout existence so long as plenty of brain-
washed workers keep the economy going.

Consumerism as applied to women is blatantly
sexist. The pervasive image of the empty-headed
female consumer constantly trying her husband’s
patience with her extravagant purchases contributes
to the myth of male superiority; we are incapable
of spending money rationally; all we need to make
us happy is a new hat now and then. (There is an
analogous racial stereotype—the black with his Cad-
illac and loud shirts.) The consumer line allows
movement men to avoid recognizing that they ex-
ploit women by attributing women’s oppression
solely to capitalism. It fits neatly into already exist-
ing radical theory and concerns, saving the move-
ment the trouble of tackling the real problems of
women’s liberation. And it retards the struggle
against male supremacy by dividing women. Just as
in the male movement, consumerism encourages rad-
ical women to patronize and put down other wom-
en for trying to survive as best they can, and main-
tains individualist illusions.

If we are to build a mass movement we must
recognize that no personal decision, like rejecting
consumption, can alleviate our oppression. We must
stop arguing about whose lifestyle is better (and
secretly believing ours is). The task of the women’s
liberation movement is to collectively combat male
domination in the home, in bed, on the job. When
we create a political alternative to sexism, the con-
sumer problem, if it is a problem, will take care of
itself.

12

WOOSTER OHIO WOMEN'S LIBERATION

I've been trying to write something for the sisters who are putting out
this paper for two months now; it's been hard—I have to be open and truth-
ful with you and we all know our third grade teachers taught us to mind our
own business and never to trust anyone. What sweet old ladies they were—
from the top of their false hair to the tips of their fake fingernails. The
saddest part is that they thought they were real.

We have two specific fights in store for us; right in front of our noses
—reach out and touch them.... These are the liberation of all women and
the total Revolution, culminating in liberation for all of the People.
There is a very obvious dichotomy here—these struggles are united and dep-
endent upon each other, and yet, we must separate ourselves enough to keep
from slipping back into the pit that we are successfully pulling out of now.

Many of us have had experience with "radical" and "revolutionary" men on
campus and elsewhere; they vow their support, etc., but when the shit comes
down they become extremely difficult to find. We must mature within our-
selves before we can presume to fight for total liberation for all. We
must organize, educate and develop in every way possible. Only then will
we be able to take the actions that are imperative for us to undertake.

This doesn't mean that we will waste our time sitting around on our asses
for years or months or weeks to come. The Revolution is here, rebellions
are occurring daily and our brothers and sisters are getting busted alto-
gether too often. Time is short, so we must use it to our best advantage.
It is necessary for us to develop a true sisterhood. We have to pull our-
selves together and become a cohesive group before we can confront the Man.
Once this is done, the Revolution will be realized in its fullest. We have

to know each other and trust, really trust each other.

The sisters at the College of Wooster are trying to work in this direc-
tion. We can't be presumptuous to say we have achieved our ends, but we're
working toward them. We want and dream of a solidarity between all of our
sisters, everywhere. Several concrete methods of obtaining this goal have
been discussed among us and we would like to share them with you. (Of
course, this paper is a beginning step and the abortion fund spoken about
in the first issue of Ain't I A Woman is another.)

One of these ideas is the development of an information center and a

law commune of female attorneys.

If we have some sisters who know how to beat the pigs at their own game,

we'll be golden.

If we have a fund established for bail, we can never be

handicapped or silenced by the jailing of our sister. Face it, if we are
to achieve our goals, we will face confrontations with the pigs' laws. It
is best to be prepared, none of us has time to waste in a cell. The need
for this is obvious, Joan Bird as an example. It took 15 months to gather
sufficient bail for this sister. We, also, need sisters who know the law,

can fight it, and educate us about it.

The information center would contain facts about abortion counseling and
referral services, hiring, courses, Women's Liberation groups, etc. It
would enable us to increase communication and cooperation between all our

sisters.

I hope that my thoughts have been coherent. My mind is all messed up,
a good friend that I love very much died recently (thanks to the pigs) and
it aids me in. How selfish some of us are when someone we love is gone.

Really though, the main point we want to make is one that we've learned
as individuals and are beginning to realize collectively. We, as sisters,
love each other, let's not let that love and our beliefs be torn down by
things and situations that are easily avoided or eliminated. Let's get

ourselves together.

All Roads Lead to the Revolution, College of Wooster

Women's Liberation Front

2 MR RR R D N ATE

MILWAUKEE WOMEN'S CENTER OPENING

August 10th the Milwaukee West
Side Women's Center will open. The
center will be run by a collective
of women from various women's lib-
eration groups in Milwaukee.

Our immediate plans include a
bookstore, lending library, sex
discrimination complaint center, a-
bortion and birth control counsel-
ing, room for meetings and just
plain rapping.

Long term plans include working
with welfare rights, women GI's,
junior high school women, elderly
women, day care center, setting up
a complete health center, and a
free-university. Hopefully we will
become a coordinating center for
anything that affects our sisters.

The address of the center is:

West Side Women's Center
2110 W. Wells Street
Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53233

Since this is a new center they
need all the help that we can give
them. Go over and see your sisters
at the center, write to them, and
send them any material that you
think they may be able to use.

Ain't I A Woman?

“THIS IS YOUR PROPERTY. IT CANNOT
LEGALLY BE TAKEN FROM YOU FOR ANY REASON.”
A paper called Left Face is on the
defensive against what they call the
United States of America Department of
Offense. It is published by the GIs-

WACs United Against the War, for ser-
vicemen and servicewomen. GIs-WACs has

more than the usual amount of bureaucra-
tic bullshit to cut through, whether it
is planning an anti-war festival ("City
officials told us that threats had been
made against our lives by certain police
officers.") or having to go to court for
the right to distribute Left Face. Their
address is P.O. Box 1595, Anniston,
Alabama, 36201.

An article of particular interest to
women in the services concerns the hon-
orable discharge given two WACs for
homosexuality. Aided by the Los Angeles
Gay Liberation Front, the women were the
first in what may be a growing number of
lesbian women to force the army to change
its routine persecution of female homo-
sexuals. According to Left Face, twenty
seven other WACs, mostly from Fort Mc-
Clellan, have asked the Gay Liberation
Front for assistance in obtaining honor-
able discharges.

It's especially important to see

some action by women in the services—

men aren't the only servicemen sold
into slavery for a few precious years
of their lives. Right on, GIs—WACs
United Against the War! And right on,
Left Face!

Vol. 1, No. 4 Ain’t I A Woman