LETTERS TO AILAW

Dear Sisters,

As I write this, I have no particular
thing to say and no particular reason
for writing, except that I'm so goddam
excited about your paper and look forward
to every issue. It's the only gay paper
I've found that relates in almost every
way to my own politics. I read Spectre
and The Furies, and at a gut level, since
I resent men so much, I identify with
their separatist consciousness. But I've
been thinking a lot about the roots of this
fucked-up society—sexism, racism, and the
rest—and I just can't buy the idea that
sexism is the primary contradiction. I
guess that I've been convinced by the
people I live with (my lover; a straight
woman (feminist); and her husband (anti-
sexist), all of whom are Marxists, that
capitalism could change to accept homo-
sexuality and equal rights for women, but
that sexism will never disappear without
socialism (i.e., a revolution). At the
same time (because of that gut-level re-
sentment and distrust of men) I am ex-
tremely suspicious of the socialist
countries that now exist and don't really
understand why even socialist men would
not benefit by maintaining control over
women. I guess I'm afraid of being in-
tellectually convinced to work for a
working-class revolution (which means
also working for working-class men) when
I feel that I have to work for/with gay
women first.

Despite my lower-middle-class origins,
I've increased my mobility through a college
education and professional training (li-
brarian). I've just been fired from my
first professional job, but I can't pre-
tend that my options are as limited as if
I had no education and no contacts. I can
make some money by writing and could al-
ways do substitute work for librarians in
a large city school system. I could not
handle a shit job. And I could not work
with working-class women, because I know
my middle-class values and preoccupations
would show, regardless of my desire to the
contrary. What I'm trying to say is, I
have to work where I fit best—yet I can't
stand liberals and become discouraged try-
ing to make revolutionary change in a mid-
dle-class context (e.g., libraries).

In short, I am pretty fucked-up as to
what to do, where to start, what context I
can work best in. I am very isolated—my
lover and I are the only gay women with
feminist, let alone Marxist, consciousness
at this middle-class college. We get into
Washington, D.C. every week or so, but
would find it difficult to take active
parts in the movement there. I will be
without a job (or, really, the need for one)
for a year while my lover finishes school.
I am excited to have so much time to read
and write and get my head together, but am
afraid of falling into an aimless, undis-
ciplined, undirected kind of existence.

I guess I am writing not for sug-
gestions or even support, but just to say
it on paper, to know what it is. And, of
course, to let you know, for whatever it's
worth, that I support you and learn and
gain strength from you.

With my love and thanks,

Dear Sisters:

I have been willing to write to you for a
long time but I never had the money to send
for the newspaper. Just today I won the
first prize in a poster contest. My pos-
ter was really stupid but I'm really glad

I won the money so I can have your infor-

mation. I was really excited when I got your let-

ter and I really thank you, you are so
nice.

Page 2

"A FINNISH PEASANT GIRL"

BY ELLEN THESLEFF, PAINTER
DONE IN THE LATE EIGHTEEN-HUNDREDS

PHOTO BY JUNE SMITH

I don't like these people here, they are
conservative, prejudiced, phony...I just
met a black boy I like to talk to but I
don't even dare to ask to go out with him
because my American mother is very strict
and always cares about reputation. My
mother in Italy is strict too but we have
quarrels and then I usually do what I want:
She thinks I'm the one in the family who
goes out of the right way. I have one bro-
ther 8 and one sister 15. I'm 17. (I
hate this word since I've read this Ameri-
can awful magazine "Seventeen").

I'm ashamed to say, in my town in Italy
we don't have any WL. I'm the only girl
in the Marxist Movement to which I belong.
Sometimes at the meetings other girls come
but they either want to make a good impres-
sion on a boy in the movement, or they come
just to see but don't really believe it.
Our movement works in the Senior High. (It
is two years that the principal cannot de-
cide and act by himself unless he wants
student strikes and sit-ins.) We are try-
ing to have more freedom and power to man-
age the school against the capitalistic
propaganda we are supposed to study.

Volume 2 Number 7

We also work as a political alternative to
the labor organizations that in Italy have
the most power on the working class but
sell themselves to the managerial class.
They really don't want any substantial
change. Last year was really hot and ma-
ny of us got denounced. This is one of
the main reasons that my mother let me
come to the United States. My friends wrote
that they had a day sit-in on the railroad
and occupied the train station. This for
a factory which closed leaving hundreds of
women without work, when it couldn't close
by law. The case was really complicated
and we have been studying the papers
for 1 year. We got the original papers
photocopied illegally and since even the
government is implicated it is a really
bad thing, and some press and the public
authorities are trying to keep it under
silence.

I guess my mother is happy I'm here. I'm
not too happy. I want all the papers so
far (1 volume) for the $2.75 and the new
ones you can send me for the rest of the
money. When it's finished let me know.
I'm so excited I look forward to reading them.
I would have so many things to ask you but
I think I'll wait to read the papers.

I have a subscription to an Italian radical
magazine, it's one of the most important
in Italy. My father got it for me as a
present. My father is not too bad, he is
what we call a "left intellectual". They
don't think too bad, but they don't act
at all and are not glad when their daugh-
ters act.

I hate the American dating. I'm not used
to dating boys. All of them are my friends
and companions and eventually sexual part-
ners. But I have never fallen in love or
never thought that one can be "my" boy-
friend. Most of the time they enjoy you as a
sexual object and don't even care about your
deepest self.

I really don't believe in love. The right-
est and best form of love I have ever ex-
perienced with people, regardless of age
and sex, is a deep sincere mutual communi-
cation and understanding. Friendship.

Occasionally I do feel hurt when the boys
I have relations with prefer other girls
or start relations with other girls. This
comes from the education and conditioning
and inhibitions I have received. My re-
lations with boys are free and I feel I
am free but sometimes I feel my freedom
causes loneliness. I'm sure I will mat-
ure and leave these stupid teenage feel-
ings. And I really don't see any other
way I could be. What do you think of men?
Do you refuse men? I don't. Some of them
I really can't stand, but some (I have
found them only among radicals) are good
friends. Since you can have many friends
and you can enjoy sex with many people,
you can have free relations with many men
at the same time.

Here is where my frustrations start. What
do you think? Do you avoid relations with
men? I know some WL avoid men and have
homosexual relations, but I really don't
feel any sexual attraction toward women.
It is true that after relations with men
I feel exploited, even if I do recognize
that they didn't exploit me more than I
did exploit them.

At this point I'm lost.

My mother also is calling for dinner. I'm
sorry I didn't answer right after your let-
ter but I thought I could have money in a
few days. Say hi to everyone in WL. Ex-
cuse my English. I hope you can under-
stand. Thank you for everything.

Love,

Ain't I