Sometimes I think people get too hung up trying to figure out whether they're into roles, when the really important thing about a relationship is whether it helps the people to become stronger. But she sure hated me. That was all so awful anger. Jesse found out that at least the people in our house don't want power over each other. She realized how much she trusts me.

Last summer I started a relationship with a woman who seems in lots of ways to be very butch. She had a short dykey haircut, is strong and tough-looking; the way she moves is very confident, and she feels more confident about getting angry and getting into fights than I do.

Although we swore to everyone we weren't monogamous, we spent all our time together in this real intense relationship for about a month. During that month I started to feel really femmy and un-together and afraid we were into roles. Finally we had to have a big talk about it and our relationship changed so much that for a while I was afraid it was over. But during the next couple of months I really pulled myself together a lot more and started to deal with a lot of things in myself I was afraid of.

A lot of what I thought were roles turned out to be class differences and differences because Jesse had known she was gay all her life. As I got stronger, things changed. I felt less threatened by Jesse's strength as I became surer of my own. And I worried less about whether I was in roles or being classist, although of course I still was at times—I just tried to deal with things in a more realistic and less defensive way.

Since Jesse was lower class and especially since she knew that, being gay, she'd have to depend on herself (and not a husband or boyfriend) for what she needed in this world, she had to learn to be tough. Since I was brought up in an upper-middle-class Jewish family, everybody expected me to snare a man to protect me and my family, to have a maid who'd take care of my housework, and to depend on money or connections to get me what I needed. Being an independent woman in their terms meant getting a high degree and having a professional career as well as motherhood. I tried to rebel against this dependent, stifling role I was being pushed into. But I didn't realize how deep it went. Things I thought were just different approaches to a problem turned out to have their roots in class. Like I would try to get Jesse to sit down and talk out disagreements, but Jesse didn't trust that. She was used to people in positions of power over her talking and talking about things but never doing anything to change them.

I thought she was being cruel to me and bragging about her butchiness when she kept prodding me about how I was incapable of taking care of myself and how afraid I'd be without anybody there. But she was trying to get me to become tougher and more self-sufficient. Eventually I understood that. But even when what we did seemed really mean, we still cared for each other—that was why it was so intense. So we were both miserable.

There were some really ugly times then—god, it all seemed so crazy sometimes: One night we were up in Maine and we dropped some psilocybin. At first it was nice, just getting off on nature—a crawfish, a loon crying, colorful mushrooms. Then I wanted to make love and she didn't. For Jesse that symbolized my dependence on her. Finally she started to make love to me, but she was so angry I felt like I was being raped by a man. (That was so traumatic Jesse can't even remember it.) We stopped and tried to talk. She kept hammering away at me about how pitifully dependent I was. I felt like she was so sadistic. "You're trying to fuck with my head," I accused. "You're damn right," she answered. I was pretty bitter at first and jealous of how into each other they were. I wanted to be close to other women emotionally and physically, but I was afraid of repeating the same intense pain of feeling over again that I lost myself in someone else. After stumbling my way through the beginning of another dependent relationship, I decided celibacy at times is better than fucking anyone else up, and me too, any more. Now Jesse and I both have sexual relationships with other women. We feel good about that, although when one of us is feeling lonely it does make us more aware of that to see the other one getting really into someone. But it's not as though love relationships are our whole lives—there are other things we're involved in. And the time we spend with each other is important to both of us.

I really feel good about our relationship now, but we've been through a lot of shit. It's not like everything's how I'd like it to be ideally, either. For one thing, although we've lived together all this time we haven't actually made love in months even though lots of times we're feeling very close and sexual and are necking and playing around with each other. We keep saying, "One of these nights." And I'm still not as physically strong as I'd like to be, and am still too materially secure in some ways. Jesse has other things I guess she's trying to work out.

I wrote this down to try and encourage other sisters to really know themselves and love each other. To love ourselves we must be strong.

avi

a Woman? 30 March 1972 Page 3