never broken out of a simplistic political decision but only when
and if consciousness of oppression makes them so inconsistent with
self-respect that they can no longer be borne. Even then it is
with enormous pain and grief and in spite of an ever-reluctant
part of ourselves that we separate from men we have cared for. I
firmly believe that one can be a serious feminist and still live
with and relate to a man and to men. The gulf that is between us
is not that, but rather that you allow men to rule on your politics.

Believe me, I understand your side of it. I've been on that
side - I've practically drowned on that side. Over a year ago I
wrote an introduction to a book of the prison letters of Sam Nel-
ville, a man I loved and lived with who was killed in the Attica
uprising of September 1971. I was already a feminist when I wrote
that introduction and had theoretically rejected the politics that
Melville had taught me and that he had lived and died for. Yet I
had never found the courage or the words to tell him that while he
lived, and especially while influenced by the powerful feelings
that his murder aroused in me, I was incapable of writing the
truth of his male supremacy - that underside of men's lives that
only women know - in my eulogistic essay on his life. Since this
is the last time I will ever write about him, I would like to tell
some of that truth here.

CoyW

I was very much pressured, against my own sense of tactics and
timing, into playing the role I did in the group of radical bombers
Melville half-led, half-dragged along with him. The pressure was
of the kind peculiar and common to male-female relationships: he
constantly threatened to leave me if I backed out. What he valued
in me, besides having a dependable sexual partner and housekeeper,
was what he took to be my "independence" and "self-sufficiency" -
as he often told me. This made me useful to him as an ally, and
further assured him that I had the quality he prized above all
others in women: the capacity to love him devotedly, yet get along
without him uncomplainingly whenever he chose to leave. The last
letter I received from him exhorted me against writing narrow-
mindedly of loving and needing him, instead of writing about great
social truths (the ones he was concerned with, that is). "To speak
of love, especially love between one desperate man and woman, limits
our vision and ties us to the past." Yet the same letter ends on
an explicitly sexual note: "Yes, sweet bitch, I love you. And if
they ever let me out and the wind is right, I'll find you." This
was typical; he would never "degrade" himself by admitting love
for a woman in any fashion not immediately tied to his sexual
pleasure.

A few months before we were arrested, Sam began a secret affair
with a woman friend of ours whom I hadn't seen in some time. In
order to keep us from comparing notes on his behavior, he told her
he was no longer living with me. He also at least hinted to her
that the sabotage of military and corporate buildings around the
city was the work of himself and friends. I discovered his betray-
al only by the coincidence of having acquaintances in common with
the other woman, acquaintances to whom she had repeated Sam's
hints. To this day I don't know how many other dangerous, possibly
fatal, violations of security his masculinist need to boast led
him to commit.

Some will say Melville's sexism was extreme just as his politics
were extreme. Yet I have seen his behavior duplicated in the most
bourgeois households by males of all political persuasions, econ-
omic backgrounds, ages and skin colors. I never knew Sam to cook
a meal for himself; he once wrote WASH ME in black magic marker
on the side of the refrigerator as a cute reminder of my responsi-
bilities; he threatened to leave me, and meant it, if I took up
smoking cigarettes after having given them up to please him; he
wouldn't allow our lease, our telephone, our utilities bill, our
bank account or anything else we shared to be in his name on the
ostensible grounds that he was delinquent with his income tax and
didn't want to be found through public records. The real reason,
it turned out, was that he didn't want his wife to find him and
demand the child support he owed her and hadn't paid in years.

He was sexually impotent unless he could fantasize the woman
he was with as a prostitute and she went along with his fantasy.

At one point Sam joined a political group headed by Rap Brown.
This group's attitude toward women was bigotry itself: they didn't
include any and they didn't intend to. According to Brown himself,
as quoted by Melville, women would be "a distraction from serious
business." When I confronted Sam on this, he seemed slightly en-
barrassed but wouldn't even commit himself to discussing male su-
premacy with his new idol, Rap Brown. Recalling this, I'm reminded
ironically of the division of all-Black bomber pilots stationed
out of Texas during World War II who, despite phenomenal sacri-
fices and heroism were forbidden the supposed privilege of being
integrated with White battalions. How strange it is that not only
the man I lived with but one of the most brilliant and sophisto-
cated Black militants of the 1960s should turn out to have the
same kind of crass ignorance about women.

"And so, my sisters in Weatherman, you fast and organize and
demonstrate for Attica. Don't send me news clippings about it,
don't tell me how much those deaths moved you.

I will mourn the loss of 42 male supremacists no longer.

6 volume 3 number 4

Part II: The Education of a Feminist At-Large

My first year underground was very hard. Expecting to die for
the Revolution in a matter of months, I was unprepared to find my-
self not only alive but living a rather unadventurous and secluded
existence less than a year after "disappearing." I found it in-
creasingly difficult to get along with the friends with whom I was
still in touch, especially with the men who were becoming increas-
ingly overbearing and critical of my actions, as I was growing in-
creasingly sensitive to their interference. Chafing at every re-
striction, hostile even to the one woman friend I really cared for,
I finally decided to take off on my own, reasoning that it couldn't
get much worse. I started to travel and for a few months just
roamed, almost aimlessly, from one community to another across the
country.

As I traveled, I slowly became aware that nothing was less rele-
vant to the lives of most people in this country than the white
left, with which I still identified myself. The leftist (and right-
ist, for that matter) distinctions between working class and ruling
class, hippies and straight people, youth and Establishment, all
seemed increasingly absurd to me. They seemed to determine nothing
of certainty about anyone's attitude or political outlook. As I
moved around I could see more clearly than ever the oppression of
Black, Chicano, Puerto Rican and Indian peoples. Yet at the same
time I was learning concretely that women existed in well-defined
subcultures within each White and Third World community. Finally
all my experiences kept reminding me of one fact of my own identity
I was continually trying to forget: that I was a woman. Men, Third
World and otherwise, young and old, hippie and straight, related to
me as Woman, all my other interests or characteristics being, in
their eyes, mere modifications of that one essential. Whether I was
desired, rejected, abused, admired, ignored, treated with kindness
or hostility, it was basically because I was a female doing whatever
it was I was doing. Women generally took their cue of how to relate
to me from the way men related to me, or I to men. It occurred to
me that this was no different from the way people I had known for
years had related to me but because we had known each other well I
had been aware of the subtleties in our relationships to the point
of being blind to the underlying structure. Of course I had heard
feminists express these perceptions before, and had even asserted
them myself occasionally, but I had never internalized them. I now
began to think that if my politics were to be based on my own situ-
ation and not on someone else's perception of reality, I would have
to deal with the fact that the rest of the world thought of me as a
woman first of all, before it even listened to what I had to say.

Together with these discoveries, I began to realize the astonish-
ing impact the Women's Movement has had over the U.S. in just a few
years. I could see women everywhere, White, Black, Brown, Indian,
responding in their daily lives to the fact that some woman some-
where had said, "Men oppress us." I came to know Chicana women liv-
ing in a barrio who were organizing women's health care programs
and women's antirape squadrons to patrol their own neighborhood.

A White woman, mother of three, from a poor Southern family and on
welfare, talked to me with great eloquence about how she saw the
courts, the police, the welfare system and her ex-husband as all
part of the same male-run system, which women needed to take over
and run for their own benefit. A woman I met who had been born
into a wealthy and traditional Japanese family told me she was
filing for divorce against a husband who physically and mentally
abused her because she refused to go through life suffering from
the same causes her mother and grandmother had before her. These
women - all random examples - would not necessarily say or think
that they were part of the Women's Movement. But they demonstrated
to me, among others, that the changing consciousness represented
by the Women's Movement has been more far-reaching than any public-
opinion poll on Women's Liberation would seem to show. As for the
frequently heard opinion that Third World women support Third
World liberation but not Women's Liberation, I believe that this

is true chiefly of a few women who are highly regarded by Third
World male radicals and hence are considered newsworthy by the
media. Among the majority of Third World women, it seems to me

that the Women's Movement is spreading and its ideas are having
increasing effect, just as among White women.

The turning point of my personal rapprochement with feminism
came when, a year after I'd left New York as a fugitive, I joined
a women's tap group composed of a half-dozen other women, of wide-
ly different economic backgrounds, ages and family situations,
brought together only by our common desire - or desperate need -
to talk with other women about our lives. No one in the group
knew who I was, or that I was wanted on a federal warrant. I know,
though, that they all sensed my unspoken inner turmoil (if not the
specific causes of it) and in response gave me more positive emo-
tional and intellectual support than I could have imagined possi-
ble from a group of strangers. They sustained me through the cri-
sis I underwent after Melville's murder and the dramatic upheavals
in my consciousness involved in that experience. Eventually, when
a series of circumstances forced me to leave the area in which I'd
come to know them, they gave me, as a group, the help and strength
I needed to face yet another move into the unknown.

The process of the consciousness-raising group, for me and for
the other women involved, was one in which we began to be able to
define ourselves as individuals and as women. Some of us had pre-
viously conceived of ourselves as exceptional women, some of us
thought being female necessarily meant being passive and dependent,

Responses to Jane Alpert by five Iowa City Dykes follow this article.

a woman?

but it soon became clear that we had come to the group each in a
private panic of no longer knowing who we were. What we discovered
in each other was the pulse of a culture and a consciousness which
was common to us as women. We discovered it as something that had
always been there, but that we had not previously recognized or
felt able to trust. Trusting it - or gaining confidence in our
thoughts, feelings, resentments, desires and intuitions as attri-
butes that we shared as a people and which were therefore valid -
became the basis of beginning to trust ourselves as individuals.

I believe that the struggle to define oneself for oneself ulti-
mately takes place in a realm of the mind in which one is always
alone and unsupported. For some women the existence of a women's
group or even a Women's Movement has not been a necessary precon-
dition of that struggle. Individual women of genius - artists,
scientists, philosophers, activists and visionaries - have left us
written and other evidence to prove that throughout the history of
patriarchy some women have found it possible to call upon their
inner powers to create and achieve and succeed. For each of these
women, many others who were unable to leave us records have man-
aged to define their individuality and assert themselves in the
face of enormous male hostility. And yet the evidence we have
proves ultimately only that no matter how many obstacles are in
the way, a few women will possess the ability, determination and
special privilege to overcome them. In considering social change
it is of much more significance that today's Women's Movement has
encouraged thousands of women who would never have done so before
to discover and develop their unique talents, and to stand up
against male prerogatives and values with originality and courage.
Moreover, as increasing numbers of women are turning to art, sci-
ence and other creative efforts, a truly female - that is, a fem-
inist - culture is beginning to take shape. It seems little short
of miraculous that with so little in the way of facilities - still
very few research grants, little access to the best laboratories,
to substantial publishing contracts and the like, our own culture
has nevertheless managed to take root and flourish. Feminist news-
papers, literary magazines, cooperative childcare centers, anthro-
pology collectives, legal clinics, poetry workshops, self-help
medical clinics, counseling services, music groups and graphics
collectives are a few of the new-born alternative institutions
providing the access for women whose values and vision are unac-
ceptable to the patriarchy, or who choose not to pay the artistic
and emotional price exacted by men in exchange for a share of
male privilege. Even more significantly, the products of these al-
ternative institutions (and of the individual women involved with
them or working on their own) are qualitatively different from the
products of men and male institutions. For instance, a feminist
all-women's rock band sounds different from a male rock band or
from an all-women's rock band trying to reproduce male music; they
are not only singing different lyrics but the melodies and harmon-
ies and rhythms are different. Feminist anthropologists are ap-
proaching their subject from a different perspective and with dif-
ferent assumptions than male anthropologists, or women anthropolo-
gists in the past who had only male-defined standards and methods
at their disposal. Feminist teachers are creating a different style
of classroom situation with their women students. Feminist lawyers
are helping their clients to use the law to help themselves. All of
us are not engaged in such activities but many of us share in the
changing consciousness that these women are expressing publicly.
And in light of the accomplishments already generated from this
changing consciousness, I think we need to take another look not
only at the old male-supremacist assumptions about women's "nature"
but also at some of the assertions of the Women's Movement so far.
Just what is the powerful source of this consciousness?

For centuries feminists have asserted that the essential differ-
ence between women and men does not lie in biology but rather in
the roles that patriarchal societies (men) have required each sex
to play. The motivation for this assertion is obvious: women's bi-
ology has always been used to justify women's oppression. As patri-
archal reasoning went, since "God" or "nature" or "evolution" had
made woman the bearer and nurser of the species, it logically fol-
lowed that she should stay home with the children and perform as a
matter of more-or-less ordained duty all the domestic chores invol-
ved in keeping and feeding a household. When women work outside the
home we have the most menial and lowest-paid tasks to perform,
chiefly because any labor a woman performs outside the home is
thought to be temporary and inessential to her, no matter how she
herself might be inclined to regard it. Naturally then, the first
healthy impulse of feminism is to deny that simply because women
have breasts or uteruses we are better suited to wash dishes, scrub
floors or change diapers. As newly-roused feminists, we retorted to
evidence that women might be intrinsically better suited to perform
some roles than others by pointing out that men have been forcing
these roles on us for at least five thousand years. After such time
conditioning and habit are so strong that they appear to be intrin-
sic and innate.

However, a flaw in this feminist argument has persisted: it con-
tradicts our felt experience of the biological difference between
the sexes as one of immense significance. To begin with, it seems
obvious that biology alone would, in primitive societies, have dic-
tated different roles and different powers as appropriate to each
sex. And biological scientists have indeed assumed, for the most
part, that the physical passivity of the female mammal during inter-
course and the demands of pregnancy, childbirth and nursing clearly
indicate the role of women as biologically determined, and inferior.
In response to this, Shulamith Firestone, with the publication of
The Dialectic of Sex in 1970, articulated the definitive feminist
antithesis to this idea by denouncing biology as reactionary.
Agreeing that biology had necessarily been an all-powerful deter-
minant of social roles in the past, Firestone went on to argue
that the advances of technology made this tyranny potentially ob-
solete. Women are still enslaved to their bodies not because of
biology but because the patriarchy will not permit the use of
technology to interfere with men's power over women. However, in