FREE ABORTION  
On Demand  

Initially, the question of whether or not  
all women should have control over their bod  
ies, through legalized abortion, appears to  
be a very simple issue. “But of course! All  
women should have control of their bodies and  
abortion should be legal! However, the abor-  
tion issue is much more complex than it ap-  

pears at first glance. Recently, abortion  
has been one of the very few Women's Libera-  
tion demands that has been an issue taken up  
by people outside of the movement. For years,  
small groups of people have been debating the  
church's stand on abortion and discussing  
under what circumstances women should be allow-  
ed to obtain abortions. In several states  
form legislation has been passed to extend the  
unusual circumstances under which women can  

obtain an abortion. Abortion is an issue  
which is being dealt with in the system today,  
and it is  

an issue that gives the illusion  
that something constructive may be done.  

However, as one gets deeper into the issue,  
she finds that there are all sorts of possib-  
ilities for an abortion demand. Is the abor-  
tion demand a revolutionary issue--if so, how?  
What type of demand is non-cooptable? Are we  
really thinking in middle-class terms?  

It is very easy to fall into a white, priv-  
ileged, middle-class bag on abortion repeal.  
In a fascist pig society abortion repeal can  
still become just another tool of oppression.  
The fight for women to have control over their  
own bodies is an important fight around which  
the whole issue of putting medical care into  

the hands of the people can be organized.  

To get out of the privileged class and color  
bag, we must fight for and demand several  
things on the abortion issue. First, the  

woman must be the one who finally decides  
whether or not she is to have an abortion.  
This final decision should always rest in her  
hands, and under no circumstances should any-  
one of the medical profession perform an abor-  
tion without first consulting her. Also,  
under no circumstances should a hysterectomy  
or any other type of sterilization be perform-  
ed unless the woman fully desires it. Finally,  

the decision must rest in her hands, not in her parents' or husband's  

hands.  
In this society legalized abortion would  

be the equivalent of mass legalized genocide  

of lower classes and non-whites. Even today,  
abortion and contraceptive information is  
seen as a means to limit the population of  
low-income people and third world people.  
Bourgeois whites believe that people only have  
the right to raise as many children as they  
can financially support comfortably. My God,  
what a fantastic line, to support not only  
the right but the necessity for the rich to  
propagate and prosper while the poor do not  
even have the right to exist. This type of  
genocide of the poor and the third world must  
not be tolerated any longer!  

Next, the oppressed people of the world  
must no longer be viewed as a vast pool of  
guinea pigs. Their inability to pay the  
prices demanded for contraception and abor-  
tion (be it legal or illegal) is no excuse  
to prey upon them and use them in experiments  
of the so-called free health clinics. Hence,  
abortion demands must include free abortion  
upon demand for all. However, even so,  
abortion, contraception, and sterilization  
services must be the same for all and indis-  
criminate as to class or color.  

Also, as mentioned, abortions must be free.  
Even if abortions are legalized, it will do  
poor people no good to have abortion services  
that they cannot even afford. Legal abortions  
in hospitals and special clinics now cost the  
woman from $200 to over $600. Where is any  
poor or even any young unmarried sister going  
to find that kind of money? For women without  
money, legalized abortion might just as well  
not even exist. Poor women will still have  
to resort to self-induced butchery if abor-  
tion is not free. If medical services in this  
country began to serve the needs of women,  
vacuum aspiration would be a common, very  
inexpensive abortion method which could be  
used in a majority of cases. However, we are  
told that these machines are very difficult  
to buy and still in the "experimental" stage.  
That is not true. In fact, they are being  
widely used in Japan, Russia, and Eastern  
Europe. An abortion with a vacuum aspirator  
takes about five minutes, is inexpensive, and  

is safer (statistics from countries where it  
is in use show) than any other method now  
available. Even where legal abortion is  
available, the more expensive and more dan-  
gerous D and C (dilation and curettage) is  
being used. This only goes to point out that  
the system (specifically medical care) is not  
serving the people.  

Free abortion upon the demand of the woman  
is not a middle-class demand. All women  
have the right to personal control over their  
bodies. If this choice is placed in the hands of  
women and is made free, along with other med-  
ical services, then there is no way that the  
present system can provide this for the people.  
To think that these needs can be met in the  
present system and then to accept compromises  
(such as abortion reform, or legal but ex-  
pensive abortion) is middle-class and is the  
kind of cooptation we should avoid. We should  
be under no illusions that free abortion  
upon demand is anything but a revolutionary  
demand. This should always be kept in mind,  
as should the fact that we are fighting for  
all people and that abortion is only one  
small piece of the whole struggle.  

Genocide  

Often it is difficult to understand how  
abortion can be genocide, but working in a  
University Hospital, I know that poor people  
and third world people come in classified as  
PI (patient indigent) or clinical pay (re-  
ceiving state aid). This means they immediate-  
ly are placed on a ward and have students tak-  
ing care of them under the direction of a re-  
sident doctor. Questions are asked and forms  
are filled out. If the woman is having any  
difficulty at all with her pregnancy, and if  
she has a poor family background (that is  
lots of kids, bad relationships with her hus-  
band, on welfare, unhealthy living conditions,  
etc.) then she is a perfect candidate for an  
abortion. I can see all those young eager  
faces trying to convince her that medically  
it is the best thing she could do. Then also,  
there are all the added advantages of one less  
mouth to feed. Any time a poor white or third  
world woman goes into a clinic for a check-up  
you know she's going to be asked all types of  
questions on just how she intends to take care  
of the child. Of course things look grim for  
her, and in the system's usual half-assed manner  
the solution will be to get rid of a symptom  
and not the cause. This means providing abor-  
tion services. Hence, abortion will become just  
one more shabby attempt to help out the poor  
people.  

There can be no doubt that legalized abor-  
tion will become mass genocide for the poor.  
Abortion can be made into a very simple pro-  
cedure that any medical student could perform.  
However, poor women obtain health care from  
clinics where they have next to nothing to  
say about the type of service and what service  
they get. You had better believe that if white  
upper-class America has in its head that only  
people who can comfortably support kids should  
have them--then that's what will be imposed on  
poor women in the clinics.  

The right of every woman to have free and adequate birth control and free  
safe abortion upon demand is one we do not question. Neither do we question  

whether birth control can be used in a genocidal way against the poor, minor-  

ity, and third world peoples. We know it can be. We know it has been. The  
problem is that women have no control over the medical care we do or do not  

receive and this is the control we must fight for.  

We must be prepared to fight the use of birth control on any woman against  
her will. But we see the availability of birth control as something we must  
have.  

September 11, 1970  

We refuse to be counted by the arguments that inevitably come up when women  
demand the things they see as necessary. The arguments by men for birth con-  
trol (meaning free sex for them) or the arguments against birth control (mean-  
ing keep them pregnant and barefoot) were easier to answer than the argument  
that our demands could cause the genocide of poor and third world people.  

The genocide of poor and third world people will not be caused by women who  
have demanded free adequate medical care. It is caused by those who have the  
power by a sexist and racist medical industry and the confrontation with the real enemy.  
To blame women is to avoid  

We know too well that demanding free medical care (birth control in-  
cluded) is to demand only part of what is needed. Poor women will not be-  
come unpoor from not having children, nor will the job opportunities or  
activities that poor and uneducated women can spend their time on increase  
in desirability. That is why the fight we wage on this issue cannot be  
separated from the fight we must wage on other issues crucial to all women.  

We believe in self-determination for all people.  
Women have the right to bear as many children as they wish.  
All women have the right to not bear children.  
We will not accept the right to birth control at the expense of the right to bear children.  

WOMEN ATTACK STERILIZATION PROGRAM AS GENOCIDAL  

DOVER, Del. (LNS)--Eighteen women from Wil-  
mington Liberation Collective, a working-class  
organizing project, disrupted a talk on steri-  
lization at Christ Church in Dover on July 29.  
Carrying signs, banners, and leaflets, the  
women took over the microphone and forced the  
audience of about 100 middle-class people to  
consider the social and political implications  
of the new push for sterilization.  

The talk was being sponsored by Zero Popu-  
lation Growth (ZPG), a national organization  
concerned with overpopulation.  

The women said that the threat of overpop-  
ulation, as ZPG talks about it, is a phony is-  
sue used to mislead people. Poverty and star-  
vation are blamed on overpopulation rather  
than on inequitable distribution of resources,  
the real causes. Mass sterilization for wo-  
men and men is the new solution to the "pop-  
ulation problem." Sterilization becomes geno-  
cide.  

ZPG claimed that they only advocated volun-  
tary sterilization, not seeing that steriliza-  
tion is threatening because of who it is in-  
evitably used against, and who controls it.  

ZPG is a middle-class liberal organization  
backed by foundation money which will lobby  
for laws to control population through govern-  
ment "incentive" programs.  

The idea is to make it even more expensive  
to have children, especially more than two.  

It is obvious who would be affected by this  
kind of plan--poor people. Discouraging large  
families not only disregards the cultural tra-  
dition of some ethnic groups, but it also runs  
counter to every demand people are making for  
such things as free day care centers, free  
adequate medical care and preventive medicine  
for families.  

Some members of ZPG didn't understand how  
women who campaigned for free legal abortion  
could fight against liberalizing sterilization  
policies.  

The women explained that the demand for  
free abortion is a reasonable demand of women  
to control their own bodies and to decide when  
they will and when they will not have children.  
It has to be linked to demands for day care  
centers, equal pay, medical care, and safe  
birth control for it to be a free decision.  

While sterilization is not a direct threat to white women, it has already  
affected black and third world women.  

40% of the women in Puerto Rico have been  
sterilized. Foreign aid is now given in  
proportion to the amount of birth control  
measures a country will accept.  

Huge Federal programs to sterilize women  
throughout South America, in India, Pakistan,  
and in Africa are underway.  
In Alabama, a woman on welfare must be  
sterilized after 3 children if she is to con-  
tinue to receive aid, and thousands of minor-  
ity women in New York City, Chicago, and all  
big city hospitals--even in Wilmington, Dela-  
ware--have been unknowingly sterilized with-  
out their permission.  

The leaflet the women handed out said,  

Sterilization is America's new way  
of controlling people. Women have  
never been able to control their own  
bodies. When there was a need for  
cheap labor for factories  
and the frontier, the childless  
woman was a disgrace. Women were  
pressured to produce huge families.  
But today when the poor and young  
are posing a threat to the stability  
of America, every means of birth  
control is being pushed.  

We know that the causes of malnutrition  
and starvation are not because there are  
too many children--but because some  
people own too much and regard-  
less of the situation.