7

they had were unfamiliar. Instead of housework, my friend had to  
take care of her pet dog and pony.  
A goal of revolution is envisioned by some as a classless so-  

| ciety, with no racism, imperialism, sexism, homophobia, i.e. gen-  
| eral equality and justice.  

To have a classless society we must  
create the structure to support that goal. Communes and collec-  
tives have attempted to simulate such a post-revolution atmos-  
phere within the capitalistic democracy of America today. Yet a  
great amount of de-socializing will be necessary before we can  
create a true communal atmosphere.  

Competitiveness, isolation, defensiveness and classism quickly  

' emerged when the communal aspect of the structure just described  

was ended and capitalism was adopted. Because these attitudes  
permeate our present society I conclude they are inherent to cap-  
italism, yet were not displayed to any great extent in the com-  

_ munistic society because attitudes are a result of one's material  

condition and the material conditions of this community were com-  
munistic not capitalistic. Just as changing attitudes without  
changing the material structure of the society is ineffectual so  
are small communities setting up post-revolutionary societies  
within a larger society that's remained materially unchanged.  

~ Racism was not notably displayed. Outsiders associating with  
community people were limited to peddlers, (I don't know what  
nationalities) Indians, Gypsies*, and hobos passing through to  
trade or working for a meal. Chicano, Black and Oriental people  
were not treated any differently when they came than anyone out-  
side to my knowledge. Yet racist attitudes were picked up unques-  

The sexism that existed within the community is obvious.  

“From each according to ability, to each according to need" was the  
practice, but with the assumption that the ability of women was  
less than that of men. The concern for justice and equality in  
this community showed hypocritically through the never-questioned  
role allocated to women. With the advent of capitalism this role  
has been rampantly expanded.  

There are only two places in capitalism: top and bottom. We in-  
dividually compete to be on top just as classism, racism, imper-  
ialism, and sexism propagate the holding down of one group so an-  
other can keep the top position (control, power, affluence). By  
ending the capitalist structure of society and replacing it with  
a structure that better meets our demands for true justice and  
equality, we will likely find ourselves living and working in  
some type of collectivity -- without the present sexist attitudes  
toward women, the racist attitudes toward non-whites, the classist  
attitudes toward poor people. These attitudes that keep us strug-  
gling for our own survival and make us fight each other for fear  
of losing our second-to-last place are the epitome of capitalism,  
and need to be structured out of the post-revolutionary society.  

* We were unsure about the correctness of this word since we  
don't know whether the name is used by a people to identify them-  
selves or if it is a label given them by others and racist in na-  
ture.  

tioningly when the community changed over to capitalism.  

by an AIAW member  

It's just the way people treat me so  
I can never forget that I'm younger. Usu-  
ally, adults see children as totally dif-  
ferent from themselves (the fact that  
there are different words for each group  
proves this.) I am seen as an age and  
judged by it. I have to go along with the  
judgement of adults, since they have more  
power. Like some adults think: "She's  
only 14, so she will only be a bother. I  
know everything she knows, since I'm so  
much older. I'm not going to get to know  
her." How could I get to know someone  
when there's already so much resistance?  
Adults forget that children (I am forced  
to use these words, although I don't like  
to) have a different way of seeing things,  
which they could learn from. Another  
thing that adults will do is they think:  
"I know I'm an age chauvinist. I can  

learn a lot from kids. She's 14; I'll  

have to get to know her better." This is  

a better attitude, but when I'm talking  

to someone like that I still can't forget  
that I'm younger than they are, when  
actually it doesn't make any difference.  
The problem is like that of many oppressed  
groups: people have a stereotype of us  

so we are forced to play roles. Here is  

an example: children are not expected to  
be friends of adults, they are expected  

to be childish. What kind of a word is  
that? Here is the dictionary definition:  

1. befitting a child 2. puerile, silly.  
What adults do often appears silly to  
children, too, except we don't have the  
power to voice our opinions like that.  

I think you can see the problem. Obviously,  
the solution is for adults to give up  

their stereotypes, and see children as  
equals. I'm sure that's not going to be  
easy, but it must be done. Children who  
are used to playing their silliness role  
will have to stop. I know it can be done,  
because I have friends who are adults and  
they treat me like any other friend. I  
hope they don't consider me the exception  
to the rule of Children Are Silly, because  
there are only as many silly children as  
silly adults. Lots of times what adults  
see children doing looks silly to them,  
because they don't understand; they have  
a totally different culture. Of course  
you will only like some children; ones  
with common interests. To me that's ob-  
vious, but I'm afraid it won't be to many  
people. I wrote this so people could see  
the problem more clearly and thus start  
solving it. I hope it works.  

age chauvinism/ children’s liberation/ age chauvinism/ children’s liberation  

High school women are as oppressed on  
the basis of age as on sex. As I live a-  
way from my parents, I'm in a privileged  
position. I'm allowed to make my own de-  
cisions and am considered "mature" by a  
few adults. This adult approval used to  
make me feel superior to other high school  
women.  

Then I considered the meaning of "ma-  
ture." The more powers a woman must fight  
against, the more oppressed she is. Kids  
are more oppressed than other individuals  
because they're UNDER parents and schools  
as well as other oppressive institutions.  
Parents and schools control kids’ lives  
and make major decisions for them. It's  
hard to be an individual if others have  
this power over you. If a year of living  
independently helped me to "mature," then  
it follows that a “mature” person is some-  
one in control of her own life.  

Adults pit kids against kids. Kids  
don't respect each other because they're  
told that adults are wiser. Children are  
less powerful than parents and other adult  
authorities. They are constantly made to  
feel inferior. Adults tell children that  
they need adult guidance. After a person  
is twelve or thirteen, adult control is  
frequently ridiculous. A parent telling a  
kid that half of each weekend must be  
spent with her family wields unjust power.  
Adults refuse to view children as people  
who need to lead their own lives.  

When I worked at various Iowa City day  
care centers, few adults bothered to talk  
to me. I was usually left with the shit  

| work while they sat around and blabbed.  
| Yet if something went wrong I was blamed,  

because I was young and therefore incom-  
petent and inexperienced. A friend my age  

was in a slightly better position, being  

the daughter of a well-known radical male.  

| People occasionally tossed charming grins  

her way, but she was basically regarded  

| as a peon also. Both of us felt bitter  

resentment, and huddled by ourselves mut-  
tering sarcastic statements about our  

~& Woman ?  

+Wo  
WOMEN  

SPEAK  

elders. We were probably as radical and  
intelligent as most of the women there,  
and were more radical than any of the men.  
Sometimes people talked to us until they  
found out our ages, at which point they  
phased out, condescending if they talked to us  
at all.  

Experience comes with age, only because  
young people are prevented from experien-  
cing. I have been leading an “adult” life  
for more than a year, yet I am still treat-  
ed as a child. High school is the supreme  
farce. I am expected to account for my  
absences from class with a note from an  
adult (my own word isn't good enough).  
Teachers refuse to regard me as a person.  
After criticizing a teacher's class and  
suggesting ways to improve it, I was told  
that my thoughts weren't valid. She would  
only change her class if a qualified  
adult made suggestions. So no matter how  
smart, shrewd, keen-eyed and witty I am,  
I'm invisible and inaudible until I grow  
to a magic age and gain some magic quali-  
fications through kissing the asses of a  
lot of messed-up teachers. And if I step  
out of place, they'll beat me back in no  
time because they have the power to do  
what they see fit with me.  

19 May 1974  

I sometimes feel that "right on" adults  
pretend they like me just so they won't  
be age chauvinists. Typically, they ask  
me how school is and I desperately ploy  
for a witty reply. I stammer, my eyes  
water, I can't look at ‘em, and I answer  
in monosyllabic monotones. Yet despite  
this gawkish behavior, my guardian is  
generally informed that they "just really  
like" me. I find such enthusiasm strange  
and possibly token. It's just cool and  
groovy to like a kid. But, my friends:  
would they invite me to a movie or to  
dinner WITHOUT ANOTHER ADULT OR SOME  
OTHER KIDDOS ALONG? Would they want to  
initiate a close friendship with me? Gen-  
erally speaking, hell no! They'll shove  
their politics down my throat (spoon fed)  
and speak with grace and confidence and  
ease. I, who am POISED! CONFIDENT: RADICAL!  
FLUENT! and ARTICULATE! with kids, abrupt-  
ly become wishy-washy and mealy-mouthed.  
Ah, strange phenomena:  

I'm trying to relate more to "adolescents"  
again, because I've found that I'm  
not alone in my paranoid feelings. It was  
once suggested that I was an age chauvin-  
ist, in that I'm paranoid of adults’ at-  
titudes toward me. Oh yeah, just like  
blacks, women, and all those other snivel-  
ling groups are paranoid. I figure that  
even if I am just paranoid, adults still  
have an obligation to try and put me at  
ease. I haven't got the confidence that a  
high school boy might have, and my exper-  
ience has made my paranoia somewhat just-  
ifiable.  

Kids should obviously revolt and leave  
their parents, but unfortunately they  
have few alternatives. Schools are shit,  
they can't get jobs, and they don't have  
any rights. They are regarded more as  
property than as anything else. Millions  
of Pinocchios waiting to turn into persons.  
This Pinocchio sub-culture for children  
would work well if kids weren't people  
and didn't want power over their lives as  
much as adults want power over theirs.  

Page 9