Er

We arrived at Grinnell on Friday night just as the first
snowflakes of the season began to fall. Grinnell is an elite
school, one of those "excellent" undergraduate colleges that
one of the women I went with could have afforded to go to. It's

a 60 mile drive along the interstate, the same distance from Iowa

City as the Quad-Cities area, only in the opposite direction.
I've never been to Grinnell for a women's liberation meeting,

but I have gone the other way, to Davenport to picket with Chicano

women and men who were demanding jobs.

Women who go to Grinnell usually end up in the League of
Women Voters, wives of businessmen and college professors—
inveterate liberals. They can usually afford to be.

The main thing we have in common with the women there
is our needs as women and a commitment to or interest in
Women's Liberation.

When we got to the auditorium the meeting had already
started. We came in just as a woman from Twin Oaks, a com-
mune in Virginia, was talking about their commune—how they
live, what they see as necessary for survival and growth, and
those things she was experiencing. Not much about women, but
I was proud of her, knowing that the same woman had come to
our meetings last year when she was in high school in Iowa City.

I was proud of what she was doing, and struck by her appearance

of agelessness. And I wondered about all the women in her high
school class who, unlike her, never had the choice of rejecting
the university and its way of life. But I did not blame her for

their plight. I think that's something I've learned from women's
liberation.

Then Marlene Dixon came on—not as strong as I've heard
her before, and not as soft either. More controlled, more
burned out. She was talking about why she was getting out of
Women's Liberation. It is a middle class, white organization,
she said, and she went on to detail actions about the Equal
Rights Amendment, blasting women for supporting it. She went
into great detail to explain how women should have been sup-
porting extension of protective laws for men instead, and I
thought, "I've seen this movie before." But we do it in small
groups and we don't confuse our sisters with the women Marlene
is accusing us of being. I thought, she spends too much time
debating with NOW, and I've heard that debate and we've all taken
part in it so many times and who the hell is she talking to? She
belittled those projects we've worked on—but they didn't sound
like our projects—they all sounded like pretty high class, frivo-
lous things.

Then came the clincher—a woman asked whether any effec-

tive work would be done about racism, imperialism, capitalism

while you remained in college, whether maybe you didn't have
to give that up—Marlene replied that there were SOME colleges
and universities where you could do effective work. Wow, I
thought, OUT OF THE DAY CARE CENTERS & INTO THE
COLLEGES, I've been through this movie before. Lay on a
middle-class guilt trip but leave room for yourself.

Nothing that happened after changed my impression of what
Marlene was saying. The most important things to fight are
Capitalism, imperialism and racism, she said. How to do that
except through Women's Liberation she was asked in four differ-
ent ways. What movement will you go to? A lot of us wanted,
and needed, an answer to that. Every time she responded with

a recitation of the horrors of capitalism, racism and imperialism.

I've known about those horrors for a long time, nothing she said

added any dimensions to them, but I have hopes that we can work
to end them through women's liberation. I don't see any other

way.

Marlene lashed out at other women for their liberal camp-
aigns to change laws, I think she knew that we had spent a lot of
time talking with women about that amendment. She talked down
to all of us who have struggled daily to get that message across
and now she was using it against us. Marlene had kind words
for everyone but women: the youth culture had potential if it
became political and it would become political as soon as the
repression came down on it, which was inevitable, she said.
The Black Panthers were the leading edge of revolution and not
to be criticized—although Marlene seems to have forgotten that
she was involved in quite a brouhaha at a Black Panther confer-
ence herself when she was the one "chosen" to represent women.
So Marlene said she was getting out. Where would she go? I'm

still wondering.
I was really proud of the three sisters from our collective
who made the only points relevant to me all night. I'm still
wondering about those points.

Marlene mentioned being at Sky River rock festival, the

fundraising event sponsored by the Seattle Liberation Front, and
she expressed disappointment that the event was non-political.
I thought of our sisters in Fanshen and the Anna Louise Strong

Brigade and their struggles within and without the Seattle
Liberation Front and I thought about how beautiful those sisters
must be. But Marlene didn't mention those sisters, she talked
about how when the repression starts to come down on them,
the youth culture will get political, so it's all for the good.
Later, a woman from our collective got up and elaborated on what
happened to women at Sky River and how three women were raped
and a fourth rape was prevented by a female chauvin patrol.
Only then did Marlene respond with any knowledge of how women
were treated at Sky River. Somehow she didn't make any con-
nection with what she'd said earlier. I thought, my god, she's
had a frontal lobotomy, can't she see any connection with her
statements about the youth culture? If she knew about it, why
didn't she talk about it? If we can't prevent rapes by our so-
called potential revolutionary allies, how in the hell can we
prevent rapes of Vietnamese women? If we're invisible to a
woman who's been working in women's liberation since 1966,
when will we ever be seen? To be a woman is to fight always on
two fronts, and it's not getting any easier. I deeply resented
Marlene for that, I questioned her honesty, something I'd
never done before.

Some women announced the organization of an anti-imper-
ialist women's movement to sign a declaration of independence
from American foreign policy. Women against the war? The
Women's International League for Peace & Freedom did that in
1915 and they're still proclaiming their freedom from it. They're
working against the draft and for a mercenary army. Some step
forward. A woman from our collective, a woman who went to
jail over the war four years ago, got up and expressed our feel-
ing that this was a rip-off of the women's movement, expressed
our sense of futility over such actions, over the takeover of the
women's centers by the YSA and our need for an autonomous
women's movement, and our refusal to be coopted by any
elitist movement directed by the eastern very old left.

Marlene's reaction was to ridicule the phrase male-identified
women, a term she doesn't use along with sexism or sister-
hood.

A third woman told Marlene that she was simply wrong
when she stated we weren't around during the invasion of Cambo-
dia. We were indeed there, 24 hours a day at times—some of us
walked off jobs, some went to jail. But mostly we spent so much
time fighting for our single demand, an end to sexism, that we
had little time to do anything else. Our demand was always the
first one to be compromised so we had to fight twice as hard as
anybody else. The sister asked, why didn't you see us, Marlene?
(People who do watch, did—one campus equivalent of J. Edgar
decided the WL people were the most dangerous on campus.)

I thought of women all over the country who were told by the
suddenly conscience-stricken liberals to take their "piddling
provocations"! elsewhere, that WE had to end the war.

No response from Marlene.

Elsewhere in this issue are excerpts from an earlier
article by Marlene.

In it she lays down a beautiful rap on women. In it she also
raises the question of leadership in the women's movement.
This was surely the Invisible Issue, the unspoken question at
the Grinnell Conference. Marlene never mentioned the issue of
leadership, because in her terms nothing but NOW exists.

She put everything in terms of a class issue. In Marlene's terms
we don't exist because we never solved the issue of leadership.
All the groups that work as we do—as collectives that refuse to
be experts and specialists—that question directions from any
centralized group—we're all invisible. Her arguments are all
addressed to the leadership of NOW.

Too bad. Something behind what Marlene says might be
right. It might be impossible to create a non-racist women's
movement. That worries me deeply because I will not take part
in a racist one for any amount of freedom.

I don't know if Marlene even cared about what she was
saying. She seemed to think it great fun when a dude went run-
ning out shouting his joy at the first snowfall and many of the
people in the audience jumped up and left, the most exciting
thing to happen to them all evening. Maybe when she cares
about what she's saying, she goes to other places to say it.

I still don't know any answers to the important questions
of how to end imperialism, racism, capitalism and sexism
(yes, sexism, Marlene) but I know we won't get them at panels
at elite colleges. Maybe we'll work them out together.

How can we fight for the needs of women and create a non-
racist, non-exploitative society? Nothing that happened at
Grinnell convinces me we don't need a women's movement. I
can see that some women won't take part, and I guess I'm sorry

that Marlene is one of them.