One of the hardest things for me to  
deal with is leaving the women of the  
AIAW collective, here in Iowa City.  

Before I came here, without a doubt,  

I was a girl whose heterosexual commitment  
was indisputable. I think that I really  
believed all those books, (starting with  
the Bible), the movies and all the  
information that our society  
socializes into a young girl's  
role of woman. It's funny,  
I'm sure that I didn't believe  
my parents. What I didn't know is that  
every word that men wrote in the  
dictionary was a lie, that words are designed  
and defined to fit our usefulness to them.  
I knew that in my relationships,  

my ideas would not be accepted.  
I never considered my lesbian friends in  
any other way than temporary, to live with  
for a while until I met a man and lived with  

him. I never realized that the close  

friendship I had with her was “dragging me down"  
to some horrible perversion. Actually, I  

felt that way because I was totally confused.  
Because I felt extremely uncomfortable  
around men and very relaxed  
with women, my parents first called  
me a "tomboy" and then accused me of  

ailments which later evolved, I guess  
they felt it was "unnatural" for a girl  

to spend so much time by herself, painting,  
or with girlfriends. I studied art, which  
is the only respectable option given to  
freaks, and for a while thought I had  

found a place with people I could be  
comfortable with, and who would listen to me.  
Except the art world is a male world, and  
it was that, I think, that made me venture  
into the women's movement as I felt that  

I had no choice. I began to realize how  
impossible it was to be an independent  
woman in a male world. I got the usual  
sexist bullshit encouragement from all the  
men teachers I had in art school, but  

there were no women artist-teachers around  
that I could identify with. It took me a  
while to realize that this situation was  
not uncommon in any of the schools in this  
country, which meant that one of the few  
ways an artist could earn money with time  
free to pursue her own work was denied  

to a woman, so that she was effectively cut  
off before she had a chance to mature.  

About AIAW - I came here because I wanted to  
see what it was like to work with women only.  
First of all, no one raised her voice, and  
everyone waited for each person to speak,  

and everyone was listened to, and everyone's  
ideas and experiences were considered  
relevant.  

When I was in bed with him, where all personal problems  
were displayed and possibly discussed, the  

relationship was filled with anger, frustration,  
all tied up with sex.  

Eight months later - how do I relearn  
to love women? My previous experiences  
with love were if I liked a guy I went  

into a sexual relationship, which was the main part of it.  

Here we are, nine women, and when it comes  
to discussing our anger and frustration within  
our group I feel impotent to react, because  
I don't feel I can break that intellectual  

barrier we have set up in our meetings.  

A barrier that excludes personal relationships.  

A few weeks ago, Pat expressed rage and  
resentment over our inability to deal  

with her anger and frustration about doing  
the shit work which we then make collective  
decisions about. Instead of dealing with  

her rage, we tried to band-aid the situation.  
I experience that very thing in my relation-  
ship with a man, that never dealing with the  
personal, but instead with the situation.  

I got so upset as to put myself into  
situations where I would be forced to miss  
the next two collective meetings, all the  

time rationalizing why I was doing it.  

What I am trying to say is that our collective  
seems somewhat the same to me (in my  

limited heterosexual experience) to other  
personal-emotional relationships, yet we  
do draw lines and this I find confusing  
and frustrating. I don't know if we could  
work better if we related to each other  
in a more personal way.  

But can we be in love with each other  
in our collective, without any physicality?  
We were going to talk about  

asexuality but never did, and have  

never talked about sex in any way.  

What I still don't know is what I want  
from a collective - woman experience.  
Every time I experience moments where I see  
glimmers of what it's about, I feel fright-  
ened because of the amount of love I feel,  
sort of an opening of all the pro-  

Another thing I feel most strongly is the  
contradiction I feel by relating to this  
group, (this whole thing is very  
self-oriented and self-indulgent, but I  
don't know how to express it any other  
way). How much does the contradiction in  

the amount of time we are willing or able to  

spend with each other should be considered?  
We meet between 8-14 hours a week, some  
of us live with men, and some of us  
are not intending to stay in Iowa City  

due to other commitments.  

I think the inconsistency between intellectual  
analysis and actions will continue  
to lead to incredible frustration.  

That total dedication for a revolutionary  
need, which the women who are involved  

I think this is due to the way  
we are used to living, and how much of  
what I have learned (called middle-  
class privileges) I am unwilling to give  

up.  

The more I identify with women, the  
stronger I feel what it means to be  

a woman in this world ruled by men.  
Without the women in this collective, I  
could never have developed the strength  
I needed to recognize the potentiality  
for change in myself, to understand  
what it means to love a woman. I wish  
the time was now that the anger, hatred  
and resentment I have learned could be  
forgotten and that the love you have  
shown me could be reciprocated.  

We don't all know the whole story on how  
the WOMEN'S CENTER first came about. Some  
women knew we needed a place and now we've  
got one. It was a quonset hut in Finkbine  
Park; living room, kitchen, two bedrooms,  
bathroom and some closet space. Now it’s  
the WOMEN'S CENTER at 1108 Finkbine; one  
large telephone-reception-sitting-party —  
room, one kitchen, one playroom, one  
crashing room, a bathroom, some closet  
space (literature storage).  

The WOMEN'S CENTER has begun with the  
idea that many Iowa City women have no  
way of meeting other women to develop  
strong friendships. Often, women just want  
to get away from families or roommates for  
a while. Women still don't have easy access  
to information such as where to go for  

abortion referral, birth control, good  
women's literature, how to get in touch  
with existing women's groups. Lots of  
women want a consciousness-raising group  
but don't know where to go for that. Now  
there is a place to go or a number to call  
for all these things. The number is  
338-1911, listed under SISTER POWER in  
directory assistance.  

The WOMEN'S CENTER can also be a meeting  
place for women's groups already involved  
in women's liberation. There are quite a  
few cells existing in Iowa City and some  
of us don't know of the others or what  
work other cells are doing. The WOMEN'S  
CENTER will house a speakers’ bureau in-  
volving as many women as possible who are  
able to speak to high schools, groups,  

April 30, 1971  

etc. We hope to get a typewriter and a  
mimeograph machine so that we can pool  
our information and literature at the  
CENTER.  

We need lots of support. Our rent is $68  
a month and we will have a phone bill. We  
have enough of a staff right now to keep  
the phone covered from 12 to 8 p.m. daily  
and we're hoping that women will come over  
on Friday and Saturday nights to rap, but  
we can use as much staff help as we can  
get. (The staff meetings are every Sunday  
at 4:30 in the WOMEN'S CENTER and are open  
for any women interested). The CENTER will  
be unlocked 24 hours a day; if someone is  
crashing there, she will, of course, be  
able to lock the door from the inside.  

It's our place, sisters, and it's O.K.  

Farewell.