In our last issue we printed an article called "Women Loving Women," which consisted of questions by straight women to gay women at a workshop on gay experience. At the end of the article we listed three questions not dealt with in the article that were more theoretical than the others, and said we'd deal with them another time. The questions were: How do straight women oppress gay women? Is being gay a prerequisite for being considered a serious, really committed revolutionary woman? What is the difference between being bisexual and being gay? How does that difference read politically?

When I was asked to write something for the paper about being a bisexual woman in response to a question in the last issue, I was put on the defensive right away. The question read, “What is the difference between being bisexual and being gay? How does that difference read politically?"

That question pissed me off because it divides women up into two categories - bisexual and gay - which are simply not valid in political terms. I know that most gay women define bisexual as "male-oriented" and gay as "woman-oriented." But the issue is not whether a woman is bisexual or gay but whether she is male-identified or woman-identified - whether the people she relies on, uses her energies towards, and mainly relates to are men or women.

There are certainly a lot of bisexual women around who are woman-identified and these women must be judged by their actions not by a word that has no meaning other than she relates to men as well as women.

I can very easily see how a "bisexual-male-oriented" definition fits a lot of bisexual women (judged by their actions) but not all women who have labels attached to them (often so they can be set aside so they won't have to be dealt with) fall into neat little categories.

I have experienced emotional pain because exclusively gay women have pushed me aside as not to be dealt with because I am "bisexual" and therefore not really interested in women. And I am "bisexual" in the strictest sense of the word - I live with two men and a woman. I don't want to get involved in a long statement about how I live now - but I related to the two men before I was gay and they are decent (not perfect) men who are interested in changing. I am not interested in relating to any other men now or ever - it is not worth the energy to get to know a man well enough to have a relationship with him. I can direct those energies toward loving women. It is hard to believe, because most men are so horrible, that it isn't a struggle to live with these men. When they don't act right they are come down on by myself and the woman I live with. They know that if they don't change we will not struggle with them and they will have to leave. If these men become a hassle so that they demand most of my energies in order to deal with them it will simply not be worth it. I can direct those energies to women instead of spending my time in a complete energy drain dealing with men.

But it is not like that now.

The fact is that I am woman-identified and I really dislike being called "bisexual" (except in a very strict sense - I do relate to two men) - in other words if the two men I live with left I wouldn't cry and run out and find other men to replace them. Loving women means a lot more to me.

On a personal level my response to you would be mistrust of what you say - that you don't spend much time struggling with the men you live with. I would find it almost impossible to commit myself personally to you or to any bisexual woman because my experience has been that men come first to bisexual women.

I disagree with the other members of the AIAW collective in that I believe bisexuality does make a difference politically. The time you spend struggling with men, in this case the men you live with, could be spent aiming your energies toward women. That is not to say that I would not work politically with you or any bisexual women if the work did not involve heavy personal commitment and trust.

When lesbians first started to "come out" to the women's movement, there was a great deal of discussion about being gay. Straight women were put up against the wall about their homosexism and about their feelings for other women. During this time, a lot more women came out, a lot of women faced their own homosexism, and gay women found other gay women and began having more support. Also at this time, a lot of straight, celibate and bisexual women felt pressures to become exclusively gay. I don't think there was anything bad about this period in the women's movement. It was important. But a lot of women who were not gay became so defensive about their lives that they either completely left women's communities or they played at being gay when they really weren't. Both of those situations were harmful. Mistakes were made by a lot of us. Some gay women pushed too hard and some straight women became too defensive. There are situations where people should be forced to deal with the ways they oppress others. As long as people have stopped oppressing other people (as much as that is possible at this time) they can't be forced to be something they aren't. That is potentially bad for both gay people and straight people.

I know there may still be times when gay women will want to be with only gay women. There may also be some levels of trust that are greater for some things among gay women. But it's also true that women who are not gay can do important, necessary revolutionary work and can be trusted on important levels.

There are three reasons why the questions posed were felt by some of us to lead to unfruitful conclusions. Basically, we recognized that, whatever our personal differences, there is a great political necessity for diverse people to work together. Concentrating on our diversities as individuals, and generalizing philosophies which place value judgments on certain groups over others, easily leads to ideological factionalism. Splits in groups can only be helpful when they free a group of people to be actively effective in ways they were prevented from when working within the original group. But ideological splits within a group that can agree on necessary actions, and carry them out, only weakens the possibilities for externally effective work.

Another danger, particularly in the gay/bisexual/straight division of supposed political commitment, is the creation of a phony solidarity based on one's sexual label. This leads to idealism in generalizations such as "All gay women have the same politics" or "Straight or bisexual women can't be trusted." We have made false conclusions of this type in the past. It used to be popular to believe, for instance, that "All gay women are feminists" because of their commitment to women (or at least a woman) at the base of their lifestyle and throughout their day-to-day existence. The naivete of that idea was quickly exposed by experience with gay women who obviously were not feminists. We must work against this dangerous type of idealism for our own security, as well as the necessity for correct thinking and analysis concerning the actual goals and ideologies which hold a group together and allow it to act effectively.

We have discussed the questions within the collective as well as with other women we know. Some of us feel reluctant now to spend a lot of energy on them. Also, as several of the articles below indicate, we feel justified in questioning their importance to us. The first article following is a response by a "bisexual" woman to the original question, and her feelings about the label. We felt it was important to print her response. The other articles are statements by a few members of the AIAW collective reflecting their personal feelings about the "gay/bisexual/straight" issue.

I am a gay woman who, like many others, used to be straight. While I was married I had a deep relationship with a woman for three years. But for some reason I never thought of myself as bisexual; it never occurred to me to integrate the two permanently. I realized it was, for me, an either/or situation that sooner or later I had to decide upon. The dialectic of that decision process is a long story. The fact that I knew I would probably never love another man besides the man I lived with didn't make the choice any more obvious to me for some time. While I was caught up in it, it seemed like a choice simply between two emotions of love that I felt, one for a woman and one for a man. That contributed to the either/or bind that I felt, as well as a tradition of monogamy in all my past relationships. Finally I came to the realization that women were my primary concern, and my lifestyle followed accordingly.

The point I want to make, however, is actually a non-point: there is no way I have, or can, generalize my personal experience into a political statement along these lines. My politics are of course related to my personal life, but that's not the same thing.

There are ways in which I do not trust or want to relate to straight or bisexual women, but they have little to do with the dogma of the questions we're responding to. I'm not sure what the prerequisites to being a revolutionary are but I think many straight and bisexual women are or will be revolutionaries. What I would like to talk about is the level at which I do exclude them from my life.

Being gay means to me not just loving all women but seeking close and intimate relationships with other gay women like myself. And although I realize that labels can stagnate people - that women who are labeled straight may someday be gay - I find the labels someone uses to identify themselves helpful. It is important to me to know the context in which I can relate to someone - who I can become deeply involved with. It is also important for me to exist as much as possible in a gay subculture. It's my nutrition and must obviously exclude on some levels straight or bisexual women. Because I don't want to become involved with anyone on any deep emotional level who is not resolved about their lesbianism I need a space in which to find those women who are like myself. A space to relax in, be dykey in, a space where I can function according to the standards and culture of my own kind. I find it impossible to explain in print what that subculture is like. Only that it is a freedom to be myself with other people like myself.

As far as relating to straight and bisexual women - well, there are a million fears. For one thing it is painful to care about someone and not be able to relate to whole portions of their lives. And sometimes I really resent the total integration straight and bisexual women can have into a gay culture (our culture) while they have a whole other culture to slip in and out of. I also feel like the qualities I have only make sense, are valued by gay standards and so I feel like so much less of myself pitted against the men in straight and bisexual women's lives.

I can't really explain any of this very well although I am pretty sure that gay women will understand. I only hope that straight and bisexual women can understand, too, the levels at which I must exclude them from my life and realize that that doesn't mean I don't respect, care about, and want to work with them on other levels.