women’s reformatory cont.  
SEER SR ER  

wondering if the staff noticed my sizing them up in regard to how  
I could expect to be treated by them, as a potential prisoner,  
not the socially concerned little shit that they thought I was  
and thus could relate to.  

We went to the vocational-education department next, and it  
was there that everything I had been feeling all day came to a  
head and I started to identify the schizophrenia I had been  
feeling. A schizophrenia between the liberal experience (for a  
moment they were attempting to give the prisoners) and the  
real reality of those prisoners' lives. They're setting up a  
program of rap groups, theatre groups, a good library and recre-  
ation and have just hired a woman to head that who wants to  
bring in women's liberation. She's going to some conference in  
NY and said she was going to try and see Gloria Steinem there  
and if she won't come to the prison at least she could tape her  
and play it for the prisoners.  

She was incredible...energetic and naively optimistic about  
her crusade to end the apathy she said existed among the prison-  
ers. It was such a contradiction, her enthusiasm, their apathy.  
All the stuff she talked about trying to get the prisoners in-  
volved in seemed so far from the lives they've led and will lead  
when they get out. It seemed real similar to me of the experi-  
ence working-class people have going to college and getting into  
a lot of liberal academic stuff that doesn't really apply - is  
a real break with their lives previous to that and with many  
(probably most) doesn't relate to the life they'll live after  
that either.  

I was also struck with the schizophrenia I felt between my  
consciousness as a working-class woman and my consciousness as  
just a woman - a kind of tearing between women's liberation  
and class issues and I realized at the moment this woman men-  
tioned bringing in women's liberation that I really had not thought  
about women's liberation very much at the prison for most of the  
day. Without conscious premeditation my feelings when I got to  
that prison were pretty much based on class. In some ways that's  
explainable because it is an all-female prison and with the  
exception of my noticing that a lot of the administrators were male  
there was no glaring reason to think about sex distinctions.  

I really felt that most of the women there were there for  
class reasons, but I don't want to deny that a lot of the women  
are there because of men, that it is a feminist issue and can  
be explained by a feminist analysis. That's all true and I ac-  
cept a feminist analysis as regards female prisoners. I think,  
though, that it only holds true for certain kinds of women. I  
doubt there are very many upper-middle-class prostitutes in jail.  
Class seemed the really important element that day to me and it  
was on that basis that I felt an identification with the women  
who are sent there.  

When I heard her say the words "women's liberation" I just  
cringed. My reaction was based on how I think women's liberation  
will be presented not just that I thought it didn't have any place  
there. If it could be presented with a really strong class con-  
sciousness and not tainted with the middle-class concerns that much  
of it has, I think it would be good. Gloria Steinem sure  
couldn't do that. In a way getting into women's liberation is good.  
It gave me an understanding of the order of power, helped me to see  
things in light of a material condition instead of analyzing  
my life only in terms of myself, my failure, my problems. But  
very often its ideology (from many groups, and many things pub-  
lished) contradicted and made light of or ignored some of the  
realities of my life.  

It's been hardest for me to relate to the women's movement and  
identify with it in times of financial or some kind of survival  
crisis. In prison listening to Gloria Steinem or someone like  
her talking about female executives, I'd freak out or just  
couldn't relate to it at all. I felt slightly at odds with a  
couple of the women who were with me that day who reacted very  
strongly to stuff that appeared sexist. They were really con-  
cerned with some "self-improvement" courses that we saw advertised  
around the prison and were asking people about that. One of  
the men there who is paid by the community college to teach  
courses at the prison explained that the women got their hair  
styled, learned about better dress and that kind of thing. My  
friends displayed their anger at that and this man got angry at  
them in return, saying that he understood how they felt about  
those things. He agreed they were a pile of shit, but that we  
have had that privilege to decide that having your hair styled  
was a pile of shit and fitting into the female mode was oppres-  
sive and that it was on that basis that we decided not to do it,  
but that many of the women in prison haven't had that choice --  
that many of them had never been able to afford to have their  
hair styled. I really couldn't disagree with him. I think it  
is a different thing to be immediately blocked by economics so  
that your consideration of whether something you can afford is  
worth it or not is like a step you never get to. Not that it  
didn't help me to eventually come to the decision that a lot  
of things I had so envied--the nice clothes, the hairstyles I  
saw on other women--were not worth having, were in fact oppressive  
to women, didn't help me a lot (both financially and to gain self-  
respect as a person). Still, what I felt the strongest was the  
anger and hurt at not being able to afford those things that  
other women could afford. I would have liked the freer choice:  
to have had money to buy expensive clothes and choose instead  
to give it to a women's abortion fund.  

Similar things happened throughout the day when I felt there  
was almost siding between women's liberation and class and I  
tended to identify with what I saw as the class position in any  
issue.  

Page +  

Volume 2 Number 6  

We talked to the man in charge of vocational training who I  
thought had a pretty good class consciousness and respectful at-  
titude about the prisoners. But given the material situation of  
women and especially lower or working-class women, his attitude  
doesn't make much difference as far as what can be done to help  
any of the women there. There are hardly any jobs period and of  
course hardly any jobs for women -- ones in which they could be  
trained and be assured of any job security are pretty much  
closed to women. And jobs which will be opening up to women will  
surely be filled by middle-class women, women with money to hire  
lawyers to fight the job discrimination that exists. These will  
have to be women with a “good background," and generally will  
even be over-qualified for the jobs. For women, the job market  
offers pretty much its lowest (jobs that don't pay enough to live  
on and offer little job security) or its highest (executive or  
professional positions which are out of the reach of lower or work-  
ing-class women). He certainly seemed aware of all this. The gov-  

- ernment will fund training for the prisoners there but it is dif-  

ficult to find anything that they can be trained in and later work  
at. And none of them can afford the training anyway. If they do  
want to get into a training program, the choice often is between  
that and getting out of prison, since the government will pay tui-  
tion and $35 a week (I think he said) to the women and no one can  
live on that. If you're up for parole continuing a training pro-  
gram would mean staying in prison since you couldn't afford to  
live on $35 per week outside of prison. So many of the women  
choose to find whatever job they can to qualify for parole and get  
out. Then of course they don't have time for the schooling and so