These Articles:

Last year we were two students attend-
ing the ninth grade in one of Iowa City's
Junior High Schools.

Before we started the school year we
did not expect it to be the way it was.
People kept saying it was a very nice
school, the teachers were excellent, and
the children were lovely.

After a few weeks there, losing all of
our fears of the people there, we began
to state our opinions of a few of the
things we discussed in the classroom.

After our fellow students learned our
beliefs about God, the war in Vietnam,
marijuana, women's liberation and homo-
sexuality, they felt that we were too much
of a threat to their way of life and re-
sorted to name calling.

Their favorite name to call us was
Lesbian. When we quietly and calmly tried
to explain to them that we were not homo-
sexuals and that it made no difference
to us whether or not a person was gay,
they immediately decided that if you ac-
cepted homosexuality you must be gay.

They took pleasure in calling us junk-
ie, hippie radical, crazy (although that
was one of the nicer ones), gook, among
many more. We learned to ignore this name
calling after a while.

They resorted to writing obscene phra-
ses on our lockers such as "fuck off hip-
pie," "motherfucker," “fuck you" and other
such things which showed to us the extent
of their vocabulary and mentality.

Gym class was one of the favorite
classes in which the oppressors verbally
attacked people.

The whole gym class was appalled when
you didn't wear a bra, shave your legs or
armpits, or wore men's long underwear.
The reasons why, we feel, that they were
appalled was because they felt women
should shave their legs and armpits, wear
a bra, shouldn't wear long underwear, but
they should be very feminine and wear
clothes that are such.

Also in gym class, we were always pick-
ed last by the team captains to be on
their teams. This happened even though
we were good in the sport.

We were about the first people to wear
long dresses. People would give us weird
stares and call us "witch." One girl told
one of us that we looked like a "cute hip-
pie" when we wore long skirts and dresses.

At the end of the year when the high
school students were taking semester tests,
some of them would come to the junior high
to visit. One of our friends, known as the
“short little greasy-haired kid," was
kicked out of the school almost immediate-
ly when he came to visit. However, the
former football stars and athletes of the
junior high always seemed to get a warm
reception and they always got to stay a
longer period of time when they came.

Another incident took place one morning
when these high school boys, including the
“short little greasy-haired kid," came to
visit. All of these boys had long hair.
After they left we heard such comments as,
“Who were those kids?" One teacher said
he was going to find out who they were. He
said it in a manner as if they were threat-
ening the school.

These incidents were not infrequent but
quite common and these along with a some-
what apathetic family made our ninth grade
year an unforgettable experience.