I doubt the nurse was so liberal. She had pretty condescending attitudes about the patients. I asked her about the physical condition of the prisoners when they arrived at the prison. Did they as a whole have medical problems? Had they had bad medical care? In reply, all she could say was they had bad hygiene and dental problems. I'm not sure if I really know enough to respond to that, but I've heard very often from medical people that kind of response about low income and poor people - that those are the two areas that are deficient. This may be the case. I would assume that if you've had poor dental care and have bad hygiene (whatever that means), that there would be other medical problems as a result of inadequate care. This is probably crazy. I didn't have good health care, and the first noticeable medical problem would be my teeth. Still, I wonder how much classism determines that appraisal. I also asked her if the women request to see a doctor often and what kind of complaints are common. 

All the time, they come up with some complaint, really just want someone to talk to, that they really are just like children.

I didn't get the impression that she would take the health concerns of the women seriously and didn't get very definite information from her about the kind of treatment women get there when they are seriously ill. Supposedly if it is serious, they are sent to the university hospital in Iowa City. She also mentions prisoners being sent to Cherokee, a state mental institution. I couldn't determine from what she said whether that applied to exclusively mental problems.

In comparison to the other staff members and administrators, I really disliked that nurse and kept thinking how I really, really wouldn't want to show up there to start serving a term being ill, nor would I want to be ill while I was there. That I wouldn't trust the kind of treatment I would get. And yet I was really uncomfortable with my dislike of her because I knew that a lot of that was because she wasn't a liberal and all the rest of them were.

In reality, does she harm the prisoners any more or help them any less? I don't know. I tend to doubt it.

John described the women in cottage three as in pretty bad shape. They have just arrived to start serving their sentence or are there because they are not deemed fit or ready by whoever judges them either for emotional reasons or health reasons to fit into the regular campus program of getting yourself together and to get yourself out on work release and then eventually parole.

The prisoners are at different levels (I think that there are three levels or grades) that indicate the amount of privilege given them—being locked in your room for bed at 10 instead of 7, allowed to go on supervised shopping trips to town, etc. The women housed in cottage three would be at the lowest level with practically no privileges.

The women who live in cottage one were described as being more dependent. More dependent than the women he described who live in cottage two... who sounded pretty far out. His descriptions of the women in the different cottages came up in his response to a question we directed to him regarding the prisoners' attitudes toward men. We told him that we realized that many of the women were in prison for crimes they committed with or because of men. We asked him if the women there hate men. His answer was pretty interesting; he didn't flinch, and I think he understood what we were asking. He said some of them do, and they do because the relations that they've had with men were relationships in which men used them, that they had been used all their lives. Although not a lot of them are in on prostitution, a lot of them have hustled, worked for pimps.

He certainly didn't have a broad analysis on how men in general do use women but let his understanding of it stop at specific people and their specific relationships which happened to have been bad ones. When he was talking about this, he referred to cottage two as the one with your more man-hating type, pretty independent, strong women. It was pretty clear that most of the dykes were in cottage two. We heard references to cottage two ranging from admiration to intimidation throughout the rest of the day. Nothing he said about it was really very homosexist.

There is one lifer there, and we had been asking him about her life, what she does there. He explained to us that she generally gets into very intense relationships and she and her "friend" don't have too much to do with anyone else, are pretty into each other. His only negative reaction to that seemed to be a genuine concern for her pain when her lover leaves the prison. Most of the women there only serve about 18 months time.

In reply, she said they complain.

We told him that we did want to see a cottage, and he called cottage one to tell them we were coming. We were disappointed that we weren't going to cottage two but didn't tell him that. At the cottage, we were met by a young black prisoner from Davenport, Iowa, who showed us around and who we hit with a barrage of questions, most of which she probably couldn't have answered totally honestly. She showed us the rooms and how the door can always be opened from the outside, but once it's closed you can't open it from the inside. So anytime you shut your door, you're locked in your room. Also, you're locked in when you go to bed. If you need help or are sick at night, you're supposed to have your light on and your shade up, and the night watchman will come in and see what kind of help you need. Everyone in that cottage had their own room; they were nice, kind of like dorm rooms. Each has a toilet and sink in them.

We didn't have the nerve to ask when people make love. After finding out the door situation, that question was really on our minds. I suppose people find ways of working that out. When we were talking to the nurse, we mentioned that we had read that prisoners are kept from getting into friendships, that if someone goes to dinner with the same person too often, they are separated. She said no and then said, "You mean homos, is that what you mean? We have them here. The psychologists don't think anything of it though. I don't understand it."

While I'm writing this, I'm struck by the timidity with which we approached the subject of homosexuality even though the questions we asked, which were obviously, even if cowardly, about that were taken well and answered pretty honestly. In reviewing that day, I think we could have been much braver about our interest in homosexuality there, and I wish we had been. But the guardedness and fear we have to have just couldn't be dropped even to get information we wanted badly. If I were straight, I think I could have asked much more direct questions, but being a dyke, I was really scared and meekly hinted at that subject. One of the women with me asked much more direct questions and didn't feel that the staff was really all that eager to talk about it. She may be right. I might have been so relieved that they didn't react hostilely that I interpreted the lack of hostility for a willingness to talk that wasn't there.

The prisoners we talked to said that the matrons in each cottage censor the mail going out and coming in. Some of them just spot check for money or things that may be enclosed; some of them check more thoroughly, so you can generally see who is on duty, and if you know she only spot checks, you can get things out.

She was really aware of security and mentioned how you have to think of not just what you're saying in your letter and getting out of the prison but where it's going. A woman who is also a prisoner there wrote a letter to her brother in which she talked about Sally Ann. The letter got out of Rockwell City but was censored when it arrived at Anamosa, the men's prison in Iowa. There was some kind of backlash when word got to Rockwell City that she was writing about another prisoner.

She did say that they will periodically search rooms if there's any reason to suspect that the prisoners have drugs, or liquor, or whatever. The prisoners can have their own money, whatever they earn or is sent to them, but the matrons must be aware of what money comes in. I couldn't get any idea if there was any drug traffic there or not. They're allowed to have visitors any day, but for some of them, like this woman from Davenport, that's not that helpful because it's a long way to Rockwell City for her friends and family.

Basically, I didn't like talking to the prisoner we talked with and didn't want to talk to anyone more. It was so much more schizophrenic. She had no reason to trust us, and there was no way to say I think I might be in prison someday and my life too is a hassle to some extent, more or less than yours, and that I've done half the things women are in that prison for, and that I identify with her, not the administration whom we were placating by various disguises just so we could be there. There's no reason for her to believe that or care—no basis at all for us to converse that way. Why should she want to talk? It was all crazy.

She got a call from an administrator saying we were coming. I felt guilty firing questions at her and could only apologize for doing that and be glad to get away, shuffling to another administrator to goggle at what a far-out job they've done there, never able to talk to the women I care about and identify with there.