man, fully uniformed. Someone recognized the woman, who turned out to be a desk-  
clerk member of the S.F. Police Dep't. When confronted with this atrocity, the Police  
Dep't dismissed it with a statement to the effect that the Dep't contains people of  
many different political views: John Birchers, Communists, and Verywhite People. As  
yet, no one has been able to contact these police communists.  

Now, thanks to the Verywhite People's Party, we have a new evening entertainment:  
Dial-A-Nazi. By calling a number you are able to hear various recorded messages from  
their Party. Most of them concern Jews, many are about Blacks, and often they try to  
tie the two in together. The first one I dialed in for described the ADL (Anti-Defam-  
ation League) as a wing of Bnai Brith, an exclusive Jewish male organization which  
was a member of the International Zionist Conspiracy which is the military arm of  
Israel. Won't my Aunt Eleanor be surprised!  

The next message I heard said that the Jews were pushing pornography (same charge  
Hitler made a few years back) and were behind the violence of the Black community be-  
cause it was the Jews who funded and controlled all those new Black movies such as  
"Shaft" which encouraged Blacks to slaughter whites. One tape said that it was the  
Jews who owned all the publishing companies and who were responsible for the censor-  
ship in this country. Thus Jews were preventing Verywhite People from reading each  
other's volumes.  

The latest message from these verywhites that I have had the burden of hearing  
talked directly to community issues. Said they: "The Jews think that with the energy  
crisis there won't be any power to operate the ovens. They should be reminded of the  
adage: Where there's a will, there's a way."  

Now what could be clearer?  

When confronted with the obscenity of these recorded messages, the phone company  
referred to the constitutional right of freedom of speech. We wonder where these con-  
stitutionalists at Bell Tel are when homosexual groups across the nation unsuccess-  
fully try to list their organizations in the Yellow Pages or even get a number under  
a gay name, let alone present positive messages of woman-love over their lines.  

When I try to talk to my mother about the snowballing growth of anti-Semitism in  
this country, especially from my perspective out here in the West, they dismiss me  
with the excuse that there is always a weirdo fringe, always a few "ignorant" right-  
wingers. But this is not the case. The real case is that this country is fast build-  
ing to a pogrom -- probably aimed at both Jews and Blacks -- at the very least.  

The Verywhite Party does have 100 silent members to every one that is willing to  
go public. And these hundreds are getting less reticent all the time. The other day a  
Jewish sister was waiting for a bus on a main street in S.F. In bright daylight, a  
flat-truck passed with 10 fully uniformed swastika-ed members of the Party in the  
back and 2 more in the cab. These people are patrolling our streets. They are members  
of our police department. They are members of our ruling class, our politicians, in-  
dustrialists, teachers, etc.  

Like Germany in the 30's, this country is fucked up. Like Germany the economy is  
unsteady, inflation is making the working people scared, the right is growing, the  
political "leadership" is in moral contradiction, the direction of the nation is up  
for grabs. This dangerously racist anti-Semitic right is grabbing and grabbing fast.  
Certainly faster than the Jews are waking up.  

Too many Jews are lulled by the promise of Amerika. The Jewish establishment is  
controlled by the middle & upper class. Jews who are too comfortable to rock even a  
sinking boat. Many Jewish leftists are paralyzed by self-hate, born both of being a  
member of a despised people and of a left that has tried to make the word Jew synon-  
ymous with the word imperialist. And working class Jews, our only real hope, are too  
busy in this time of recession hustling to survive that they haven't the time to see.  
Some Jews who are Jewish-proud are too privileged and racist to see that whatever  
comes down on Blacks will surely stomp us too.  

For example, last week at the S.F. Jewish Community Center, a JDL'er told a dyke  
friend of mine that they encouraged the continuing involvement of Amerika in Cambo-  
dia because if the USA stays committed there, maybe they will also stay committed to  
Israel. This is support we do not want. This is a disgusting set of politics from a  
people who KNOW persecution & oppression, who know the necessity of owning land, of  
having a nation. These are ideas that can never win life & freedom for us.  

(P.S. “Yrayf" means unkosher.)