building

Monday June 28 - Beginning of my third week as a carpenter's ap-
prentice. Last night, Sunday, before I got to sleep I felt weak,
scared, didn't want to go to work. Work was painful at times and I
wasn't physically strong enough yet to do all that was required of
me. It seemed that I was enduring instead of working. Also it was
so frustrating to realize that the men carpenters were stronger
than I was and probably always would be. One day Fred, one of the
carpenters on our 3 person crew, was gone and Jack, the foreman,
had me help him and do Fred's job while we waited for a replace-
ment carpenter. Fred's job entailed going over to the stack of ply-
wood sheets 8'x4'x3/8", spinning them around, picking them up
(sometimes it's windy) so that the groove and match are going the
right direction and the good side is up, and carrying them over to
the panel of the deck and dropping six sheets crosswise over the
2'x8' joists in the panel to which they are to be nailed.

Box, outside
Framing boards

Joists, cross boards
that hold up the
floor

6 sheets per panel, 5 panels per deck, 3 decks each day.

Granted part of my trouble with doing this was not knowing about
plywood: which is the good side, which way the groove needs to go,
how to wield it. But it's also true that if I had had to do Fred's
job all that day, I would have had to admit that I wasn't physic-
ally strong enough, yet. I still maintain I will be.

I cried a little while lying in bed, and despite Martha's
efforts to coax it out of me I couldn't cry. No encouragement
about work helped. Now I think that's because the problem was that
I felt weak and unequal to the task; crying seemed an emotion I
couldn't allow myself -- it reinforced my state. I dreamed about
work and being late and it raining so that all told I had to
work very little. Telling.

But today was a good day -- I did all sorts of different things
(my hammering has improved) and only had to cut the 2'x8's for two
decks.

While I was working I thought about my bad reaction to coming
to work. I don’t want to be too hard on Leslie because I under-
stand her situation and how it affected what she said Friday when
four of us were talking. Leslie asked if I considered myself a
workman or a craftsman. Later she asked if I thought I'd go be-
yond that and ever see myself as an artist. I think her definite
stated value (which was powerful on me because it has societal
backing) that being a craftsman isn't enough (so heaven help the
workwoman which I am at present) and repetitious jobs aren't re-
spectful (worthy of it.) One must be learning something to vindi-
cate repetition. All the power of her statements made me ashamed
of my work. (I had a one-act play about Joanne and Lynne coming
for lunch and seeing me do repetitious sawing and I felt ashamed.
That's how I discovered shame was my emotion.)

It was easy to get out of this state of mind by thinking of the
redefinition of useful work -- after the revolution. Also my work
today was more interesting.

On the way home I was thinking about how hard being an appren-
tice is and whether I'll be able to last four years.

The whole Pentagon Papers scandal has interested me in a way
the newspapers haven't for a long time. I was thinking as I was
driving home that Daniel Ellsberg's action was really quite right-
on for a liberal. It's also fascinating to think of his moral dil-
emma and the courage he mustered like Sir Thomas More did. I de-
cided (probably just on the grounds that he will go to jail) that
he was doing more of the work of the revolution than I was at the
moment. Then my vision of the actual rev came to mind, how diffi-
cult and painful I conceive of it as and how it's odd that I see
the rev's hard work as beginning at a definite point in time and
that nothing that goes before it will be quite the same or as hard.
It occurred to me that my job as an apprentice was certainly the
only thing I've done that has come close to requiring of me phys-
ically and emotionally what the rev will need from me. Then I won-
dered if my being a carpenter's apprentice wasn't in some way con-
nected with the revolution: either as preparation or as part of
the revolutionary process that is vague to me yet but which I'm
coming to comprehend.

That made it much easier to think about all the initial diffi-
cult things — whether I'll be strong enough, enduring enough, the
loneliness of working all day around men who can't, because I'm a
woman, include me in their camaraderie, whether the person within
me can withstand the day constantly insulting two things that I
am, a feminist and a gay woman.

PAGE 4

Lotune 2, /Ve, 7
ESE aE re

es

for the

revolution
Dames Pada

Besides, my being a carpenter's apprentice just might be part
of the revolution in the ways it might affect women now. Like the
other day when five boys and one girl came to ask if we had wood
for a doghouse. Everyone thought it was pretty funny because the
construction company we work for doesn't sell to the public -- the
yard is a warehouse. But Chuck, the yard man who drives the fork
lift truck to load and unload trucks was in a strange mood and not
only gave them some wood but sawed it to the right size. I heard
him ask the girl if she were going to help or let her brothers do
the building. Then I caught her watching me so I decided to ignore
what the guys would think. I walked over to her and told her (in
my high pitched voice, so that in my overalls and short hair she'd
be sure to know I was a woman) to be sure and make her brothers
let her help. She looked at me and nodded.

Also there's the effect it will have on the future rev. I cer-
tainly began to consider it because of my belief that at this
stage of the struggle women should be learning the essential
skills: electronics, mechanics, plumbing and carpentry. Both for
our own survival as a community and for their possible future use.

July 20. Now after time and thought I have different feelings.
One is shame that I allowed myself to respect in a revolutionary
way Daniel Ellsberg. It was shallow thought on my part that looked
only at his actions not his motives. After more reading I discov-
ered that he was motivated by liberalism in all its ugliness — his
wish that the war end, coming from a desire that this country
(while still treasuring free speech and press) see the error of
its ways, and prove his faith in the principles on which the U.S.
was founded.

My job is also going much better. I am stronger and so don't
have to endure it as much and I'm beginning to understand more
about the trade. One important thing that has made my job easier
is realizing how it is work — or the nature of the job. I always
understood in my other jobs, maybe because they were more familiar
to me and my class background, how they were work or what it was
about them that made them work. But I haven't until recently com-
prehended this about carpentry. Maybe part of it is that my other
jobs like teaching involved dealing with people and had some sup-
posed altruistic or humanistic motive.