Ya Vv  
Se  

OO I <P “ZA <A ee,  

a black mother talks  

about daycare:  

Q: You were around when free daycare got started in Iowa City,  
right? I wasn't into that. Could you tell me how you heard  
about it and how you felt about it?  

A: It's hard to start out with just the free daycare movement.  

The free daycare movement seemed to come out of the other one,  

the movement with University preschools and with cooperative day-  
care, where you could give 8 hours a week and then it's free,  
otherwise it's pro-rated: the amount of money that you paid being  
according to the amount of time that you could put in. It was like  
the national movement of daycare centers, with fairly middle class  
and university women doing a daycare thing, so I guess my first  
impression is like I had of the whole movement -- it was only in-  
clusive for people like those people that started it. It didn't go  
outside the immediate group.  

Q: Could you explain in what ways you are not part of that,  
what your situation is?  

A: My situation is different in a way. Well, I am a student. I  
wasn't always a student, so in the past when daycare started I was  
not only a black woman and an unmarried woman but I was on welfare.  
That gave us a total dichotomy between myself and the people who  
ran and populated daycare centers. So, while I am a student right  
now, that's a real unimportant part of describing me. So I guess I  
would still have a major difference from the rest in being from a  
whole different background and situation from white middle class  
student women.  

Q: So they got theirs started. Did they make any overtures to  
you to get into it or anything? Or did you just know about it?  
A: Well, being black in a white university community, you do  
have a sort of pull from the more radical elements to get in-  
volved. So I was approached by the university people to partici-  
pate, and I'm sure other black women with children here have been  
wooed to participate. Mostly without success because black wo-  
men are not real hip to letting highly "political" types  
take care of their children.  

Q: So there was this dichotomy between you and the "hip" univer-  
sity community who were getting this together. And so they told  
you about it? Did they come and say, 'Do you want to do this?'  
or did you kind of just cool it from that or what?  

A: I guess the first people aren't the same people that we would  
be talking about if we talked about the existing Sparky community  
or something like that, because the first group of people -- ad  
hoc committees for dealing with children -- were some of the peo-  
ple who are outside the community that we talk about; but they  
were middle class women, and some of them were married and had  
black children, and I guess that's what the immediate negative  
reaction that came from single black women on campus was dealing  
with -- these people that had black children that were white, because  
it was real hard for black women to trust their kids to people  
that would take a child knowing that they couldn't give them the  
kind of future that they need, the kind of identity and everything,  
and so you aren't going to give your own kids to them to do the  
same things they're going to do to the black kids they adopted.  

So in the very beginning, back in '67, those kinds of people were  
involved in trying to set up daycare. They weren't real success-  
ful but those were the first people that approached black women.  

Q: Would you like to run down your politics about how you feel  
about that?  

A: Well, it's just that, you know, we haven't gotten to the point  
where we're all people yet. I mean, that's ridiculous. That's just  
real superfluous to talk about it even -- white middle class people,  
and even upper class, especially around here, they are professors  
and so start to leave the middle class with those kinds of salar-  
ies. But any white person, hard as you might try, it's hard to fig-  
ure out what it's like to be black, and all the empathy in the  
world isn't what you need. And this child grows up and they need  
more blackness than the child in the ghetto because the child in  
the ghetto does at least see other black people. This child is  
going to grow up knowing that everything he sees good in the whole  
world is white and then there's nothing that the parent can tell  
him that's going to change that, because children see what we do  
and how we act and not what we say. So tell them that black people  
are really worthwhile and they don't even see any, you know, it  
just doesn't settle right in their stomachs. It'd be like in the  
early '60s when they said the talk about equality without doing  
anything about it, when you could tell a child that the child next  
to him was equal yet that child couldn't go into the same restau-  
rants or couldn't go to the same schools, had to go to inferior  
everything, I mean to that child the words were meaningless. And  
that's the same thing that happens to black kids that grow up in  
white families is that you can't say enough to take the place of  
what's actually going on in his life -- that he was saved from  
being in an institution by a wonderful white family that sends him  

page 24  

volume 3 numbers 2+3  

an  
interview  

to wonderful white schools to sit by nice little pretty white  
children, and then that parent is going to make some effort to say,  
you know, your difference shouldn't matter -- that right there is  
negative. It's saying even though you're not the same as us you can  
strive to be like us. The whole thing is real messed up. We haven't  
gotten to the point yet that people can take cross-cultural things  
like that. I don't think that's always the case; but it's the case  
when a person from a majority society is taking a minority child.  

I say that there's a difference because if a white child grew up in  
a black family, no matter what he lives in America, and there's  
nothing in the world like being white in America, and nothing you  
could do at home would take the place of what goes on outside in  
the world. He knows he's worthwhile because he goes to school, and  
he sees the president looks just like him, the vice president, and  
the whole damn senate, and there's nothing that that black family  
at home could tell that child that that whole world wouldn't erase,  
so you know, it wouldn't be the same always cross-culturally, but it definitely  
is when the child comes from a minority culture.  

Q: So those daycare centers because they were staffed by whites  
were no different from putting your child into a white family?  

A: Right. Definitely. Any daycare center staffed by white people  
would be like putting them in a white family. They cannot meet the  
needs of that child no matter how many of them there are and I see  
that even putting him in a daycare center -- another angle is that  
people ask you to bring your black child so that the white kids can  
get used to being around black children, and I think that's a real  
bunch of shit, because it's like your child isn't really a real  
person, it's a doll, you buy it for the kids to play with.  

Q: Did that actually happen? Can you describe?  

A: Oh, yes. We can start out with welfare. When I started out with  
welfare here in Iowa City, they have their own daycare centers -- well  
people -- you couldn't call them daycare centers -- babysitter centers,  
where one woman or two women take care of a group of children from  
welfare families, and the welfare pays her. And they approached me  
because I was talking about going back to school, so that I'd have  
child care that wouldn't cost me, and the person that was sitting  
for me then, they couldn't certify her for various reasons, and the  
people that they took me to always came up with the fact that they  
thought it'd be good for the other kids to be around the little black  
child. Or if they were hesitant, they weren't sure what the other  
kids would think having a black child. It was always negative.  

They always came up with they were always happy to have him, but it  
was for the sake of the other children. This was something new and  
it'd be real fun for them. I think that’s real detrimental to  
children to be treated like they're a nonentity, and their only  
worth is in the goodness that they can bring to other people's  
lives. If you decide to do that for yourself that's one thing, but  
for other people to decide that for you, it's real strange. That's  
the way it was with the first Dum Dum and up and down Melrose Ave  
with the preschools. The attitude they took...  

Q: (Interrupting) This was supposedly from the feminist or women's  
community?  

A: Especially the further down Melrose you got like when it got  
down to Dum Dum. They were more radical than, say, Melrose Pre-  
school -- commercially run and has no pretenses to being cooperative.  
I had classes by then with people that worked at them. They were  
teaching assistants and research assistants that had talked to me  
in classes about bringing my child to daycare. Some of the people  
from that center did talk to me and said they thought it'd be good  
to have a black child in there -- the other kids, they could learn  
equality and I don't know what else they were supposed to learn.  

Q: And they'd see to it that the black child learned his lesson  
subtly. (Laughing)  

A: (Laughing) Yeah, that he was there for the service of mankind  
and not there for his own... you know, he had nothing to do with  
himself being there. He was there to be played with. Which is, I  
don't know, real strange. In those terms they would be totally  
abhorred and that's not what they had in mind. "How do our children  
learn if they're not around them?" They learn to be racist without  
being around them, so I imagine they could probably teach 'em other  
things, too.  

Q: You're part of the community of women, made up of gay women in  
town who have for political reasons broken with those other daycare  
centers and formed another one, and yet we're still this white day-  
care center. Can you talk about how you feel about that?  

A: Well, I mean that's true, it is a white daycare center so I  
think that on a personal level -- while myself and other women that  
I know that have talked about daycare and the people that run that  
daycare center, you know, we can deal with them on a personal and  
adult level because at this point we pretty much know where we're  
at as third world women. There isn't a lot of harm that can be done.