Dear J and M,

Your letter sounded so different than the issue of Struggle we responded to in AIAW issue #4. Maybe we did project a stereo-type onto you but it seemed to fit. You were saying stuff that we've heard before from middle-class women - stuff that had hurt and wounded. We found what you had written offensive especially to those of us that are working class. Now you have explained some things more and said things many of us can relate to.

None of us have an absolute formula for determining people’s class and with women who fit so awkwardly into the standard class analysts it is even more difficult. Still this is a class society and most of us do come from some rung on the ladder and most of us don't move very far from where we came in that context. It strikes me so strange that even though we are aware certainly of at least the general categories of lower, working, middle, and ruling classes and many shades in between all of these that so many of us think if we didn't starve we must have been middle class. There is, I think, a learned assumption that everyone in this country is middle class and we don't question our class position unless it is so blatant - like no food or no clothes. The working class in this country by and large is not starving but as you know from your own background they don't have the advantages and options that the middle class has. Attending a university is one of those options but I think only one. I don't think it necessarily changes your class position only your class identification.

It is painful for me to now read your letter and know your background was similar to my own and then think of your speaking to me in that issue of Struggle as a middle-class woman. I feel deserted when that happens.

I too have felt beaten down and it has had its effect. I don't argue with you on that. But I really believe the oppressed are better than their oppressors and that for instance the working class has their own values and standards but since middle-class standards and values are predominant, a working-class person is judged accordingly and will of course seem unintegrated regardless of how well integrated she is by the standards of her class. It’s not unlike gayness. Judged by the predominant standards of straight society we seem pretty messed up but even though our battle scars show we fare differently when judged by our own values and culture.

I want somehow to respond to your saying that our positions are not so different but I'm not sure how. I know they are different and that we are willing to have divisions in political thought rather than forge unity in the face of them. You see, your position can't be close to both ours and Spectre's. We disagree with Spectre on a lot of things and they disagree with us. We really feel they're wrong and prefer that disagreements be out in the open. The fact that both Spectre and AIAW are concerned with the issue of class doesn't mean our positions are the same. I think there is a difference in our feelings about the importance of class - that we felt you were saying more than that you were confused about.

To P & AIAW,

We feel good about our letter and P's response being printed in your paper as well as our response to what P is saying. We are trying/learning to write less abstractly, distantly and avoid the misunderstandings that come from writing that way. It was good to get a real response from you but it is hard for us to answer you--partly, I think, because we feel that the middle-class woman has no more say in choosing her values and standards than the working-class woman has in choosing hers. We agree that the oppressed are better than the oppressors but this means more than saying things to the oppressor's values.

I don't want to start relating to women in the male world ways that I see some working-class women do either--like some of the students I work with are third generation welfare "cases" who haven't known any other way of dealing with things than to fist fight even with each other. One of the women explained this to me--"People don't want to listen to you talk so first you beat the shit out of them and then your friend listens." This is true in Marg's experience, but I don't think that she and the women she fights with created that way of dealing with their problems anymore than my mother "created" the silent suffering soft-spoken non-questioning, hesitant and self-denying way of facing/not facing her problems.

Or the distancing that I see the lesbian working-class women doing at the gay club we go to--where they talk to each other in "safe" ways--"god, you're so ugly it's a wonder they let you in the door"--"yeah, well you're so ugly that they were too scared to say no." So hours and hours of this stuff fills the same purpose as the women in the faculty lounge discussing Shakespeare--it still keeps us separate and comfortable and still doesn't let us look at each other or ourselves.

As for my deserting my class, P, I think that comes out of my ambiguity because just like I took on a lot of male values growing up, I took over a lot of middle-class values too, which I see as mostly male created. But here's an example--when I first moved in with J & G who both come from professional families I went through a whole inferiority trip--I couldn't talk right, I was so dumb. I kept silent awhile about the words they used that I didn't understand and when they didn't make me feel put down I began to ask them what they meant and awkwardly tried using the big words. Now I know the big words and in turn I use them to oppress working-class sisters. Now I know that instead of asking them what the big words meant, I should have asked them to talk in a language that I understood. We've been learning their language to relate to middle-class women and it's time we stopped. It's just like the French in Quebec have been made to learn English if they want to get anywhere in an English-dominated society.

Our sense of destroying sexism--is destroying male structures and class is another of those. As we destroy bit by bit the male world and the male value system--we destroy the class system--like not using big words or abstract thinking/writing and trying to get closer to what we are really thinking, feeling, seeing then we are breaking down classist values that ruling class males have used to keep themselves safe. We see being male-oriented (male-world)--against using the same shit males have used on us, that middle-class women use against working-class women.

We feel that allying/identifying with the "class struggle as basic, essential, needed before or at the same time as a woman's struggle" is a male-world identification. So if the poor you talk about are women who ally themselves with their sisters then we believe they can deal with sexism and racism but if you are talking about poor men, then no, because just like gay men and black men they want the power for themselves. We accept no group that is not seen as female or male--i.e. poor women, gay women. We keep hoping we misunderstood you--keep hoping that you do see them as the same struggle.

Sorry we lumped you and Spectre in the same bag--just carelessness--apologies to you both. As for jobs--you're right that working-class jobs don't support the status quo as much as middle-class jobs because when J came out at work and there wasn't even a hassle because even 'a sick pervert' can file cards and paste pockets on library books. But I still maintain that it is a shit job because it is a boring routine that requires nothing of me but the guts to keep at it so I can eat.

In struggling sisterhood,  
J & M

Cage F

share a main group identity as women. We understood you to be denying the importance of class when you said "A revolution in the 20th century cannot be based solely upon the basic needs of the lower class, for those needs can be filled by other means than a socialist revolution." A socialist revolution seems only a beginning to us, but so long as private property remains the basis of the state and profit motives remain, the basic needs of the lower class will never be met. I still feel that what you wrote was classist but I don't think, in light of your letter now, that you are unaware of class or unconcerned.

I even don't think we totally disagree on the job issue not at least in what we desire ultimately but we still don't think the jobs you refer to are shit jobs nor do we think they (doing them) contribute to the running of or status quo in this society in the same way as most professional jobs do. It is a principle - one that tells us that the oppressed are not responsible for their own oppression. They will have to end their own oppression but they aren't responsible for it.

I know your fear about class struggle co-opting the women's struggle but for me I fear equally the women's struggle co-opting a class struggle. I think we really have to stop thinking of different struggles as being contradictory to each other. A women's movement based on middle-class ideology can only be oppressive to all lower and working-class people and a class struggle submerged in sexist ideology can only be oppressive to women. The list could go on forever. Because I am oppressed in one way does not mean I can correctly deny someone's oppression in another way. The whole thing confuses me a lot and I feel torn a lot. I don't think the fear of having feminism co-opted by class is valid even though I feel it. Somehow we must struggle to have both, I think -- to have a women's consciousness that doesn't cancel out a strong class and race consciousness. The early women's movement should teach us that. Its death was well deserved because it became so diseased that to win the crumb of a vote it reverted to all the racism and classism it never struggled adequately with.

Its real radicals were forced to leave it to its own racist, classist illness. I fear that more - not being able to relate to a women's movement because it violates my sense of decency.

Why do you think it is a contradiction to say how can one fight only classism and at the same time agree that "a revolution is an insurrection, an act of violence by which one class overthrows another." The class in question must deal with its real needs that include destroying sexism and racism. Do you feel that the poor are unable to do this - would not need to do this? Maybe I don't see the contradiction because I accept that definition of revolution - that happening as a necessary event and yet know within that I must struggle as a woman: Shit, it all comes down to us seeing a class struggle as basic, essential, needed before or at the same time as a women's struggle. Our politics are changing.

In Struggle,  
P. for AIAW

I didn't understand and when they didn't make me feel put down I began to ask them what they meant and awkwardly tried using the big words. Now I know the big words and in turn I use them to oppress working-class sisters. Now I know that instead of asking them what the big words meant, I should have asked them to talk in a language that I understood. We've been learning their language to relate to middle-class women and it's time we stopped. It's just like the French in Quebec have been made to learn English if they want to get anywhere in an English-dominated society.

Our sense of destroying sexism--is destroying male structures and class is another of those. As we destroy bit by bit the male world and the male value system--we destroy the class system--like not using big words or abstract thinking/writing and trying to get closer to what we are really thinking, feeling, seeing then we are breaking down classist values that ruling class males have used to keep themselves safe. We see being male-oriented (male-world)--against using the same shit males have used on us, that middle-class women use against working-class women.

We feel that allying/identifying with the "class struggle as basic, essential, needed before or at the same time as a woman's struggle" is a male-world identification. So if the poor you talk about are women who ally themselves with their sisters then we believe they can deal with sexism and racism but if you are talking about poor men, then no, because just like gay men and black men they want the power for themselves. We accept no group that is not seen as female or male--i.e. poor women, gay women. We keep hoping we misunderstood you--keep hoping that you do see them as the same struggle.

Sorry we lumped you and Spectre in the same bag--just carelessness--apologies to you both. As for jobs--you're right that working-class jobs don't support the status quo as much as middle-class jobs because when J came out at work and there wasn't even a hassle because even 'a sick pervert' can file cards and paste pockets on library books. But I still maintain that it is a shit job because it is a boring routine that requires nothing of me but the guts to keep at it so I can eat.

In struggling sisterhood,  
J & M