NEWSLETTER Women's Liberation

Women's Liberation 3800 Magee  
Kansas City, Missouri 64111  

WHERE WE'VE BEEN

During this first year, a core group of a dozen women have met weekly,  
trying to "get it together." At first, the time was spent concentrating  
on the design and development of a slide and tape show to be used in  
raising the issues of Women's Liberation. This has been used to speak to  
more than thirty groups in the city and nearby towns. Involvement in the  
planning for a Day-Care Center at UMKC and participation in a group to deal  
with women with unwanted pregnancies formed the main thrust of action undertaken  
by the group. Two six-week study sessions were held in the spring  
and some new women were reached in this way. A very active group emerged  
on the East side made up of women students and seminary wives. This group  
planned and sponsored an intensive three-day school-wide event, using  
national and local resource persons. Finally, in May, seven women attended  
a regional Women's Liberation Conference in Mississippi sponsored by the  
Southern Female Rights Conference.

Subscriptions  
$4.00 for 12 copies  

WHERE WE ARE NOW...

We have been struggling! In June, the group spent a whole day evaluating  
the past year. In some ways, there seemed to be little progress. It was  
hoped that many small groups would be organized and going strong by now.

BUT there have been scores of contacts made and some of these women are  
beginning to call in and seem ready to go. We have been sending out literature  
constantly filling orders from all over the United States. There is now a $2240  

Women's Liberation Office (in the Ecstatic Umbrella, 3800 Magee) complete  
with telephone (756-0843). We are being approached frequently now for  
statements and interviews by area newspapers and local talk shows. There has  
been a proposal submitted for a WOMEN'S CENTER with hope of expanding in  
that direction. We have had two seminars this summer (topics: sexuality,  
Woman as Consumer and Commodity), providing an open forum for any interested  
women who want to question, probe or become involved. We are now in the  
process of organizing the files, the resource materials and making personal  
contacts with individual women. Finally, we have re-grouped ourselves in  
“areas of interest" to provide the broadest range of options for women who  
want to become involved in the Movement. Therefore, we come to the next  

Ain't I A Woman? is published  
by the Publications Collective  
of the Iowa City Women's  

Liberation Front. We are in  
the process of working  

Some Cleveland women were involved in an action on August 26.  
We have gotten together a short summary and hope to follow later with  
an analysis but are sending this now so that perhaps it will reach  
you in time for your next issue.  
Sisters Take a Stand  
"Is this a talent show or Women's Liberation," was shouted to the  
people at the August 26 celebration on the Mall in Cleveland as  
Elsa Gidlow and seven Women's Liberationists in white face and several others took  
the stage from the chauvinist band enthroned there.  

The original program which had been planned by women's rights groups  
had been shortened from a series of five-minute speeches by women  
groups and organizations concerned with different aspects of women's liberation. About 200 women participated. The age spread appeared to be from teens  
to seventies, with the majority probably in their twenties and thirties.  

Of particular interest was the late afternoon  
panel discussion of lesbianism with representatives  
of NOVA, DOB, and Gay Women's Liberation participating. This inclusion on the program was an advance  
over the first Caucus held last autumn when lesbians  
were kept invisible so far as the program was concerned.  

The lesbian panel climaxing the Conference's  
afternoon session proved to be highly dramatic.  
More than one woman avowedly "straight" said she  
found the frank talks of the panelists and subsequent  
audience interchange the profoundest part of the program.  

Closing her talk, Alice Malloy said, "I was  
going to do something here, but was told it might not  
be advisable." As she paused and smiled over her  
audience one could sense a feeling of expectation: the  
women present wished her to go on. After a silence,  
Alice said, "I'll tell you what I had in mind and leave  
it to you. I was going to ask if every woman in the  
hall who had ever felt she could be erotically attracted  
to another woman would care to stand up."  

After the electric statement the silence was  
tensely felt. Several women stood. A few more  
slowly followed. Then, like a dam bursting, practically  
every woman of the 200 or so in the hall was  
on her feet. Since the majority undoubtedly thought  
of themselves as "straight" and were living hetero-  
sexual lives, this could be seen as an expression of  
acceptance and sisterly solidarity, beautiful in its  

spontaneity. Perhaps also it was something of a group  
confession, for the atmosphere of relief was evident,  
and reflected in the frank give-and-take of the plat-  
form-audience interchange that followed.  

One of the women told the people, "We're judged by the shape of our  
legs, whether or not we have hair on our legs, whether we wear mini's  
or maxi's, by our bodies not our minds. If you think minds are more  
important than bodies and people are more important than clothes,  
come to the back of the Mall."  

The women left the stage area and proceeded to the rear of the Mall  
followed by a large portion of the crowd. They performed an  
original skit showing the stereotypes of women--a little girl ("Aren't  
I pretty?"), a high school woman ("I wanted to take chemistry but  
I guess typing is more important."), a college woman ("I just got  
engaged"), housewife ("I'm just a household drudge"), waitress  
("Don't pinch!"), secretary ("If I'm here 25 years, I'll still be a  
secretary") and freak ("When the heavy shit comes down, I'm still  
just a chick.").  

Cleveland Women  

Peggy  
13997 Mont Avenue  
East Cleveland, Ohio 44118  

Since the majority undoubtedly thought  
of themselves as "straight" and were living hetero-  
sexual lives, this could be seen as an expression of  
acceptance and sisterly solidarity, beautiful in its  

If your group wants to receive bundles  
of AIN'T I A WOMAN?, send 15¢ per copy.  
Minimum bundle: 20 copies  

The voice of the Midwest needs to be  
heard in the Women's Liberation Movement.  

WOMEN | AIN'T I A WOMAN? is published on the  
second and fourth Fridays of each  
month by the Publications Collective  
of the Iowa City Women's Liberation  
Front, P.O. Box 1169, Iowa City,  
Iowa 52240  

September 1970  

Ain't I A Woman? will print without editing  
any laid-out page from a Midwest (New  
Mexico thru Ohio) Women's Liberation group.  
We would like to encourage other women to  
start working collectively to avoid elitism  
and destructive power relationships that  
pit us against each other. We will send  
details on deadlines, page size, column  
length, etc. if you would like.