Grinnell Personal Rx

I went to Grinnell after going through a  
fairly traumatic week. The woman that I am  
having my first lesbian relationship with  
finally came down on me for all my insensi-  
tivities and told me how much I had been  
hurting her. In essence I had refused to see  

how different her experiences were from mine.  

She has been angry for a long time, and I  
just recently came out. The entire week I  
had been trying to deal with all the things  
she told me. When I went to Grinnell our  
relationship was foremost on my mind.  

At Grinnell the workshop that was the heav-  
iest for me was the first lesbian workshop.  
I heard a sister from Bloomington say with  
anger how she was tired of always dealing  
with the problems of lesbianism in light of  
women who have recently become lesbians.  

She said that Women's Liberation had somehow  
forgotten that the people who had been les-  
bians for a long time also have problems.  
She came across very strong with all her  
demands that gay women in Women's Liberation  
recognize their different experiences and  
accept what gay sisters have to say as being  
valid and unquestionable, because of differ-  
ent experiences. Because I had been thinking  
about this all week, what this sister said  
really hit home.  

I think the results of this discussion were  
really tremendous. First, all of us started  
thinking in terms of how all gay women are  
different. Also, I think for the gay women  
who have been angry about many things that  
Women's Liberation has put on them, it was  
a time to get together. The result was that  
in the second workshop they were wonderfully  
together. It seems that many things WLF  

(at least here in Iowa City) has been doing  
will be changed. However, I saw one potent-  
ially bad thing. This was pegging people  
with labels. If anything, I think the  
lesbian workshops should have reinforced  
the fact that we are all individuals and  
all of our experiences must be recognized  
as such. It will be very destructive if we  
see what the sister from Bloomington said,  
as just a call for one more category.  
Categories do nothing but divide us and  
build up false dichotomies. It is when we  
look at problems in categories that we see  
no hope for the splits between straight  

and not-quite-straight, married and single,  
gay and straight, not-quite-gay and  
straight, and not-quite-gay and gay. Like  
we always say in the consciousness-raising  
groups - we are all sisters, and we all  
have individual experiences.  

Other thoughts about Grinnell include how  
much I liked the Saturday night all -  
women's dance, how I met some really beau-  
tiful sisters that I can't wait to see  
again, how much I hate people talking  
down, or telling us where it's at, and what  
a fantastic experience it is to cut hair.  
Also, I came away really afraid of the  
hassle that I can foresee with the anti-  
imperialism shit. I'm very much concerned  
about how I am going to be placed in the  
position of defending a women's liberation  
movement for women only.  

Having only attended the workshops, I  
can only comment on that part of the  
conference. Generally, I thought the  
workshops were too big. Also it was bad  
that women were put in the position of  
"leading" workshops. Until we have better  
ways of providing resource information  
where people don't lecture or dominate the  
discussion, we should avoid putting  
ourselves in that position. Perhaps an  
alternative would be to write some suggest-  
ed discussion topics and make them avail-  
able before the discussion.  

One of the two workshops on child  
care was very good. There was a fairly  
good exchange of practical experiences and  
ideas about child care as a revolutionary  
or reformist demand. Near the end of the  
workshop we started to get into some  
issues that we must begin to look at more  
closely. How can we organize women invol-  
ved in child care centers? The place of  
males in child care work and in decision-  
making. The concept of child care centers  
controlled by females only. Just as we  
began to discuss some of these issues the  
workshop was over. We had planned to  
meet again at the second workshop on child  
care, but we ended up with a completely  
different group of people (except the Iowa  
City Day Care Collective). The second  
workshop was bad. We were all fairly  
exhausted and the Iowa City people put  
ourselves in the "teacher" position. We  
talked almost the whole time about our  
situation and problems in Iowa City.  
We were so tired, we were saying things we  
don't even believe. We realized through  
the discussions that it would be benefi-  
cial to get together with other women who  
are involved in child care to discuss the  
problems and issues we are dealing with  
in child care.  

To me, being involved with a man and  
in WLF, no matter how liberated your  
relationship is, (unmarried or equal-  
itarian), is somewhat of a contradiction.  
This seemed to be the painful message  
given in at least one of the Marriage and  
the Institution of Sexual Intercourse  
workshops. Trying to unintellectualize  
marriage, and deal with it on a personal  
basis other than “we've got a groovy  
relationship" or "we've got a shitty  
relationship" is really hard.  

The reasons why we find ourselves  
almost incapable of it are varied. "Married"  
women feel that any problems only  
involve themselves and their man, and  
that's where they can be discussed in any  
real way.  

There has also been the feeling that  
WLF wasn't interested in these problems,  
(often shown when a married woman, new to  
the group, wonders if she is welcome).  
But that happens for some good reasons.  

It's hard not to get into patching up  
marriages that perhaps shouldn't be put  
back together. But this doesn't mean that  
WLF shouldn't be interested in any women's  
problems.  

We must make married women feel  
welcome, as we must make all women welcome.  
And those of us involved with men, or  
"married" must quit intellectualizing it,  
and try to understand the effects of that  
relationship on our work and on our sisters.  

It is difficult for me to write my  
reaction to the Grinnell conference be-  
cause it left me with a lot of mixed  
feelings on a lot of subjects, none of  
which I can tie together. I feel as if  
suddenly I don't have a handle on any-  
thing and there is so much I don't under-  
stand. Usually I think I have a pretty  
good understanding of stuff even though  
I don't know what to do. But I feel  
shaken now and unsure of the correctness  
of my thoughts.  

There were so many women there  
with a million different things on  
their minds, so no one really seemed  
to get to talk about what they wanted  
to. Nor was there the feeling of  
sisterhood or acceptance I have felt  
before at conferences. Everyone seem-  
ed defensive. The gay sisters were  
very strong and together but I felt  
a real division between gay and  
straight which left me dangling in the  
middle. This was the heaviest thing  
for me that weekend. The other great  
concern I am left with is racism.  

I have been only recently ack-  
nowledging my gayness. Not because  
of any recent sexual experience but  
first through realizing the feelings I  
have for other women and the primacy  
women hold in my life. Second by look-  
ing backward and admitting what I have  
experienced and felt. By admitting the  
painfulness involved in relationships  
I had with women when these relation-  
ships were given no legitimacy. It is  
the second process that has been very  
painful.  

I decided to go to the Lesbianism  
workshop at the conference and although  
the first workshop was closed to only  
gay women my sisters and I kept joking  
about my going--that for me they'd make  
a deal. It was important for me to not  
have to hassle with straight sisters.  

I need my experiences affirmed and  
straight sisters always seem to question  
the validity or political importance of  
my experiences and I don't find that  
helpful at all and difficult to take.  
Before the workshop when some of us  
were joking about why I was going, I  
said that I was going because I was  
gay. I was so shocked at how hard it  
was for me to say that.  

At the workshop everyone had many  
different experiences and those women  
who have been gay for a long time re-  
sented having to be constantly concern-  
ed with how they relate to straight  
women and whether they threaten them or  
not and there seemed quite a division  
between those women who came out through  
WL and those who were leading gay lives  
before WL. I really felt that there was  
validity in what the gay sisters said  
but I felt really torn, unable to talk  
on this subject to straight women and  
not really legitimately gay.  

Women are of prime concern to me  
and I am critical of any revolutionary  
groups when they are sexist but I am  
afraid that my criticism of third world  
revolutionary groups could become  
racist or that criticisms that WL  
as a whole has can turn to be racist.  

I don't think my concern is uncalled  

for because just as I didn't know at one  
time that what I said to gay women was  
sexist I may not even know consciously  
whether I am being racist or not and  

I am very worried about it. I hate to  
think I would have to make the choice of  
fighting for WL and being racist or  
compromising women.  

20 NOVEMBER, 1970 7  

Pte  

3