Gin't I A Woman?

I have been reading copies of your  
Paper and in the October 9th issue there  
is a double page spread of stories on the  
Panther, Constitutional Convention. The  
first story written by white women really  
horrified me at first. Then I read the  
second story which you credit as a reprint  
from Come Out where, also a white woman,  
at the Panther Convention was told by a  
friend that she came on like "whitey."

The first story written is full of  
racism - only the women writing it weren't  
even aware of it. It seemed to me a repe-  
tition of the women's movement when one  
of the leaders of the organization that  
worked closely with the abolitionist move-  
ment spoke out against "Sambo" after the  
Emancipation. This woman didn't have to  
put down Black people in her anger, but  
she did it and it was a discrediting  
affair to the women's movement.

A fat lot of good the Emancipation did  
is recorded in history and one of the big  
reasons for the calling of the Constitu-  
tional Convention.

I'd like to call your attention to the  
title of your paper. You know who said it  
and where it was said. I don't remember  
who wrote this in her memoirs - but as  
she was participating in a rather large  
meeting she was very upset when Sojourner  
Truth showed up at this Women's Convention.  
Yet, at this convention, Sojourner answered  
the stupid remarks made by prejudiced  
males in the most eloquent way. I came  
across this quote (of whoever this woman  
was who wrote this in her memoirs) and I  
copied it out in notes I was making on  
another subject - I was so afraid I might  
never again remember where to find it if  
I ever wanted to - I told my daughter  
about it - she was 9 or 10 years old then  
and every time parts of it were quoted we  
both used to rejoice.

My daughter introduced me to copies of  
your paper in the same way - the title  
meant Sojourner at the Convention (my  
daughter is 23 now). So, to read about the  
Constitutional Convention convened by  
Black people by racist sounding people in  
your paper is a hurt I can't quite describe.

I think white women are more alert to  
the Women's Liberation movement right now.  
This doesn't mean that Black women are not  
with it, there are other political prob-  
lems where Black people are concerned. I  
haven't heard of a police shoot-up of a  
Women's Liberation office or a Gay Liber-  
ation office. Angela Davis was put into  
solitary confinement on her arrest. Erica  
has been imprisoned for a year. When the  
establishment goes after Blacks they go  
with a vengeance. The writers in the arti-  
cle don't seem to understand anything of  
the Black people's problems, not only in  
the historical sense, the present period, too.

Sophie Wessel

AIN'T I A WOMAN? is published  
every three weeks by the Publi-  
cations Collective of the Iowa  
City Women's Liberation Front,  
P.O. Box 1169, Iowa City, Iowa  
52240.

We are a collective of 10 women  
functioning either as a front  
for a worldwide conspiracy of  
Radical Lesbians or the house  
cornfield of the women's Move-  
ment.

The voice of the Midwest needs to be  
heard in the Women's Liberation movement.  
Ain't I A Woman? will print without  
editing any laid-out page from a Midwest  
(New Mexico thru Ohio) Women's Libera-  
tion group. We would like to encourage  
other women to start working collective-  
ly to avoid elitism and destructive  
power relationships that pit us against  
each other. We will send details on  
deadlines, page size, column length,  
etc. if you would like.

Page 2

SOJOURNER TRUTH,  
“THE LIBYAN SIBYL."

“Think that's over, that's say that a woman  
needs to be helped into carriages and  
lifted over ditches, and to have the  
best place everywhere. Nobody ever  
helped me into carriages, or over mud  
puddles, or gives me a best place...

And ain't I a woman? Look at me.  
Look at my arm! I have plowed  
and planted and gathered into  
barns, and no man could head me...  
And ain't I a woman? I could work, as  
much and eat as much as a man when I  
could get it, and bear the lash as well...  
And ain't I a woman? I have born  
thirteen children and seen them  
most all sold off into slavery. And  
when I cried out with a mother's grief  
none but Jesus heard...  
And ain't I a woman?"

Sojourner Truth: Speech before the Women's  
Rights Convention at Akron, Ohio in 1851.

4.00 for

Send

By 4-year subscription

+o

Both Ne aA

$240  
bras or Enshiwtional  
prices “are $15.00

Volume 1 No. 9

——

If your group wants to receive bundles  
of AIN'T I A WOMAN?, send 15¢ per copy.  
Minimum bundle: 20 copies.