I've been with AIAW from the beginning  
and now after two years of working in WL  
in Iowa City I feel really burned out. My  
life has been shook up lately and because  
the problems I generally face when things  
get really bad in my life are survival  
ones (food, shelter, money) I've been  
questioning what I should be doing politi-  
cally. In the last 2 years I've struggled  
with community relationships, with coming  
out and working through my identity as a  
lesbian, and I've also really defined my  
politics through the analysis and discus-  
sion we've engaged in putting out the pa-  
per.  

These things have all been valid and  
important to me and I know that a lot of  
what's getting me down is a certain re-  
lationship having ended. Still it's the  
survival problems that make all the rest  
so hard to handle. So I've been thinking  
that what I need must be fought for and  
that the only radical struggle is the one  
that will end the imperialist and capital-  
ist system in this country and begin to  
equally distribute wealth and make retri-  
bution to the rest of the world.  

That struggle I know will have to be an  
armed one and perhaps we would all die. I  
am constantly thinking of Attica. So ba-  
sically I'm feeling frustrated that revo-  
lution seems so out of sight, and I'm un-  
sure of what more I have to say as far as  
publishing a paper.  

I'm also thrown by the dichotomy of  
being a lesbian who is beginning to see  
things in terms of a class struggle - who  
wants some material change so desperately -  
who perhaps would sacrifice much at this  
point for even minimal socialism.  

I'm not sure that class can be dealt  
with in the women's movement and I'm less  
sure that AIAW can display much class con-  
sciousness, can struggle adequately with  
that, especially if the two of us who are  
working class move away.  

In spite of all this I see little hope  
of struggling with class anywhere else  
and still feel that a paper engaged in  
self-criticism is important. So even  
though I feel hopeless about succeeding  
as far as class goes within the women's  

Before we can talk about direction,  
AIAW must come to grips with several ques-  
tions concerning class.  

1. How can a collective of all middle  

class women deal with class?  

2. If we decide that we as middle class  
women cannot speak to the issue of  
class in the Women's Movement, but  
still believe that it's a crucial  
issue and that without class con-  
sciousness any analysis we'd come  
up with would be meaningless, then  
the only politically correct thing  
to do would be to cease printing.  

If we decide we can as middle class women  
relate to class, then we must determine  
how, in what ways middle class women can  
do anything. One direction then we can  
take is to go more into theory -- like  
political economy. But here again there  
is the danger of any analysis we come up  
with not taking class into account enough.  

The only way we can personally write  
about class is from a middle class perspec-  
tive. This may be helpful to middle class  
women dealing with class, but I don't know  
how long it would be a valid way of deal-  
ing with class.  

When laboring under the possibility of  

finding that white middle class women can-  
not put out a paper that adequately deals  
with all women, it is difficult to talk  
about the direction AIAW will take. Unfor-  
tunately I feel that AIAW will be a middle  
class paper, read by middle class women.  
I can hope that we as middle class women  
can raise our consciousness about class  
and race and speak to those women of their  
privileges and affect their behavior.  
Women's Liberation cannot be a white  
middle class movement and hope to achieve  
an honest revolution. We must evaluate  
ourselves as white middle class people in  
the light of this while constantly trying  
to listen to working class and third world  
women -- not just when they're angry, but  
always. We can show ourselves dealing  
with the problems of race and class and  
hope that working class and third world  

women will tell us when we're full of shit,  
or on the wrong track.  

movement, I feel more hopeless about deal-  
ing with it anywhere else.  

I think this is a very crucial time  
both in the women’s movement and in the  
life of this newspaper. We're becoming  
more and more aware of how middle class  
the women's movement is, not only in its  
people, but in so many of its liberal  
reformist demands. A strong class anal-  
ysis is going to be imperative if we are  
to be anything other than a movement to  
make women more comfortable in a capita-  
list nation. Even though I know we're  
all struggling to raise our class con-  
sciousness and change our lives, I don't  
know that we can trust our analysis of  
any situation if we're all from white,  
upper middle class backgrounds.  

lesbianism. We identified collectively  
with radical lesbian politics. Our first  
realizations about class antagonism were  

Once, in a meeting, we were saying how  
getting into the Women's Movement had  
changed our lives. When it came around to  

me I made all of us laugh because I said  
"it's raised my standard of living." That  
was last fall. This time I don't think  
anyone will laugh. Our perspective on the  
standard of living of WL relates to pretty  
serious problems. Last year we could joke  
about our money. Class consciousness was a  
fuzzy, distant concept to me. I can't re-  
member analyzing our lesbian community  
lifestyle in terms of economic class from  
that comfortable perspective.  

Who we were speaking to then, I'm not  
sure. Now our priorities are more clear,  
and a lot of women don't want to deal with  
them. Those of us who are gay and working  
class had to deal with our lives; from  
there we began to see women, people we  
wanted to trust, refusing to take us ser-  
iously. Gay sisters were together and this  
collective had never been unserious about  

from events outside the working collective;  
it really started to be clear through the  
collective living and daycare struggles  

and in public speaking to outside groups.  

I think we knew it would be hard to begin  
dealing with class chauvinism in our col-  
lective because of the togetherness we had  
built up. Like I felt how can I tell women  
who helped me come out that they don't know  
what I'm feeling, they're oppressive. But  
that's not a valid reason for avoiding con-  
frontation and it became more and more up-  
tight. It was a coming out of a kind for  
some of us who had working class back-  
grounds but had been absorbed (partly) in-  
to a middle class lifestyle and identified  
very little with working class women in  
general. There were so few of us in the  
women's movement here....  

A Woman?  

October 15, 1971