c  
pasanaets’  

— ur  

Gesetide is not ae  

For some time now, Women's Liberation groups across the country have  
raised the demand for free and legal abortion as part of an overall demand  
for control over our own bodies. Other groups have called for extensive  
availability of birth control methods, legalized abortion laws and other  
measures to prevent overpopulation. More recently, a new demand has reached  
us: That we deal with the possibility that uncontrolled abortion and other  
methods of birth control could easily mean genocide for non-White peoples.  

q  
by Laura £ Pare  

-- white women  

Mi lt  

As a concrete example, it would be very simple to include sterilization  
after a certain number of children as a prerequisite to obtaining welfare  
payments, etc.  

We already know that women in cities all over the country are being  
sterilized without their knowledge or consent, perhaps after delivery of a  
child or during some other kind of operation. This happens with regularity  
in New York City to Black and Puerto Rican women. This is presumably done by  
doctors who feel they are doing it for the good of the women themselves and  
for the good of the world. But which world -- the white or the non-white?  
White America controls over 60% of the wealth of the world and consumes over  
60% of the world's raw materials. Certainly it would be to the benefit of  
the non-white peoples if there were fewer white people, particularly Americans.  

A growing group in the United States, called "Zero-Population Growth"  
supports forced sterilization programs in Third World Nations. Paul Ehrlich,  
chief spokesman for "Zero Population" and author of the Population Bomb,  
commented on a proposal to sterilize all males in India with three or more  
children: "We (the U.S. Government) should have applied pressure on the  
Indian Government to go ahead with the plan. We should have volunteered  
logistic support ... Coercion? Perhaps, but coercion in a good cause."  

Why is the advocacy of compulsory sterilization particularly directed  
at India? India's population per square kilometer was only 113 in 1957,  
while the population per square kilometer in England was 208, Belgium 288,  
and Holland 304. Why not direct resources into reclaiming land and making  
it more habitable? Or perhaps the justification was the periodic famines in  
India. In 1952, for example, 20 million Indians were starving, although  
India's Government warehouses were so full of food that the U.S. and Canada  
were asked to postpone shipments of wheat until the next year. After invest-  
igation, the author of a report in the New York Times concluded that, "India's  
current problem apparently is not a food shortage or famine, therefore, but  
widespread unemployment..."  

The real causes of starvation and poverty is not overpopulation but the  
poor distribution of wealth in the world, due to man-made institutions,  
barriers, and social conditions. Any person concerned with the population  
explosion who points first to Black and Third World peoples as a prime example  
of “too many kids" is in reality suggesting and inadvertently supporting an  
already existing program of Genocide.  

India is only one example. In Puerto Rico, birth control pills were  
tested for at least three years before they were allowed on the American  
market. In several Third World Nations, including Vietnam, experiments are  
being conducted with chemicals, to induce temporary sterilization. For some  
women the effects are permanent. These are subtle manifestations of the  
racism in this country which declares that non-white peoples simply aren't  
as important as whites.  

Groups concerned with "overpopulation" and Women's Liberation are going  
to have to deal with the fact that now, as in the past, demands by white  
groups can very easily be converted into justification for further oppression  
and loss of self-determination for the non-white peoples of the world.  

Racism has always allowed white people to gain "more freedom" at the  
expense of the rest of the world. Our demand must be analyzed in the light  
of our acknowledged racism. Abortions and other forms of birth control can  
continue to be legitimate demands of a group concerned with world liberation  
only if they are put forward as elective alternatives. Measures have to be  
found to prevent the possibility of coercion or ways in which they can be  
used for genocide. These measures must be included in our demands for self  
determination.  

Otherwise, we as two individual women who are working within the Women's  
Liberation Movement, feel that the demand for legalized abortion should not  
be pushed further.  

Reprinted from WL. Newsletter  
Wk Library, 131 So. Wrook St.  
Louisville, Kentucky 402035  

Volume, 2 No 10  

Page 4  

oer i  

Berkeley Tribe/Liberation News Service  

Berkeley (LNS)--One hundred and fifty women  
recently crowded into a Berkeley City Council meet-  
ing to demand a public hearing "at which all the  
raped women of Berkeley can finally speak, (and  
for which on-the-premises child-care must be made  
available to us.)" While the women presented their  
list of demands, one woman with a Winchester rifle  
in her hand stood at the council chambers' doors,  
guarding herself and the other women.  

These Berkeley women have been putting on spon-  
taneous guerilla theater skits in the streets and  
have made tape recordings to teach women how to  
deal with hecklers and rapists. They are encourag-  
ing women to pick up women hitchhikers and to at-  
tend self-defense classes.  

Their demands are as follows:  

1. Free, frequent public bus transportation  
for all women from dusk to dawn.  

2. Increased, improved adequate lighting for  
all neighborhoods, including the dark areas around  
all buildings.  

3. That landlords bear the total expense for  
effective security locks on all windows and doors  
of Berkeley apartments.  

4. That taxpayers' money be diverted from the  
Berkeley police budget into a fund to hire a staff  
of women trained in the psychology of rape. That  
these women will accompany the police on the initial  
investigation of all rape reports. (This is done  
in other countries)  

5. That further funds be diverted from the  
Berkeley police budget into the hands of all of the  
Women's Liberation groups in Berkeley to initiate  
and maintain public self-defense classes for all  
women in Berkeley.  

6. That self-defense training for all female  
schoolchildren be introduced throughout the Berkeley  
school system.  

7. That the City Council give Women of the  
Free Future adequate funds to draw up, print and  
circulate a pamphlet on How to Prevent Rape.  

8. That since the Berkeley police are either  
unable or unwilling to protect women against rape,  
any woman in Berkeley who feels that her life is  
threatened have the right to bear concealed or  
unconcealed loaded weapons which will deter rape and  
aid in her self-defense.  

Ain't £