KATHY

Kathy, pick up the gun

that your father used to kill
your mother.

It is yours.

It is your inheritance.

Take revenge on this putrid
patriarchal world.

Your mother's murder is part of
the world-wide woman genocide.

Your father is one of the everyday
murderers.

Seek revenge, Kathy.

Am I being followed?

What is that noise?

Planning my karate attacks.

If he's tall—kick him in the shins.

And do an elbow punch to his stomach.

If he's short—go for his eyes.

If he comes up behind me, smash his instep.

I hate it.

I hate it.

I hate the need to always be conscious of
my survival.

In my house.

Lock the doors.

Don't take a bath when no one else is home.

I try to ignore the cats which sound like
murders, rapists, intruders.
Watching kids—doubles, triples,
multiplies by thousands.
The caution.
The fear.
The need to protect.
What if something happened to one of them?
Can I really defend them and me?
I don't know.
I really don't know.
This constant fear.

And no one did.
Pure luck.

My fear of men is so deep-rooted.
So real.

Hundreds of men every day pass through the
cafeteria line.

And I think any one of these men

Could be a murderer.

The murderer of the student nurse who was
killed in her dorm room over spring
break.

Almost every one of these men

Is a personal threat to my life.

They hate women.

Want us destroyed.

They are so helpless and stupid.

"How do you get coffee?"

"Can I give you 3¢?"

"How does the creamer work?"

"I have the change"—and I know he hardly
ever does.

They spill things all the time.

And they take their inability to function

in this world

As a natural expected phenomenon.

They turn their inferiority into hatred.

Choose your weapons
And use your anger well.

Become a woman-loving woman. Newark and NYC.

I used to walk down the streets of

Brute obnoxiousness.
Slamming the money down.

Become strong and learn to resist: Alone; Throwing it all over
men. 

Leading a quacking toy duck on a string. When I told one of the men, half-smiling,
that he was a little slow in always having

Men are too dangerous to be with
And women are too beautiful to
neglect.
Pick up that gun, Kathy
And help us blow their world
to pieces.

PARANOIA

What I hate most about being
a woman

Is the unavoidable

Almost always present paranoia.

Every day.

Every day watching

Keeping my sixth sense of woman's
awareness

Alive and alert.

Walking down the street.

Where are all the cars?

Is anyone in them?

What's in that alley?

Pretending I was crazy
So maybe no one would bother me.

His money ready.
He replied,
"Oh, it's so nice you're so maternal.”
Everything of theirs is a distortion!
I fear their stupidity.
Their hatred.
Their envy of women.
Their physical strength.
I need a lesbian nation.
As a reality,
Not as a toy in my head.
Paranoia is one of the great contributors
To women being half people,
And I know that any woman's paranoia is
real.
I would like to get a gun.

= Rowboat

OOS
=

“The Enormous Contradiction
We Have Sold Ourselves”

The murder and suicide of Pat Cone and her ex-husband, respec-
tively, in Lone Tree last week is too "close to home" both liter-
ally (because she worked and had friends here in Iowa City) and sym-
bolically (because every woman has seen and/or felt violence done
by a man or men to her or a woman close to her) for us to just let
it go by.

It's time we saw the repeated fatal beatings, stranglings,
shootings of women by men close to them (we hear/see it on the
radio, TV, and newspapers every day) not as isolated incidents or
peculiar private crimes but as the product of the values our soc-
iety cherishes and promotes.

Males are socialized to see violence towards others, espec-
ially females, as a sign of affection. Females are socialized to
disarm their natural, self-protective instincts and to accept that
"VIOLENCE=LOVE" double-think as truth. For males in our culture,
violence serves two purposes: (1) as a defense and outlet for
hostility and (2) as a love message, a way of communicating af-
fection (or deep caring). "I can't live without you," so popular
in our songs and romantic myths, translates easily into: "so I'll
die unless I can have you." Similarly, "I don't want you to live
without me" becomes "I'll kill you if you leave me."

In school and families around the time of puberty, girls are
taught to double-think when violence is done to them by boys, to not
react naturally and fight back, but rather to interpret a boy's
hitting them as "he loves me!" This brainwashing is an important
factor in preventing a woman from taking action to stop a man's
hurting her. Similarly, it works as an effective stop to anyone
else's interfering when a man is seen—say, on the street—hitting
a woman. Onlookers assume that because it is or may be a lover's
quarrel, it's "their business" only.

Even the laws enforce that kind of mentality. In most states
there has been legal support of men's violent crimes against wives

A Werner?

June

22, 1973

or female lovers. Men's crimes in these cases usually take a
lesser penalty—manslaughter, for example, in the event of the
woman's death; whereas women's slaying their husbands or male
lovers often is seen as murder in the first degree. In some states,
even with the same charge, a woman has gotten a stiffer sentence
for her "family crime."

The enormous contradiction we have sold ourselves—that some-
one is beating someone else because he loves her—puts women who
relate to violent male lovers (this is, sooner or later, most men
in our society) in the hideous double-bind of always hoping for
affection from the person who physically abuses her. How can she
prevent her own harm? He might be nice tonight when he comes
home, so, she reasons, she shouldn't leave or call on friends or
the police to deter him from hurting her. Anticipating his vio-
lence might bring it down on her, she fears. And, anyway, he
may beat me a little when he’s upset but he's never seriously hurt
me.

Violence is violence. We should not see "slapping her around
a little” as different in kind (only in degree) from the violence
that ends in fatal beatings, stranglings, knifings, shootings.
Everything begins little. Extreme violence is not exceptional; it
is the natural escalation of small violent acts.

The number and frequency of beatings and other violent crimes
as a cause of women's deaths in this society are so common as to
be ignored as an unchangeable part of "the way things are."

But nothing is unchangeable. We need all women to get together
with other women you know to talk about male violence against females (yourselves or women close to you).
Sharing that grief and anger will help us understand what we live/have lived under, and will help us decide how to put an end to that
oppression.

The story of Goldflower is well-known in China. A woman badly
abused by her husband, Goldflower gained support in "speak bitter-
ness" meetings with other wives in her town. As a group, they
warned Goldflower's husband that violence has no place in his
treatment of his wife. Still, he beat her. Then the women of the
town went together to his house and beat him. Convinced, he chang-
ed his behavior; so did other men in the town.

Violence is no kin to loving. We must not lie to ourselves
about that anymore. We must teach our children the truth, too.

We must enforce our demand that violence against women stop. To do
that we must begin where we are, now.