The below excerpt is a section from LOOK FOR ME IN THE  
WHIRLWIND, The Collective Autobiography of the New York 21  

(Black Panther Party members indicted for allegedly "plot-  

ting to bomb public buildings.) The book is made up of short  
passages from the individuals involved talking about their  
childhood, their life, their political development and ac-  
tivities. It makes you happy and angry to read it--it did  
me. Especially stuff by Assata Shakur who sounds so incred-  
ibly tough. It gave me a few things to think about. Like  
all the people who were in the NY 21 did not have perfectly  
similar backgrounds--some were not so poor as others, some  
had acquired a lot of education, some hadn't. It made me  
real aware of the Black identity that was their unifying  
force--common experience. I thought about how women as a  
group (or the working class) have a less binding unity. On  
a broad base (common needs, oppression based on the same  
thing) women, gay people, working class people, poor people  
are each certainly unified but this society works so well  
to isolate woman from woman, poor from poor, etc., that  
all these groups have far from what could be called a com-  
munity. In a way the isolated community that Blacks have  
been forced into by this racist society has given them a  
base that they can turn around and use to fight from. In  
other ways too the tables seem to get turned like the level  
of toughness needed to survive in a ghetto can give one the  
tools--the ability--to fight those responsible for their  
oppression. It was also really good for me to think about  
Blacks ripping off each other (which several of the 21 talk  
about) in terms of the working class from which I come. It  
is so common and such a sign of powerlessness but it happens  
that it is easier to rip each other off in numerous ways than  
to attack the ruling class. Anyway the book is worth reading.  

JOAN BIRD: In February, 1971, I was thrown into the Women's House  
of Detention here in New York City again, at 10 Greenwich Avenue,  
in the middle of Greenwich Village, because two people had not  
appeared that day in court. I had been there two times before,  
once for a year and a half. The outer layers of this grotesque  
building are reddish-brown brick. Inside the prison, the walls are  
made of stone and the bars of steel and brass.  

On April 2, 1971, after we had been in pig D.A. Hogan's office  
all afternoon and also in court, it was very late, and Sister Afeni  
and the two other sisters who had been arrested at that time had  
been asking me about the Women's House of Detention and how I had  
found it, because I had been there. And I was telling them that  
although they were very hungry and very tired, they need not have  
the thought in their minds that they would be able to get a decent  
meal or be able to rest their heads down and relax for one moment,  
because it was impossible. And I was telling them that conditions  
were so horrendous and terrible that the hideousness of it would  
make you vomit. And I was telling them about the rats that run  
around at night. I was also telling them that when I had been  
there before, I did not receive any type of medical attention  
whatsoever for the beatings. And all these things they found out  
for themselves. And Afeni and I saw them clearly as all being  
directly a part of the jail experience.  

The sisters in there are actually very beautiful. Because  
they are all from the colony and they know about how rough it is  
and how hard it is to survive. And they know how to use differ-  
ent methods to get around and survive. When you are in there you  
learn to do some time, you learn that you can't actually control  
what is happening out there in the street. So you have to deal  
with what you are confronted with, and that is basically the  
Women's House of Detention. So that's the complication that we  
have to deal with. The sisters in there have come in and out of  
the House for years now. We found them to be very beautiful. I  
mean, there wasn't a time that we would actually have to want or  
need anything in terms of knowing how to jail--as far as linens  
or blankets or pillows or anything of that sort was concerned--  
because we always had a connection somewhere. You see, we always  
knew that they would do the same for us, and we would also do the  
same for them. There are both “detention women" and "sentenced  
women" there. The ages run from sixteen on up, to maybe 65.  

Upon entrance the women are taken to a section in the prison  
called the receiving room, which is located on the main floor.  
We are told to sit down on long, hard wooden benches on one side  
of the room, at which time you sit or sleep for hours until a  
guard--called "female officer"--is available to process you.  
First you are stripped of all your possessions--jewelry, money,  
watch, cigarettes, wig, pocketbook, etc. If a sister happens to  
be an addict who is sick and is asking for medical attention, she  
is told to shut up or is totally ignored. The prison's outstand-  
ing character is complete disregard for humanity, human life.  
There's a big sign in the receiving area: "You can write Legal  
Aid for a lawyer after you've been here two weeks."  

The next act of degradation and humiliation comes as the  
women are told that we must take a shower. For those sisters  
who are addicts and are sick with chills and sweats, this is the  
perfect opportunity for them to die of pneumonia. After this  
shower we are given a dingy cloth robe to wrap around our bodies  
and a pair of rubber shower slippers to put on our feet. We are  
sent to the back of the receiving room to once again sit and wait.  
Then the prison doctor comes in to search our bodies, internally  
and externally. This part of the processing is a standard rule  
of the prison. Those who refuse to be "finger searched" are then  
placed in a locked cell until they change their minds. The prison  
doctor goes along with the entire prison program in that he comes  
along when he wants to do searching, disregarding the bare fact  
that the women have been up for hours (up to ten hours) going  
through the prison authorities’ "procedures," and are tired and  
hungry and want most of all to sleep. The women are called into a  
dim and dirty office one by one and are told to lie down on an  
examining table with their legs spread wide apart, at which point  
the doctor jams his rubber-gloved index finger up the vaginal and  

rectal areas of the body. The authorities' attempted justifica-  
tion is that someone might be smuggling in drugs, weapons, chewing  
gum, cigarettes to take into population. Now the women are assigned  
to cells according to the alleged charge you are arrested for.  
Depending on what time of the day you are brought in, you might be  
fed possibly a slice of bologna on stale white bread and a cup of  
water or watery coffee or tea.  

Onto the elevator and onto your respective floor, and then to  
a cold, stone-wall cell not big enough to hold a hyena. Now you  
are double-locked in a cell until the following day when you are  
again taken to the receiving room to undergo further physical pain  
and mental torture of more alleged "medical" examination. The  
women's height and weight are taken, rectal temperature and blood  
pressure are taken, and a series of unrelated questions are asked.  
For instance: "Are you a virgin?" "When is the last time you  
have had sexual intercourse?”  

In the chaos of women sitting on benches and lying on the cold  
concrete floor--since there are never enough seats--each one is  
rushed into the doctor's office to face further maltreatment.  
Sisters are told to lie down on the examining table again and  
spread their legs wide apart so that this "healer of the sick" can  
jam a surgical clamp up into the vagina, whether the person is a  
virgin or not, frequently causing hemorrhaging and severe damage  
to internal female organs. The reason given for this morbid pro-  
cedure is that a Pap smear must be taken of every woman who enters  
the building. The entire ordeal is suffered by all women who are  
arrested.  

Up on the floors where the girls exist from day to day is  
found a world of maximum security in terms of its relationship to  
existence in the streets. On the street, which is a larger area,  
there are police precincts to patrol our communities; in prison  
there are two female guards assigned to each sixty or eighty women,  
patrolling every tier and corridor with keys which madly jingle,  
which communicate the thought imbedded in mind that only the  
guards can turn the key to unlock the gates.  

The fourth floor is specified for women who come in on drug  
busts, women who are kicking drugs--at which time you can hear  
cries of pain which are in vain for there is no help given to  
those in need. Women vomit, urinate, and kick in a cold cell all  
alone; also, the fourth floor is set aside for "diagnostic" cases,  
women whom the authorities claim cannot cope with jailhouse living  
and are classified as crazy--when actually any woman has a right  
to fuss and raise hell under the existing, deplorable conditions.  
And last the fourth floor is also used as a disciplinary area,  
Corridor 4A, which blocks off from the rest of the corridor 4B,  
4C, 4D. Women who talk after lights are out, who talk back to the  
guards in defense of true human rights are thrown into A as punish-  
ment for "offenses" against the established prison "rules and reg-  
ulations." These "punishment" and "psychiatric" cells are without  
beds, mattresses, or toilets. They had wash basins and water.  
There is no hot water in the punishment cells, but there is hot  
water in the psychiatric cells. Women live in these cells for  
months. They have to ask the officers when they need to go to the  
bathroom.  

The fifth floor is specified for drug addicts, robbers, and  
women who have been in jail before. Both adolescents and adults  
are on this floor.  

The sixth floor is a placement floor for what the authorities  
call "first offenders" and women with very serious crimes who are  
classified as "extremely dangerous." An example: homicide,  
conspiracy, and of all things, prostitution.  

The seventh floor is used basically the same as the fifth floor.  

Floors eight, nine, and ten are used for sentenced women who  
are doing up to a year. Eight is also used for detention women  
who are working, as a means of utilizing the time and the days and  
the months away until their court date. The eleventh floor is the  
hospital area and clinic area, which appear more as a morgue than  
an area to heal the sick. The atmosphere is not one which is ex-  
actly conducive to recovering and getting well. The twelfth floor  
is called the roof. Here there is an arts and crafts room where  
women can draw, two rooms where women can play cards and listen to