sity, which I'm attending to get my Ph.D. is providing  
this house, and...

THE ANSWER TO THAT IS:

Then don't. But there are gay women who aren't con-  
cerned with careers and reputations, there are gay women  
who don't even have that option. Those women want a  
room where they can have the option not to relate to  
straight women. Many gay women aren't in the privileged  
position of having an individual career, they come  
from a crowded mixed living situation with no opportunity  
to make it on their own. When the needs of gay  
women are considered, their individual needs are melded  
into the whole. There is no room for individualism when  
gains for the gay minority are strived for. The needs  
of those women with the least options must be met by  
the group first. These needs may seem insignificant to  
women who take for granted that all women are having  
their basic needs met, such as women who have indivi-  
dual careers.

Individualism also demands a woman justify her needs,  
justify why she deserves to have those needs met, just-  
ify her existence.

Liberals in Srbi

What need do lesbians have that aren't being met  
by the women's center in general? Aren't we all women,  
and isn't that our most important reason for coming to-  
gether? We are women first and lesbians second.

If we as gay women demand a room, this will unnec-  
essarily divide us as women. If we have a room gay  
women will spend all their time there and not relate to  
the straight women and that will just increase the dif-  
ferences between us. How will straight women understand  
if we don't relate to them and let them see what we're  
really like? We must all share this house.

We are all women and if we can just stick together we  
will succeed. But if we're always fighting with each  
other and can't agree on what we want--even us, all  
gay women--how can we succeed at anything?

Why should we, what gives us the right to take a room?  
If we do and don't let straight women in it, then we are  

Oppressing them the way they have oppressed us.

THE ANSWER TO THAT IS:

Yes, we are all women, but within that group there are  
different subgroups; and it is no use ignoring them.  
There are class differences, racial differences, and dif-  
ferent sexual orientations. Third World women and work-  
ing-class women have an experience that I haven't had and  
they have been oppressed not just as women but as work-  

Olver (S$ , 1A 2\

ing-class and Third World people. That separate oppress-  
ion like the oppression of gay women is something that  
each subgroup feels the need to discuss with women of  
like experience, partly because white, middle-class,  
straight women have been involved in oppressing these  
minority groups.

Why should the getting together of minority groups  
of women be seen as divisive? All of a sudden this is  
the divisive act, but why aren't the weeks and months  
spent talking in one large group of women where gayness,  
or racism or class were not discussed, considered just as  
divisive? The majority never deals with the minority  
unless forced to. That is one reason it is necessary  
for the minority group to get together--in order to con-  
front the rest of the women.

The forming of the gay cell here last year wasn't a  
divisive act. It helped us understand and accept our  
selves better; it gave us pride as gay women; and it  
gave us the strength and support to confront the rest of  
women's liberation about lesbianism. I would say that  
the gay cell reduced differences and divisiveness. Even  
though it was closed to straight women, it didn't isolate  
us from them; rather it reduced the isolation of gay women.

That we must all stick together without regard to  
difference, be concerned with straight women and their  
needs, implies that we are concerned with everyone's  
needs but our own. It sounds to me like we don't think  
ourselves very important. Certainly it is good to con-  
cern ourselves with the needs of straight women but not  
to the exclusion of our own. One thing is sure, no one  
else will concern themselves with the needs of gay women  
except gay women. And if we are off paying sole attention  
to the needs of others then no one will speak for  
us.

What would we succeed at if we did manage to bandaid  
our differences? We would succeed at the one, little,  
watered-down thing that we could all agree on. And how  
much good would that do? I doubt if it would bring any  
lasting changes.

It seems useless to lament differences in a group this  
way. They are there, we all know they are there and ig-  
noring them or lamenting them does nothing to eliminate  
them. If there are differences, let them surface so that  
they can be worked with. If unity is a goal then  
covering up differences isn't the road to it.

That is, assuming that unity is something to be  
strived for. The unity of gay women I would say is a  
goal that I am willing to struggle for. Many times,  
however, the unity rap has been given to women in very  
liberal ways and each time we bought it, we got sold down  
the river. Men in the new left intone it and when they  
do it means “sit quietly baby and the whole group (mean-  
ing males, who are not sitting quietly) will take care  
of your needs." Bullshit. Anti-war people say "Let's  
all stick together and end the war first and then we'll  
get to you." Bullshit, again.

Unity just for unity's sake isn't useful. It  
accomplishes nothing by itself. It must have a politically  
valid base in order to be meaningful. I am not  
concerned with unity with groups whose politics are  
racist, class chauvinist or anti-gay.

The argument that gay women having a room would be  
turning the tables of oppression and that then gay women  
would be oppressing straight women fails to consider a  
lot of things. It is an argument that is used a lot by  
males: “You are oppressing me and being unfair to me  
because you won't let me in your women's center or your  
meetings." These statements are based in the idea that  
if the oppressed obtain any gains they are either taking  
them away from the majority or oppressing the majority.  
They say that equality is oppressive. This ignores  
what has gone before. It is true that in order for  
there to be equality the majority may have to give up  
some things, but that is because the majority had all  
things to begin with and that is unequal. There is  
an analogy of a foot race that is helpful in understanding  
this. There are two runners and they have run 100  
yards, one with a 100-pound weight on her back and the other  
with no weight. The problem is how to make the race  
equal for the next 100 yards. Merely taking the weight  
from the one woman would not do it because it does  
nothing to change the distance she has fallen behind  
during the first 100 yards because of the weight. The  
only way to bring them to the equal positions they  
were when they started is for one woman to take on the  
weight of the other for the next 100 yards.

That there is not one room in this whole town for  
gay women to get together in is unequal. That the  
women's center gives one room to gay women begins to  
equalize that.

Page 1