CONNIE TRIMBLE, an 18-year-old black  
woman, is being held in Ramsey County jail  
in St. Paul on charges of murdering a  
St. Paul policeman last year. The police  
and court authorities' treatment of Connie  
is typical of the treatment given to all  
female and black prisoners. The bail,  
set at $50,000 ensures that she will re-  
main in jail. This means that she is  
not allowed to visit with her fifteen-  
month-old child. At her pre-trial hear-  
ing, when her mother came into the court-  
room with the baby, Connie cried and  
asked to hold him. The court refused.  

Despite the seriousness of the  
charges, the evidence presented by the  
prosecution in pretrial hearings is very  
questionable. Their main pieces of  
evidence are two voice prints they are  
trying to match up. Voice prints are  
very unreliable. One person's voice  
can make two different prints and two  
people's voices can make similar prints.  

The print of Connie's voice was  
obtained in a typically sneaky way. At  
the request of the St. Paul police,  
Connie's welfare worker called her into  
his office saying he needed more infor-  
mation to decide on her welfare status.  
While there, Carolyn Bailey, a police-  
woman posing as a welfare statistician  
called to talk to Connie and made  
several tapes of her voice. By help-  
ing the police in this trickery, the  
welfare department showed its true face.  

The crime of Connie Trimble is that  
she stepped out of her role. Connie is  
a black woman who has engaged in polit-  
ical activity in her community, something  
women are not supposed to understand  
and blacks are not supposed to do.  

An appeal sent by the Women's Action  
Committee, Box 7193 Powderhorn Station,  
Minneapolis, Minnesota, 55407 says:  

"We know that the St. Paul Police  
Department was under tremendous pressure  
to make arrests in connection with this  
case. Their target was a group of people  
working for human liberation. Prior to  
her imprisonment, Constance Trimble work-  
ed with a group of young blacks in St.  
Paul doing community organizing, the  
Inner City Youth League (ICYL). In  
recent months, the St. Paul Police Dept.  
has moved to frame other members of this  
same group. Ronald Reed, arrested for  
conspiracy to kidnap the governor of  
Minnesota and hijack a plane (these  
charges were later dropped), and  
Hogan arrested for bombing Dayton's in  
St. Paul, were also members of the ICYL.  
It is no coincidence that the charges  
should be similar to those being brought  
against others in other parts of the  
country.  

Women are attempting to help Connie  
by raising money for her defense and  
support for her in court. Expert wit-  
nesses in linguistics, ballistics, etc.--  
services which are automatically available  
to the prosecution--must be paid for.  
Collateral and money for bail are needed.  

Women are encouraged to come to the  
trial.  

There is a poster on sale to raise  
funds for Connie Trimble. See page 2.  

A WOMAN?  

ALDERSON IS A WOMEN'S PENITENTIARY IN WEST VIRGINIA, WHOEVER  

Sisters in Alderson, and sisters  
around the world, this is Pauline Collins  
speaking. I am now what our decadent  
system of prison would call a fugitive.  

I will not dignify this by the term  
"fugitive from justice." As things stand  
now there is no justice for Black sisters  
in this country. Actually, I was "liber-  
ated" from Alderson by revolutionary  
forces.  

This country is still holding fast to  
the "master-slave" syndrome in the treat-  
ment of its people. To quote a very  
fine person who happens to be locked up  
for his beliefs, "The mark of inhuman  
treatment of humans is the mark of the  
beast," whether its insignia is polit-  
ical procrastination or judicial double  
talk.  

I could have stayed in prison, but I  
know I could never be free in a society  
such as this. The same uptight living  
conditions, rotten courts, different  
strokes. Women are pretty far down in  
their scheme. Black women even farther.  
And a Black woman convict or ex-convict  
at the very bottom. The "beast mark" is  
shown through economic enslavement, social  
prejudices, barbaric prison system (And  
take it from me three hots and a cot  
don't make for a human prison system);  
whether it's outright murder of young  
intellectuals and students for no other  
reason than their political beliefs,  
this is still "the mark of the beast."  
Whether it be continued perpetuation of  
ghettoes and what they breed, rational-  
ization of police brutality, antiquated  
criminal and corrections system for the  
Blacks and Puerto Ricans and poor in our  
courts, while there is the extension of  
fast and liberal treatment to the white  
collar criminal "the mark of the beast  
is still there."  

The beast tries to be cunning in his  
propaganda, too. Dig the following: In  
New York City recently it was revealed  
that the system was paying for a welfare  
family to live in a vermin-infested hotel  
to the tune of what would have been  
$54,000 at the end of a year. This,  
rather than use the same amount of money  
to make several of these families  
self-sufficient, maybe. Their plan  
depends on keeping you in your place,  
you see.  

Nixon states that he would raise the  
poverty standards, while at the same time  
Reagan is cutting welfare checks. Medi-  
care and Medicaid take a cut while Apollo  
14 zooms to the moon. They now want to  
make John Connally secretary of the trea-  
sury, a man who obviously can't keep his  
own financial affairs straight.  

They claim inflation is tied to de-  
fense cuts. This so they can attempt to  
show that when you make illegal war and  
keep them going it boosts the economy.  
Then they have to name a panel, get this,  
to find jobs for the veterans of that  
war. Of course, some of them won't need  
jobs. A lot of our Black brothers won't.  
They are usually up front on the firing  
lines over there; the only time as a  
matter of fact we have ever been up front  
for anything.  
Let me tell you how the beast leaves  
his stamp on 800 sisters in Amerika in  

MARCH 12, 1971  

& WHEREVER YOU ARE, PAULINE, THANKS FOR THE LETTER.  

the Federal Prison system. These few  
forgotten souls, (and they are just that,  
souls I know, I lived with them and many  
are pure soul) have the mark of the beast  
on their minds and bodies forever.  

Make no mistake, the structure has no  
intention of giving up any of that power,  
willingly.  

For those few who may not know it,  
there is a movement, a revolution going  
on right now to do something about this  
medieval system.  

There is a group near each person  
listening to my voice. You have merely  
to look around. We do not play chief  
and peasants or any of the games of the  
system. We work side by side to help  
each other.  

Naturally my primary interest is  
Black Sisters. We are the most down-  
trodden, oppressed of all. The bottom  
of the heap in their weird priorities.  
Now that we stand up and refuse to pay  
any more dues, don't think the beast  
isn't frightened. Why do you think they  
are trying to get Angela? They have al-  
ways known that if and when we realized  
our potential, they were in trouble, bad!  
It is a known fact that the beast has  
a fear of coalitions of oppressed groups;  
but you can imagine how he feels about  
such a coalition with one of the most  
potent ingredients imaginable, the  
Black Woman.  

I can't stand behind a brother in  
this revolution, but I will stand beside  
one; and every time he fires on the beast,  
I'll fire. I will stand beside a sister  
when I know she's "aware." If a sister  
who hasn't suffered at the hands of this  
monster can do battle, can I do any less?  
And believe me, "If I cannot bend the  
higher powers, I'll shake the lower  
roots!"  

I'm sure you already know these  
things are true but just knowing they  
exist is not enough anymore. Now you  
have to stand up and be counted, and  
you have to act... Sisters, when you  
salute and say power remember that these  
are not empty phrases. There is power  
at the roots. Then too, the fist would  
not be necessary if this sick, psychotic  
dying excuse for a nation had not started  
it all in the first place.  

I feel absolutely no pity for what  
is happening to this republic. If the  
powers currently operating are not  
scared and running by now, they should  
be, because it's late, very late.  

In closing I would like to say:  
the underground already realizes what  
hour this is. They understand: they  
dig their strength which is beautiful.  
They have given me love, help, and care,  
and an inside view of togetherness. They  
operate efficiently and intelligently,  
and I am a living witness to this.  

When a woman is beaten and pounded and  
scarred for any length of time, sometimes  
this has the effect of a chisel on rock  
and the shape that emerges is beautiful  
in form and strength, though the  
sculptor may have intended to create  
an animal.  

Pauline Collins  

Page 3