bes eae eee! aS

a Jughh OT

WOMANY

The weekend of Oct. 9-10 five members  
of the gay cell of women's liberation in  
Iowa City attended the Midwest Gay Liber-  
ation conference in Minneapolis sponsored  
by FREE, Freedom from Repression of Erotic  
Expression. We knew that some women in  
gay women's liberation there were going to  
try to get the women together separately.  
We arrived in the hall at which the meet-  
ings were to take place to witness a typ-  
ical interchange. The males had just  
asked the gay sisters how they wished to  
relate to the conference and while the  
sisters were getting ready to speak to  
this, the men began to discuss women's  
oppression and how they can relate to it.  
We could say nothing. The sisters from  
Iowa City exchanged glances that said this  
is why we want to meet with the women  
alone.

The women adjourned to a day care cen-  
ter on another floor to decide how we  
wanted to relate to the conference. Some  
wanted to meet with the men; others did  
not. The women that were in mixed gay  
liberation groups felt a strong bond with  
their gay brothers stemming from their  
common oppression. The Iowa City sisters  
thought that it could benefit only the men  
to meet in mixed groups--it would do no-  
thing to bring women together. We felt  
lesbianism was not a priority of the males  
that made up a good majority of the con-  
ference and that we would not be able to  
participate fully. Homosexual and les-  
bian experience are very different, es-  
pecially when lesbian oppression is seen  
as an integral part of women's oppression.  
The women decided to meet separately all  
weekend at a nearby women's collective  
and that those who wanted to were to meet  
with the males at 10:30 Sun. to help them  
deal with their sexism.

It was around noon on Sat. when all the  
women got to the collective. There were  
about 25 of us all crammed into the liv-  
ing room. We went around the room with  
everyone saying their name, where they  
were from and what they wanted to talk  
about. There were women from Minneapolis,  
St. Paul, Dekalb Ill, Lawrence Kansas,  
Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Louis, and Iowa  
City. We broke up into three small groups  
with each town represented and talked all  
afternoon until we had sandwiches at 4:00.

We talked about how or whether butch/fem  
relationships are oppressive, working in  
mixed gay liberation groups, consciousness  
raising, helping gay people with gay prob-  
lems, the situation and experience of old-  
er lesbians, the revolutionary people's  
constitutional convention, the position  
of bisexual women, psychiatry, the oppres-  

sion of people who are considered ugly by  
society, sisterhood, the problems in try-  
ing to make relationships more collective,  
and gay women's collectives. In these  
groups and throughout the weekend we were  
struck by the strong feeling of warmth and  
sisterhood.

After eating the sandwiches we all met  
together to discuss the revolutionary  
people's constitutional convention, how  
we wanted to relate to it and have the  
gay liberation movement relate to it. We  
formulated two demands which we presented  
to the male homosexuals: 1. That in their  
delegation to the convention, GLF make  
their priorities those of third world  
peoples, women and lesbians. 2. That for  
every male homosexual on the delegation  
there be two lesbians and third world  
women.

A group of about ten of us drove to  
where the men were meeting to present the  
demands. We were to be there at 5:00,  
the time arranged that morning. The men  
were sitting in a large group discussing  
racism. The third world gay revolutionar-  
ies had felt the need to caucus because of  
the racism in the group and had confronted  
the white males with their racism. As we  
walked in a group of males left saying it  
was time for a coffee break. We stood  
there in a group waiting to be recognized.  
They asked if we wanted to join their dis-  
cussion on racism. We said no and that we  
had talked about it separately and had come  
only to present to them our decision on the  
revolutionary people's constitutional con-  
vention. We still were not recognized by  
the chair so during a silence we began  
reading our demands. What ensued, whether  
intentional or not, was a case of racism  
being used to divide black males and white  
females who basically understood each other  
pretty well, but who lacked the tools to  
control the situation. (We were called  
racists many times by the white males,  
but not once by the black males.) Later,  
the gay liberation organization accepted  
our demands.

When we returned to the women's collec-  
tive, we discussed how we could have been  
more together in our confrontation. The  
confrontation alienated several women who  
work within FREE, and some sisters felt  

that if we had stuck to our original idea  
of just presenting the demands with no  
discussion, their anger could have been  
prevented. Women must be strong when con-  
fronting male groups because the males  
will bring up issues that attempt to di-  
vide women against each other by class,  
race, or threatening us with our abnorm-  
ality because of our non-acceptance of the  
heterosexual norm.

Saturday night we all went to Honey's,  
a lesbian bar. When we walked in Honey  
shouted "How many of you are from Women’s  
Lib?". We all raised our fists. It was  
a wonderful welcome. We'd never been to  
a gay bar that had such a sense of com-  
munity. The atmosphere wasn't competitive,  
not much role playing, not tough or up-  
tight, no one was hassled, quite a few  

older people, and the women there felt  
free enough to dress like men if they  
wanted to. While they were dancing, the  
women would sing together the defiant  
phrases: “let me be myself", "I am gay",  
and "we shall overcome". About 15 of us  

danced in a big circle with our arms on  
each other's shoulders to ‘What have they  
done to my song'. We got high from the  
sisterhood of it.

The conference was a good experience and  
we made new friends. A community of mid-  
western gay women is developing and we may  
hold a retreat at Thanksgiving time. We  
think this would be a good idea and that  
it would solve the major problem the con-  
ference had--male domination. Half the  
short time we had together was spent talk-  
ing about men, problems of women in mixed  
GLF groups and how we should relate to the  
FREE conference going on around us. Al-  
though we realize the need of gay women to  
do consciousness raising on their relation-  
ships to men, we also realize that women  
are afraid to confront themselves by re-  
lating to other women and so tend to talk  
about men. Women need to get themselves  
together so we can relate to each other  
without distraction and get on with the  
business of defining our own needs and  
building a strong women's movement.

REBIRTH

Last night I was driving alone. I had  
just spent three days at a Gay Liberation  
Conference in Minneapolis with part of the  
gay cell from Iowa City WLF. This was the  
first conference of any type for me; I'm  
only 1 month old/new.  
One month ago I entered a Women's Libera-  
tion Collective merely fulfilling a weekly  
favor to a friend in relation to my job.  
I entered both apprehensive and curious; I  
left feeling the same. The next week after  
thinking things out for 5 days, I returned  
less apprehensive, but just as curious.  
After fulfilling my weekly duty, I decided  
to stay another day in order to talk to the  
women who weren't there and would be re-  
turning the following day. The day was  
filled with house duties I normally would  
appall, but because they were done collect-  
ively I wanted to help. During these days,  
I listened to the various discussions and  
talked to several individuals. This time I  
left very reluctantly. My reason for going  
every week had folded, so two weeks passed  
before I decided to go back. I really  
missed the sense of community and sister-  
hood the women in the collective offered,  
fulfilled, and instilled in me each in their  
own and individual way. This particular  
weekend I found myself ACTUALLY GOING to  
a Gay Liberation Conference. (Don't miss  
the write-up about it.)  
Ever since, I've been trying to decide  
how I could possibly describe the way I  
was feeling that evening when I left the  
sisters in Iowa City and returned to the  
straight and narrow. Like most things beau-  
tiful, it's next to impossible to express  
an emotion in words. The closest I can come  
is contained in the word "rebirth." Think  
about the days and years before you were  
born or the months in your mother's womb.  
(Take a minute to really think about them.)  
Do you miss them? This is the  
way I feel about the years before Women's  
Liberation. Actually, I don't feel any-  
thing about them except wonderment at how  
many days and years passed without any  
consciousness on my part about ALL the op-  
pressed women in the world.  
Now take two minutes to think about the  
days and years after your death and the  
unborn sisters to come.

Moments, days, and years that matter. I  
feel like standing up and shouting I'M  
ALIVE AND I LOVE YOU. Do it to the next  
woman you see, look at her face, and you'll  
know how oppressed we've been.

I'm sure the women already in Women’s  
Liberation have felt this sense of rebirth  
at one time or another, so I'm writing  
to express my deep gratification to them  
and to YOU who aren't in the movement.  
Investigate, talk, participate.