PY GrandndSO9s Fave  
Toll”

Alice and Sam were fighting all the time. Alice is the daughter  
of a feminist, gay woman and already has quite a consciousness.  
She doesn't like Sam much, but it got to the point where we had to  
cool some of the fighting between them. So, Alice invented this  
game called 'ghost' where she'd walk around with Sam holding an  
oversized plastic play hammer looking for ghosts. All of a sudden  
Alice said, "Sam, there's a ghost on your back." Sam cocked his  
head and said, “ohhh?" Then Alice said, "Well, we'd better get  
him." She raised the hammer and hit Sam on the back. He said,  
"Hey, that's my back." What a con job!

**The twins suddenly started saying this in response to any request  
even though their grandmothers live miles away and they see them  
about twice a year.

Gladys pissed her pants so she could have  
a different change of clothes.

p stink " So

~—_

Today the plumber came to daycare. Afterwards Gladys  
said to Jane, “you be the man, ok?" "ok and I'll  

go up and fix the potty." Then looking at the space  
where the stool was  

a bunch of women here had a talent show  
to raise money for Sparky. Lots of kids came  
and ran around making noise which was  
a hassle at times. I was in the wings for  
one point eyeing a winner across the way.  
She was tidying, so Mary put her hands  
over her mouth. “After she quieted down and  
Mary removed her hands, the twither kept  

her own hands pasted across her face  
with a bursting expression that cracked  

me up.  

..."Where's the potty?"

Teri has a chapped  

because all his shirts  
are too short and on the  
play structures he digs too  
deep. Teri and I were riding in the car, and she was asking me  

a whole string of why questions, like she was always doing then.  

I'd give an answer and she'd say, "Why?" Then I'd explain that, and  

she'd say "Why?" again. I was trying to be real patient,  

but pretty soon I got exasperated and said, "Teri, why do you  

say WHY all the time?" She looked at me with this proud look on  

her face and said, "I say why ALL DAY LONG!!!"  

I don't WANT to go potty!

I'm in love with Gladys which has nothing to do  
with the price of beans especially if you don't know  
her or her twin sister. They are three years old and  
remind me of Groucho and Harpo Marx. They're really  
funny and seem to be spoofing everybody. I walked  
into daycare yesterday feeling pretty sick. I had  
diarrhea. Teri said she had it too. She's three  
and whines and cries a lot but is a tough little  
woman in her own way. She said her diarrhea was  
a drag which is what I tell her about her crying  
and what she tells me in return about everything.

I tried to lay down on the couch but Gladys jumped  
and crawled all over me saying, "I eat diarrhea."  
Meanwhile, Maria and Sidney (adults) were talking  
about the women's talent show that was coming up.  
All of a sudden Alice and Mary (2 four-year-olds)  
closed the big wooden doors between the living room  
and the hall and stairway that leads upstairs. Then  
they opened them and began their own women's talent  
show with Alice's quirky movie act full of punches and  

BIG PERSON: "Why is the potty clogged?"  
LITTLE MARY: "Because Joe flushed his  
underpants down it."

Teri has been raised on health food, and isn't allowed  
candy or coke or things that aren't good for her. At a  
birthday party the other week she was gorging herself on  
cake, popcorn, punch, and anything else she could get her  
hands on. One time I went upstairs and passed her sitting  
alone on the landing stuffing popcorn into her mouth saying  
over and over, "Shit food! Shit food! Shit food!"

Max the Gorilla lives in Sparky's Basement

child proof your home!

Every house or apartment should be safe for  
kids - whether kids live there or not.

When I take kids someplace that's set up with only adults in mind, it means more work for me to ask the kids closely and there is immediately  
no reason for endangering the life or  
health of a child.  
SOME THOUGHTS TO KEEP IN MIND:  
1. Don't keep cleaners and other poisonous  
stuff under the sink. Put all that stuff up  
high, out of reach or locked up.  
2. Everyone knows they're supposed to keep  

medicine out of kids' reach but often don't  
do it. Put a lock on your medicine cabinet.  
Put razor blades in there too.

Don't leave water in a bathtub. Drain  

Keep small dangerous items off the floor  
that babies might put in their mouths.  
Tape over wall sockets not being used.  
Put electrical cords out of reach.

Take knobs off gas stoves.

Always turn handles of pans in so they  
don't stick out past the edge of the stove.

strong movements and some theme centered around beating  
up a man, eating him and vomiting him up. Alice  

and Mary did a lot of dancing and Gladys and Jane joined  
in. They all fought the boys off their stage and made  
them sit in the audience. It was great. Sam is four  
and he freaked out about not being able to be in the  
show. Joe is two and didn't really understand the dia-  
lectics of what was happening but put on a baseball cap  
and stalked away. I love those kids.

Put sharp knives up high.

For babies that crawl, put gates on  
stairs or have some way of blocking them  
off.

Put locks on basement doors or any  
doors leading to stairs.

Paint, turpentine and other "basement  
stuff" that's poisonous should be put out  
of reach even if you think kids won't be in  
the basement.

Get rid of tablecloth type things that  
can be pulled down. Heavy things fall on  
kids that way.