yomen could be confronted directly. As we well know, these efforts  
have not prevented the informal male-only networks from discrimi-  
nating against women, but they have made it more difficult.  

Since movement groups have made no concrete decisions about who  
shall exercise power within them, many different criteria are  
used around the country. Most criteria are along the lines of  
traditional female characteristics. For instance, in the early  
days of the movement, marriage was usually a prerequisite for  
participation in the informal elite. As women have been tradition-  
ally taught, married women relate primarily to each other, and  
look upon single women as being too threatening to have as close  
friends. In many cities, this criterion was further refined to  
include only those women married to New Left men. This standard  
had more than tradition behind it, however, because New Left men  
often had access to resources needed by the movement—such as  
mailing lists, printing presses, contacts and information—and  
women were used to getting what they needed through men rather  
than independently. As the movement has changed through time,  
marriage has become a less universal criterion for effective par-  
ticipation, but all informal elites establish standards by which  
only women who possess certain material or personal characteris-  
tics may join. They frequently include: middle-class background  
(despite all the rhetoric about relating to the working class);  
being married; not being married but living with someone; being  
or pretending to be a lesbian; being between the age of twenty and  
thirty; being college educated or at least having some college  
background; being "hip"; not being too “hip"; holding a certain  
political line or identification as a "radical"; having children  
or at least liking them; not having children; having certain  
"feminine" personality characteristics such as being "nice";  
dressing right (whether in the traditional style or the anti-  
traditional style); etc. There are also some characteristics  
which will almost always tag one as a "deviant" who should not  
be related to. They include: being too old; working full time,  
particularly if one is actively committed to a "career"; not being  
"nice"; and being avowedly single (i.e., neither actively hetero-  
sexual nor homosexual).  

Other criteria could be included, but they all have common themes.  
The characteristics prerequisite for participating in the informal  
elites of the movement, and thus for exercising power, concern  
one's background, personality, or allocation of time. They do  
not include one's competence, dedication to feminism, talents,  
or potential contribution to the movement. The former are the  
criteria one usually uses in determining one's friends. The latter  
are what any movement or organization has to use if it is going  
to be politically effective.  

The criteria of participation may differ from group to group,  
but the means of becoming a member of the informal elite if one  
meets those criteria are pretty much the same. The only main  
difference depends on whether one is in a group from the beginning,  
or joins it after it has begun. If involved from the beginning it  
is important to have as many of one's personal friends as possible  
also join. If no one knows anyone else very well, then one must  
deliberately form friendships with a select number and establish  
the informal interaction patterns crucial to the creation of an  
informal structure. Once the informal patterns are formed they  
act to maintain themselves, and one of the most successful tactics  
of maintenance is to continuously recruit new people who "fit in."  
One joins such an elite much the same way one pledges a sorority.  
If perceived as a potential addition, one is "rushed" by members  
of the informal structure and eventually either dropped or initi-  
ated. If the sorority is not politically aware enough to actively  
engage in this process itself it can be started by the outsider  
pretty much the same way one joins any private club. Find a spon-  
sor, i.e., pick some member of the elite who appears to be well  
respected within it and actively cultivate that person's friend-  
ship. Eventually, he will most likely bring you into the inner  
circle.  

All of these procedures take time. So if one works full time  
or has a similar major commitment, it is usually impossible to  
join simply because there are not enough hours left to go to all  
the meetings and cultivate the personal relationships necessary to  
have a voice in the decision-making. That is why formal structures  
of decision-making are a boon to the overworked person. Having an  
established process for decision-making ensures that everyone can  
participate in it to some extent.  

Although this dissection of the process of elite formation  
within small groups has been critical in perspective, it is not made  
in the belief that these informal structures are inevitably bad—  
merely inevitable. All groups create informal structures as a  
result of the interaction patterns among the members of the group.  
Such informal structures can do very useful things. But only un-  
structured groups are totally governed by them. When informal  
elites are combined with a myth of "structurelessness," there can  
be no attempt to put limits on the use of power. It becomes  
capricious.  

This has two potentially negative consequences of which we  
should be aware. The first is that the informal structure of  
decision-making will be much like a sorority—one in which people  
listen to others because they like them and not because they say  
significant things. As long as the movement does not do signifi-  
cant things this does not much matter. But if its development is  
not to be arrested at this preliminary stage, it will have to alter  
this trend. The second is that informal structures have no obliga-  
tion to be responsible to the group at large. Their power was not  
given to them; it cannot be taken away. Their influence is not  
based on what they do for the group, therefore they cannot be  
directly influenced by the group. This does not necessarily make  
informal structures irresponsible. Those who are concerned with  
maintaining their influence will usually try to be responsible.  
The group simply cannot compel such responsibility; it is dependent  
on the interests of the elite.  

The ‘Star’ System  

The idea of "structurelessness" has created the "star" system.  
We live in a society which expects political groups to make deci-  

a Ween P  

June 16, 1972  

sions and to select people to articulate those decisions to the pub-  
lic at large. The press and the public do not know how to listen  
seriously to individual women as women; they want to know how the  
group feels. Only three techniques have ever been developed for  
establishing mass group opinion: the vote or referendum, the public  
opinion survey questionnaire, and the selection of group spokes-  
people at an appropriate meeting. The women's liberation movement  
has used none of these to communicate with the public. Neither the  
movement as a whole nor most of the multitudinous groups within it  
have established a means of explaining their position on various  
issues. But the public is conditioned to look for spokespeople.  

While it has consciously not chosen spokespeople, the movement  
has thrown up many women who have caught the public eye for vary-  
ing reasons. These women represent no particular group or estab-  
lished opinion; they know this and usually say so. But because  
there are no official spokespeople nor any decision-making body  
the press can query when it wants to know the movement's position  
on a subject, these women are perceived as the spokespeople. Thus  
whether they want to or not, whether the movement likes it or not,  
women of public note are put in the role of spokespeople by default.  

This is one main source of the ire that is often felt toward  
the women who are labeled "stars." Because they were not selected  
by the women in the movement to represent the movement's views,  
they are resented when the press presumes that they speak for the  
movement. But as long as the movement does not select its own  
spokeswomen, such women will be placed in that role by the press  
and the public, regardless of their own desires.  

This has several negative consequences for both the movement and  
the women labeled "stars." (1) Because the movement didn't put  
them in the role of spokesperson, the movement cannot remove them.  
The press put them there and only the press can choose not to lis-  
ten. The press will continue to look to "stars" as spokeswomen  
as long as it has no official alternatives to go to for authorita-  
tive statements from the movement. The movement has no control in  
the selection of its representatives to the public as long as it  
believes that it should have no representatives at all. (2) Women  
put in this position often find themselves viciously attacked by  
their sisters. This achieves nothing for the movement and is  
painfully destructive of the individuals involved. Such attacks  
only result in either the woman leaving the movement entirely—  
often bitterly alienated—or in her ceasing to feel responsible  
to her "sisters." She may maintain some loyalty to the movement,  
vaguely defined, but she is no longer susceptible to pressures  
from other women in it. One cannot feel responsible to people who  
have been the source of such pain without being a masochist, and  
these women are usually too strong to bow to that kind of personal  
pressure. Thus the backlash to the "star" system in effect en-  
courages the very kind of individualistic non-responsibility that  
the movement condemns. By purging a sister as a "star," the move-  
ment loses whatever control it may have had over the person, who  
then becomes free to commit all of the individualistic sins of  
which she has been accused.  

Political Impotence  

Unstructured groups may be very effective in getting women to  
talk about their lives; they aren't very good for getting things  
done. It is when people get tired of "just talking" and want to  
do something more that the groups, unless they change the nature  
of their operation, flounder. Because the larger movement in  
most cities is as unstructured as individual rap groups, it is  
not too much more effective than the separate groups at specific  
tasks. The informal structure is rarely together enough or in  
touch enough with the people to be able to operate effectively.  

So the movement generates much motion and few results. Unfor-  
tunately, the consequences of all this motion are not as innocu-  
ous as the results, and their victim is the movement itself.  

Some groups have turned themselves into local action projects  
if they do not involve many people and work on a small scale. But  
this form restricts movement activity to the local level; it can-  
not be done on the regional or national. Also, to function well  
the groups must usually pare themselves down to that informal  
group of friends who were running things in the first place. This  
excludes many women from participating. As long as the only way  
women can participate in the movement is through membership in  
a small group, the non-gregarious are at a distinct disadvantage.  
As long as friendship groups are the main means of organizational  
activity, elitism becomes institutionalized.  

For those groups which cannot find a local project to which to  
devote themselves, the mere act of staying together becomes the  
reason for their staying together. When a group has no specific  
task (and consciousness-raising is a task), the people in it turn  
their energies to controlling others in the group. This is not  
done so much out of a malicious desire to manipulate others  
(though sometimes it is) as out of a lack of anything better to do  
with their talents. Able people with time on their hands and a  
need to justify their coming together put their efforts into per-  
sonal control, and spend their time criticizing the personalities  
of the other members in the group. Infighting and personal power  
games rule the day. When a group is involved in a task, people  
learn to get along with others as they are and to subsume personal  
dislikes for the sake of the larger goal. There are limits placed  
on the compulsion to remold every person in our image of what they  
should be.  

The end of consciousness-raising leaves people with no place to  
go and the lack of structure leaves them with no way of getting  
there. The women in the movement either turn in on themselves and  
their sisters or seek other alternatives of action. There are few  
that are available. Some women just "do their own thing.” This  
can lead to a great deal of individual creativity, much of which is  
useful for the movement, but it is not a viable alternative for  
most women and certainly does not foster a spirit of cooperative  
group effort. Other women drift out of the movement entirely be-  
cause they don't want to develop an individual project and they  
have found no way of discovering, joining, or starting group pro-  
jects that interest them. (cont: on Page »  

Page 3