i” Vey.

f ORO

ed

Women with kids can't just do anything
anytime--women with kids often feel oppres-
sed just as gay women did and still do
when they are among people who are not
conscious of their hassles and their lives.
Often women with kids are isolated so that
they aren't even aware of any alternative
to staying home. It's incredibly pain-
ful to think of all the women who are with
their kids constantly, thinking that there
is no way out, and for many of them, at
this time, there isn't. In a way, I think
married women with kids have the most e-
laborate systems for coping with daily
hassles that most other people would not
be able to bear. I'm sure that one of the
main reasons some women just can't get
it together to leave their husbands or
male lovers is that they get some help
from them with the kids which they wouldn't
get if they were alone. And that they
don't expect their women friends to give
them.

It's easy to say "Well, that woman has
kids, so she must have wanted them." That's
false. There were so many (and are so ma-
ny) women who got pregnant because they
didn't have good contraceptive methods,
they couldn't afford abortions, or at the
time, they didn't think they could handle
having an abortion. When I think how
much I've changed in the last 3 years, I
have a great understanding of the diffi-
culty of women who had kids and now find
that they can't take all that having
children involves--they can't do it alone,
anyway. A few years ago I would have
loved to have a child. Now, I'm incred-
ibly happy that I didn’t. It would have
meant the possibility of having total re-
sponsibility. And I know I don't want
that now.

ya,’

a ose

PRS et IEEE
Rte SOOO
i, Lo SOE

Ne

.

fe

THINGS WOMEN WITHOUT CHILDREN CAN DO TO SHARE

RESPONSIBILITIES OF WOMEN WHO LIVE WITH KIDS

1. Offer to babysit.

2. Ask questions about anything you're un-
sure of--changing diapers, feeding, etc.

3. Don't expect to like all kids, but
don't expect to hate them all, either. The
statement "I hate children" which I've
heard from a lot of adults, is as despic-
able as saying “I hate blacks."

4. Child-proof your house. Move poison-
ous substances out from under the kitchen
sink and all other low places. If you
have possessions that you don't want played
with by kids, either have things out of
reach, move them when the kids come over
or have a couple of things that kids can
play with so they won't get into other
things. (Pots and pans and spoons and
newspaper are good for babies to play
with.) :

5. Offer to take kids for weekends or
several days to give women with kids a va-
cation. This could be done collectively
with several people helping take care of
the kids. This shouldn't just be done for
emergencies or special occasions.

6. Don't make women with kids feel embar-
rassed or uptight because they have kids.

Don't make them feel like they're burden-
ing you when they bring their kids to your
house.

7. Make sure that childcare is available
for all conferences and meetings. We
should make sure women with kids have
childcare for parties and social things,
too. This should not have to be the sole
responsibility of women with children.
Women without children should take it up-
on themselves to make sure that childcare
is provided.

8. When you're visiting a home where there
are kids, help care for the kids, even
when their mother or another person that
lives with them is home.

9. When discipline or socialization
things come up with kids, go ahead and
deal with them with the kid. Don't as-
sume that because a woman had the kid pop
out of her that she knows the best way to
discipline/socialize or be “right on."
Talk with women with kids about all that.

This letter is written to Martha so that
I could get all my feelings out about wo-
men with kids as opposed to women without
kids. What I've felt might be worthwhile to get down.

Dear Martha,

I think we are probably in a situation
that is common to a lot of gay women, so
maybe if I try and analyze it, it will
be helpful to lots of women.

Several months after we started being
close, loving friends, I realized that
there was a significant part of my life
that you didn't relate to--the children
I live with. You weren't interested in
them or the ways they were a part of our
lives (mine and the woman I live with).
When you and a lot of my other friends
were visiting here, I always felt ashamed
of the hassle, chaos and disorder of the
place we live. I envied the orderly din-
ners, quiet evenings, uninterrupted nights
and leisurely mornings you and my other
friends who don't live with children have.
I was hesitant to ask people over because
I knew there would be things happening
here that would unnerve some people. I
was paranoid that some friends didn't
come over because of the kids. One night
I was alone with the kids and wanted to
be with you and several other women.
You said you were going out to dinner and
that I should come along. I explained
that I would have to bring the kids. Af-
ter a hesitant sigh, you said that you
had a headache and didn't think you could
take being with the kids. When that hap-
pened, I resented both the kids and you.
They were keeping me from doing what I
wanted/needed to do and you were insen-
sitive to my needs. Kids don't disappear
when their mothers have a headache or are
depressed or tired--not unless someone
takes them away.

Now, after a couple months of feeling
undercurrents of hostility toward you and
other women who haven't helped with our
kids, I know that we have both been guilty
of incorrect things. I should have been
more honest about my anger, rather than
letting it just sit inside me. I should
have asked for help when I wanted it.

You should have been more aware of my re-
sponsibilities with the kids. —

When we finally did talk about the whole
subject, a lot of things were cleared up.
You and other women who don't live with
children or work in childcare or have
younger brothers or sisters were honest
about your problems in getting into kids.
When you told me you were afraid of kids
because you were worried they would re-
ject you, I was surprised. That thought
had never occurred to me. Many women are
nervous about not knowing how to do things
that kids need done for them--feeding,
diapering, etc.

I have a handle on how to deal with
everything now. First, you and all other
women who are uptight about being around
kids should talk about why. Ask questions
and if you are unsure about what to do in
a situation, we can talk about it. We can
show you how to do things children need
done for them.

I was afraid to say a lot of this--afraid
to be honest about my resentment. I was
afraid you would be defensive.

I love and need to escape to your house
sometimes--for the quiet. But I would like
so much for us to sometimes take care of
the kids together. I want you to know them
and care about them and love them. I want
you to be amazed at the way they learn and
laugh when they do funny things. I expect
that they will annoy and hassle you some-
times. They do that to me, too.

I can imagine the pain of a gay woman
with children whose friends and lovers can't
relate to her kids.

E

10. When in a situation with kid and mo-
ther (or woman who kids are used to de-
manding from) you should even over-compensate.
Be alert to what's happening between kid
and woman. When the kid always goes to
the woman they're used to, it's probably
easy to just let that woman "wait" on the
kid. You have to tell the kid "you'll
get it" and do it.

11. Be sure and discuss all this with the
woman, though. It might be threatening
to her to think someone is trying to “take
over" her child, when her child may be
the one person who gives her security and
love.