DIALOGUE BETWEEN OLD GAYS

I never wanted a child, or wanted anything to do with children.  
After doing babysitting in my early teens I had nothing more to do  
with children until this last year. I've gone through really rad-  
ical changes in my attitude about children: from being threatened  
about how little control I have with their candidness to being less  
authoritarian and giving them more control over activities, trying  
to be non-age chauvinistic, from feeling they are helpless, puzzl-  
ing and fragile to encouraging them to be independent, self-suffi-  
cient and tough, listening to their ideas and respecting children.

I shared the attitude held by many lesbians who have been gay  
for years--why should I do any childcare? Children come from  
heterosexual relationships that not only oppress me, but socially  
ostracize me when the opportunity comes up. Children cannot be  
entrusted to homosexuals because we are perverted, say the straight  
parents, to the point of keeping us from teaching and any occupation  
dealing with children, so why, now, should I do childcare for women  
with children, whether they are poor, don't have husbands, or even  
if they are gay? I'm gay and with that I accept not having child-  
ren, I do not want children, and I do not want to have anything to  
do with children.

Where I'm coming from about kids is liking them O.K. but just  
not having much contact with them. My only brother was one year  
younger and my only younger cousins lived in Minneapolis and came  
down once a year. I didn't like to babysit because the thought of  
the parents coming home drunk made me cringe.

When I was a teenager everyone reinforced my behavior with kids  
and told me I was good with them. But because my interactions were  
so far between, I never have had much confidence in my ability to  
come through in a pinch and calm a crying child. I'm only just  
most recently realizing that I can meet children's needs, like  
Saturday night when I did overnight care at Sparky, I got them  
all to bed without crying just by kissing them. But still I have  
real problems with getting angry when a child is crying for no rea-  
son that I can see. Sometimes I can't control it and it scares me.

I didn't like babysitting either, but I did it because I always  
needed money. And, yes, the parents were usually offensive when  
they came home drunk: Because of that I've come to realize that  

part of my not wanting to be around children has been environmental.

Straight households are oppressive to everyone including the child  
and the babysitter. Children in this situation have caused me a  
lot of grief. They have called me names in front of their parents,  
they've asked me if I am a man, and they've even told their parents  
that I had a girlfriend over. Statements like that aren't so un-  
comfortable for me in the environment I'm in now, but because of  
the children's honest and eager observations in the straight home  

I usually had to make some witty and self-put-downish comment to  
appease both child and onlooking parent. These circumstances were  
great reinforcers of the self-hatred most gay people live with in  
this stiflingly straight society. The flaw in my resentment is  
that it was directed toward the children involved rather than ag-  
ainst the oppressive straight, nuclear family.

Castigation of gayness is induced by straight society onto not  
only gay people but children who will carry on that attitude. It  
is self-contemptuous of me to promote anti-homosexuality when doing  
childcare, and I will not do it. When I babysat in the straight  
environment that is what I had to do, and that is one reason why I  
no longer wanted to do childcare in any capacity. In such an envi-  
ronment a gay person has no stake in the care and development of  
any child--not even her own--and is forced to contribute to her  
future oppression. This society brainwashes children to hate and  
adopt biases against people for no direct reason other than that's  
what the parents were taught. I refuse to promote sexist, homo-  
sexist, racist and fascist attitudes in children I do childcare  
with because it is ultimately self-destructive to me and the soci-  
ety I want to live in.

I agree with you. There are many real and material reasons why  
gay women don't seek out children to relate to. Over the years  
gay people have been burned, castrated, hung, jailed and beaten  
for even looking crossways at children. And if those consequences  
seemed far removed to me, very few times have I related to a child  
since I've been gay without looking over my shoulder to see who's  
watching and what they're thinking. Society has planted the seed  
and I carry it and torture myself.

Page 88

Volume 3 Numbers 243

One of society's most basic and powerful psychological weapons  
against gay women is that living with a woman means you're cutting  
yourself off from having children. Most gay women have to deal  
with that within themselves very early. If it is overcome, it's  
done in varied ways, but certainly one defense is to reject child-  
ren and motherhood as anything valuable.

I have also felt paranoid constantly with children because of  
some of the things you pointed out. But another problem for me  
has been even accepting my responsibility to children because I am  
not ultimately responsible for them and because of my painful inter-  
actions with them in the past. Also, because of my isolation in a  
rural, extended-family type community I was not early aware of the  
many women who have to raise their children alone, I was not aware  
of the difference class makes in childcare responsibility even if a  
husband is present, and I didn't take into account that all women  
are socialized to be child-bearers and that I was casting off that  
role earlier than many women would. I now accept responsibility  
for children because they are people who need to be cared for be-  
cause of their age and because in primary parent/child relation-  
ships the daily child-rearing falls on the mother's shoulders.  
Women with children need to be freed from that.

My transition to taking responsibility for other women's child-  
ren hasn't been smooth. The glaring facts remain unresolved and  
undealt with that: 1. I have qualms about doing childcare for  
women who relate to men exclusively because those relationships  
create more space for heterosexuality and do nothing to lessen my  
oppression as a gay woman. 2. I question the criticism from mid-  
dle-class gay women with children whose approach it is that I am  
privileged not to have children and responsibility for them because  
where they are coming from is a doubly privileged position from  
mine: their money could buy childcare services and their hetero-  
sexual relationship was socially sanctioned. 3. I resent being  
told by new gay women with children that my conscious decision at  
the age of 13 that now gives me more time than a woman with child-  

ren, is a privilege because the ensuing, daily oppression by  
straights from my decision was certainly a long unrewarded and  
painful struggle--while heterosexual standards rewarded marriage  
and children.

I understand the unsmoothness of the transition. I have simi-  
lar qualms, but I think the problems between gay women and mothers  
are caused by oversimplification on both sides.

Your number one in the last paragraph doesn't fall into that  
category, however. I have the same gut level feeling when I think  
about doing daycare for heterosexual women. But we are assuming  
that struggle within them isn't going on. Last night at the Sparky  
general meeting which 3 heterosexual mothers came to, I saw them  
struggling with and realizing why we as gay women did not want sin-  
gle men parents in Sparky--and how it was oppressive to us. The  
other thing I always want to be careful of is to not rule on other  
women's sexuality or make my responsibility to them contingent on  
their being gay.

I know it's hard to listen to the anger of a mother when she's  
middle class and more privileged than you in some ways. If it were  
a working-class mother you could hear the anger and oppression much  
more clearly, but it's there in a middle-class mother also. (A lot  
of times I catch myself playing "More oppressed than thou" and have  
to stop and make myself listen to what the woman is angry about.)  
The oppression of motherhood hits both classes.

Not so long ago you both as gay women were all real self-right-  
eous in putting other women up against the wall about dealing with  
our homophobia. You sometimes made mistakes and were blind to the  
other oppressions that some straight women suffered. Still in the  
long run your confronting straight women was a good thing. It help-  
ed a lot of gay women, gave them space and pride and it also developed  
the consciousness of the whole movement. Perhaps the anger of  
mothers will do the same. I just think we should give them the re-  

spect we want given to gay women.