dear jane,

I don't know how exactly to respond to your theory of mother
right as the basis for feminist revolution. I find it to be something I very much disagree with and with increasing intensity each
time I read your letter, but it is hard for me to sort out where
that feeling is coming from—whether it comes from personally being
fucked over by mother right or from real revulsion at the idea
of motherhood being so glorified. Probably, it comes from both.

I think what hits me most about your article is its inherent
heterosexuality and the picture it paints of a post-feminist
revolutionary society which gives little or no indication of not
being the same entrenched heterosexual world. I think at the basis
of your theory of mother right is the assumption that women
are heterosexual beings. Obviously, motherhood, at least for now
(and you give little indication and/or support of development of
artificial reproduction techniques that can free women from their
biology) implies that at some point in time in a woman's life she
was fucking with a man. By saying that the basis of a woman's
powers and the source of feminist revolution is the capacity for
motherhood, you are inextricably linking women to men in this
society, in any revolutionary struggle, and in the future society
of matriarchy that you envision. I think such a theory comes out
of your belief "that one can be a serious feminist and still live
with and relate to a man and to men!", a notion which I reject as
totally contradictory and which I hope you will come some day to
reject too. I am linking your notion of mother right so strongly
with heterosexuality because you talk of motherhood in a
future matriarchal society as coming from where it has come from
now and in the past—through fucking with men. The change in
reproduction methods brought on by technology that you only vaguely
refer to means, at least to me, the possibility of an essentially
motherless and fatherless society; that men and women would
play an equal role, or perhaps even no role, in the creation of a
human being and that society would collectively be responsible
for the embryonic development and upon birth, the nurturing and
raising of the child.

Another sort of major disagreement I have with your letter is
that the whole idea of motherhood and the values of motherhood
as you see them—protectiveness, intuitiveness, adaptability—
sort of makes my stomach turn. I do not feel and cannot relate
to my oppression as a woman in this society as being one of an
inability to raise children. Rather, I feel my oppression at

x * *

MS FIRE

When the rage spreads above my eyelids
in that debilitating form
for a while I don't recognize that
weeping is the last turn inward for my heat.
I forget that it has crept by then
from my community to myself
without burning even the fingers
of those who are the cause of it.

It isn't the tears so much I mind,
but the fact that not long ago
when anger against the women
with whom I work and sleep
was hotter than anger against the cop-callers,
queer-baiters and fuckers of every description,
I flared at the careless word of a friend.

In a cold spring night I fumed,
Learning finally that if I loosen the teeth of a malicious woman
or if I choke, until her eyes pop,
the neck of a slippery-mouthed woman,
I hurt them for our mutual enemies;
learning that if I smolder into a night that burns back
because of a woman I love,
the cop-callers, queer-baiters and fuckers of every description
gather in soft victories.

And so this spring, almost this very day

I kicked the first fucker who passed on that street
and before I was finished

I knew what I needed to know.

April 1973
Iowa City

poy 10

%* * KKK KK KK OK

volume TT number +

least partially as being because of that ability and my attempts
to reject the glorification of motherhood that is foisted on me
everywhere and now even with the women's movement. Where does
your idea of motherhood as the moving force of the revolution
leave women, particularly lesbians, who cannot fit into the role
of mother—who both emotionally and intellectually abhor the
thought of bearing and raising children? Where is our place in
this new society?

I want to say something too about the importance of women's
history. The knowledge of the position of women in ancient ma-
triarchal cultures I find very exciting because it gives me a
sense of a history of women as being strong and powerful and con-
trolling—how I envision women in a future society. I think this
knowledge is very important in building a women's movement be-
cause it gives women a sense of where we have come from. What
scares me about books like The First Sex is the reaction to it—
that feminists are turning to the concept of matriarchy as being
the new vision or goal of feminist revolution. I think it is a
mistake and even reactionary to transform the basis of ancient
women-controlled societies to that of post-revolutionary society
of the twentieth or 21st century or whenever and to see the same
source of power in ancient cultures as being the source of women's
power today. It scares me because it is coming dangerously close
to accepting values which have been the source of women's oppres-
sion for thousands of years and at a time in which we are on
the very brink of being able to do away with that very fact which
has oppressed women for so many years—our ability to bear children.
It is that which you idealize and which I reject. I want to live
in a society in which women are totally free to determine their

lives. I don't want a society in which I am a mother, in actuality
or not, first.

These are some of my thoughts on your article, Jane. I hope
they are of some help to you in thinking out your ideas. Take

care of yourself.

In sisterhood and struggle, B.

* KKK KK KK KKK RE

The fat lesbian bitches

ugly lesbian whores

filthy bull dykes

who fight to clear a living space
that all women will occupy

are freeing us

from the touches and pokes,

the small indignities

we suffered as girls.

Young women will no longer sulk
when little boys pull their hair
or smile when bigger boys

pinch their asses.

They will not make the mistake

of thinking nuisances will go away
if they are ignored.

On your own street

if you do not know

On whose head to bring down

a tire iron,

if you do not, if you cannot
stand with the fat ugly filthy
whores and lesbians

who are drawing overdue blood
then defend them

against the mind bending that
tries to discredit them

for taking offense where
offense was intended.

When even small lines are drawn
give praise to women

who are clearing ground

on which we will all live.

June 1972
Iowa City