WHAT WE DIDN'T  
AND WHAT WE DID  

August 26th - Strike! The idea was con-  
ceived by Betty Friedan (past president  
of NOW - National Organization of Women)  
as the day when women would walk off their  
jobs or go to work and do no work. Women  
at home were to carry out no household  
duties. A day of demonstrations across  
the country. Except in Iowa City.  

Although the idea originated with Betty  
Friedan, the media created the day. In  
the same way as "flower children" did,  
women's rights sold newspapers that day,  
and that week. Beforehand were the esti-  
mates of how many would attend the demon-  
strations, what activities were planned,  
what critics thought would be the effect,  
and what major employers anticipated.  
Afterwards were the head-counts (of course  
lower than anticipated, for how could there  
be more?) including the fact of sizeable  
male attendance in some cities, interviews  
with employers - "No, no women walked off  
here", and even interviews with store  
people - "No, I don't think our business  
was affected." Who gained? The women's  
movement got some publicity, made itself  
known to more women, who hopefully received  
somewhat of an honest treatment of the  
issues presented at the rallies and demon-  
strations. And a lot of newspapers and  
magazines were sold.  

Many women probably attended their first  
women's rally that day. How many were women  
who did not have to strike to have the  
afternoon free? How many already had child  
care, free of the responsibilities that keep  
so many women down? Women with transporta-  
tion or car fare? Women drawn by the de-  
mands of day care, equal pay for equal work,  
abortion? Women not being ground under the  
heel of Amerika.  

The purpose of the day isn't quite clear.  
Perhaps NOW women (or Betty Friedan) felt  
the need to prove how many women the move-  
ment has drawn into it. To prove to all  
of our detractors that there is a woman's  
movement. The women in Iowa City don't  
feel that need. There is a woman's move-  
ment, and its worth and strength do not  
depend on how many women appear at one  
rally, or 1000 rallies. Or any number of  
one-day strikes.  

How could we ask women whose jobs were  
their means of support to take off from  
work that day? Risk getting fired in the  
belief that a one-day strike could accom-  
plish something? How can you negotiate  
when you say how long a strike will last?  
Not only is nothing accomplished in that  
short of time, there is no way that the  
injustices to women could be overturned in  
one day.  

There was pretty good apparatus set up  
for demonstrations, for that's what the  
day really was. A strike is day-to-day  
work, organizing where you find women -  
at their jobs, in their homes.  

Iowa City WLF took no action on that day:  
because we didn't discuss it. We were  
wrapped up in our day-to-day things.  

We started with demonstrations, though.  
On the Miss America pageant and on the  
pill. But demonstrations have to have  
chairwomen or spokeswomen, and speakers.  

We feel that this encourages elitism, and  
that the media will try to make leaders  
of whoever seems most likely. The media  
has shown that it can and will create a  
star-system for us that we don't want.  
We've found that workshops can educate,  
answer specific questions, and provide a  
forum for exchange, on a much more per-  
sonal level. They can't obviously con-  
front the power structure (if that's what  
you're into).  

About the same time that we began having  
workshops as a means of reaching out to  
women, our own group broke up into small  
cells. We were able to begin to work col-  
lectively, to try and share responsibility.  
We divided on the basis of interest -  
Speaker's Bureau, AIN'T I A WOMAN, Say  
Women, Day Care, with the possibility of a  
Medical Issues group functioning in the  
fall. These groups are where discussions  
of issues are held, leaving the monthly  
large-group meeting for taking care of  
business.  

The Day Care cell has set up three free  
day care centers in Iowa City. One of the  
day care centers is open not only during  
the day but also offers free night care.  
These three day care centers are collect-  
ively community controlled by the parents  
and volunteers who work in the centers.  

The Gay Cell has in the past initiated  
workshops on loving women, and there will  
probably be more to come. One of the  
major concerns of the Gay Cell is organiz-  
ing and talking with gay sisters about  
their special type of oppression. In the  
past the cell has put together a page for  
the paper AIN'T I A WOMAN. However, this  
was discontinued in order for the Gay Cell  
to have more time to get its politics  
together.  

During the summer the Medical Issues  
cell has not done too much, but it hopes  
to organize a practical first-aid class  
and perhaps even free medical services.  
There is plenty of room for this cell to  
expand and it needs help in getting off  
the ground.  

The Speaker's Bureau cell is organized  
to handle all requests from people who  
want someone from Women's Liberation to  
come talk to them. They have established  
a speaking policy for our group in Iowa  
City, and all requests for speakers must  
go through them.  

The Publications Cell puts out this  
paper. As with the day care centers all  
of the work is done collectively and the  
decisions are made by all of the women who  
put out the paper together.  

Our learning to work collectively has  
meant less emphasis on another very import-  
ant part of WLF - organizing. Women were  
attuned to thinking about women's rights  
that day - and we hadn't made ourselves  
available. And neither were WLF sisters  
across the country able to make their  
demands for more than day care, more than  
equal pay for equal work, and more than  
abortion heard by the organizers of the  
26th. For if we are to say anything at  
all, let it be towards the liberation of  
all women.  

Minimum bundle:  

AIN'T I A WOMAN? is published on the  
second and fourth Fridays of each  
month by the Publications Collective  
of the Iowa City Women's Liberation  
Front, P.O. Box 1169, Iowa City,  
Iowa 52240  

September 11, 1970  

If your group wants to receive bundles  
of AIN'T I A WOMAN?, send 15¢ per copy.  
20 copies  

the following courses  
offered by the  

WOMEN'S ACTION STUDIES PROGRAM — non-students  
WOMEN  

are welcome  

DESTRUCTION OF THE FEMININE MYTH  

This three-week short course is devoted  
to the exposure, discussion, and destruc-  
tion of the myth about women's "inherent"  
inferiority, their sexual roles, their  
psychological and social make-up, their  
occupational abilities, the feminine ideal  
as presented in the communications media,  
the economic system and the family as an  
instrument of oppression, and other racist  
views designed to further the exploitation  
and discrimination against women.  
Prerequisite: Oppressed Female Status  
Organizational Meeting: Wed. Sept. 16 at  
7:30 pm in 19 PHBA.  
Coordinators: Anne Silander and Pat Pringle  

ORGANIZING FREE CHILD CARE  
5 hours work per week at one of 3 Wo-  
men's Liberation free day care centers with  
individual project to be arranged if the  
course is taken for credit. The work will  
be with pre-pre-schoolers and pre-schoolers.  

Credit: 7E:293 (graduate students only)  
other credit arrangements.  
Organizational Meeting: Mon. Sept. 14 at  
7:30 pm in 17 PHBA.  
Coordinators: Francie Hornstein & Sondra  
Smith  
Faculty Sponsor: Dr. Robert Carlson  

HISTORICAL BACKGROUND: WOMEN'S LIBERATION  
An historical study of the Women's Lib-  
eration Struggles of our past...from the  
colonial period to the present.  

Credit: 16:100 (History) for 3 hrs.  
Course Meetings: Tues. & Thurs. 6 pm-8 pm  
beginning Sept. 15. Room arrangements.  
Coordinator: Sheryl Malfeld  
Enrollment limit: 20. See Sheryl Malfeld.  

AIN'T I A WOMAN? is published  
by the Publications Collective  
of the Iowa City Women's  
Liberation Front. We are a group  
of women -  

P.O. Box 119 Iowa CITY, IA 52240  

$4.00 for 24 copies  

The voice of the Midwest needs to be  
heard in the Women's Liberation Movement.  
Ain't I A Woman? will print without editing  
any laid-out page from a Midwest (New  
Mexico through Ohio) Women's Liberation group.  
We would like to encourage other women to  
start working collectively to avoid elitism  
and destructive power relationships that  
pit us against each other. We will send  
details on deadlines, page size, column  
length, etc. if you would like.