In our fifth issue we did a page called  
Things Men Can Do. It was a smashing  
success. Not surprising. Men are a  
smashing success -- writing about men,  
having a man, or the ultimate smashing  
success of being a man. What made our  
page even more successful than it might  
have been was the liberal, easily digest-  
ible content. There was nothing we sug-  
gested for men to do that was difficult.  
We suggested they discover, they think,  
they cry, they remember. Men could  
easily follow the advice we gave by set-  
ting a few minutes aside a day in between  
fucking their chicks or running THEIR  
movement to meditate on their privileged  
position.  

The page was reprinted in several move-  
ment publications (Movement with a capi-  
tal M not to be confused with the Women's  
Liberation Movement). It was hung on walls  
of student or radical newspaper offices.  
But very conveniently the bottom part of  
that page was left off. Underneath our  
suggestions we excerpted a part of Robin  
Morgan's "Goodbye To All That" and an  
inch square block for men who want to  
write in our paper was provided sug-  
gesting that they sharpen their crayons.  
Conveniently we had drawn a thin line to  
divide the type (which was the bottom sec-  
tion) from the handwriting of our sugges-  
tions so movement papers could easily cut  
off the top -- the palatable from the  
bottom. We even realize that they prob-  
ably thought the two were separate. But  
they weren't. They merely represented  
the schizophrenia involved in women (the  

oppressed) relating to men (the oppressors).  

We didn't give that page the time or  
the thought that we have given to most  
other pages we have printed. We didn't  
talk together to iron out the differences  
that we had among us over the subject.  

We threw it together the night before the  
paper came out. The stuff that we have  
worked hard on has been about women and  
what women can be doing because it is  

women who need the changes we are talking  
about most desperately. And now as women  
we can only struggle to relate our exper-  
iences and muddle through a seeming mirage  
of complexes to find a direction in which  
to work. It is not easy to find the ans-  

Things for Men to do:  
= Discover what your privileges  
are as part of a privileged caste  

— Discover how you can give  
someone else your privileges  

= Think about how you feel when  
you look around you and down,  
- Kiss a brother.  

— Try to be emotional about  
power and using it to your heart,  
— Keep your legs together every  
time you sit down for a  
whole day.  

— Remember all the times you felt  
like crying. Then your dark play  
ed with your body roughly.  

- Discover what it's like to be  

the oppressed. That's important for you,  

Think about the difference between  
relationships of two women and one  

man and a woman.  

We need them but we need them and should  
not be wasting time supplying copy to a  
male mutilated and yes -- a still male  
dominated movement or supplying sugges-  
tions for men -- it is women with whom  
our concern lies.  

The things we have written about women  
have mostly been reprinted by women, for  
it is women who are concerned about their  
lives -- not men. Movement male papers  
cannot seem to assimilate the stuff we  
write unless it is about them (nicely  
about them) or unless it is written in  
male movement rhetoric -- unless it is  
good agit prop for the (their) revolution.  
The personal experiences about women  
would not be political enough for their  
presses and the criticisms women have of  
movement macho is too divisive for them.  
Ask them to cry and they'll print that.  
Ask them to print what Seattle women have  
to say about the macho maneuvers of the  
Seattle Liberation Front and that's an-  
other story altogether. We women are  
probably pretty lucky that how and what  
we write does not interest the male left  
for we need time to determine where we  
should be moving and the male left has  
never cared let alone had much to offer in  
terms of constructive analysis for anyone  
but white radical males.  

We were really sweet and they loved us  
but we were not really being us -- we were  
not really being honest. We said, "Dis-  
cover why you can't give someone else  
your privileges", but that is to say the  
opposite of what it is really all about.  
Those privileges they hold that are de-  
cent we want and must determine how to  
take. That is if they cannot discover  
how to give them to us. And those privi-  
leges that are indecent - the privilege  
that comes by being a male in a system  
that denies the value of being female un-  
less you are filled with a prick most of  
the time -- those privileges have to be  
removed by any means necessary. If men  
are holding on to those privileges, they're  
going to be in the way. They can deal  
with that as best they can -- we have no  
suggestions.  

But we do have the following --  
another successful episode of:  

THINGS FOR MEN TO DO  

Yourselves  

PARE I  

dynamite. , walk onto the  

en ta gor  

Paya 12  

aH Ad  

JOHN. We  

VOLUME 2 No. 10  

PAGE 15