the melt

It has been over six months since I  
came out to race and decided to use the pa-~  
per as an outlet for my feelings about race.  
Much has changed since I got the idea to  
slap a few thoughts down into an issue.

So much that I don't even recognize the per-  
son I was when I got the idea in the first  

place. Although there’s been some glimmer-  

ings of hope, nothing much has changed about  
the isolation for third world dykes in this  
town, such as we are. The only way I can cope  
with race in a big way is to talk about the  
melting pot, when I know I am talking to a  
white audience, for the most part. I feel  
the urgency of placing race into a larger  
framework that includes white people. I want  
to see the whole spectrum, being a member of  
some portion of it that is not well under-  
stood. In my thinking this is what I've  
come up with, because I am middle class and  
I pass, less direct racial oppression has  
come my way than the cultural elitism of  
language fuckovers and the hatred of some-  
one who is different but not different en-  
ough to seem dangerous. Being caught be-  
tween conflicting cultures is something I  
understand from my gut.

I have tried to get different women  
of color to work on this issue. Two of them  
said they didn't want to work on a white  
women's paper, but I have been given full  
control of copy and layout. So you're  
looking at the work of one still white-  
oriented halfbreed's work, with the help of  
her mulatto friend.

I hate to mislead anyone into thinking  
they're seeing this paper deal with race  
in any real constructive way, because there's  
so much that's unclear and misunderstood  
by me, and so many better people to hear  
the real story from. I have yet to come  
across reading material about women of  
color, much less dykes of color that sat-  
isfies my desire to learn and grow.

I have done what I've done here be-  
cause I want so badly for someone who's  
been lied to like I have to be spared some  
of the pain and confusion, though I haven’t  
done too well at getting around to it myself.  
If just one person figures out that their  
problem is race (if it is) then I will feel  
like I've gotten somewhere.

So here it is, the race issue, in a new  
format because we're printing the paper  
ourselves at the Iowa City Women's Press.

Rosa, from the CNSUM?  
collective

background

Ever since I remembered from social studies class that  
there is such a thing as the melting pot I have been fasci-  
nated by the perversity of the idea. And in thinking about  
race, which I have been doing for some months now, I see  
how my experiences fit into that sick idea. The melting pot  
idea really boomed with the beginning of the United States  
of America (and that's what I mean when I say America) be-  
cause so many different people emigrated to this new land.  
Since the Indians didn't count to the fuckers who started  
this country, they had to begin a culture. They borrowed  
heavily from the fuckers that preceded them, like the Eng-  
lish and the Puritans, where they got the idea of import-  
ing black people. They borrowed some decadence from the  
French and with those brilliant ideas to guide them, they  
set out to see how many people they could exploit. And they  
certainly did a fine job of ripping everybody off.

Page 2

Vol. 4. No. 2.

the melting pot:

the races

Now to define the races. As the old standard "Jesus  
loves the little children" points out, the races have been  
traditionally defined as red and yellow, black and white. I  
have some quarrel with this. For one thing brown people  
have begun distinguishing themselves as a race in the Uni-  
ted States, as my relatives would call it. Chicanismo,  
(the Chicano movement) helped me greatly in understanding  
that I should consider myself non-white. The number of Chi-  
canos whose hands I had to keep out of my pants on the way  
to this discovery is painful to remember. I have known for  
a long time that there was a word for “white” in Spanish  
(guero, "blonde"). Remembering things like that helped me  
see that it was there all along, the racial difference I  
mean. Not to mention that poor brown people have replaced  
the "freed" blacks as exploitable farm labor, with the  
whites not even having to feel guilty about looking at a  
black face.

The notion of Third World people allows Arabs to con-  
sider themselves non-white, as they are. That term expands  
race (as it should be expanded) to include peoples of all  
those small and not so small islands like the Filipinos. And  
the Jews, who have been treated as a race, should be consid-  
ered non-white in my opinion, regardless of the fact that  
there are Jews who have really "made it big" and the fact  
that Israel holds its own as an imperialistic power.

The only way it seems to describe in a broad way the  
American non-white experience is to think of it in terms of  
the melting pot. The natural order of things (whatever that  
would have been) has been tampered with permanently by the  
killing off of the Indians and the importation of black peo-  
ple to Western countries for purposes of slavery, beginning  
in Cuba for instance in 1524.

I think the white people never really expected black  
people to "melt". I don't think they considered them people.  
That's why I have always enjoyed the theory about how George  
Washington died. According to some black author, Washington  
caught pneumonia from slipping out to the slave quarters one  
winter night to fuck his favorite black woman.

the soft soap

The ones the melting pot was ready for were immigrants  
who spoke other languages, had conflicting customs, religion,  
taste for food, etc. To bring some kind of order to the  
chaos, they decided instead of changing anything about them-  
selves, they would unite and neutralize (spelled SMASH) all  
these different cultures. And if any of the cultures com-  
plained they had cleverly picked up a thing or two from ev-  
eryone's culture that they could throw back at them and say  
"here, aren't you satisfied with this?" And believe me, these  
crumbs are pretty crummy. Their plans for you are obvious  
when you first get here. If you have another language you im-  
mediately learn to be ashamed of it. If you do real good and  
are real lucky (read PRIVILEGED) you may lose the title of  
alien and become “naturalized”. But you'll never be all-Amer-  
ican enough. Then you can sit back and watch your TV (if you  
have one) deal you such offensive shit as: a mockout of Kung  
Fu (which is bad enough on its own) for Seven-up, a cat do-  
ing an Americanized cha-cha that goes chow-chow-chow for Pur-  
ina cat chow; black people sprinkled throughout TV with shit-  
eating grins on their faces; Enzo Stuarti insulting Italian  
people with “that's-a nice-a sauce."

If you're a kid in school you can pick up some really  
offensive jokes before you understand that they're funny on-  
ly if you are a racist or a cultural elitist: things like  
Bohemian or Polack IQ test jokes, slanty eye jokes, Rastus  
and Liza jokes, rotsa ruck, yes, we have no bananas, and  
even poems like:

Roses are reddish  
Violets are bluish  
if it weren't for Christmas  
we'd all be Jewish.

Enough of this. It's  
just that every day I am bombarded with this shit and each  
time I hear it it socks me in the stomach. No matter how much  
I try to become a militant non-offensive non-white person I  
am steeped to the gills with “American (spelled RIP US ALL  
OFF) culture. IT'S A PLOT! And a damn well organized one at  
that.