editorial

There are many reasons why we  
felt a need to put out a paper in  
Iowa City. Until now there have  
been no underground or people's pa-  
pers in Iowa City. There have only  
been the usual commercial town pa-  
per and the University paper. Nei-  
ther can be trusted to function as a  
service for the people who read them.  
Both subscribe to the good journalis-  
tic "professionalism," thus being  
written for the people, not by the  
people. Both are controlled by cap-  
italist interests and concerns.

Both, as most newspapers, display  
unmitigated sexism.

We also feel that there is a spe-  
cial need to increase communication  
between sisters in the Mid-West.

Not only because this will make large  
actions possible and events better  
publicized, but because we see the  
Mid-West as having particular prob-  
lems and conditions with which we  
have to deal. Women in the Mid-West,  
with the exception of the few large  
urban areas, find themselves work-  
ing in their city's only women's  
liberation group. There simply are  
not numbers enough to split along  
many interest or political lines.  
Sometimes the organization itself  

I can't write.

is the only group within a radius of  
50 miles or more. Unlike our sis-  
ters in Chicago or Detroit, who have  
large brown and black populations  
and proportionately large working  
class populations, most of us tend  
to work in groups that are campus-  
based rather than community-based.  
We find ourselves dealing with  
middle-class, university privilege  
and bourgeois mentality and find it  
difficult to gear our actions toward  
meeting the needs of the last first  
even though we are committed to do  
this. It is also difficult to find  
targets to attack as big industry  
and media pigs tend to nest on the  
east or west coasts. We have no  
Grove Press here. Those of us work-  
ing in the Mid-West need to work  

out these problems together.

There are special reasons, however,  
why we needed a paper for and by  
women. All of us tend not only to be  
without confidence in this area but  
also without developed ability. We  
need to develop all kinds of abili-  
ties and know we have not been able  
to do this working jointly with men.  
We would tend to do mostly routine  
shit work even if this wasn't im-  
posed on us. We would volunteer for  
it since we don't feel the confidence  
to volunteer for or do more statusy  
work. Even if the men we worked with  
were free from the male chauvinist  
pig mentality that has intimidated  
and humiliated us all our lives, (this  
situation is pure fantasy at this  
stage of the game), we have been con-  
ditioned to play our subordinate role  
too well and have had too many ex-  
periences of seeing ourselves pitted  
against each other in some ridiculous,  
competitive way. And this would most  
likely happen since men, although  

If I try to write something, no one will like it, but they'll be afraid  
to say so, so they'll print it anyway, and it will ruin the paper;  

they'll hate me and I'll feel awful.

Maybe I should just volunteer to type and paste up--no, just type: I  

don't know how to paste up.

What do we know about putting out a newspaper? Maybe other Mid-Western  
groups won't know much either so they won't know it's bad; but I bet  
they will know and think Iowa City is funky.

Maybe all the other sisters will know how to do stuff and I won't have  
to do anything; but I'll still feel bad.

Even if we make money, we'll probably lose it somehow.

The printer might screw us.

The male radicals, who all know how to write, will laugh.  
I don't know how to draw and maybe no one else does either.

Maybe I'll ruin my film.

If I walk around taking pictures, everyone will think "that woman thinks  
she's real good" and then I'll be bad and they'll laugh.  
When we finish laying out our first issue, I'll spill coffee on it.

P99

You can contribute by sending us articles, reviews, opinions,  
rages, etc. You can also contribute by committing your  
women's liberation group to a page, either in each issue or  
in every other issue. This kind of commitment is the best  
way to make a Mid-West paper of AIN'T I A WOMAN? The page  
can be articles (or any kind of printed material), pictures,  
drawings, cartoons, poems, etc. Fill it; it's yours! Write  

if your group is interested. We'll send details, deadlines,  
etc.

If your group wants to receive bundles of AIN'T I A WOMAN,  
send 15¢ per copy (minimum bundle: 20 copies) in advance.

June 26, 1970

some see the implications of women's  
liberation, tend to work in the same  
way using the same pig structures as  
before.

It is important to put out a news-  
paper in our own way - a collective  
way. We want no hierarchy of editor,  
assistants, staff, etc. All the  
people working on the paper should  
be involved in all decisions and po-  
licy. We want to maintain no "pro-  
fessional" standards. "Professiona-  
lism" has been used as an excuse for  
the educated elite to corner the mar-  
ket on knowledge and communication.  
We feel all women have something to  
say and can say it. We have been  
kept down by rigid structures for-  
ever. We don't want any part of  
them - even the top part. We want  
new structures that do not allow  
people to fall into leader/follower,  
boss/worker, powerful/powerless roles.  
We don't want to work in any situa-  
tion in which we are oppressed or in  
any situation in which we do oppress.

Not only do we want to work col-  
lectively on the AIN'T I A WOMAN  
staff but would like to expand that  
kind of collectivity to all sisters  
in the Mid-West. In addition to  
asking for articles, we would like  
commitments from other WL groups in  
the Mid-West to do their own page.

We hope that AIN'T I A WOMAN will  
serve as a forum of communication be-  
tween women in the Mid-West about  
ideas, actions, and events. This  
issue is mostly by and about Iowa  
City Women's Liberation Front - we  
hope that won't happen again.

Vikie C2 Ddbiy

AIN'T I A  
WOMAN?

SUBSCRIPTION

NAME  
ADDRESS

24 issues $4.00

AIN'T I A WOMAN? is published on  
the second and fourth Fridays of  
each month by the Publications  
Collective of the Iowa City  
Women's Liberation Front, 301  
Jefferson Bldg., Iowa City 52240

TesAin't