We wake up one morning realizing we have been blind for 2000 years. We have
been deceiving ourselves for so long that the undoing process seems insurmount-
able. We see that we must take a look at our beginnings, figure out where we are
and where we can go.

Women are doing a lot of questioning now. It's a very painful process because
we must examine the very core of our natures which collectively form this money-
motivated, sexually obsessed, imperialistic nation.

Oppression is a difficult state of mind and body for women to admit to. We
tend to take two opposing and equally blinding views. Either we cling to the myth
that we are happy in the roles we play, that we do control our bodies and that we
can be liberated on our own, or else we give in too readily and sink into depths
of self-pity and solitary torture, becoming cynical without knowing it, and robbed

of self-confidence. I think the important thing to remember is that the essence
of revolution is the struggle for human dignity. I believe that women are capable
of unlimited strength which we must allow to surge forth in the struggle.

In order to be strong, we women must carve a place for ourselves where we can
listen to ourselves, listen to each other, give of ourselves, and support one
another. We are terribly trapped; together we must find a way out. Somehow we
must find alternatives to the stifling roles we have been stuck with: the sexual,
the economic, the social roles. For too long we have let ourselves take the path
of least resistance. We have clung to a self-conception of weakness which only

allows us to set limits for ourselves.

We need to undergo a mass transformation

of consciousness in order to realize that there are no boundaries.

We must give birth to a new morality that figures in the needs of all people
instead of conforming to worn-out forms of politics and religion. This new mor-
ality will not allow us to copy our oppressors who fearfully grab for power. It
should allow us to become angry for we have not become angry soon enough. Only,
we must be careful to direct this anger not toward ourselves, not toward our sis-

ters, but toward the enemy.

And we must work together. The fanaticism of individualism has really warped
our minds in this society. Somehow we believe that if we do something all by
ourselves it is done better. So much stress is placed upon the individual to
prove herself, to produce, to be completely responsible for her actions, that we

have almost forgotten how to work together.

The result of this kind of thinking

is that each one of us carries around huge bundles of guilt and futility. We
think it is unheroic to admit openly what is deepest inside of us. We have
learned to be gratified only on an individual basis. We have forgotten how to

acknowledge each other's achievements... This is so completely isolating because
it teaches us to protect our individual egos and we never learn the gratification
of limitless reaching out to our sisters. We are responsible for all women.

We cannot rise up alone.
Elsie
AIN'T I A WOMAN? is published on the
second and fourth Fridays of each month by the Publications Collective of
the Iowa City Women's Liberation Front. AIN'T I A WOMAN received the following

P. O. Box 1169, Iowa City, Iowa 52240

SUBSCRIPTION

NAME
ADDRESS

24 issues $4.00

announcement from the Southwestern Fe-
male Rights Union:

THE SOUTHWESTERN FEMALE RIGHTS UN-
ION HAS CALLED OFF THE WORKCAMP OFFER-
ED THIS SUMMER IN NEW MEXICO, NEAR
TAOS.

We talked with a more experienced
group of women and decided that we had
no right to have a camp in the midst
of a Chicano community. It would be
like offering such an experience in
the center of a Black ghetto in the
city; the mountains and cabins only
change the setting; the reality of pov-
erty and racism still exists.

We had changed the coordinating of
the workcamp from San Francisco to Al-
buquerque because it was too complic-
ated doing it in two areas. The women
in San Francisco have not heard of our
decision. We will be sending a de-
tailed analysis of our reasons, as
well as a reprint of an editorial from
“El Grito del Norte," on the Anglo
situation in Taos. If you want a copy
of these articles, and/or more inform-
ation, please write: The Southwestern
Female Rights Union, 804 Vassar N. E.,
Albuquerque, New Mexico, 87106.

"A WOMAN REALIZES HERSELF A PERSON
WHEN HER VIEWPOINT TRANSCENDS EGOISTIC
INTEREST." (From a statement by Josi-
fina and Sarita, two University of Ha-
vana students, taken from "The Young-
est Revolution," by Elizabeth Suther-
land.)

Vol. No. 2.

Collective workers: Vicki, Pat, Debbie,
Lori, Linda, Dale, Penny, Carole, Julie
Anne, Carol, Pat, Sue and Linda.

You can contribute by sending us arti-
cles, reviews, opinions, rages, etc.
You can also contribute by committing
your women's liberation group to a
page, either in each issue or in every
other issue. This kind of commitment
is the best way to make a mid-west pa-
per of AIN'T I A WOMAN? The page can be
articles (or any kind of printed mater-
ial), pictures, drawings, cartoons, po-
ems, etc. Fill it, lay it out; it's
yours: Write if your group is interest-
ed. We'll send details, deadlines, etc.

If your group wants to receive bundles
of AIN'T I A WOMAN?, send 15¢ per copy
(minimum bundle: 20 copies) in advance.

Below are some good articles that
the Grinnell WLF suggests for you to
read:

1) "More of the Same Thing" by Rox-
anne Dunbar in the third issue of "No
More Fun and Games."

2) "Radical Feminism and Love" by Ti-
Grace Atkinson. Send away to the New
England Free Press in Boston or to the
Feminists to get this.

3) "The Institution of Sexual Inter-
course" by Ti-Grace Atkinson.

Notice:
It would be appreciated if anyone
who has information about women's

collectives would write to Ain't I A
Woman.

ALBUQUERQUE

An Open Reply from the Publications
Collective:

Dear Sisters,

We applaud your decision. For whites
to meet in the midst of a Chicano
ghetto--even in its beautiful natural
setting--is racist in the same way
that “going slumming" in Harlem used
to be. We say used to be, because now
that the blacks have gotten it together
very few whites would dare do that any
more. In other words, the blacks can
no longer be treated with the condesc-
ension bestowed by a self-designated
Superior Race upon their almost invis-
ible “inferiors." Even the most rac-
ist whites have gotten that part of
the message. And the blacks are no
longer invisible.

For militant women to treat ano-
ther oppressed group as invisible is
ironic indeed. The Chicanos of New
Mexico, imprisoned in their beautiful
setting, are like the woman whose op-
tions are mainly limited to childbear-
ing and doing shitwork for the man.
Both are in jail; only the jailers are
different. Surely we, as radical wom-
en, should know this.

By your action in calling off the
workcamp, you have reminded all of us
of how easy it is to unthinkingly com-
mit racist acts. For this, we thank
you very much.