VAGINAL POLITICS

Self-examination of the vagina is
really no more shocking or revolution-
ary a concept than self-examination of
the breasts. A physician hasn't the
time and most women haven't the money
or inclination to facilitate medical ex-
aminations as often as would be neces-
sary to catch all early signs of breast
cancer, or vaginal infection, venereal
disease, cervical cysts, or pregnancy.
So the M.D.s came up with breast exami-
nation for the home. It has received
wide publicity and advocacy. I don't
think we can expect the same for vagi-
nal self-examination; the first time I
told a doctor that I had examined my-
self for an infection, he would not be-
lieve that I had actually done it. It
is, in fact, not nearly as difficult a
physical act to perform as might be ex-
pected. Any woman can learn to examine
herself (although in the learning pro-
cess a group of five or six women would
be optimal.)

The tools necessary for self-exam-
ination are: speculum, directional
light, long-handled mirror, and a firm
bed or table. (Each woman should have
her own speculum to eliminate the trans-
fer of infection. The speculum should
be washed with phisohex after each use.)
Arrange yourself on the table or bed on
your back with knees bent and feet
placed far apart. Insert speculum up-
side-down (when your doctor inserts it,
he has the handle pointing down, you
need it pointing up so that you can
open it). After inserting, open spec-
ulum (manipulate your speculum exten-
sively before insertion so that you are
well acquainted with it and can use it
easily). If you have difficulty, have
a friend open it. Point directional
light at vagina, place mirror so that
you can see your vagina and cervix. If
you cannot see your cervix, try with-
drawing speculum slightly and sucking
your stomach in; cervix should pop into
view. If not, have a friend try mani-
pulating the speculum.

If you have never had a child, your
cervix will be small (1 to 1½ inch di-
ameter), pink, smooth and very firm
looking. If you have delivered one or
more children, your cervix will be larg-
er, perhaps colored differently and the
cervical canal will be substantially
larger than those of your friends who
have not had children. The vagina
should also be pink and firm looking,
although ridged, and not terribly sen-
sitive to touch (not sore). The vagina
has a normal clear or whitish secretion
which varies in quantity with each woman.

If the vagina is infected or irri-
tated it becomes swollen, tender to the
touch, extremely sensitive to the pres-
sure of the speculum. Upon viewing, the
vaginal walls will be inflamed and red
(much the same as a sore throat). There
may be an increased secretion, usually
of a different color. Discharge from a
yeast (Candida) infection looks white
and cheesy, and smells like fresh
cheese. This is why when antibiotics are taken, a yeast infection often results. The antibiotics kill the natural bacteria and the yeast
grow wild. Some physicians who are con-
cerned with the comfort of their patients
will prescribe Mycostatin (orally or va-
ginally) along with antibiotics; other
physicians concerned with their patients’
pocketbooks as well as their comfort will
indicate that yogurt will preserve their
natural bacteria. And eating yogurt will
replace the bacteria in the digestive
tract which has been destroyed by the
antibiotic.

MEDICAL SUPPLEMENT

SELF-HELP CLINIC

The vagina and cervix change during
the menstrual cycle. Once you are famil-
iar with the changes that occur in your
own body, it will become easy to detect
an early pregnancy simply by noting the
unusual changes, or the lack of the reg-
ular ones. The only way to give yourself
the necessary knowledge of your body is
to follow it closely through a menstrual
cycle so that you can observe and learn
what it looks like at what stage in the
cycle. During the first two weeks fol-
lowing menstruation, the healthy cervix
and vagina will be pink and firm and
smooth, there may be a clear mucous se-
creted from the cervical canal. Most
women have cyclical changes in their
vaginal secretions and you may learn
that these secretions increase for you
at the time of ovulation or one week
before menstruating. When you examine
yourself just before menstruation you
may be shocked to find the vaginal walls
swollen and tender, the cervix swollen
and blue with veins seeming to pop out on
it. This is a perfectly normal pre-men-
strual condition and is not the condi-
tion in which you would find a two or
three week pregnant cervix.

Whatever the changes are in your body,
know them. If you suspect you are preg-
nant, check yourself; if your period is
late and your cervix does not appear as
it usually does pre-menstrually, you are
probably pregnant, and can at least make
an intelligent and informed decision.