An argument I had with two married couples began with the two  
women saying that AIAW doesn't “answer their needs."  

women: How can you say you relate to us when all you write about  
is a lesbian culture?  

me: I think understanding why you are not gay is fundamental  
to your woman-identity.  

woman: But you live with a man, is he exceptional?  

me: No (thinking why am I always asked by these men and women  
to expose my life to their scrutiny).  

man: All you (gay) women ever write about is killing men.  

me: I think the last time we mentioned killing was in an ar-  

ticle I wrote. (I think) as a straight woman, and because  
I live with a man, I feel more directly threatened by men,  
so I write more about hate--I've noticed that gay women  
write much more about women and love.)  

man: Anyway, you don't want to kill men, you want to fuck them  
(or...all you need is a good fuck).  

...At which point I heard sirens going off in my head, mumbled  
you are offensive, my girlfriend said that she didn't have to  
take that shit from anyone, and we all split.  

I've been thinking about how I've changed this year, and what  
it means in terms of my self-image and relationships to women and  
men.  

I came here to be with a man who was to teach at the university.  
We thought it best to pretend we were married because we didn't  
know how it would affect his job if we were to live together as  
we did in the city. Right away I had trouble when university peo-  
ple would speak to me only because of my relationship with him.  

I held out less than a month before I began to tell everyone the  
truth (at that time I thought there was a real big difference  
politically to choose not to get married and yet live with a man).  
Even now these people still call me Mrs. or don't remember my last  
name (or choose not to). I didn't see how I was manipulated right  
from the start.  

I identified with the faculty wives because I thought under  
different circumstances I could have been married, with children,  

E cat  

a Woman ? Hu  

een FRAGT  

in the same situations they are in. In discussions about women  
they nearly always agreed up until their secure middle-class po-  
sition was threatened, and they usually defended their men then.  
I found that they listened and questioned but never really chang-  
ed their minds about anything. This crusading drained much of my  
energies, yet I always continued because I saw in their behavior  
a good deal of myself. I began to think about why all of us were  
so frustrated in our love relationships with men and why we stayed  
in these relationships.  

I felt if I had nothing else I could be sure of about myself—  
that men were attracted to me, I figured that I hated myself when  
I got right down to it, but with a man I always felt I had a se-  
cure role-identity to fall back on, within which I felt safe and  
knew I would be acceptable. The funny thing is, I never linked  
that role with sex until now, nor did I see how vulnerable that  
"secure" role left me. It gave the man the absolute power to  
manipulate the approval which I sought.  

With women, I'm into singing praises right now, because the  
honesty and affection with which we deal with each other is so  
incredibly beautiful. I keep thinking of Pam's poem about "the  
dyke in me never being able to go back to the heterosexual world"  
and though I've never had a gay sexual relationship - I know I  
understand what she meant.  

I feel it's a big transition to see myself as a dyke, and even  
saying dyke makes me feel a bit frightened because it's such a  
strong sounding word. I've never seen that part of myself before  
and I feel unsure of how my advances will be accepted by gay  
women. A lot of WL literature talks about straight women wanting  
to use gay women to have a "gay experience" so I feel a sense of  
guilt even though I know that's not where I'm at.  

I've seen the love that gay women have for each other, within  
the context of our collective and within the female community.  
One time when I was freaked out and wouldn't answer the phone or  
come to meetings, two women from AIAW came out 17 miles to find  
me, to see if I was OK. I see women together, arms around each  
other, best of friends, lovers. And I know that a certain level  
of lying a person maintains to preserve a relationship with a  
man, could never happen between two women who know each other.  

SWadl] SONG  

eZ I'm not writing anymore songs  
till I know what I'm talking about  
till we understand each other  

till then I'm only writing  

notes to myself  

about your oppression  

and my oppression  

I'm not coming out to sun myself again  
till I've burned and peeled some  

till I remember more summers and  
winters of white skin  

and the red pain of changing  

Got to go somewhere  

in this crazy place  

and try to hear my own noise  
then come back quiet  

and confront you where we are  
looking behind us for the directions  

that each of us walked away from.  

Page 5.