VD in China:

concern for the people

Away With ALL Pests, by Joshua Horn, is an excellent book about
pre- and post-revolutionary China from the perspective of a Brit-
ish doctor who has lived through those times. The following article
is excerpted and quoted from the chapter "The Conquest of Syphilis!"
We feel it is inspirational, and directly relevant to our article
on VD.

ACTIVE VENEREAL DISEASE HAS BEEN COMPLETELY ERADICATED FROM MOST
AREAS AND COMPLETELY CONTROLLED THROUGHOUT CHINA.

This is a sweeping statement but I am convinced that it is true.
Syphilis is a ‘social disease’ -- that is, a disease whose inci-
dence and spread (and, as we shall see, its decline and eradication)
are dependent on social and political factors.

The social and political factors responsible for the hold it
gained in China are as follows:

imperialism and colonialism; subjugation of the people and
wrecking the economy. Syphilis was introduced into China
in 1504 by the colonialist powers.

war (implied by imperialism); rape and spread of syphilis.

poverty (caused by capitalist exploitation)

drug addiction (caused by imperialism; Britain and the US
sold opium, morphine and heroin to China in huge amounts)

prostitution (caused by poverty and drug exploitation)

attitude toward women characteristic of a class society which
sees women as inferior to men, as their chattels and
playthings.

In pre-liberation China syphilis was estimated at a rate of 3
to 5% -- that's 35 million people.

The anti-syphilis campaign, begun about 1951, was waged along
these lines:

elimination of prostitution. Prostitutes were taught trades
and jobs were provided for them. They learned why they
had become prostitutes under the old order and the new
prospects open to them under the new Government.

transformation of the position of women. This has not been
completely changed, but great strides have been made.

elimination of poverty. No one starves. The economic roots
of prostitution and crime have been cut forever.

mass campaigns against syphilis.

Here is Horn's account of how it was done.

New methods of case finding

To find the millions of cases of latent syphilis scattered
throughout the country was an immense undertaking which could not
be tackled along orthodox lines.

Opinions were divided as to how it could be done. Those with
conservative, stereotyped thinking urged greater working efficien-
cy, more personnel, better and speedier methods of blood testing
and more expenditure. Theirs was a purely technical approach.
Those who could think in a bold, revolutionary way urged a politi-
cal approach, with reliance on the initiative of the masses as the
key to success. The political approach won out, although not with-
out a struggle....

In a county in Hopei province, after prolonged discussions be-
tween political and medical workers, a form was drawn up asking
ten questions, an affirmative answer to any one of which would
suggest the possibility of syphilis. These ten questions contained
"clues" such as a history of a skin rash, falling hair, genital
sore or exposure to the risk of infection. To draw up the ques-
tionnaire was one thing; to persuade tens of thousands of people to
fill it in, honestly and conscientiously, was quite another thing.
To do this intensive propaganda and education was carried out by
anti-syphilis fighters who were able to make close contact with
the people, give them the concept that they should liberate them-
selves, and enlist them as allies in the struggle. Propaganda
posters were put up in the village streets, one-act plays performed
in the market place, talks given over the village radio system,
and meetings, big and small, held night after night at which the
purpose of the questionnaire was explained and the co-operation of
the peasants gradually won. The opening talk would be brief
and to-the-point and would go something like this: 'Comrades,
syphilis is a disease that was bequeathed to us by the rotten so-
ciety we have thrown out. It's no fault of yours if you have syph-
ilis and no shame should be attached to it. It's only shameful if
you cling to your syphilis when you can easily get rid of it. We've
got rid of the landlords and the blood-sucking government that
looked after their interests and now we have a government that
looks after ours. We have a Party that speaks for us and shows us
how to go forward. Now it calls on us to get rid of syphilis and
we should seize the opportunity. This form asks ten questions and
you should answer them honestly. We will be glad to help any of
you who can't read or write. If you don't remember the answers to
some of the questions, ask your friends and relatives. In fact,
there's nothing wrong with friends and relatives jogging your mem-
ories even when they're not asked. This is our country now and we
should all be concerned about the well-being of everyone else.

‘Comrades, we're going forward to Communism and we can't take
this rotten disease with us.'

a woman?

11. February 1972

At first in some places the response was slow; few villagers
filled in the questionnaire and some of those who did so concealed
one or other of the 'clues.' More propaganda was done and more
meetings were called at which the main speakers were those who had
already been diagnosed as having syphilis and had been cured by a
few injections. They told of the mental struggles they had gone
through before admitting to the clues, and of their feelings after
they had been cured. They recalled the brutality and indifference
of the old days and contrasted it with the present.

The trickle of diagnosed cases increased until it became a tor-
rent. News of the questionnaire, spread by political workers, at-
tracted peasants from far and wide who came to the treatment cen-
tres eager to be diagnosed and treated.

All those having clues were given a blood test and it was found
that one in twenty of them actually had syphilis. This reduced the
problem of case finding to manageable proportions, but the skeptics
were not convinced. They said this method was too crude, that it
was not scientific, that politics couldn't diagnose syphilis, that
it wasn't known how many cases had been missed. Accordingly, the
Research Institute decided to test the method, improved in the
light of experience, in Ningtu county, Kiangsi province, where the
VD rate was known to be high.

The People's Communes assembled three thousand volunteers, some
of whom, after suitable study, were given the political task of
mobilizing the people to regard the fight against syphilis as
their own fight. The remainder were given a seven-day course on
the principles of diagnosis and treatment, at the end of which
they examined some 3,000 people under the scrutiny of experts, who
checked on their results, questioned them, and watched them per-
form blood tests. Eighty per cent of the trainees passed this
stringent practical and theoretical examination and thereby quali-
fied to work independently. One old professor, who had been par-
ticularly skeptical, examined a trainee for twenty minutes without
getting a wrong answer to his probing questions. He then graciously
expressed his complete approval in the classical Chinese phrase,
'I bow to the ground with all the five points of my body.'

The campaign went on for two months, covering not only syphilis,
but also such diseases as ringworm of the scalp, leprosy and mala-
ria. Forty-nine thousand cases were examined and treated.

Then the results were checked. Some 30,000 people who had been
'processed' by the trainees on the basis of the questionnaire were
given a full clinical and serological examination by qualified
doctors. It was found that 90.2% of all sufferers from venereal
disease had been discovered.

The value of the mass line method had been conclusively proved
and the baffling problem of finding one case in a hundred or one
case in a thousand among 500 million peasants had been solved.

In the National Minority areas, this method was not suitable and
total population surveys were carried out.

In the cities, several case-finding methods were used including
examinations of selected age groups, of service trade groups, of
army entrants, of those about to marry, of pregnant women and of
residents in particular lanes and localities. In some cities, the
whole population was covered; in others, only those sections who
were particularly at risk. In Shanghai, where the VD rate at the
time of Liberation was as high as five percent, the whole popula-
tion was tested and to do this some 3,600 technicians were trained
to perform the rapid fresh blood slide for syphilis, which gives
an answer of ninety-two percent accuracy within twenty minutes
and which requires only two drops of blood from a prick in the ear.

Active treatment

Once the sufferers from syphilis had been discovered, treatment
was a relatively simple matter although this, too, aroused some
controversy around the question as to whether or not trainees with
little knowledge and experience should be allowed to give treat-
ment. Some elderly doctors with a strong 'closed-shop' mentality,
argued that it would be unethical and unwise to allow such people
to carry out treatment. But the Ningtu experience refuted their
arguments and, moreover, it was obvious that for many years to
come there would not be enough fully qualified doctors to carry
the workload.

Penicillin was proved to be superior to all other forms of
treatment and Chinese antibiotic factories were by now producing
enough to supply all domestic work needs, leaving a surplus for
sending to impoverished newly-emerging nations.

Criteria of cure

The new approach to syphilis demanded a concept of cure which
extended beyond the individual to include the whole community. The
criteria for community cure were strict. They included the finding
and treatment of all existing cases, a total absence of new cases
appearing in the community, disappearance of congenital syphilis
in new-born babies, and normal pregnancies and pregnancy outcomes
in previously treated mothers. When these criteria had been ful-
filled and maintained for five years, the community was considered
to be cured. This has already been achieved in most areas and
soon, with continued follow-up measures to detect the rare case
of recurrent or congenital syphilis, it will undoubtedly be reached
throughout the country.

That is how China, once the so-called ‘sick man of Asia,’ became
the first country in the world to conquer syphilis.

Away With ALL Pests, Joshua S. Horn, M.D., Monthly Review Press,
116 West 14th Street, New York, N.Y. 10014.

page eleven