WHAT HARDENS TO THE BODY  
PHYSIOLOGY OF SEX AND  
HYGIENE AND HEALTH  

Much of the misunderstanding about sexuality in men and women  
stems from incomplete and frequently incorrect knowledge of sexual  
physiology. This article will deal with the physiology of sex and  
with sex-related hygiene and health care.  

I. Sexual Excitement  

Many of the myths about the physiology of sex are very old:  
vaginal orgasm myths, clitoral stimulation myths, penis size myths,  
and all have contributed to unnecessary tension and unhappiness  
for men and women.  

Sexual response in general is very much alike in men and women.  
In both, sexual excitement causes physical reactions over the en-  
tire body: flushed skin and muscle tension with hardened nipples  
and flow of blood to the pelvic area. In women the vaginal walls  
begin providing lubrication. Orgasm brings involuntary muscle con-  
tractions and a (usually rapid) flow of blood away from blood-en-  
gorged body areas. Usually, in men, ejaculation of semen accom-  
panies orgasm; in women, the minor labia may turn bright red. The  
pattern of male orgasm varies from person to person, mostly in  
duration of the various stages of excitement (plateau prior to  
orgasm, orgasm, and resolution). In women three main types of  
orgasm are common: (1) rapid excitement to orgasm with almost  
immediate resolution, (2) excitement to plateau stage which contin-  
ues for a while then rises rapidly to orgasm with slower resolution,  
(3) excitement to plateau with a series of "smaller" orgasms and  
slow resolution. If you don't seem to respond in any of these ways,  
don't worry about it. Whatever feels good to you is good.  

After orgasm for men there is a refractory period (which varies  
with different people) during which you cannot be re-excited to  
orgasm. For many women, if stimulation is continued during the  
resolution phase of one orgasm, you can again have orgasm. Orgasm,  
although frequently assumed to be mainly pelvic in nature, is in  
both sexes a total body response. Many women prefer continuation of  
stimulation during orgasm; many men prefer deep vaginal penetration  
and cessation of movement during his peak of orgasm. When a man  
and a woman with these preferences get together, it throws new  
light on the unrelieved marriage-manual glorification of "mutual  
orgasm." Find what's best for you; that's right for you.  

For women, our sensual response is, thank God, usually closely  
linked with our emotional response to whoever we're in bed with.  

If all your sexual excitement is concentrated in your pelvis and  
breasts, it may be because you're resisting making love with that  
person and should more closely explore how you're feeling about  
him or her and the situation you're in.  

Now to the common myths:  

Myth #1: Vaginal Orgasm. Masters and Johnson's research  
proved interesting on this Freudian mainstay: There ain't no  
such animal. The clitoris serves the express purpose of receiving  
and transferring sexual stimuli, regardless of whether it's applied  
through intercourse, masturbation, or any other means. There is  
no physiological difference between orgasm which results from  
either direct or indirect clitoral stimulation.  

Myth #2: Sexual excitement is concentrated mainly in the pel-  
vic area, and the breasts in women. Experimentation is beginning  
to show that all areas of the body are potentially equally sensi-  
tive. Also, Masters and Johnson argue that there is no physiolog-  
ical reason why men's breasts are not usually proclaimed to be as  
sensitive as women's. Remember what it was like when you were very  
small and enjoying your body was not so frowned upon. We all have  
bodies capable of good feelings. Your body is enjoyable and know-  
ing and enjoying your own body are prerequisites to being able to  
give pleasure to others and enjoying them.  

Myth #3: Intercourse during menstruation is (choose your own)  
dirty, unhealthy, unsanitary, taboo. As long as both people want  
to, there is no reason not to have sexual activity during a woman's  
menstrual period. Menstrual blood is as "clean" as semen or  
vaginal lubricants. For some women who have temporary swelling of  
the pelvis, intercourse might be uncomfortable. However, many women  
enjoy sexual activity then because the swelling increases pleasure  
and the uterine contractions which accompany orgasm help expel the  
menstrual flow and relieve cramps.  

Myth #4: Breast and penis size are important; there is also a  
"correct" penis shape. Size and shape are important only in so  
far as the people involved are prejudiced one way or another.  
There's more to making love than "correct" bodies and if two peo-  
ple like each other and what you're doing you'll find out how to  
play together happily regardless of common notions about bodies  
and sensuality.  

Myth #5: Circumcision makes a difference. Circumcised and un-  
circumcised men are equally sensitive and have equal ability to  
control orgasm.  

(The above section contains a very brief overview of common  
problems, questions, and fears. If you want more detailed  
information read Human Sexual Response, Wm. H. Masters and  
Virginia E. Johnson. 1966, Little, Brown & Co. or An Analysis  
of Human Sexual Response, Ruth & Edward Baker, eds. 1966  
Signet Books, 75¢ in paperback.)  

II. Hygiene and Health (especially for women)  

Cystitis  

Cystitis is a painful, but not uncommon, infection of the  
urinary tract. Although most women will probably never get it,  
those few who find themselves prone to the inflammation can be for-  
warned by some advance information.  

The major cause of cystitis is intercourse, often long and/or  
frequent, but it may be connected with other factors such as ex-  
treme tiredness (low resistance), alcoholic beverages, or pregnancy.  
Some women get it so regularly that they must take medication  
after intercourse; older women often contract it from unknown  
sources which are not necessarily connected with sexual activity.  

The basic problem is that the female is constructed with too  
many organs crammed into too small a space. Urethra, vagina, and  
anus are all within two inches of each other, and lots of activity,  
like the friction of intercourse, or even the movement of an un-  
born child, will irritate the lower end of the urinary tract. The  
resultant pain may just be that of irritation or it may indeed be  
an infection which should not go untreated. Because the female  
urinary tract is only two inches or so long, such infections are  
not usually very serious (that is, there isn't too much of them,  
as compared to a similar infection in the male which is a greater  
problem), but will become serious if the infection is left untreat-  
ed and spreads to the bladder.  

How to know you've got it: first, it hurts, especially when  
you urinate and you feel like urinating all the time. You know  
the pain is down there somewhere, so try to determine if it's  
forward of the vagina, yet behind the clitoris. Itching & burning  
sensations are common. If you begin to have blood in your  
urine, you've got it for sure.  

Get to a doctor. The inflammation is not bizarre and should  
respond readily to simple treatment: analysis of a urine specimen,  
some antibiotic for a week or so if you have the infection, then  
another analysis to make sure it's cleared up. The really pain-  
ful symptoms should stop within four to eight hours after begin-  
ning medication—ending the pain will be your immediate concern at  
that point. Go easy on screwing till it’s cleared up, about ten  
days after you begin treatment.  

female pelvis: normal anatomy (lateral view)  

Douching  

Douching is one of those very unclear and somehow mysterious  
activities that most women think they should be doing something  
about, but are not sure what to believe. Most doctors now take  
the stance that douching as a hygienic measure has been overempha-  
sized to the point of sometimes causing more harm than it's  
supposed to prevent.