iGootinued, Cram e- 8)

Any child care that women can work on now has many
serious problems. Most women have been working on getting
together cooperative child care centers controlled by the com-
munity (people who are involved in them). Now if these centers
are really community controlled there will be very few non-sexist
centers. Most of the people involved in child care coops are
people who have the time and interest to devote to working in
centers or at least in coming to meetings where decision-making
takes place. So far, in the Iowa City centers, most of the
people in that position have been students, semi-political freaks
and a few feminist-oriented women.

At this point I am very skeptical of cooperative child care
centers with any connection whatsoever with industry or business.
I don't know that they shouldn't exist. We should only be aware
that the people could probably only have token control—as in the
state-funded child care programs for low-income people that are
now in existence.

In the next few years there will probably be several other
types of child care cropping up. Universities, big business,
and the state are all beginning to be pushed into child care by
either liberal guilt or hopefully increasing power of women.
They will provide child care which will begin to free women.
They will mess up a lot of children. Women must have child care.
I only hope the children can be saved... eventually.

II

In spite of all the hassles involved in child care, we should
continue to work on it. I have come to several conclusions about
where our time should be spent. We should continue working on
establishing child care centers—at minimum as a survival tool
for women. Women should devote some time to working in cen-
ters, if possible. People with experience in setting up child care
centers or coops should make their experiences available to
other people who are interested in child care. (This can be done
either through writing on how to set up child care or speaking
with people.) We must be certain to make clear to other people
and to ourselves that the limited child care controlled by the
people at this time is not an end.

Through the centers we work on we will be helping women
and children survive in this system that destroys so much in all
of us. We can be free to learn our own ways of relating to chil-
dren. Child care centers have the potential of bringing people
together for mutual support and in some situations become an
intermediary step between the nuclear family and some as yet
undetermined living situation.

One thing women must do is beware of wasting time and
energy on child care projects where the people involved will have
little or no control. That includes most universities, big busi-
ness, Kentucky Fried Childcare type things—and state programs.
The liberals are going to be involved in these programs, so they
are inevitably going to exist. I just don't feel it is worth the
frustration to put energy into this type of child care. These in-
stitutions are not going to hand over any control to the people.

It may be difficult, but we must learn to recognize when it is a
frustrating waste of time.

It is very difficult to come to any conclusions at this point
about organizing women through child care projects. The only
thing to say is that it is very difficult and energy consuming.
Women who have children and who are usually married have

AK Woman!

very few alternatives. The least we can do is lend our support
to the women involved in child care. We also must constantly
try to raise people's consciousness about sexism and all other
political issues. The ideal would be to have a radical feminist
perspective at the base of the entire program, but that is not
possible in most situations.

It is very early in our development to make any dogmatic
decisions about what is correct or incorrect concerning child
care. We have barely scratched the surface in knowing how to
meet the needs of women with children of every economic class.
We have yet to know exactly what we are capable of doing and
what is worth doing.

I realize that we are still relatively untogether on the
issue of child care. I have tried to bring to the surface some of
the problems we have run into in our experiences in setting up
child care centers. There is a lot more analysis that needs to
be done.

Dec. 11, 1970