Last year some of us lived in a women's collective.  
Being in the middle of the country on Interstate 80 made our house  
a logical place to stay for women who were traveling from one coast  

Iowa City,  

to another. About the middle of the year we read that even the New  
York Times had reported that there were 500 female agents in the  
Women's Movement. So when the snow melted on the mountains and the  
visitors began to drop in, we began to think about how vulnerable  
we were. We had discussions about how we could make ourselves more  
secure, and even came up with some good suggestions. But we never  
did anything about them. That is usually what happens concerning  
security—it gets put off until it's too late because it seems insig-  
nificant at the time. One essential thing to remember, however, is  
once you have someone in your midst that you doubt or don't trust,  
it is almost impossible to deal with the situation. The best way  
to be secure is to be prepared.  

We got ourselves into one of those impossible situations last  
year and that experience has made us willing to do the tedious work  
necessary in creating a system that would protect us from getting  
into that position again. A woman had come to Iowa City for a short  
time and needed a place to stay. We offered her a spare room in our  
collective and she stayed for two months. One of us started having  
suspicions but didn't mention them because she thought they were  
so outrageous and because she didn't know how they would be received  
as we hadn't talked very much about security. Finally, we all be-  
came suspicious and began talking about what we could do. We dis-  
covered that it is almost impossible to protect yourself from some-  
one who is living with you. Things like being gay (which is illeg-  
al in most states), or smoking dope or addresses of friends or par-  
ents—all these things come out in the routine of a day. They seem  
insignificant and you may be into nothing that is illegal, but the  
F.B.I. documents at Media, Pennsylvania that were lifted and cop-  
ied show that this is just the type of information the government  
wants to collect on people who are working for change. It can be  
used later in either tracking you down if you've broken the law or  
in busting an acquaintance of yours. A male broke the law in L.A.  
and within an hour the police had contacted all of his friends and  
relatives. They knew just where to go for information and knew  
exactly where he'd be likely to go.  

Another thing to consider is that we (or our friends) often  
feel close or become emotionally involved with people very early in  
relationships. In situations like this, we often rely on the person  
closest to the new person to determine the level of trust. That's  
very dangerous, as well as unfair to the person involved.  

In thinking over why nothing is ever done about security, why  
it's hard to ask routine questions to a visitor, we found we were  
hesitant because we didn’t want to be unfriendly or hurt their feel-  
ings. If the Women's Movement is to have a system of security, it  
has to be agreed upon and practiced. We must be serious about it  
and operate on rules outside the realm of friendship and hospitality.  
In light of this we propose the following structure which we will  
expect when visiting other places and which we will go by when  
people visit here.  

Page 4 Volume 2  

Cameramen took our pictures  

I felt myself sliding  

into the government files  

with my sisters and brothers  

to reappear  

in an article in Life Magazine  
after some future catastrophe  

white circles and arrows  

indicating those of us being hunted  

—from a poem by Fran Winant  
in Looking at Women  

Security  

THINGS YOU SHOULD DO WHEN TRAVELING OR MOVING  
1. Before your visit, write a letter at least a week in advance.  
If there is no advance notice, don't expect to be put up by  
living collectives. Sometimes women's centers have crashing fac-  
ilities that wouldn't need advance notice, but it would probably  
be good to write ahead if possible. In the letter you could men-  
tion groups you have worked with as references.  
2. When you come, expect to be asked some questions. Don't expect  
a warm welcome until after this business is taken care of. We have  
talked about this among ourselves and agree that we would not feel  
anyone or group holding back permission to stay with them until a  
security check has been done would be being unhospital. It's sim-  
ply a necessary precautionary procedure.  

THINGS TO DO FOR NEW PEOPLE COMING TO YOUR COMMUNITY  
1. Check on their background...people they knew, groups they  
worked with.  
2. If new people who come have been involved with movement things  
in other cities, contact groups in those places to check on the  
extent of the person's involvement.  
3. Try to know how the people are being supported.  
a job, etc.  
4. Be careful about what you talk about around new people until  
you know more about them. It's unnecessary, in most situations to  
use last names. Don't implicate any more people than necessary.  
5. Be careful about leaving lists of people's names and addresses  
around. One address book carelessly left around could easily be  
ripped off.  

6. The thing about trusting your "vibes" is not a particularly  
good way of dealing with security. You get feelings about people  
for legitimate reasons, though, and they should be thought about.  
When you are in doubt about a person for any reason, do some check-  
ing on them. We have to get over thinking it's a heavy thing. It  
should be considered routine to do security checks by any group that  
has serious political intentions. I'd rather have someone check on  
me than to mistrust me for a long period of time.  

If anyone else has suggestions to make about what to do about  
security, let us know. We can only learn from our experiences and  
our mistakes, so we should share them. We realize that becoming  
too paranoid about security can make you totally ineffectual, but  
we must have some structure that we follow to give ourselves some  
degree of protection.  

Do they have  

ATTN Too.