No Tlore Radical. Sabbaticals

FEMALE PERSPECTIVES

The Southwestern Female Rights Union is a small collective of
women interested in establishing a strong women's movement based
on the struggle of the most oppressed in the Southwest. At this
point we are primarily an informational office.

Because of the problems we have talked about it is especially
difficult to organize here. We are in the process of developing
ideas for various positive programs.

We are interested in any suggestions and help people have to offer.

Some of us live together in a house where we also have our office.
We are desperately in need of contributions for our rent and the
first issue of our journal. Our staff will be severely depleted. We are in the process of trying
to catch up with correspondence. We ask that all be patient.

Struggle,
(Nancy Adair, Martha, Mary Maxine)

THE SITUATION IN NEW MEXICO

The situation in New Mexico, in the South, in the ghetto, de-
mands special attention from the white Women's Movement and the
Movement as a whole; it demands analysis and sensitivity on the
part of all white (Anglo) people. We have studied, and are still
studying and reading about the problems and the oppression of the
Black in her ghetto. Movement papers have analyzed the problems
and establishment press, television, and films have inundated us
with propaganda concerning the Black's situation. The Movement
in centers like New York and Berkeley is just beginning to under-
stand the situation and deal effectively with its racism. In New
Mexico, however, we are just beginning to understand our chauvin-
ism and racism because the situation demands a different analysis.
Most of us were educated in "heavy" Eastern and West Coast poli-
tics. Most of the communication and information we have with other
groups comes from both these areas. It is time now for the analy-
sis of the problems of this area, by the women of this area, to
reach the rest of the country. (For the beginnings of the analy-
sis of Chicana problems we suggest you read Enriqueta Longauex y
Vasquez' articles in "El Grito Del Norte").

Racism thrives here in the form of imperialism and supremacy.
New Mexico is a colony as is the South. The government can test
its bombs and missiles at White Sands and Los Alamos because it
does not have to put up with the objections of an urban white
middle class whose goodwill it has to nurture. They build their
bombs in a third world area and drop them on third world people.
The atomic bomb, developed and tested in New Mexico, was dropped
on Japan. The government which did this continues to send mis-
siles over New Mexico to land at White Sands. Could anyone ima-
gine their sending it over Chicago to land in Lake Michigan?

The government comes to the Southwest and offers good, well-
paying jobs to Anglos. The Chicano remains unemployed - except
in the low-paying menial jobs - his land is legally 'stolen' in
quit-claim deeds - he moves to the ghetto of the city with his
family where he can be easily contained and constantly harassed
by the police. (We use he in this instance because the plight of
the Chicana is much worse - she usually owned no land, her jobs
are worth less money, welfare is ridiculously low.)

The Chicano and Indian are people raised on the land. A hun-
dred years before the Pilgrims landed, the Chicano and Indian were
fighting the harsh elements, growing their crops, and herding their
sheep. They built irrigation systems to tap the precious water
supply. They fought droughts and flash floods, they fought for
their freedom - from Spain - the frontiersman - and the United

"That man over there says that a woman
needs to be helped into carriages, and
lifted over ditches, and to have the
best place everywhere. Nobody ever
helped me into carriages, or over mud
puddles, or gave me a best place. 

And ain't I a woman? Look at me.
Look at my arm! I have plowed
and planted and gathered into
barns, and no man could head me...
And ain't I a woman? I could as much
and eat as much as a man when I
could get it and bear the lash as well...
And ain't I a woman? I have borned
thirteen children and seen them
most all sold off into slavery. And
when I cried out with a mother's grief,
none but Jesus heard...

And ain't I a woman?”

Look at

SOJOURNER TRUTH,
“THE LIBYAN SIBYL.”

Some of us are going to Cuba and so our

Sojourner Truth: Speech
Rights Convention at Akron, Ohio in 1851.

before the Women's

States government. When the railroad came the land became valu-
able for raising cattle to supply beef for the East. The Anglo
raped the mountains for minerals and stole the range lands, over-
grazing them, turning the plains into a desert. With the help

of "heroes" like Kit Carson they raped and massacred the Indian.
They destroyed the buffalo and the deer. Worst of all they
brought their capitalistic, imperialist system; the economy that
turns people into leeches, parasites who live off the misery of
others, that creates the Vendido and Uncle Tomahawk.

A second migration is inundating the Southwest... the cult of
the commune, the freak, the longhair. Hollywood and Dennis Hopper
have discovered a cheaper way to make "authentic" movies. The
"rich" come to escape the noise and smog of the city, the ar-
tist comes because this is truly "the land of enchantment" and the
people are so "real", so "genuine". They live in dirt houses,
attend dirt churches, eat tortillas, chile, and beans. Tourists
don't have to deal with the expense and language of a foreign
country when they can visit the quaint mountain villages of the
Sangre de Cristo and the “sublime” pueblos of the Rio Grande.

The beauty of New Mexico has created a mask unlike Harlem that
covers the reality of extreme poverty. The tourist, imperialist
representative in his own country, does not see that there are no
hospitals for thousands, that the mountain streams - the very
subsistence of the people - are polluted by mines, lumber mills
and "hippie orgies". They do not see into the schools where
children are forbidden to speak their own language, that the his-
tory which is taught is not their history but that of the Pilgrim...
Kit Carson, a genocidal murderer, who led their forefathers on a
death march, is acclaimed a great American hero. The media tells
them how lucky they are that the Anglos came to build them good
highways to the ski resort and the nearest McDonald's - the former
they could not afford and at the latter they would not eat.

Movement people come through on their way to California, light
up a joint, and stay because it is so beautiful...when they travel
from Berkeley to San Francisco they do not stay in Oakland because
it is so beautiful. New Mexico is becoming the land of the Radical
Sabbatical. The Mesa has a way of suspending our sense of humanity.
How can hunger, disease, despair exist in such beauty? It does.
We call for a boycott on travel and tourism in New Mexico. If you
come -- come as a true revolutionary, come with the consciousness
that we have to work together and to fight together -- when asked--
against the oppression of the most oppressed.

Anglo women who were planning to come to the work camp had not
been invited by Chicanas. They were coming to work and learn,
but we who planned the camp did not have sufficient insight or
knowledge to understand the position we would be in. Instead of
arriving as sisters we would be seeing the loveliness which
brings tourists; instead of achieving unity we might be splitting
the ranks of the Chicanos. Rather than be guilty of any of these
errors in judgment we called off the work camp. We offer our
apology to our sisters in California who helped us but who did
not participate in the decision. We, in New Mexico, were solely
responsible for our ignorance and insensitivity to the problems.
We feel that we have learned something from this experience and
we have wanted to share it with you. Our further apology for
the delay in this analysis reaching you. Sometime in the future
it may be possible to have a camp when we are invited. The Cuban
people have asked many North Americans to join the Venceremos
Brigade and participate in the sugar harvest. When and if a group
of Chicanas find it opportune to educate a group of white middle-
class Female Liberationists then, perhaps, we can have a work camp.
We feel that women should get together in work camps next summer.
We must learn to work together after we have learned to talk to-
gether. We support the efforts of any who are interested in hold-
ing such camps. We welcome any correspondence, critical analysis.

~~ J

Vol. 1, No. 5

Ain't I a Woman?