acs  
aA  
ae  

A child I know told an adult that she was going to “bite her  
all over." The adult later smiled at the image of hoards of child-  
ren attacking adults, biting them all over their bodies. This idea  
is amazingly similar to the actions of women, united against their  
oppressors, during the Chinese revolution. I do not think the  
comparison should be taken lightly.  

Children have little or no control over money, transportation,  
their living situation, their time or energy; even their anger is  
laughed at, ignored, or beat out of them. A child says something  
that is perfectly serious and is laughed at for being cute, then  
catching on, she or he tries to do it again for a laugh and is  
rebuffed. Adults talk about children as though they were little  
animals who aren't quietly hearing every word. And women who  
would like to bash in the face of men who call them chicks (baby  
chickens) continue referring to children as kids (baby goats), and  
on and on.  

Being unable to physically survive alone, children are totally  
subject to the adults that take care of them. This dependency  
falls largely on mothers who are fed large doses of mystification  
and guilt (along with who knows what else) to get them into their  
roles and keep them there in order to provide the necessary labor.  
At the same time, a mother and child begin to know each other and  
special feelings build up like with a person you've been friends  
with since grade school. Generally, though, the mother has total  
responsibility for and control of the child. The mother is  
oppressed by the institution of motherhood which takes so much  
time and energy that she begins to lose herself, becoming "Mary's  
mother" and frequently someone's wife as well, but never a person  
in her own right. In anger and frustration, she hits, pleads,  
screams, and punishes the child so she or he will be good enough  
to be worth the mother's life, and also so that the child will  
leave her alone, get off her back. The child responds to this  
overt oppression by trying to "be good," though she or he can  
never quite make it, by anger/screaming, crying, fighting, and by  
sneaking around to get what she or he wants. Children usually  
learn pretty fast how much or how little power they actually  
have, when to shuffle, how to get by and do the best they can, etc.  

Children are oppressed by adults and at the same time are  
used as instruments for the oppression of mothers. What should  
be a very nice friendship turns into a complicated love/hate mess.  

Many adults are beginning to relate to their passive oppres-  
sion of mothers in allowing this to happen and are doing child-  
care as one approach to changing the institution which oppresses  
mothers (and by association all women). And they are now being  
confronted with their oppression of children. Some women freak  
out when they realize that they are doing to children what has  
been done to them; they are the enemy too. Others simply dig  
in and begin to try to change things. All make mistakes.  

The first reaction is usually total permissiveness; a des-  
perate illogical fear of doing something oppressive leads to  
allowing and sometimes even encouraging children to pick up adults'  
worst habits. Children are allowed to smoke and drink beer  

(children have small livers which can't deal with these things  
very well), regulate all their own sleeping and eating habits,  
and destroy everything in sight. Coughing, sickly, grouchy,  

obnoxious tyrants begin making enormous demands on shocked adults  
who forget that children don't have all the information and exper-  
ience necessary to make many decisions, and they sometimes go  

vl, no, 2 and 3  

\WE MUST  

LISTEN TO  
CHILDREN  

wild with power, totally unconcerned with other people.  

The state many adults seem to be in now may be a reaction  
to this or may simply be another approach, but it seems to be a  
pretty widespread situation. Having total control, many adults  
now seem to be struggling with the problem of the oppression  
of children with a different form of adult chauvinism: the child  
as a political experiment rather than a person, with the adult  
political ideology imposed on the child, not by example but by  
force: emotional and/or physical. Girls, for example, should not  
wear dresses; sounds familiar in reverse. With male children, this  
sort of thing is just as devastating. The female is told it's  
good to be tough and strong and to fight for her rights—“don't  
be wimpy." He, in the next sentence, is told to be wimpy, be  
passive, wear dresses, be quiet and submissive. If she hits him  
she's applauded; if he pushes her down he's a bully. But all of  
this totally disregards two real people struggling to live togeth-  
er: fairness is often neglected in favor of a political abstrac-  
tion.  

School and television and the whole rest of the world is  
telling the male to be macho and the female to be wimpy, but  
just telling them and trying to enforce the opposite isn't  
working. She wants people to know she's a girl; she's proud of  
being female. And people rebel against being taught to be weak,  
so he's lost, ignored if he's passive, rejected if he's aggressive.  
Those are the only two alternatives that we have so far been able  
to give them.  

Children don't seem to identify with our ideals; they iden-  
tify with us. They don't have all the information necessary to  
sort out the good from the bad. A friend of mine who is almost  
four years old lives with people who don't smoke. One night  
I noticed that she was picking up my cigarette butts and trying  
to smoke them, all the time I was explaining how smoking is bad  
for you. Adults need to be giving fewer criticisms to children  
and more to themselves—and each other.  

It seems necessary that all children be given love and re-  
spect and space to grow equal to their repression as a severely  
oppressed class of people. With male children, this is amazingly  
difficult, perhaps because there are so many privileges attached  
to traditional male behavior and so few men who are decent models.  
For male children living within a gay women's community, this can  
become especially difficult. If a male child constantly hears  
that all males are hated, he will learn not only to hate himself  
but also the people who taught him. If he is constantly rejected  
simply for being male, he will see no reason to struggle, or to  
try to be different. There are a few adult males who have shown  
by virtue of consistently assuming responsibility for children  
over extended periods of time that they are sincere. It seems  
that we must begin to judge their efforts with the same degree of  
trust that we hope for from children and other people that we our-  
selves oppress, putting faith in actions rather than words. Male  
children sometimes choose to relate to male adults and feel it is  
unfair that they live with all women and no men. To a gay mother,  
this is a frightening problem. A child is not loved more or less  
by a mother because of what sex she or he is, but simply as a  
special person with unique needs. Those needs for male children  
are often not met by other gay women except in the most limited  
ways and with some resentment, not liking, for example, to be  
touched by male children but enjoying being touched by female  
children. But it seems that we teach children their roles by  
treating them differently rather than treating them as individuals  
within an oppressed class.  

It seems that we must begin to deal with our oppressiveness  
in the ways we've learned and been taught to analyze our oppres-  
sion. We must listen to children. It was a child who told me  
that he didn't like being called a kid; he only told me once. A  
screaming child is trying to say something; we must listen to  
children's anger; not demand explanations when we're criticized;  
try to share our privileges equally with children; remember that  
with children too, the inability to articulate does not mean an  
inability to think or to hear and understand. We should allow  
children to spend time alone with each other, safe from eaves-  
dropping adults (although their physical safety must be consider-  
ed too); and encourage and support their unity with each other  
in struggling with their oppressors.  

With these sorts of cross references, we can begin to deal  
with such everyday situations as the similarity of an adult  
ripping off a record and a child sneaking a forbidden toy. Child-  
ren cannot write down their feelings to help each other understand  
and unite against their oppression. They are totally at our  
mercy. It seems that learning to use power fairly is something  
never taught in this society, something that women are struggling  
hard to teach themselves. With children, this necessity for fair-  
ness is urgent because they learn our oppressiveness as they  
suffer from it. We cannot afford to be any more liberal or less  
critical with ourselves than we are with people we consider to be  

our enemies.  
QUE 25