NO  
MORE  
PRISONERS  
OF  

WAR  

I've been in prison now for 6 months -  
a different kind of prison than the POW  
camp my friends rescued Tim Leary from,  
but a prison nevertheless. It's been a  
drag, unnecessary, and an absolute waste  
of our time - but I will be free soon.  
It's made me understand how wrong our atti-  
tudes and actions toward political pri-  
soners have been.  

When I was released on $160,000 bail in  
May, after a month in various jails, I was  
exiled to the very middle of Babylon -  
Fort Dodge, Iowa. Placed in my parents'  
custody (after all, where should a young  
pregnant revolutionary be sent - to keep  
her out of trouble - but "home" to her  
mother), I was locked into my white skin-  
privilege past, forced to live with my  
parents, except for brief sojourns to  
court, when I have to be chaperoned by my  
parents. Pretty decent psychological tor-  
ture - a constant assault on every level  
of my identity and sanity (can Fort Dodge  
really be real?!): severe culture shock  
hardly describes it. So my life energies,  
for now, are directed toward SURVIVING in  
this alien world, reading the few books I  
can get my hands on, and grinning nightly  
when I hear the news (only to receive three-  
hour lectures from my parents on morality  
and the glories of the Republican Party).  

Our original mistake made it easy for  
the Feds to impose such insidious punish-  
ments - on the advice of my lawyers, we  
tried (very unsuccessfully) to pretend that  
I was a sweet, apolitical young thing,  
hoping to win pig Julius Hoffman's favor  
- and a bail reduction. (Picture me using  
straight (piggy) lawyer and a dress as my  
"weapons" against the state...!) Obviously  
the Feds knew better - somehow it seemed  
improbable to them that weatherwoman/fugitive  
Linda just "reformed" after a few weeks in jail,  
especially when I refused to inform on my friends  
and "clear myself." So we got no bond reduction,  
heavy and unprecedented custodial/travel restrictions,  
and, later in the summer, another indictment. But even worse than Hoffman's decisions  
(which after all were pretty reasonable given that he's a part of the Enemy)  
is the sexism that has kept me here unnecessarily all summer long. Some of my "revolutionary"  
male lawyers made empty promises and priorities (to calm my "hysteria," no doubt) to get me out -  
and they've done nothing. I guess it was hard for them to understand that, being a woman, I have any  

important political work to do in the few  
months before my trials begin - so they  
abandoned and isolated me even more by  
promising to help and not following through.  

However, I'm not really so bitter, only  
disappointed at having a trust betrayed and  
wasted. I finally took matters into my own  
hands and got a woman lawyer/friend to take  
all of my cases - quite a job, but she is  
going to get me out on the streets again  
soon. Some of my sisters are helping her  
with the legal shit, and helping me keep  
my head together - and some men, revolutionaries  
in a real sense of the word, who are changing  
their attitudes/actions toward women, have even joined. So I will be free  
soon. Sisterhood is powerful - and very  
beautiful. (How much I have learned, how  
much I have changed...)  

But we have to use our power in other  
ways, too. As I wrote this, Angela was  
caught and now is held without bond. Pun  
Plamondon was captured in August and  
starts trial soon for bombing the CIA re-  
cruiter in Ann Arbor. Bobby Seale has been  
in jail for over two years. Afeni Shakur,  
Erika Huggins, the New Haven women, the  
Panther 21 - the list can go on forever.  

It includes people in every state, on every  
campus - draft resisters, kids we know and  
love and care about. We need each other to  
be free - our people and our lives are our  
best weapons in this war. Having our people  
in jail is a waste of our time - and we can  
do something about it.  

Obviously, some people should probably  
go to jail if they can get good deals or  
do only a few months' time. Many people who  
are now fugitives could come back, spend  
2-3 months in jail, and come out "clean" -  
able to move freely, accomplish more, make  
more/wider connections than you can when  
you're underground. So for some, a few  
months in the hands of the state will be a  
drag, but worth it.  

We can get some of the people out legally,  
through the courts, or by raising bail  
money, so they can have a few months' free-  
dom before the pigs try to put them away.  
Skip Taube, busted for harboring a Federal  
Fugitive (gee, officer - that's just my  
friend Pun...) can be free for $3000. We  
got Dianne out (thanks to our New York  
sisters, especially RAT women) in time to  
get her an abortion and a few months' (relat-  
ive) freedom before her trials. But we just  
can't give up on people when they are cap-  
tured - we have to fight on every level, in  
every way, to get them out and back in the  
streets with us.  

There are others, though, who won't get  
by so "easily." The pigs want them off the  
streets permanently - so they abduct Bobby  
Seale in the middle of the night, bust  
Angela despite her great disguise, put  
Bernadine on their 10-most-wanted list.  
These sisters and brothers can be freed  
only by taking a few risks. So when the  
pigs tried to put Afeni back in jail, pri-  
soners all over New York took hostages,  
rioted for a week - demanding her freedom  
and substantive bail reforms so other peo-  
ple could be freed as well. (Break open the  
jails - the people inside are part of us.  

A Puerto Rican junky sang beautiful songs  
through the bars to calm my angry tears...)  
When Leila Khaled was captured the PFLP  
freed her by risking the anger/reprisals  
of the world, and their own expulsion from  
the Palestinian guerilla command. They  
won. So can we.  

"The revolution is upon us. Unless we  
stop them now, these young radical revolu-  
tionaries will change our whole way of  
life," said the head pig at the sit-in on  
the steps of Congress. He's right, of  
course - we're in the middle of a revolu-  
tionary war, though we may be just begin-  
ning to realize it, accept it, understand  
what its possibilities mean in terms of  
our own lives. We have to take time to  
live, to create a beautiful culture and  
beautiful lives, to love each other - but  
our love for each other means a lot of re-  
sponsibilities, too, especially when our  
sisters and brothers get ripped off. THERE  
SHOULD BE NO PRISONERS OF WAR. We need each  
other to be free, so we can grow together,  
learn together - fight and win together.  

We have to fight so Eldridge can come back,  
so all my weatherfugitive friends, Janie  
Alpert, Rap Brown can come back and live  
among us. It means changing ourselves/loving  
ourselves a lot, realizing how much we  
really are oppressed, fighting for the  
kinds of lives we could live if the pigs  
hadn't robbed us of our freedom - and our  
possibilities. We really are as strong as  
we want to be, as strong as the risks we  
are willing to take to win our freedom.  

Power to my brothers and sisters of the  
Proud Eagle Tribe. Freedom to all prisoners  
of war, all fugitives, all exiles... Power  
and love to all of us.  

FREEDOM, Joy.  

Linda  

3