In issue #9 we printed an article by Martha Shelley entitled  
"Subversion in the Women's Movement: What Is To Be Done?".  
In response, we received a letter from Ruthann Miller, long  
time member and official of the Socialist Workers Party. We de-  
cided to print the letter because of our profound disagreement  

with Ruthann Miller.  

We need a theory about how to make a women's revolution,  
about how to assure that this time there are no oppressed groups  
told to wait until after the revolution. We need a radical theory  
of how to end our oppression as women and Martha Shelley pointed  

out that.  

An article by Martha Shelley called  
"Subversion in the Woman's Movement: What  
Is To Be Done?" has been printed recently  
in several women's liberation newspapers.  
I feel that this article contains many un-  
true statements and distortions, as well  
as some ideas which can be very damaging  
to the women's movement. I am sending this  
reply to Martha Shelley's article in the  
hopes of contributing to an open and fruit-  
ful discussion of these differences within  
the movement.  

The main point of Martha Shelley's art-  
icle is to attack all other women in the  
movement that Martha Shelley defines as  
"male-oriented" and urge that such women  
be "cast out" of the movement.  

Included among the women Martha Shelley  
condemns as "male-oriented" are women who  
are part of various social struggles, such  
as Angela Davis, Black Panther women, wo-  
men from the Socialist Workers Party; women  
who appear in the mass media; and women  
who support male politicians.  

It is important for us to be aware of  
the logic of this approach because if the  
various categories of women which Martha  
Shelley defines as male-dominated were  
excluded from the movement, it would  
mean the destruction of our movement.  

Martha Shelley refers to Angela Davis  
and Leila Khaled, the Palestinian woman  
commando, as “women fighting for male  
causes." Not only is it wrong for fem-  
inists to consider other struggles against  
oppression as "male causes" and exclude  
women who are involved in these movements;  
but if all women who are involved in other  
struggles than women's liberation were ex-  
cluded from the feminist movement, there  
would be little movement left. Such a  
policy would exclude all Black and Third  
World women who participate in the Black  
liberation movement, the Chicano libera-  
tion movement, and other Third World lib-  
eration movements. Such a policy would  
exclude all women who want to build the  
movement to end the war in Vietnam. Such  
a policy would exclude all working women  
who are fighting against their oppression  
as workers. These struggles can only  
strengthen the feminist movement. We  
should welcome women involved in these  
movements to join us. They can provide  
strong fighters for women's liberation.  
Also, we want to bring the women's libera-  
tion movement into these other movements;  
for instance, working women will be organ-  
izing within the trade unions to make them  
fight for the needs of women.  

Martha Shelley also says that  
women who belong to organizations that in-  
clude men should be excluded because they  
are supposedly "male-oriented." Again, if  
this policy were carried out, it would  
destroy the movement by excluding the vast  
majority of women in this country. Such a  
policy would mean excluding all women who  
registered or voted for candidates of the  
Democratic or Republican parties, which  
I would agree are certainly male-dominated.  
It would exclude all women who are members  
of trade unions. It would exclude women  
from such groups as the Phoenix Organiza-  
tion of Women. POW is a group of mainly  
Black and Puerto Rican women who live in  
Phoenix House, a drug rehabilitation cen-  
ter for both men and women in New York City.  
POW women have become very active in the  
New York Women's movement since August 26.  

Lacking that theory, women in male organizations cannot  
conceive of the notion that women can and must liberate themselves.  
Falsely believing that the structural roots of racism and sexism are  
in capitalism and failing to see that racism and sexism have pre-  
dated and outlived socialist revolutions, women still in male-  

dominated socialist organizations can only have a liberal attitude.  

Actually, if Martha Shelley really  
wanted to throw all the "male-oriented"  
women out of the movement, she would not  
stop with women who associate with men in  
organizations only. What about all women  
who live with men? Should they be exclud-  
ed because they are by definition "male-  
oriented?" This would exclude the over-  
whelming majority of American women. We  
could obviously never hope to build a mass  
women's movement if these women were all  
treated with automatic distrust when they  
began coming around the movement.  

The reality is that our entire lives  
are circumscribed by men. Even women who  
don't live with men or join organizations  
with men still more than likely must work  
for a male employer; they must read news  
papers published by males; they must live  
surrounded by, and relating to, sexist in-  
stitutions, from the school system to the  

courts, to the hospitals.  

The central goal of women's liberation  
is to end this whole system of sexist op-  
pression. But we can only do that if we  
are able to involve all women who are  
ready to fight against their oppression as  
women. And we will not be able to reach  
out and involve new women if the atmosphere  
in the movement is one of hunting for "sub-  
versives" and "male-oriented" women and  
"casting them out" of the movement.  

One of the organizations singled out for  
special attack by Martha Shelley is the  
Socialist Workers Party. Since almost all  
the statements she makes about the Socia-  
list Workers Party are simply untrue, I  
would like to briefly correct these errors  
for the benefit of women in the movement  
who want to know the truth.  

First of all, she says "The Socialist  
Workers Party is highly attractive to male  
oriented women who have swallowed the line  
that a socialist revolution will automati-  
cally bring about the liberation of women."  
This is not the position of the SWP.  

The SWP believes, along with many other  
women in the movement, that in order to  
lay the economic and social foundations  
for winning our total liberation, we must  
change the whole system -- we must elimi-  
nate capitalism and build towards a socia-  
list society. But we do not think that  
"a socialist revolution will automatically  
bring about the liberation of women." A  
socialist revolution will not be completed  
until women are totally liberated.  

The SWP believes that women must begin  
to struggle now, we must build up the po-  
wer of women, through a mass women's move-  
ment which will continue to exist through  
and after a socialist revolution. Only  
by building up our own independent power  
will women be able to assure that our needs  
are satisfied.  

Here is a quotation from the position of  
the SWP, adopted almost a year ago:  

"The most important basic characteristic  
of the emerging women's liberation move—  
ment, the key factor which gives it such  
revolutionary implications, is its inde-  
pendence. The movement, of course, is  
related to and interconnected with other  
struggles—youth, Black and Brown libera-  
tion, antiwar, working class -- but it  
has its own demands, its own organizational  
forms. It is not simply the women's wing  
of an antiwar committee, a union, or a  
Black organization, and its fate is not  
directly dependent on the evolution of  

other struggles. For the first time in  
decades, women are saying that they are  
not willing to wait for anyone else to  
take up their struggle; they will do it  
now, in their own way, and they are not  
willing to subordinate their demands to  
the needs of any other struggle."  

The SWP does not support the poli-  
cies of the present regime in the Soviet  
Union, as Martha Shelley implies. We are  
for the overthrow of the Soviet bureau-  
cracy. One of our strongest criticisms  
of Stalin and his successors is the fact  
that they reversed many of the gains women  
won in the first stages of the revolution  
and reintroduced reactionary laws and  
practices which strengthened the family  
and the oppression of women.  

The whole section in Martha Shelley's  
article on the SWP sounds like it could  
have come directly out of "I Led Three  
Lives" or out of the mouth of J. Edgar  
Hoover. She says the SWP “has moved with  
frightening success to infiltrate and take  
over sections of the women's movement."  

Another paragraph says the SWP has a  
"handbook" on how to infiltrate the move-  
ment, which is given only to "loyal party  
members." When I was reading this part  
to a group of SWP women, we all burst out  
laughing at this section, because it is  
so ridiculous.  

The policy of the SWP is to build the  
women's movement, to participate in it, to  
learn from it, and to contribute what we  
can to it. We support and help to build  
all struggles against oppression. What  
Martha Shelley objects to and calls  
“infiltration” seems to be simply the  
fact that SWP women participate fully in  
the movement and try to build it into a  
mass movement.  

Martha Shelley says that the SWP has  
"moved full-time workers into the women's  
centers of New York, Boston, Baltimore,  
and Los Angeles..." First of all, neither  
the SWP nor the Young Socialist Alliance,  
a youth organization which generally agrees  
with the SWP, have any members who live in  
Baltimore. In the other cities she mentions,  
SWP and YSA members have simply participated  
in the women's centers very actively, try-  
ing to help them grow.  

Whether she is aware of it or not, the  
type of language and charges Martha Shelley  
uses to describe the SWP are all the stan-  
dard charges of right-wingers against all  
socialists. This type of thing reached a  
high point during the McCarthy period in  
the 1950s when not only communists and  
socialists were persecuted, but anyone who  
dared to struggle at all was charged with  
being a communist or a "dupe" of communists.  

The new movements of the 1960s have so  
far rejected the reactionary practice of  
red-baiting and purges against socialists.  
These new movements have set the policy  
that the most important thing is to unite  
the broadest possible forces in struggle  
on various issues, no matter what views  
people may have on other topics.  

The charge that SWP women would try to  
"move out" feminist literature from wo-  
men's centers is also false. We think  
that the literature that has come out of  
the movement, from women awakened to  
their oppression, is one of the most  
important accomplishments of the move-  

ment. (cont on next page)