records for an hour. Also on the twelfth floor there is a beauty
parlor, which you only have access to after you have been in jail
for two weeks.

Two floors that I must mention are the second and third floors.
On the second floor there is a library which contains books that
are irrelevant to our current-day situation. All books which re-
late to law and constitutional rights of human beings, and they
are few in number, are kept locked up and are not to be taken out
of the library. Afeni and I were without any type of literature
over a period of nine or ten months. Only after major efforts by
the attorneys and constant pressuring and going to different courts
did they finally give us permission even to receive our legal
papers, our writs of habeas corpus, or whatever legal matters that
had to be attended to or that we should know about. So after nine
or ten months, we were only able to get that little bit of infor-
mation. But information about the Party, or the Party newspaper,

or movement leaflets or such things, we were not permitted to
receive.

Also on the second floor is an alleged learning school for the
adolescents—which is actually a game which the adolescents play
to get whatever candy, cigarettes, pencils, pens they can con out
of the teacher. Also there is a chapel on the second floor, where
on Sunday the women come from different floors to see one another
and talk to their friends. Also on two is a priest and a nun who
offer you the forgiveness of the Lord and offer the advice,
"Sinner, repent, or to hell you will go," when actually you are
living in hell—jail—called the Women's House of Detention.
Basically, like the people who are in there have been through
oppression all their lives so it's nothing new to them. But
coming in and out of there can be a thing for some.

Then there is the diagnostic area, which a lot of sisters are
in, where a quack doctor fills you up with thorazine and chloral-
hydrate to keep you from shouting out how awful and horrible the
place actually is, they just drug you up. Many women walk around
like zombies from these drugs called medication. They just walk
around all day in a daze and not relate to anything except being
high.

On the third floor we find a slave work area, where women
slave in the laundry and sewing room all day and receive no wages
for their labor. Recently, after mass protest from the inmates,
some of the sentenced women are receiving 10¢ an hour. The scale
of payment now goes from 3¢ for janitor work to 10¢ for cooking.
The maximum a woman is allowed to earn in jail is $120 in a year.
You can't take it out with you or save it up, you're not allowed
to, you have to spend it at the commissary. Detention women who
are working receive nothing. As the authorities put it, “It's a
privilege to be a detention and allowed to work the time away."
Detention women are the ones the courts haven't declared guilty.
They're there because they don't have enough money for bail.

Most of the sisters in jail are detention women.

Also on the third floor is the commissary area where women can
buy the following items: wool, grease, powder, paper, soap, candy
sugar (50 cents a box), milk, non-filtered cigarettes, cookies,
crackers, cupcakes, and doughnuts. Three times a week detention
women are permitted to go to the commissary, spending three dollars
on the first two days and four dollars on the last day. Sentenced

women are permitted to go to commissary once a week, spending no-
thing exceeding ten dollars. The problem is, most women do not
have money to spend on the items since the prices are exploitative—
that is, sky-high! Some women receive one dollar from a voluntary
group of women called the Friendly Visitors, who in turn take all
the wool goods made by the women and profit off of them while the
women receive nothing but three cigarettes wrapped in foil, deo-
dorant, and candy—and this they expect you to be thankful for.

The day-to-day living is a rigid program set up by the prison
authorities. At 6:30 a.m. the female guards switch on all the
lights on the floors and open up the cell gates for the women to
take a shower. The shower room is a dirty cubicle consisting of
two showers and a wet concrete floor. In the shower room can be
found rat holes, dead rats, dirty sanitary napkins, and roaches,
yet the shower room is supposed to be used for women to keep them-
selves clean and healthy in terms of good physical hygiene. Break-
fast is served at 6:45 a.m. to 7:15 a.m. which means each corridor
of women, usually consisting of thirty totally, has fifteen min-
utes to shower. This procedure makes it impossible for all women
to clean their bodies.

Breakfast consists of the most unhealthy and nonnutritious
artificial food available, since 37 cents a day is spent on each
inmate for meals. For breakfast the women are served a limited
variety of foods, specifically: powdered milk, coffee, hard
stale bread, dry cereal or oatmeal, one slab of margarine. Lunch,
like all meals, consists of starch and powdered products. Pow-
dered eggs, rice, potatoes are fixed into a sundry amount of con-
coctions and a base for pork, pork fat, and grease. Only on rare
occasions—for example, Christmas or Thanksgiving—is fresh fruit
available for the women. Specifically, each sister receives one
orange! (That is the vitamin C for the year.) Dinner is basic-
ally the same composition of food except once every two or three
weeks the women are fed one chicken part of bologna, or "mystery
balls" (the name given to jailhouse hamburger meat by the women
prisoners). The meat is a definite mystery as to the bad-tasting
components authorities call "good healthy meat."

The daily curriculum of activities for the women consists of
cleaning out the cells, playing cards, or watching TV from 9:30 a.m.
until 10:45 a.m. Then all women are locked into their cells for
an afternoon-lunchtime count of the entire population. Lock-ins
are forty-five minutes long. After the lunch count, the women are
let out (like animals from cages) to eat. After eating, recrea-
tion begins at 1:00 p.m., at which time the activities are card
playing and TV on the floors, or going up to the roof area to
listen to records, until 3:00 p.m. At 3:00 p.m. all women are again
locked into their cells for another count until 4:45 p.m. Then
at 4:45 p.m. the gates are opened for the women to eat supper.

After supper the women have recreation for thirty minutes, during
which time detention women are called to go on their visits—for
those who have visitors. The visits last thirty minutes (included
in recreation time). Visits for detention women are on the main
floor in a closed area with booths and a phone, through which each
woman communicates with her visitor. Seeing your visitor is
complicated and uncomfortable, because persons view each other
through a glass window (approximately 12 by 18 inches). Before
and after seeing any visitor, sisters are searched externally, then
made to squat and jump up and down squatting so that anything that
may be hidden in the vagina will fall out. This happens before
and after visits to court too. When you're taken to court and
back again policewomen are with you all the time. Sentenced
women receive their visits on Saturday and Sunday only, and deten-
tion women Monday through Friday, holidays not included. Money
orders may be left for the women, which they sometimes never get.
Clothes (skirts, socks, underwear, etc.) can also be left for
detention women only. For sentenced women the state supplies
cloth to make dresses, and sneakers, underwear, socks, and loafers
for them to wear.

They say that now they're closing the Women's House of Deten-
tion on Greenwich Avenue and they're going to have it in a new
building. But don't you see it really isn't going to change
things, it's not the building, it's the people, the cruel and
corrupt people who can treat other human beings in a way they
would never in the world think of treating their dogs.

This is actually the way or form of rehabilitation the system
is offering. These conditions we do not need, want, or desire.
Therefore we as human beings must move to eliminate all elements
in society that are contrary to the existence of freedom and humanity.

FROM

LOOK FOR ME IN THE WHIRLWIND,
THE COLLECTIVE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF
THE NEW YORK 21 — A VINTAGE BOOK

SPOCHSSHOHSHHOHHHOSOHHOHHOSSOOSHOHSSHESHETOHSHOSHOLOOOOOHOSY

UiateL tr285, boa 399, NYC: /0009

MAY 19, 1972 FHGE