10-24

My earliest recollection of 'love’ was  
when I was in 6th grade for my best friend  
Maria, who seemed to have so many of the  
things I yearned for such as extremely ad-  
vanced musical talent, money, maturity,  
gracious parents, etc. Music was our whole  
life and we went to each other's recitals  
and concerts. I somehow felt more talented  
and strong when I was with her. I had to  
move at the end of our 7th grade year and  
was torn knowing I wouldn't see her very  
much, if at all. I bought her an identifi-  
cation bracelet (which was my thing for a  
long time. If anyone had given me one I  
would have treasured it forever. No one  
ever did, but I certainly kept the jewelry  
stores in business.) I called her up on  
the phone and at the end of a very long  
pause, waiting for mother to leave the  
room, I told her I loved her. She told me  
she loved me too, which no one could have  
brought me down from for days. I delivered  
the bracelet shortly after that and with  
renewed confidence in our love tried to  
kiss her. Well, it was a very awkward at-  
tempt, but just as I went to kiss her she  
turned her cheek. Completely embarrassed,  
I left. Our relationship ended there with  
sporadic visits for many years. She ended  
up married to a music teacher twice her  
age after much scandal. I found out in  
college that she had announced to a room  
full of women in the dorm about my "homo-  
sexual tendencies." Of course she was  
right, but it's always amazed me how much  
a childhood kiss could mean.

The move from a medium-sized to a small  
rural town was a real shocker. There was  
more opportunity for many close relation-  
ships to develop rather than just one or  
two. I immediately fell in love with my  
piano teacher's daughter, who was five  
years older than me. She was a loner, be-  
cause her family was considered really  
weird. She had bright, bushy red hair,  
B.O., a back brace, and was sickly. Our  
relationship consisted mainly of long  
philosophical walks discussing life and  
the hows and whys, etc. Our relationship  
was never discussed openly, but there were  
many times alone in her bedroom when we  
would play "I want to hold your hand" -  
"Don't you dare" games which we both en-  
joyed but could have been much better since  
I never won. Her family moved out of town,  
and I never saw her again. I learned later  
she'd gone East to school, got pregnant,  
married, and lived unhappily ever after.

The next year was filled with several  
one or two week crushes with four differ-  
ent women and with a few fumbling attempts  
at heterosexuality.

Up until my sophomore year in high  
school I had been very indiscreet, not  
knowing that my behavior was considered  
"abnormal." I thought that there was some-  
thing unlovable about me, otherwise why  
would so many people not love me. I won-  
dered why I got laughed at about holding  
hands with Jane in chorus, so I just  
laughed back. On one side Jane fit right  
into the high school scene. She was a cheer  
leader, extremely attractive, and was real  
outgoing socially. On the other hand her  
father was a teacher, and her mother had  
tried to shoot herself but only succeeded  
in damaging part of her brain. She never  
went out, and Jane brought few people home  
with her because of her "crazy" mother.

One night we were sitting in the car  
talking when she asked me if I knew what  
homosexual meant. I told her I didn't,  
and she told me to look it up when I got  
home. I looked it up, but actually didn't  
become horrified by the thought until I  
heard several homophobic comments, and  
jokes from kids, adults, and T.V. which  
I'd never been aware of before. After sev-  
eral professions of love on my part for  
Jane she said she'd never see or talk to  
me again unless I went to see somebody  
about help. When I refused she cried and  
carried on. It was obvious she didn't want  
our friendship to end, so I gave in. I  
made the terrible mistake of talking to  
the school psychologist. It was excruci-  
ating because I didn't know what to say.  
Finally, I ended up telling her "I become  
too close to my friends, and I only care  
about them." She didn't say anything re-  
assuring at all and recommended I see a  

psychiatrist with my parents' knowledge.  
Well, that ended that in a hurry. I would  
never have seen any of my girlfriends  
again if mom and dad would have found out.  
One night when mom and dad were having  
one of their arguments I left to see Jane  
who was super upset that evening. (She  
thought she was pregnant.) She was lying  
on the bed staring into space, and I was  
shaking from being so upset with my par-  
ents. We looked at each other for a long  
time, and then she put her arms around me,  
and I kissed her and we just lay there for  
hours. When I got up to leave she said  
that she didn't know if I was an angel or  
the devil. That was the only close physi-  
cal contact we ever had. I saw her approx-  
imately a year after she got married, and  
she told me that her sex life left a little  
to be desired. She said she just about  
called me up once and was going to leave  
him and come live with me, but she was  
pregnant. I haven't seen her since but  
learned she had another baby.

I wasn't too concerned about being a  
lesbian, because I knew when I got to the  
big university that I would meet a "nice  
young man," hold his hand, and be so happy.  
Well, wouldn't you know, I was really at-  
tracted to my hall advisor who just hap-  
pened to live next door. She was flunking  
out of school, had a boyfriend 2,000 miles  
away, and was miserable. She liked to talk  
to me but was really concerned that her im-  
age as advisor might be damaged. At night  
when she'd be upset, she'd pound on the  
wall and that was my signal for going to  
comfort her. I was at the point of flunk-  
ing out myself when she finally did. The  
night before she left she told me she loved  
me, never to quit music, and that she had  
told the house mother about my "homosexual  
tendencies" so she could keep an eye on me.  
I was never hassled about it, but always  
wondered when I would be and resented it  
terribly. She got married the following  
Spring and sailed off into the matrimonial  
sunset.

My next relationship was to last all  
through college and one year beyond. It  
was by far the most painful day is hard to  
look at realistically. Kate had a very  
strange combination of inferiority and  
snobbishness. She wanted to be loved so bad,  
but never wanted to or couldn't commit  
herself to a love relationship. To make a  
long story short, for four years we did  
everything together day and night with a  
few physical caresses from year to year.  
She knew I was gay from the first week I  
met her so the caresses and love did not  
come as a surprise to her, but she met them  
with cold indifference. I don't know why I  
continued to love her, but I did. After two  
or three years one night I couldn't stand  
it any more and went all to pieces over it.  
I then went to a psychiatric hospital to  
become straight. Well, I didn't come out  
straight, but better able to handle the  
situation of loving a so-called straight  
woman.

The year I left school we saw each other  
frequently and for three months before  
Christmas for some unknown reason she de-  
cided to sleep with me. I always made love  
to her, but it was never reciprocated. I  
always wondered why but never asked too  
many questions being afraid it would end.  
I was ecstatically happy after waiting  
five years and finally thinking she might  
want a love relationship for us. Every-  
thing was developing slowly but well, when  
one morning after she wanted me to make  
love to her she said she never wanted to  
see me again. She said she was straight  
and could never be a lesbian. I didn't  
know what to say, but I felt crushed and  
very confused. I still can't imagine it.  
One time later I merely inferred she  
could be gay, and she said that all the  
lesbians she'd ever known were slightly  
crazy. (She knew plenty.) I haven't seen  
much of her since, but she's not married  
and there's still hope for her, but some-  
body else is going to have to do the hop-  
ing.

For exactly a year after that I worked  
hard, didn't do much socially, and just  
spent many hours by myself thinking about  
my love for people and why they were al-  
ways straight, why did they get married,  
why didn't I have the courage to stop  
loving them, etc. I think I came to a few  
good solutions for me, and I know I'm not  
alone. I decided I would never again love  
anyone who didn't love me (women incapable  
of loving me because of their straight  
heterosexual hang-ups) or sacrifice what  
I believe in or what is a part of me for  
the sake of a love relationship. I'm not  
saying I haven't been attracted to  
straight or married women, but there's a  
huge difference between attraction and  
love.

HUP! HUP!

I think that for too long gay women  
have been oppressed in various ways by  
straight women. All of us at one time or  
another have looked to straight women for  
acceptance or love. There is no way that  
this can come about just like there's no  
way I could ever love or understand a  
straight woman again. This has been proven  
to me over and over again.

Right now I'm having a beautiful les-  
bian relationship, and wish all the love  
and power to gay women everywhere.

If this is in any way offensive to  
straight women, that's great!

We have been talking about monogamy lately on a lot of differ-  
ent levels -- whether it's good or bad -- how we feel in rela-  
tionships or outside of them. I don't remember it being much of  
an issue here or at least an issue I was dealing with. The last  
time I can remember that subject being a constant topic of debate  
things were really different. I was married. And the debate most  
often took place between me and other married women and lesbians,  
the former running down the evils of monogamous love relationships  
and the latter saying that our terms and our experiences from  
which our views grew did not apply to them.

Things have changed drastically for me since that time and I'm  
never sure whether your head changes and then or therefore your  
living situation or vice versa. I imagine it is closer to the  
latter. My view of one to one relationships a year ago was so  
shaped by the situation I lived in.

Marriage was stifling and on the basis of that daily experience  
I formed a negative opinion of all intense one to one relation-  
ships. My vision of a better world was for one to be a strong and  
independent revolutionary woman -- alone -- self-sufficient. In  
retrospect the perspective I had of monogamous relationships at  
that time seems so understandable given the situation I lived with.  
I believe your vision is limited to the confines of your experi-  
ence and your perspective on any situation determined by your role  
or position within the power relationship at play there.

One reason for my absolute negation of monogamy was that I  
wanted out of my marriage but did not have the strength to leave  
the security of that relationship but that was solved painfully  
but easily because he left me. I moved into a women's collective  
and along with the changes in my living situation came changes in  
my perspective on one to one relationships. My marriage-influenced  
view became obsolete in the female culture I had entered.

I soon saw that exclusive feelings I had did not have to be  
held in such tight rein in a female environment. The things -- the  
bad things -- that an exclusive relationship had meant to me as a  
married woman were not totally present with other women and the  
defenses necessary for survival at one time became unnecessary and  
could be dropped. I began to see that all the problems could not  
be laid on one to one relationships per se any more than I think  
women's problems on a broader level can be blamed on the family --  
there are too many variables to think so absolutely as "monogamy  
should be smashed." "Anything between two women is different than  
between a man and a woman" they told me and it wasn't until I  
could see this that I could become gay identified.

Mostly I think monogamy exists -- it happens that people have  
exclusive feelings for each other and it happens within collec-  
tives of women. The idealism of saying it is bad is too much of a  
self-denial of people's feelings for me to relate to and a way of  
avoiding the real struggle we have over the problems of working  
and living collectively with each other.

I think it is hard for women to honestly love each other on any  
level. Without the rigid conventions of heterosexuality -- who  
does what when, what the relationship means, what commitments we  
must make to each other -- are all fresh decisions to be made. The  
strength and aggressiveness that calls for and the equality it  
takes makes lesbian love very beautiful but very much of a strug-  
gle. Because I feel that struggle is important and because it  
takes courage to love each other I can't see labeling those rela-  
tionships that we develop as counter-revolutionary. Which is not  
to say that monogamous relationships within collectives do not  
complicate matters. They do and it can be very hard on anyone not  
in one but in collectives involving mostly couples. But I don’t  
think the way to deal with these problems is to attack those re-  
lationships that exist.

For those of us not involved in intense relationships there is  
the fantasy of happiness ever after once we get in one. When I got  
unmarried I still thought I was ending one relationship -- but I  
don't think I'll ever have one again like that. Still it's hard  
not to live on those fantasies but the happiness they promise  
comes with the conventions that define them. Absolute security can  
be close to confinement. The sacrifices are high. That kind of  
total love security I tend to desire could only be kept with lies  
and sacrifices -- lies that women can't really get away with, with  
each other. We know ourselves too well. Yet my fantasy of that  
perfect relationship smacks of that kind of stagnant security and  
exclusiveness and I know I'll never have it. I can't afford the  
lies and have little courage for the honesty to combat them. The  
aloneness honesty can bring hurts a lot and I feel lost and in-  
secure often in a sea of twos. But the complexity of human emo-  
tions leaves me baffled -- desiring independence but wanting the  
security of an intense relationship. It's hard to put it all in a  
rational framework that I can deal with. So I mostly try to keep  
in mind that no relationship is perfect and any relationship I  
may have is a struggle within the relationship itself and concern-  
ing how that relationship relates to other women in my community.

Mostly when I start to think about monogamy I start to think  
about what a materialist I am. How we can act, how we relate to  
each other is so greatly affected by the material conditions we  
live with. Even though I think we have to change both, to think  
I can be in control and self-sufficient in my personal relation-  
ships when I can have so little control or self-respect in this  
society is to expect too much of myself. I often think of the con-  
fidence that men have in their relationships -- that gall to be  
aggressive -- I hate them for that but some amount of aggressive-  
ness is called for to honestly relate to other people. I think  
men have that confidence only because they can afford it -- the  
material conditions they live with are better and yet to relate  
to and love each other we have to develop that confidence --  
even before we can tangibly change our material conditions and  
that is a tall order. I'm sure it is important to try and support  
women struggling on this level but I guess I feel it is a diffi-  
cult level for me probably for a lot of reasons like being working  
class so that the level at which I must survive is so material  
and different or personal relationships has been limited until  
recently and thus left me with less experience or a more rigid  
and simplistic approach to relationships.

Anyway it is a schizophrenic struggle with me and proceeding  
at a rather slow rate.

Each new way to move  
gives me a glimpse of a new way to feel  
and to express what I am feeling  

to a woman I might care to know well  

But my paths of movement  

are still shackled heavily by  

the conditions I am confined to  

and with them my perspective and my vision  
of ways to see and act  

If I could only move freely  

I could act freely on my emotions  

but for now they remain  

as caged as my floundering gestures  

to break the confines of oppression.  

The confidence it would take  

to act honestly would jeopardize  

the timidity required of my position  

But when we break loose  

I will pause to kiss you, my friend.  

Tuy 30,177) 7