a Naren RES me mE

MENSTRUAL

Explanation of terms *

Speculum = basic duck-billed instrument
used to hold vaginal walls apart and
expose cervix

vacuum syringe - 50 cc syringe specially
designed to create vacuum without allowing
air to be injected or forced through
end *

cannula; mm. tube used to evacuate uterus.
Karman cannula designed to conform to
shape of uterus and to collapse before
perforating *

#* Available Medical Concepts Box 6 Hl Se~
gundo, Calif.

Peggy Grau

The essence of any form of birth
control can be interpreted as an as-
surance of menstruation. The presently
available methods of preventing con-
ception (insuring menstruation), short
of permanent sterilization, are not fully
effective and, at the same time, offer
considerable risk to the user. The most
effective contraception technique now
being marketed is the birth control pill
which carries the risk of clotting, hyper-
tension, carcinoma, not to mention the as
yet unknown long-term effects to the woman
and her offspring. The methods with no
side effects, rhythm and diaphragm, have
unacceptable rates of efficacy.

There is available to some women a
mechanical form of menstrual insurance
that is so simple that any woman can learn
to use it at home, so free from long-term
side effects that it can be considered
safer than the birth control pill, and
barring a tubal pregnancy, without chance
of failure. The technique is menstrual
extraction. It is currently being used
by medics at the University of Hawaii on women
who have missed their period. Women are
learning to extract their own late or
pending menses through the Women's Move~
ment. The procedure has been used at
the Women's Medical Center in New York
and at the Women's Abortion Clinic in
Los Angeles by both physicians and para-
medics. The Women's Abortion Clinic
originally used the technique for self-
implementation by women who were, for medical
reasons unable to use the conventional means
of effective birth control and who were
unwilling to rely on rhythm or diaphragm.

The medical establishment will no doubt
resist the spread of this concept since
it not only offers women complete auton-
omy in the area of contraception, but also
has the potential of completely eliminat-
ing an extremely lucrative field from
their practice, that of birth control and
abortion. They prefer to keep the prac-
tice of birth control totally within
their sphere of influence. This is
evidenced by the direction all research
in birth control and abortion is pre-
sently taking. Our doctors and public
officials are looking to prostaglandins

MEDICAL SUPPLEMENT

EXTRACTION

with flexible tubing
attached to nozzle

ENS/GAIL

ENS/GAIL

The Karman cannula was inserted through the cervical canal into the uterus. Then the flexible
tubing attached to the nozzle of the specially modified syringe was clamped shut

and the plunger of the syringe was pulled out to create a vacuum. Still clamped shut,
the tubing was attached to the end of the cannula.

for the answers to all problems in this
area. These chemicals, presently out-
lawed in the United States because of
their side effects which include severe
nausea, vomiting and diarrhea (also the
admitted cause of at least one death within
the limited number of doses admin-
istered), once watered down to a "safe"
dosage will be available, but still within
the controls of the male-dominated
medical practices.

Any woman can learn to control her own
reproductive system with menstrual ex-
traction. Once this technique has been
mastered it can be employed free from any
controls of the medical society.

The actual act of extracting a menses,
when performed by a capable person using
proper instruments, is no more dangerous
than administering an enema. Infor-
mation about the location, appearance
and nature of one's reproductive organs
is a vital prerequisite to mastering men-
strual extraction. The
necessary equipment is: light, mirror,

speculum, cannula, vacuum syringe and
clamp for syringe tubing. The cannula
and speculum should be sterilized (cold
sterilization solution can be purchased
at any sickroom supply store). A douche
with Phisohex (1 tsp to quart warm water,
rinse till clear) or Betadine is recom-
mended to eliminate as many as possible
of the vaginal bacteria. Hands should
be scrubbed thoroughly with Phisohex or

Betadine. The procedure: Arrange yourself
in a semi-upright, self-examining
position with light and mirror in place.
Speculum, cannula and syringe should be
readily available. Insert speculum and
manipulate to expose cervix. Clamp tubing
of syringe and withdraw plunger to cre-
ate suction. Lay syringe aside. Introduce
cannula through cervical canal into uterine
cavity. Connect cannula and syringe tubing
and remove clamp. Rotate cannula in a
circular motion. Blood will pass through
cannula and tubing into syringe or trap.
Continue with this motion until you get
nothing but foam for a few rotations.

(continued on next page) PAGE 4