Dear Jane Alpert,

One of the claims that your letter makes is that ruling class males are not going to give us anything we ask for or turn over to us anything we demand. 

It is that mother right cuts across many important lines, including sex preference. Obviously, there are lesbians who have children, some who want to have children, some who long for them if only the world wasn't the way it is, and some who do not now and never have wanted children. I am a woman from the last group, and I want to try to tell you why your analysis is offensive to me and why I think it is incorrect in general.

The religious fervor of mother right as described in your letter sounds no different to me than the ruling class propaganda about the myth of motherhood. It takes the ideology which grows out of "biology is destiny" and attempts to glorify it into "biology is power." That is my first gripe. It has a familiar ring--all women will serve as a useful model in a revolutionary society.

It is cruel to encourage white middle-class females--to bear children.

I also feel that what you say about the "few options for meaningful participation" available to childless women that aren't available to mothers points up a big gap. First, it is clear you are not talking about lower-class women with men and without children. Second, women without children are outside of "meaningful participation." Women in this position generally do so after failing to respond to all hints, are at least capable of being mothers. You could as well and as truly argue that all women are potentially lesbians.

Sex and sex preference are both descriptions that limit possibilities for women, especially when you are talking about a post-revolutionary vision. At present, your analysis neglects to mention the enormous complications that mother right presents regarding institutionalized heterosexuality, men, and male children.

It is idealistic to talk about methods of impregnation without men before women have seized power. I am stunned by your statement that "Radical feminists are demanding less that women leave men, and suggesting that it might be more effective in building a revolutionary base if women in our experiences." 

Further, the demands that you enumerate, about wages, vacations, holidays, research facilities, hospitals and clinics "financed by the government" no less, are idle dreams. In this country, you have been in the field.

Dear Jane,

There are many things in your article that disturb me and make me angry. As I read it, I question these areas of your thought: your concept of revolution, your concept of children, and your concept of womanhood.

To start with the last one first, it is probably obvious that I would have to disagree with you about your projected concept of womanhood because you evidently are still straight and I am a Dyke. There are subterranean hints in your article that indicate a sympathy toward lesbians, and maybe you are moving toward that place yourself, just as you moved from old left heterosexuality to radical feminist (heterosexuality? celibacy? I don't want to guess or try to define you without more words from you). The most glaring example of our differences arises out of your definition of feminist culture's base: “...feminist culture is based on what is best and strongest in women, and as we begin to define ourselves as women, the qualities coming to the fore are the same ones a mother projects in the best kind of nurturing relationship to a child." I would agree with the "based on what is best and strongest in women" part, but as for the rest, I strongly take exception. To use as a prototype a mother/child relationship, even the best kind as you describe it, is miles from my experience of valuable relationships with women. As I see it, the only working definition of "best kind" that we can come up with in this society (including counter-culture living arrangements of all kinds) is still distant, powerful, one-sided and oblivious to the deep struggle/love mutuality that can exist between women. Because you rely on the mother/child relationship as basic, you have to take into account the necessary age difference that also exists, and I think it is safe to say that we haven't been able to even begin to bridge the age differences and chauvinism that exist in social relationships today. If you mean some kind of post-revolutionary vision of a mother/child relationship, I still think you are misguided because I seriously question whether post-revolutionary conditions will even embody a mother/child relationship as we think of it now. Later in that same paragraph you say: "the paradigm for all social relationships (will be) the relationship of a healthy and secure mother to her child." I contend that "healthy and secure" in your statement can only mean some kind of psychological prescription that is already part of the idealistic status quo. (In fact, it sounds a lot like Freud.)

That last quote also brings me to my second point about our differences. What is your concept of children? As reflected in your article (and you don't discuss it, so I can only infer from your usage of words and discussion of motherhood and Mother Right), I would say that you assume something of a children-as-property attitude toward young people. You use the phrase "a healthy and secure mother to her child" in the paragraph I mentioned above.

To me, this whole idea is one we have to work against, as we do the concept of the nuclear family, even with the mother as the only nucleus. I don't believe biological mothers should be the pivot point for their biological child's upbringing, and to predicate a theory for revolutionary change on that notion is, I think, a dangerous one. You also say that in your analysis, the source of your personal oppression (do you generalize this?) is: "the enormous economic, social and psychological obstacles against bearing and raising children of (your) own." Here again, the mother is defined as having power and control over the biological child. I know it is shit to have kids in this society, for all the reasons that were pointed out to you by the women you met while traveling around the country. But you are not having kids because you have the power to decide not to put up with that shit, and for that you should only be thankful. If you aren't, then I agree with another writer that you are a victim of the glorification of motherhood myth.

Finally, I question the concept of revolution as suggested in your letter. First, it is only suggested, and aside from a couple of references to violent struggle, your strategy seems to lie in basically reformist tactics -- change (by demand) the center of the nuclear family, magically take over scientific research and practice, etc. The system will kill us before anything happens if we rely on that route. Your analogy at the end of your article to the Reformation, rather than the Chinese or Cuban revolutions, as being the process we should think of is again, I think, wrongheaded. (I don't know what you mean by the Christian revolution, and I'm not arguing that the Chinese or Cuban revolutions can give us a pattern either because they were male-dominated.) But you say that the change in consciousness predated the changes in economic and social organization, and will in our struggle too. I can only conjecture about the changes in consciousness that men went through before they smashed the gynocracies that probably existed in prehistory, but I doubt that they came first. As they got more power, they became more piggy, and on and on until the whole shit pile that exists today evolved. But I don't need conjecture to contradict you; both you and I are good examples of the ways our material conditions changed our consciousnesses. It wasn't until you began living in a culture that contained ideas about women's liberation and radical feminism that you were able to deny and contradict the lip service that you were paying to the male left even when you knew it was a sham, as you describe in the account you gave of your distrust of Sam Melville that you submerged when you wrote the introduction to the edition of his prison letters. My example is that I have been having gay relationships since I was 19, ten years ago, but I lived heterosexually in society, even got married, while I was having that constant gay experience, because everything around me reinforced the heterosexual society and the only lesbian I knew was my lover. It wasn't until I met a lot of other Dykes and saw that the lifestyle I was submerging was correct and good that I had the strength to quit the heterosexual world. And I don't think the rest of society is all that different from you and me in that sense...except that they may realize a whole lot quicker than us because of our various privileges that stand or stood in the way of our perception of our self-interest.

Love in the struggle,  
Martha, from the AIAW collective