The concept of service has always bothered me  
but maybe I should explain what I mean by ser-  
vice. I mean by service those projects that we  
do for a group of people other than ourselves--  
a group we do not identify with. For instance,  
the class action workshop was a group of women  
who offered transportation to welfare mothers  
to pick up their government surplus food and  
also sent out welfare handbooks to people on  
welfare in this county. None of these women  
were on welfare themselves. Also the Free  
Medical Clinic in Iowa City, and most of the  
daycare centers including Sparky where you and  
I work.  

There are two things I really believe in--  
one is that people needing a service should  
have control over the service they receive, the  
other that people should have control over  
their own labor. Since the workers and users  
of a service are rarely the same people, it  
seems to me that someone ends up being screw-  
ed. Usually I think it is the people most in  
need of the service that suffer at the hands  
of those offering the service who normally  
have no gut understanding of the need. But  
there are so many complexities to the issue of  
daycare and in the past I think volunteers  
and workers at daycare centers have been  
forced to hide or give up their feminist poli-  
tics in order to supply service to people who  
did not accept them, to work in situations  
that were offensive to them; to find it imposs-  
ible to relate to children in any honest way.  

What you say about service is substantiated  
by my experiences. As you know, I was in the  
class action workshop and have had a lot of  
time to observe the Free Medical Clinic be-  
cause I work there.  

My reason for involving myself in class  
action workshop was that I wanted to work on  
something that had tangible results. The only  
real tangible result of that was that I felt  
that I was doing something. Is that clear?  
What I'm trying to say is that service pro-  
jects often make the do-gooder feel good. Not  
a very good reason for existence.  

The Free Medical Clinic speaks for itself.  
It serves no one but the doctors who assuage  
their guilt on the patients. The Women's  
Clinic was different, I felt, because the wo-  
men involved had a stake in the clinic because  
we needed it and had some control of it. And  
when we found that we would lose that control  
by altering its structure (by using male doc-  
tors because the female doctors would not sup-  
port us) we closed it down because it was no  
longer useful to us. That seems correct to  
me.  

Which brings me to Sparky. I don't even  
think of it in terms of being a service pro-  
ject, for two reasons. First, it meets the  

SERVICE  

What I want to say to you in response to  
your saying that you don't see Sparky as a ser-  
vice daycare center is that some people in the  
center do and that issue is not by any means  
settled. I think it is an issue that women  
without children should be very clear in their  
heads about ‘cause we will have to fight for  
control and I think we should be sure that we  
have valid reasons for doing so. So let me try  
to explain what my reasons are ‘cause they re-  
late directly to my negative feelings about  
service projects.  

If the mothers had final control in the cen-  
ter and those of us without children worked  
there to serve mothers and to serve children  
we would be forced by the situation to see our  
function as charity. That is really all char-  
ity is--a payoff to oppressed people from the  
guilty. I do understand how in a sense that  
should seem right--a way of equalizing oppres-  
sions. But in reality, I don't think the in-  
equalities are that clear because as women we  
all carry various scars and many oppressions  
and any equalizing that is to be done should  
not be as superficial as putting in time due.  
I want and I think we can change in a more  
complete way. For instance, the term non-bio-  
logical mother has been tossed around a lot  
since the non-biological mothers group was  
formed. When we first chose that name, I  
think we only did so to identify ourselves as  
women without children. Now it has become used  
as (or at least interpreted as) us calling  
ourselves mothers. I can see how offensive  
that could be to biological mothers--that af-  
ter doing childcare for a few months, we  
think we should be referred to as mothers.  

However, I think what we should be going toward  
is in fact being mothers, toward viewing child-  

care as a women's issue--crucial to all women,  
political work that all women must work in and  
have a stake in--not something we do for those  
‘other women or those other women's children,  

but something we all do for ourselves. The only  
way I can see this happening is a fairly high  
level of struggle between women, all the women  

involved and to totally reject the sentiment  
that we are responsible for the oppression of  
mothers. Women without children have not suf-  

fered that oppression ‘though some have suffer-  

ed other oppressions and so I can understand  
how we can rightfully be resented but we have  

not caused it. We have perhaps perpetuated it  

just as many mothers have perpetuated the op-  

pression of gay women. I think I want to walk  

In a daycare center you need furniture  
and playthings that cost a lot of money.  
One way around that is to build as much  
stuff as you can yourself.  

Wood is expensive, but lumber yards will  
always let you raid their scrap pile. They  
might even give you some wood if you say  
it's for a daycare center, but we haven't  
had luck with this. For heavier lumber  
like 4x4's and 2x4's go to a construction  
site and ask if they have any old or short  
pieces. Heavy construction sites like  
high rises or poured concrete buildings  
even though there's not a stick in them  
still use lumber for forms, scaffolding and  
supports. A poured concrete building in  
the process of being built will have a  
whole shit load of 4x4's to get rid of.  

Lumber is named for what it measures before  
it is finished and dried.  

The measurements of our lumber was 3/4"  
by 11 1/4". First, cut the 5 pieces you  
need:  

top--12 1/4"x11 1/4"  
2 sides--11 1/4"x11 1/4"  
2 sides--10 3/4"x11 1/4"  

Then nail the top and the two square sides  
together. When you nail to a board on end  
like this make sure there is a sturdy surf-  
ace beneath the upright piece or else some  
of your effort is wasted. Use something  

of similar height to prop up the other end  
of the horizontal piece. Don't fight it.  

Next weekend we are going to begin build-  
ing the SUPER PLAYTHING. We designed it by  
gathering ideas from Big Rock Candy Moun-  
tain (published 6 times/yr by Portola  
Institute Inc., 1115 Merrill St., Menlo  
Park, Calif. 94025) and by trying to in-  
clude in it as many motor developing things  
as possible. We hope it will help the kids  
mature physically, become stronger and give  
them something to organize their playing  
around so we won't always have to be stop-  
ping fights and destruction.  

We were lucky obtaining material. We got  
the 4x4's from a heavy construction site,  
the 2x4's we found in a garage, and the  
1x2's and plywood we scavenged from houses  
the city is tearing down because of urban  
renewal. When working with lumber this  
thick that must have square ends, you  
should probably borrow a power saw. It's  
not that the wood is that hard to saw by  
hand, but your body naturally slants the saw  
one way or the other. When sawing through  
3 1/2" of wood you may get a difference of  
1/2" between one side and the other.  

SUPER PLAYTHING  

won't be built in a day,  

blade on your screwdriver is worn or has  
been sharpened or used as a chisel so it  
keeps slipping out of the slot (the part  
fitting into the screw should have a flat  

edge for gripping);  

or the wood you are screwing into is hard  
wood or has a knot and you should have  
drilled a hole in the first place and prob-  
ably put beeswax on the screw.  

I have drawn a conclusion from my exper-  
ience about women tackling problems or  

needs of our community by providing child-  
care for our children. Second, it meets  
the need to be with children and relate to them  
in a setting that is more realistic in terms  
of my life as a gay woman. Working at Trinity  
was a sham. (Trinity is a daycare center for  
poor women who need free childcare. It's  
come from middle-class women who see it as a  
charitable babysitting service. There's little  
parent/volunteer communication at Trinity.)  
I don't feel that Sparky is like that.  
I need Sparky. It gives me support in dealing  
with children and my childcare responsibilities.  
Those two things are separate in my mind.  
I want to relate to children. Because I'm gay  
and childless, I'm isolated from them in this  
society and Sparky helps to break down that  

isolation. And because I see childcare as a  
political responsibility, Sparky helps me to  
begin to meet that responsibility.  

Your feeling about Sparky is the same as  

I agree that the service issue is still  
hanging. And in part I blame the cumbersome  
structure. Our last general meeting with the  
mothers (over a month ago) was pretty positive,  
I thought. But we've got to meet together more  

often or we'll fall back on reading meeting  
minutes and having 4th hand accounts of what  
"the mothers" think. Sparky is a daycare center  
that involves kids, mothers and workers--we're  
interdependent and we might as well accept it  
and work with that idea.  
I don't think that control is the issue.  
Gay women, by refusing to work with men, are  
not trying to seize control of Sparky. And  

Once you have the 2 square sides and top  
nailed together, nail the other two sides  
in. For ease in handling turn what you  
have built on its side like the letter "c",  
then when you put the other side in you can  
hold it in place by pressing down on the  

side. Remember the side you are putting in goes from the inside of one  
square side to the outside of the other.  

There's nothing more frustrating than  
spending 15 min to get a screw in--one  
quarter turn at a time. Whenever you are  
building and a task is that hard, just stop  
and think. You are either doing something  
wrong or you don't have the right tool for  
the job. For instance if it is taking you  
15 min to put in a screw, your screwdriver  
may have the wrong size blade for the slot  
in the screw; you may be trying to get by  
without a Phillips head screwdriver for a  
Phillips head screw; the  

shank is named by numbers (2x4) which sig-  
nifies the width and thickness, but it does  
not actually measure that (1 3/8x3 3/8").  

When you buy lumber you should know  

P.14 vol.3 no. 2&3 Ain't I A Woman? Feb. '73 P.15