WOMEN’S REFORMATORY

the contradiction of liberalism as applied to any oppressed person

The women's reformatory in Rockwell City is the one adult
women's prison in Iowa. The prisoner population averages 75.
There are 48 staff members. Forty-eight percent of the women
inmates are in on charges of crimes involving bad checks, 30%
other stealing, 11% drugs, 8% crimes against person, 3% other
crimes. The average age is 27. Twenty-five percent of the wo-
men are Black.

After only being on what the staff refers to as the campus
for about 15 minutes, I was struck by how my image of what a
prison is like is based on 1930 crime movies. The prison con-
sists of six or seven white Spanish-looking buildings surround-
ed by a lot of flat land. It does look like a small, quiet col-
lege campus.

Rockwell City has no guards, no fences, and no guns - as far
as we could see or were told. We were told that women escape
often and are not often prosecuted. Many of them return on
their own because they really don't have anywhere to go and get-
ting out of the town itself is difficult. There are signs
warning drivers not to pick up female hitchhikers. It's a
small town so I don't imagine there is much public transporta-
tion. One of the staff members said that if an escapee doesn't
return on her own and isn't picked up on another charge, they
figure she's doing okay.

But what really threw me was the number of women there. It
seemed such a small number. I had envisioned before going
there, thousands of uniformed prisoners being marched around.
Apparently federal prisoners from the Midwest are often kept
there instead of being transported to the women's federal pri-
son in Alderson, Va., and also women sentenced to terms in
county jails. By law, women can't serve more than a thirty-
day sentence in a county jail in Iowa.

Somehow I imagined that there were more people in prison than
there are. I wonder how most people stay out considering how
impossible it is to live within the rules of this society if
you're not rich and white and even then you break laws often
but have the money, knowledge, lawyers and whatever to stay out.

I don't know what the situation regarding mental institutions
(there are three in Iowa) is. It is probable that women con-
victed and sentenced could be sent to one of them instead of the
prison, especially if they appeared hard to control, potential
agitators.

My reactions during the day ran the gamut from utter relief
at seeing the place and realizing I could stand it there - could
get through a prison term there if I ever had to - to depression
and anger at the liberalism and model prison atmosphere by the
end of the day of talking to enthusiastic and sincere liberal
administrators. The schizophrenia of the place really tore at
my mind. Recently I had been thinking of prison a lot because of
various conversations and also because of a change I had sensed
in myself as to my capacity to withstand prison. I used to
think I would freak out in prison, would never be able to with-
stand the authority, the fascism, the confinement. But lately
I have been realizing my capacity to do what I have to, to cope
or at least accept the hassles of my life being gay, being work-
ing class, being a woman.

I don't mind office jobs, or factory jobs anymore. My con-
sciousness of class has really just come to me in the last few
years - I don't feel above the people I work with on the jobs
I've had lately - not like I used to when I was younger, think-
ing I wouldn't do that kind of work all my life - I was just
doing it temporarily until I became a star, rich, something. It
took me a long time to realize I was a working-class woman and
accept joyfully, in a way, my preference for working-class jobs
as opposed to liberal purposeful university-type work with val-
ues I could never relate to. Somehow I can accept and withstand
what I have now but I really want a revolution. All the crumbs,
the reforms, the liberal consciousness lying somewhere between
my life and the revolution I want seem meaningless and unrelated
to my life and I don't care much about them. All this that I
have been feeling fit right into my vision of prison - forced
labor - the rigidity and along with knowing that the people in
prison are my people - that in this society my peer group, those
I am and I choose to be identified with, are working in what
the middle class defines as shit jobs or are in prison.

Anyway, my first reaction to the prison was relief but then
as the liberalness of the prison started to show I wondered
whether I could stand it. It pissed me off. You spend most of
your life being trained to accept authority and get by - you
build the strength to do that - hassle for a living by other
people's rules. Then after you finally can function, are
trained, some liberal changes the rules on you. They don't
change the reality, they don't take away the authority, but
don't want you blindly following it anymore. You're supposed to
challenge it, use your mind, be purposeful: Always to a limit,
though, a limit you can never define for sure. The liberals’
rules are always hazy. They have to be; if they weren't they
would be fascist. And the liberals demand that you love them
for their good intentions, love the authority controlling your
life because it is a kind one. The staff we talked with end-
lessly solicited our approval.

Page 8

own making.

Volume A Number 6

And the whole contradiction of liberalism as applied to any
oppressed person would really show through. Liberalism doesn't
work for the poor or for prisoners. The program at the prison
is geared at getting the prisoners out into the freer society
as soon as possible. The charts on how this is done were end-
less and presented with a cheerleader push, push, get ahead.
The chart "funnel" prescribes clearly the route of cottage #3--
cottage #1 or #2--work release--parole in freer society. I
think I might be able to withstand being forced to scrub a floor
that has been washed 10 times that day, better than proving my-
self in the achievement-oriented atmosphere.

The first person that we spoke with was the Program Coordinator.
I can't say I didn't like him. Like all the administrators we
talked to that day he was sincere and I really think had the wel-
fare of the prisoners in mind. He also seemed to have a fairly good
understanding of the unfairness of things, or the conditions that
put the prisoners in prison, how those conditions were not of their
kind. And he was cynical but I don't think cynicism went be-
yond liberalism. I don't think he saw the futility of working with
the contradiction of helping the inmates within the prison when the
problems lay in the society outside. He described to us the three
cottages that the women live in. He had kind of categorized the
prisoners living in each one. Cottage three houses the medical de-
partment and the infirmary and is where inmates stay on arrival to
the prison for assessment and evaluation before they are sent to one
of the other cottages and melted into the mainstream of prison so-
ciety. The medical department seems like a well-equipped doctor's
office. There are 2 nurses who I believe rotate shifts so one is
on duty every day. In addition, there is a doctor coming in every
week or two weeks and the prisoners can sign up to see him.

I found it difficult to talk to the nurse that was on duty that
day. I'm not sure she really understood my questions. Talking to
the other administrators we met was actually easy. It was easy to
get the kind of information you wanted. Generally I'm pretty
guarded with my questions in situations like that - afraid that my
politics will slip out, that people will react hostilely, that I
won't get what I want from them. Even my very guarded questions
most of the administrators responded well to. Probably because they
were all so liberal and so concerned with making that prison this
far-out example of prison reform, they would talk on end to my
questions. Trying to convince us in a way of their right-on-ness.