START NOW

Ain't I A Woman is committed to helping create revolutionary alternatives for  
women -- alternatives to the sexist, racist, imperialist Amerika which defines  
out-groups as objects, as not quite human. Blacks, Indians, people of the Third  
World, women -- all are out-groups. All are defined as objects.  

Although the specific problems faced by the different oppressed groups are in  
many ways not comparable, all share this one burden. All are treated as things  
that can be ignored, brutalized, or even destroyed by the power elite.  

There are all sorts of ways to destroy people short of killing their bodies.  

If the ruling elite can get them to accept a definition of themselves as naturally  
inferior, then a good part of their human potential has been destroyed, and they  
have unwittingly cooperated in their own destruction.  

For centuries, whites fostered the belief in blacks and Third World peoples  
that they were inferior to the white races. Now, in this century, they have risen  
to challenge that lie. For thousands of years men have defined women as the  
inferior and now women are beginning to cast off that false and  
dehumanizing definition.  

What can blame them? Who thinks highly of their  
traits of mind, such as logical reasoning, and autonomy?  
And least of all, that creature of sex? Traditional psychology and psychiatry  
(the sciences of mind and behavior) have urged women to accept her immutably ordained  
sex role, and have defined that role as essentially being a breeding machine. They have told her she is weak, passive, full of motherly instincts, and best  
suited to remain in the home. They have defined women as "sick," if they dared  
rebel against such a cripplingly narrow definition.  

Woman as sex object is supposed to sell herself into marriage. In order to do  
this, she is programmed to compete with her sisters so that she may be chosen to  
grace the home of one of her oppressors. Such competition pits individual against  
individual; it makes it almost impossible for women to recognize the social basis  
of their oppression, and to unite with their sisters against it. Once married,  
she is isolated psychologically from other women; her entire identity -- name,  
social status, reason for living -- is derived from her husband. Women who re-  
ject this loss of their personal autonomy are told there is something wrong with  
them -- that they are different, and people who are different are sick. It takes  
a very strong woman to break through this definition of what she ought to be, to  
realize that what is wrong is not in her head, but in an oppressive system that  
would have her be something other than what she can be.  

SEX IS BIG BUSINESS. The media use women's bodies to sell products to men.  
They tell women how to sell themselves to the highest bidder, and then how to keep  
their buyer from discarding them for a younger and prettier model. With incredi-  
ble cynicism they order women what to buy, what to cook, what to wear, what to  
eat, what not to eat, all in a manner that reinforces the narrow social definition  
of women, all in a manner precisely calculated to exploit women's insecurities.  
Hemlines going down? Then change your wardrobe -- for appearance defines a wom-  
an's being. Too fat? Starve yourself. Too thin? Eat. Too ugly? Cover up with  
pounds of expensive cosmetics. You are only an object, and if you are not a beau-  
tiful object, you have no value. The annual Miss Amerika cattle show parades tons  
of expensive beef before the eyes of an admiring nation, inviting all women to  
compare themselves to this year's best of breed.  

Sex objects can't usually sell themselves for much on the job market -- long  
years of training in passivity and in non-competitiveness, in accepting a negative  
self-evaluation, make it hard to believe one is worth very much in the man's  
world. How can an object compete with a man? Why aren't you home with your fam-  
ily? (Yes, I know I ought to be.) Don't you know aggressive women are castrating  
bitches? (I'll try very hard to do more poorly than all the men.) Your kids will  
be delinquent! (And it will be all my fault.) Your husband will step out on you!  
(I will kill myself.) You won't get a husband! (I am worthless.) You're taking  
a job away from a man! (Men should come first.) You will get married/get preg-  
nant/move away. (Then it is reasonable not to give me a decent job.)  

Many women quite understandably find it hard to fight this jungle of restrictive  
definitions. Those who can usually pay a high price in psychological stress.  

Men issue a lot of propaganda about the supreme importance of the wife-mother  
role. ("You are mother, companion, cook, nurse, chauffeur, gardener, teacher", etc.  
ad nauseum.) And all too many women blindly accept it. But the true value of  
these jobs can be seen in what they bring on the market, since in capitalist Amer-  
ika one's value is determined by the money one's skills can earn. Women who att-  
empt to support themselves as domestics, baby-sitters, practical nurses and atten-  
dants, maids, scrubwomen, waitresses -- women who desperately need a decent wage --  
are obviously of little value, since they are at the bottom of the wage scale.  

By definition, an object is controlled by outside forces, not by itself. And  
that's why women are fighting to gain control over their own bodies, over their  
very lives. Only then will we have any value to ourselves. Even our bodies are  
not highly valued by men: if they were, we would never have been so casually used  
as experimental animals by the male scientists who developed the pill. If they  
were, we would never be denied the right to abortion on demand. (Is there any  
medical procedure denied to men on the grounds of sexual morality? Think about  
it.)  

We believe that there must be a revolutionary transformation of Amerikan soc-  
iety before people can live humanly together. But each oppressed group must get  
themselves together, must make themselves strong NOW, or they will be left behind.  
People who have been brutalized into believing in their inferiority, people who  
have passively accepted becoming less than they can be -- these people must change,  
or they cannot make the revolution. Women must develop pride in themselves and  
in each other; women must identify with each other as members of an oppressed  
group. The time to start is now. The place to begin is where you are.  

of women  
by women  
for women  
eae Se ee  
AMAZON  
BOOKSTORE  

journals, magazines, buttons, litera-  
ture, posters, books, newspapers,  
SISTERS. 2418 S. 26th Ave.  

Minneapolis, Minn.  

Mon-Fri: 2-9, Sat: 11-4  

FREE AND DECENT HEALTH CARE IS A  

HUMAN RIGHT! We are ready to listen  
and to share our experiences with you.  

We have a play area for your children  
if you can't leave them at home.  

Hrs. Tues-Thurs. noon til 9pm; Fri-Sat  
noon til 6pm. Women's Counseling  
Service, 808 E. Franklin Avenue,  
Minneapolis, Minn. 339-5479  

He  
is  
8  
B  

HS 9g Coa  

711 Amsterdam  
New York City  

School Women are  

STATE ZIP  

AIN'T A  
WOMAN  

WLE PO BOX 1164  
IOWA CITY, IOWA 52240  

You can contribute by sending us arti-  
cles, reviews, opinions, rages, etc.  

You can also contribute by committing  
your women’s liberation group to a  

page, either in each issue or in every  
other issue. This kind of commitment  

is the best way to make a mid-west  

paper of AIN'T I A WOMAN? The page  

can be articles (or any kind of printed  
material), pictures, drawings, cartoons,  
poems, etc. Fill it, lay it out; it's  
yours: Write if your group is interest-  
ed. We'll send details, deadlines, etc.  

If your group wants to receive bundles  
of AIN'T I A WOMAN?, send 15¢ per copy.  
Minimum bundle: 20 copies.  

Collective workers: Vicki, Pat, Debbie,  
Lori, Linda, Dale, Penny, Carole, Julie,  
Anne, Carol, Pat, Sue and Linda.  

AIN'T I A WOMAN? is published on the  
second and fourth Fridays of each  
month by the Publications Collective  
of the Iowa City Women's Liberation  
Front, P.O. Box 1169, Iowa City,  
Iowa 52240  

2 | Vol. (No? 07 Ain't I A WOMAN?