(eon't £xom F.»)

We believe that all feminist litera-
ture should be available at women's cen-
ters, including socialist views concern-
ing women's liberation. Does Martha
Shelley think that the views of femin-
ists who are socialists should be ex-
cluded from women's centers?

She also charges that the "SWP has
considered gay people to be counterrevolu-
tionaries." Again, this is completely
untrue. We think that homosexuals are
unjustly discriminated against and op-
pressed in this society, and we fully
support the struggle of homosexuals to
eliminate all laws penalizing them and
all oppression of them.

I believe it is an insult to the in-
telligence of women in the movement to
say that they are being "co-opted" or
"infiltrated" by socialists. Rather than
making such charges, it would be more
fruitful and beneficial to the movement
for Martha Shelley to deal instead with
the political ideas that the YSA and the
SWP have stood for in the movement.

In the New York Women's Center,
Martha Shelley voted with about 30 other
women to exclude YSA and SWP women from
all leading bodies of the Center on the
grounds that they were "male-dominated."

A Black woman from the Phoenix Organiza-
tion of Women also left the Center meet-
ing, feeling that she was excluded too.

It became clear in New York that the
YSA and SWP and the Phoenix women were
excluded from full participation in the
Center because a small section of the
movement who worked around the Women's
Center disagreed with the ideas that the
YSA, SWP, and POW women have concerning
what the New York women's movement
should do.

In the New York movement at this time,
women from a broad spectrum of around
30 organizations, from the YWCA to campus
women's liberation organizations to the
SWP, have decided to unite to form an
action coalition, to plan demonstrations
and other actions that could bring to
bear the weight of the whole movement.
Women around the Women's Center disagreed
with the perspective of building such an
action coalition, and disagreed with the
first action projected by the coalition:
a mass march of women and their children
on Mayor Lindsay's home demanding public
abortion clinics and childcare centers.
Many of these women opposed building any
demonstrations at all, and felt that
August 26 accomplished nothing.

But rather than discuss these two per-
spectives openly within the movement, the

A

women from the Women's Center, including
Martha Shelley, resorted to the charges
of "male-domination" and "infiltration"
by the people they disagreed with, in an
attempt to discourage women in the move-
ment from even considering the ideas
held by the so-called "male-dominated"
groups. Their ideas on mass action—when
they did present them at a meeting
of 300 women to form the women's coali-
tion—were not accepted by the vast ma-
jority of women. Neither were their ideas
on exclusion of women accepted. The
coalition decided to welcome the parti-
cipation of all women.

The question of what is the best and
most effective perspective for the wo-
men's movement is very important, and must
be seriously discussed in an atmosphere
of free exchange of ideas and democracy.
This cannot be accomplished in an atmos-
phere of purges and “casting out" any
"unpure" women.

Only with the full participation of
all women who want to fight against
their oppression can our movement grow
and be strong.

Ruthann Miller

Socialist Workers Party
Young Socialist Alliance

‘Too Little Too Late

Martha Shelley was asking how to build a revolutionary
women's movement. If we're interested in answering that, our
theory must come from our practice, not from the practice of
officials of any party. Quoting resolutions of support for the
struggles of women and gay people from the SWP is about as

meaningful as Richard Nixon calling for the 2nd American Revo-
lution. I can hardly get excited about the fact that a party which
is 75% male and whose leadership is mostly male has decided to
grant women's liberation revolutionary potential. That Ruthann
Miller is a socialist is beside the point, so is Martha Shelley

by any reasonable definition. That Ruthann has a liberal attitude
toward the women's movement because she's primarily interested
in building socialism is directly to the point. The kind of all pur-
pose organization she wants W.L. to be best serves the interests
of those who are not motivated out of any special sense of oppres-
sion other than the general issue of living in an oppressive society.

How much can one want to end the whole system of sexist oppression
while working in an organization which is 75% male, not having
risen up and taken control of that organization?

To say that a socialist revolution will not be completed
until women are free is to put a priority on working for socialism
and to keep women from gaining a consciousness as women. To
want to build a mass movement without ever questioning marital
institutions, domestic relationships and the whole system of
patriarchy is the most reformist of politics. Building a mass
reformist movement is the surest road to single issue politics
where everyone can be united on the most meaningless reform
with the least struggle.

To what end, this mass movement? 'To end this whole
system of sexist oppression.' But that level of abstraction is
a sham and for SWP sexual oppression is an afterthought. How
could it be otherwise? Women and gay people didn't just start
being oppressed - it's that we finally got together and made
enough noise that the obvious became recognized. Now the SWP
resolves to fight laws which oppress gay people, but not to re-
examine their ideology which allowed them to expel gay people
for years from membership. Now the SWP supports the Equal
Rights Amendment for women because their attitude toward
women's liberation is so liberal they compete with NOW for their
constituency.

If we want to broaden our understanding of what it will take
to make a women's revolution we'd better start building a theory
that has some understanding of the history of women organizing
in America before. We'd better understand that women have
worked in many ways against oppressive conditions and avoid
the pitfalls we can.

We must also look at our own time, at the roots of our
new consciousness which came out of the condition of living in
the heart of the monster at this time.

Tentative thoughts on these things:

First things first -- The women's movement in the 19th cen-
tury started to make a radical analysis of the condition of women.
Radicals like Elizabeth Stanton and Susan Anthony questioned the
domestic institutions and marital relationships - questioned how

that perspective joined the women's movement when suffrage
became the goal. It was so much easier to work for what men
had assumed as their right.

A mass movement was built around the issue of suffrage
and women got what they asked for - the vote - precisely at the
time when the vote was becoming meaningless in America's so-
called democracy. Suffrage was no victory for women - it was a
long pause in our struggle for freedom and it was a meaningless
reform. Having failed to raise women's consciousness of their
oppression as women - appealing to women to ask for only what
men assumed as a right - the suffrage movement never prepared
the ground for women to ask the revolutionary questions about the
condition of women. In part, that failure left generations of women
who have labored to keep from asking those questions until now.
Radical feminists in women's collectives, in women's publications
and in consciousness raising groups are asking those questions.
Socialism to us is as the vote was to radical women in the 19th
century - too little, too late. Of course a sane society operates
on socialist principles - those same principles of sharing and
concern for other human beings that women have always been
taught. Men should learn them - we were born socialists. But
we don't get that society by voting in socialism. We become a
single issue movement when we see socialism as a precondition
to freedom as women - the precondition becomes the end.

We can find little comfort in the history of socialist move-
ments per se. They can be racist, sexist and imperialist, es-
pecially when they see legal reform as their road to power. We
should look to Rosa Luxemburg for an example of revolutionary
consciousness to alert us to the dangers of organizing a mass

movement for legislative reform. 'The true dialectic of revolu-
tion is not through a majority to revolutionary tactics, but through
revolutionary tactics to a majority -- That is the way the road

runs.' That must be the road of our practice - our collectives,
our thoughts, our groups.

We must read and understand Stanton, Anthony, Gilman
and all those women who labored while suffrage became the
single issue and death of feminism. Radical women lost not be-
cause they were less reasonable and less fair-minded than the
women who created a mass organization around suffrage. Every
woman lost because a mass movement was built on shoddy politics.
Every woman will lose again if we refuse to take risks and are
afraid to work for a radical reconstruction of the patriarchal
system.

Something about the new consciousness of movements in
the last decade. Those movements which grew - SNCC, SDS,
3rd world liberation movements - were not formless, open
and fair-minded the way Ruthann Miller would have you believe.

Continued on next page

sistas 29, 19TA 5.