First Feelings For A Woman Passing Through

I am sitting here in the living room

I could have asked you to stay  
There is lots of room in this living room  
It isn't often I feel this attraction  

I sit here often  

There is so much I can't seem to do  

but I sit well  
in living rooms  

Tonite I am sitting alone in the living room  

The others have gone to bed  
two by two  
Often I sit with them and  

I never mind going to bed alone  

except tonite  

I hoped she'd call today  
but I knew she wouldn't  

or might not  

I knew I shouldn't hope  

so I sat in the living room  
for most of the day  

until I got up to be productive  
I always feel I have to be productive  

if I leave the living room  

Tonite I am thinking about you  

I never feel attracted to anyone but her  
except tonite  
I didn't know the situation though  
There were four of you  
and I am in the habit of thinking  
she'll still call  

i  
ke  
ed  
tf  

The women's movement is my community. I  
find love and strength and support among  
sisters. I'm even comfortable with the  
women now; I've forgotten to be self-con-  
scious at times, which isn't usual for  
me. We have community. There was a time  
when I must have forgotten the source of  
my new self-confidence because I got in-  
volved in a one-to-one relationship with a  
woman who wasn't part of the women's move-  
ment. I thought I could maintain all the  
community I felt with sisters while en-  
gaging in a more exclusive relationship. I  
think now that it's possible, depending on  
how good the one-to-one is.  

Fége 4  

to let it go by is  

so scary  

I may sit here for a long time  
before it comes again  

to reassure me I am still  

a sexual being  
of sorts  

Tonite was not one for knowing  

what's happening  

I wouldn't mind your "no"  
if I could have asked the question  

But I'm not so sure  

I could have handled your "yes"  
if that's what you answered  

The Women’s Movement  
is My Community  

Community doesn't mean physical satis-  
faction to me. It means a sense of trust  
that comes from my assumption that if you  
too are working toward a women's culture  
then we must share the same anger and loy-  
alties. More depthful analysis is needed,  
because class background, for one thing,  
certainly gives women different perspec-  
tives and priorities, but the basic iden-  
tification of oppression (male culture on  
every level) and loyalty to women (by wom-  
en who are woman-identified) is an equal-  
izing step we have all taken, my assumption  
‘edes. Community describes the feeling I  
had of several trips last year, not know-  
ing anyone in the cities I visited, yet  
being able to find sisters to help me out  
everywhere. It's a feeling I'll never get  
over if you know what I'm talking about.  
This very intimate relationship lured  

S back into the straight world (not as  

opposed to gay, but as opposed to communal  
lifestyle). It was a wild and wonderful,  
idealized love affair with the appropriate  
promises and plans. All the romantic, eu-  
phoric frolics of a first love high aimed  
me out of the women's community and toward  
monogamy. The love affair ended (she is  
heterosexual after all), as the real ones  
do, in a broken heart. I was so hurt that  
I was pretty much out of my head.  

I had never suffered a tragedy within  
the women's collective I was living in at  
the time, and I didn't know how to tell  
them, once it had happened, that I wanted  
their help pulling myself together. My  
method of handling hurt for 21 years had  
been to keep it inside, and that was my  
reaction to this painful ending. Having  
been raised with the social conscience of  
guilt about everything, I isolated myself,  
trying to anaesthetize the pain, hide in  
guilt and shame, and lick my wound, leav-  
ing my body to sort of get along by itself.  

My catatonia lasted a good long time.  
My body, left to its own devices, literal-  
ly and figuratively fucked up my life  
pretty well. I (it) neglected and disloy-  
ally turned my (its) back to sisters who I  
do love and care about very much. I wanted  

Pe: eet ey OF lice Oe  

someone to talk to me, but I guess my im-  
age of distrust and hurt barricaded me  
from attempted approaches. I was numb, and  
unable to exert one ounce of energy for  
anything. Socialized behavior is very un-  
kind I think, with all the defensiveness  
we learn,  

Another relationship began. It was an  
attraction-based friendship, very down-to-  
earth. She was understanding and attentive  
during and after my trauma. Perhaps, out  
of old habit, I needed just one woman to  
lean on after my disillusionment. Though  
we have some very strong differences, I've  
built up a very special loyalty toward her.  
We're trying to work out a sort-of monog-  
amous relationship that leaves plenty of  
room for community with women; in other  
words a less possessive, less insecurity-  
laden, less dependency-oriented monogamous  
relationship.  

I haven't really been able to under-  
stand why I had to do what I did--leave  
the movement, get into a more exclusive  
relationship, and take so long in reviving  
myself. Some of my thoughts and feelings  
during that time were replays from my past  
before I knew of women's liberation. I re-  
sented having to compromise my zest for  
women's culture to support myself in a  
system I detest and want to destroy. I  
recognized the beginnings of old vices--  
money cycle (have want have want), compet-  
itive-isolative cycle (have keep stayaway  
have keep stayaway), etc. Old feelings re-  
turned of being alone and not understood  
and desperately ready to fight for my few  
and waning rights under the shitty system.  

Because of these feelings, their ugly  
associations, I feel a now tried and last-  
ing bond between myself and feminism. Sure,  
women can be feminists and be loners, or  
even twosomes, but sister, there's no sup-  
port like a loyal collective, or a coven  
of screaming, hexing witches, or a cross-  
country population of strong, inflicting  
feminists.  

WATCH-OUT FOR SUBVERSIVE RELATIONSHIPS!!  

Chant