JO JANE... I'm struggle

Dear Jane,  
I was very glad to receive your communication. Glad also that you are well and to hear of your political conversion.

I was impressed by your analysis. It was new to me, but I could see it had been thoroughly thought out.

Later as I was thinking about it, I wondered what is the purpose of such an analysis, even though I have read them, written them, been excited by just this type of far-reaching analysis before. Maybe it was that it didn't touch me personally enough because I am a lesbian and we are prevented from even vicariously enjoying our mother-right.

That is the context in which I was thinking. What good does it do to determine who the vanguard is? Does the act of determining them make them rise up? Communications have to be directed to them to raise their consciousness about being oppressed so that can happen?

If they know they are the vanguard, what do they do? Pick up weapons we do not know how to use because we are women? Or will it be more of a general strike? All women refusing to take care of children and bringing things to a halt this Lysistrata way.

There are other things I question. It seems to me that even though you don't identify with women struggling for equal pay for equal work, this is a more widespread and gut-level interest among women than mother-right. Especially among working-class women where pay differential is more crucial.

Yes, I agree women in the movement are beginning to experience their feelings as mothers, but I don't know that this is any more integral to our identities as women than women becoming in tune with their feelings of love and sexuality for other women. Certainly, you would agree that the culture of the gynarchies and Amazon nations of long ago. What Elizabeth Gould Davis is describing in The First Sex reminds me of the culture Sappho nurtured on the island of Lesbos.

I'm not saying that I have the right analysis and yours is wrong. But I've learned in dealing with analysis and direction that if you don't have the answers, questions are the next best thing. The inability to tolerate different perspectives from different oppressed groups of people is a problem the women's movement has. Different groups of women can work to form their own interests, but they must consider and deal with the oppressions of the other groups i.e., class, race, gayness, motherhood, age, etc. Maybe this is why I don't tend to think in terms of vanguards. Probably different groups have different conceptions of who the vanguard is. If I thought in these terms I would name lesbians as the vanguard.

I can imagine where you are in your head because I was there. The excitement of realizing the dynamic of feminism as a basis for social revolution. But I find it ironic that I am maybe closer to where you were originally (politically) and you are now closer to where I was. I don't know. I think it would be a shame if you let the talents you learned in Weatherman slide before you taught them to other women.

May I also add that I have always felt a love and concern for you as I do for anyone who has fought this society in some way, who has gone underground, been caused pain and turmoil because of their opposition. And I am happy at your change—your finding of feminism—I admire you having gotten there in what must have been isolation. But I want to respond to your theory honestly and that will have to mean negatively. I feel as if I have written a million articles, letters, etc. like this, always trying to preface with a love that is there my disagreements and anger—wanting whoever I am writing to to know and understand what my criticism means—that it is not malicious—that it is an attempt at communication. Normally the preface gets lost somewhere. Maybe it is just the smile that the evil shine on their victims. I'm crazy enough to know that I am capable of insanity and error but the conscious part of me speaks of intent that is loving—a desire to not be ripped off and hurt, to not have you ripped off and hurt, to not have any women ripped off and hurt.

With every mention of mother-right in your article, my body tenses and strains to hold in all the hysterical anger and repulsion that term evokes in me. I hate the term, Jane, and everything it means to me is worse than Mark Rudd or Sam Melville. You claim this mother-right as a basis of some kind of liberating direction for all women but I know in my gut I am left out of that. Before I knew I was gay I knew I didn't want to reproduce myself—the thought repulsed me more than any fears my childhood saw. My ability to reproduce means nothing to me and I don't want my ability to mean anything to anyone else either.

Within this society and the reality we all live, certain situations are going to mean certain kinds of oppression for women. Relating to and living with men is going to be oppressive, having children is going to be oppressive and so are a lot of other things. But, the two things I mentioned we have more control over (we can choose not to do) unlike other things (jobs for instance) that we don't have much choice over. A gay mother wrote in an article for our last issue on childcare that she thought there was a choice involved in having a child but that that choice did not justify her oppression. I agree with that. I don't think women who relate to men or women who have children deserve what they get. What I am trying to say is they do get what they could have intelligently expected and gawd damn we know we have so much to do to arrive anywhere close to freedom. I wish we would stop wasting our time choosing a situation which will according to our own analysis oppress us. Buy a gun every time you experience your mother instinct—whatever the hell that is and I don't know what the hell it is. I have never felt it. Where do I fit into your future society? As a mother's helper? Fuck that.

I am aware that you have been influenced by The First Sex. It seems to be the rage. I haven't read it but have been real unhappy with what people have been thinking and talking about having been influenced by that book. I am in no way interested in recreating the past. I am also not interested in being biologically superior to anyone. That is a distasteful line of thought.

The feelings I'm expressing are very personal and involve what I want my role in any society to be. But I haven't spoken to the point that many women like yourself want to have children. That is a right I think any woman should have if she wants it. How that would be accomplished without the now present accompanying oppression in some post-revolutionary society can only be speculative. But the present is real and upholding a woman's right to childbirth means a lot to childless women. It means that childless women must help a lot to avoid a mother being oppressed because she is a mother. It is free labor and because a mother still has property rights over her child (and I should add that with the recent adulation of mother-right it is sanctioned) the labor put in by childless women for mothers is exploited.

What the issue of childcare has done to all of us is push us to attempt to achieve some post-revolutionary state without having made any material changes in society—to set personal behavior codes that are unreachable. The attempts frustrate all of us and stagnate us. Attempting the impossible I do not find admirable. I think it kills and destroys human potential. And I want to repeat again that even though I do see the oppression of mothers and see its unjustness, the property right that mothers (especially recently, movement mothers) understandably cling to is exploitative to childless women. Especially exploitative to those childless women who mothers confront and guilt trip into doing childcare. I do believe that mothers' demands on childless women are justified when you consider the oppression that mothers suffer and the help they need but the subject of property rights were never fully considered and many mothers insisted on wanting to deny such rights only later under the influence of the glory of mother-right to take up their right again and hurt many childless women who developed attachments to their children by taking the children away.

We tried to deal with motherhood and childcare. We had a daycare center where childless gay women worked and other non-institutional childcare arrangements were made. They weren't perfect and people made mistakes, arguments between mothers and non-mothers, straight and gay women were heated but I think people were trying. In the end we discovered what we knew from the beginning: gay women are not allowed to do childcare in this society and mothers have all the power regarding their own children. The result of all of this remains to be seen. The center closed because of county and state investigations and threat of custody suits, mothers are still overburdened and do not trust childless women and childless women feel used.

So I do worry about your whole theory primarily because of my identity and the experiences I have had. I hope this is understandable.

P.S. I should try and make it clear that when I speak of property rights and power—in fact everything I spoke to, I am speaking within the context of a women's community and so refer to the relationships that exist within that community. I am well aware that mothers, although having more power in regard to their own children than childless women, most often have less power than men and always less than the state.

Betsy IV of ALAW

page 7