There are several gynecological text-
books recommended to University of Iowa
medical students; one of them is Novak's
Textbook of Gynecology (Seventh Edition),
Edmund R. Novak, Georgeanna Seegar Jones
and Howard W. Jones, Jr. (1965). In the
"Preface to the Seventh Edition," the
authors conclude the usual explanatory
bullshit with these kind words, "...with-
out Miss Helen Clayton in the office, and
Miss Eva Hildebrandt in the laboratory,
this textbook could never have gone into
print, and these truly indispensable la-
dies are formally given our humble thanks."

Oh wow. I really think Eva and Helen
should have joined up with Georgeanna and
stopped the presses altogether. Or at
least stolen the proofs and given them to
the New England Free Press.

This 736-page, $16 volume is jammed
with all that secret information gynecolo-
gists will never divulge to the lowly
patient. I started reading Novak's Gyne-
cology voraciously, first glancing at the
chapter titles, that the male medical
student who owned the book had helpfully
highlighted in sunshine yellow:

Gynecological History, Examination and

Operations

Diseases of the Vulva

Diseases of the Vagina

Cervicitis and Cervical Polyp

Carcinoma of the Cervix

Myoma of the Uterus

Ectopic Pregnancy

Leukorrhea

Amenorrhea

Management of Menopause

Miscellaneous Problems of Gynecology

I won't list them all; you can well ima-
gine that I barely knew where to turn
first. Actually, the first chapter I read
was none of the above, but one on Herma-
phroditism -- fascinating in a genuine
truth-is-stranger-than-fiction way.

Hermaphroditism has to do with sex
identification; it occurs when there are
abnormal numbers of chromosomes and/or
structural abnormalities of individual
chromosomes. Male or female hermaphroditism

is possible, with either virilization or
feminization. For example, a male herma-
phrodite with feminization may have ex-
ternal female genitalia, breast develop-
ment, etc., but internally, the uterus
and tubes do not develop and testes are
present. Of interest to the physician is
“helping the patient adjust to the sex of
rearing," i.e., constructing vaginas
where possible.

The first chapter, "Anatomy," intro-
duced me to the vocabulary -- I learned
all about Skene's ducts, the glands of
Bartholin, the ganglion of Frankenhauser,
and Mullerian ducts, parts of the female
anatomy named, no doubt, after men, because
men, in all their infinite wisdom, "dis-
covered" them. Before all those glands and
ducts were discovered, they weren't offic-
ially there.

The chapter titled “Gynecological His-
tory, Examination and Operations" was
when I started getting angry. Up until
now I was fascinated, especially with the
illustrations, which I'll discuss later.
In this chapter the real class conscious-
ness of the budding physician is rein-
forced. The section on “patient's Com-
plaint" reads:

The general nature of the patient's

complaint should be ascertained at the

beginning of the consultation, and
should be stated as nearly as possi-
ble in the patient's own language.

This may not always be very precise,

or even literate, but will at least be

authentic and will often point the way

to later questioning.

This incredibly condescending attitude
towards the use of everyday language to
explain what a woman must know is an im-
portant Philosophy of Gynecologists. We've
all seen it -- the Great Cool Dude Gyne-
cologist as Guardian of All Secret Infor-
mation -- if the man can't throw in refer-
ence to Skene's ducts and Mullerian
glands, it isn't official and therefore
not "literate."

Next is a section on "past History"
which ties in with all of the above, “it

is remarkable how little women know as to
the nature of operations to which they
have submitted." Of course, now it becomes
clear how the Great Doctor has utterly
failed to explain anything in terms that
can be understood, has intimidated and de-
humanized until we have the conclusion
stated in "Past History." Why don't women
know about the "operations to which they
have submitted"? Because of the pig physi-
cian, that's why.

Oh, but wait. I know you're really
seething by now, ready to go string up all
the gynecologists you've ever known -- but
wait.

Here's Chapter 34, "Miscellaneous Prob-
lems of Gynecology," in which the medical
student is treated to a thoroughly medi-
eval explanation of sexuality in marriage,
right here in the 20th century.

In the section on "The Premarital Con-
sultation," there is the subheading,
"Sexual Education and Hygiene" (hygiene?).
After discussing the efficacy of visual
aids in explaining the missionary posi-
tion, the authors point out that,

The frequency of intercourse depends

entirely upon the male sex drive and

there is a wide divergence of normal--

varying from two to three times in 24

hours, for the newly married couple,

to once or twice a week...The bride

should be advised to allow her hus-

band's sex drive to set their pace

and she should attempt to gear (like

a machine??) hers satisfactorily to

his. If she finds after several

months or years that this is not

her physician as soon as she real-

izes there is a real problem.

I always knew doctors fucked women over,
but I never realized they studied it
formally in medical school. Truly sick
psychological and physical dependency on
the husband is fostered, and if that does-
n't work, dependency on the physician --
an endless cycle of fuck-ups. Plus: ‘she
should be warned that it may take 3 to 6
months and sometimes longer for the inex-
perienced woman to develop a complete or-
gasm." Not one word on masturbation.

The illustrations are of three types:
1) microscopic, 2) photographs of removed
tumors, cysts and cancers and 3) full-
color pictures of real women. In the ac-
knowledgements, profuse thanks go to the
doctors who procured these pictures, but
not one word of appreciation to the women
who are in them. About half of the women
are black-- (in one illustration, the au-
thors found it necessary to identify the
raised thighs as those of "a colored wo-
man, 45 years of age," presumably because
her skin was darker than the rest).

I felt such sadness and sympathy for
these women-- probably poor, who couldn't
get to a doctor until they had incredible
diseases, such as carcinoma of the vulva,
horrible things that merited a photograph
in a gynecological textbook.

After reading Novak's I realized
even more strongly that women must join
together to help each other about their
bodies and their health. As long as med-
ical schools educate doctors with text-
books like Novak's, women must be made
aware that blind dependency on a gynecol-
ogist only leads to self-destruction. And
that any dealings with a male gynecolo-
gist must be undertaken with extreme cau-
tion.