antee of enough money from Union members  
to allow us to sign a lease for a year,  
and that isn't enough to do much. Other  
people are trying to root out supplies,  
equipment and drugs, and we have a few  
good leads on these things.  

The general concept of the center is  
a humane group of people treating each  
other in dignified, personal ways, and  
trying to recognize problems involved  
in getting medical care in a monstrous  
place like Chicago. We see the center  
as a highly political project, because  
it demonstrates a counter-institution;  
it shows how people can work together  
to meet their own needs; it debunks  
a lot of professionalism; and it shows  
women acting together for substantial  
social changes. The community chosen  
for the location is full of enormous  
challenges---it is Chicago's Southwest  
side, a fairly poor, mainly white  
working-class community, heavily Polish  
and Catholic, and is changing rapidly  
with patterns of Black and Mexican  
moving. Businesses are leaving, new  
things are opening, churches have a lot  
of influence, many women work, many men  
have two jobs, families are tight,  
everyone is overweight and in chronic  
need of dental care, abortion is a  
dirty word, there are no day-care  
centers, and the American Nazi Party  
isn't far away. We are trying to be  
realistic about the possibilities of  
actually operating a health center that  
does more than have educational meet-  
ings; some people think we will only  
stay open a month, others guess we  
could make it for a year. Harassment  
is expected, probably in the form of  
frequent disruptive police and fire  
checks.  

Some of the sisters working on the  
center live on the Southwest side, and  
have been working to arrange speaking  
engagements at church groups and PTAs  
and to get things in the community news-  
papers. For the rest of the Union wo-  
men working on the center, the experi-  
ence of learning about the problems of  
women from different backgrounds is  
greatly broadening our understanding of  
our oppression and making us identify  
with ALL women. We've done this intel-  
lectually for a long time, but it takes  
personal involvement to believe it and  
feel it down there. For those of us  
committed to the center project, this  
may be the most important thing that  
comes out of it.  

Details of the class plans, materials  
used, and summaries of the discussions  
will be available to other women's lib-  
eration groups in early September. We  
will report regularly on the develop-  
ments here and would like to be in  
touch with all the women's groups work-  
ing on medical problems across the  
country. Please send questions, infor-  
mation or ideas to Women's Liberation  
Health Center, 2875 W. Cermak, Chicago,  
Illinois.  

POWER to the SISTERS!  

a \Woman? why  

If a married woman chooses not to work,  
she then becomes economically dependent  
upon her husband for household expenses,  
clothing and personal expenditures,  
pocket money, and in fact, for physical  
survival. Not only does this oppress  
her by putting her physical welfare in  
her husband's control, but it oppresses  
her husband by requiring his full-time  
participation in the work force in  
order to "bring home the bacon."  

A final major way in which women are  
oppressed is by the distorted and nar-  
row definitions of women current in  
American culture. Women are seen as  
emotional, irresponsible and incom-  
petent in relation to occupational,  
political, and sometimes educational  
achievement (although they are consi-  
dered supremely capable of the socially  
crucial work of child-rearing and  
housekeeping). Women are treated as  
sexual objects by the mass media and  
especially by the advertising industry,  
which uses their bodies to sell cars,  
beer, cigarettes, deodorant, and a host  
of other consumer goods (while basic  
social necessities such as hospitals,  
schools, and clean air are neglected  
because of the fact that they are not  
"profitable"). At the same time, the  
exploitation of women as sexual objects  
leads many women to view themselves as  
inferior models who must continuously  
spend money on an always changing stream  
of the latest in wigs, cosmetics, and  
clothes in an effort to "shape up" to  
the media-promoted image of the desire-  
able woman. This supports the profit-  
oriented, capitalist corporations, and  
at the same time adds to the problems  
of psychic survival women experience in  
our male-oriented, competitive society.  

The CWLU sees this oppression of wo-  
men as linked to the oppression of  
other powerless groups in society---  
blacks, Puerto Ricans, American In-  
dians, youth, and the aged, for example.  
We see it as stemming from basic eco-  
nomic and political structures in Amer-  
ican society, such as the fact that the  
entire economy functions according to  
what is most profitable rather than what  
is socially necessary or desirable, and  
the fact that the wealthy control such  
things as the major political parties  
and the media. Revolutionary social  
change is necessary to fully end the  
oppression of women as well as of other  
subordinate groups. In order to work  
toward this massive social change, and  
to lessen our present oppression, we are  
currently raising these issues:  

(1) the demand for voluntary preg-  
nancy, that is, for the ability of women  
to have children if they want, when they  
want, and as many as they want, and to  

refrain completely from bearing children  
if they so desire. This entails the  
demand to provide free abortions un-  
regulated by law (there are no laws  
governing tonsillectomies; we see this  
as an analogous situation, but further  
demand that abortions be given free in  
accordance with the right of all to  
high quality medical care free of  
charge). This also includes the demand  
for significant research into the  
problem of safe and effective birth  
control, and for free and open access  
to complete information about the  
merits of various means of birth con-  
trol, for men as well as for women.  
Finally, it includes the demand that  

no person ever be forced to submit to  
involuntary sterilization, and that  
persons wishing a permanent means of  
birth control can obtain sterilization  
at their own request.  

(2) Connected with the issue of  
voluntary pregnancy is the broader  
question of the nature of medical care  
in America. We challenge the profit-  
orientation of the drug companies; the  
elitist, hierarchical organization of  
the medical profession; the refusal of  
many medical specialists to give infor-  
mation to their patients and in other  
ways to deal with them honestly; the  
direction of a research establishment  
which develops heart transplants but  
not safe birth control; and above all  
the failure of the American medical es-  
tablishment to provide decent health  
care for all. We will work to develop  
programs calling this establishment  
into question, and raising the demand  
for good, free medical care for all.  

(3) Also linked with the demand for  
voluntary pregnancy is the demand that  
child-care be recognized as a social  
responsibility. The provision of free  
child-care centers open seven days a  
week, 24 hours a day (so as to be  
accessible to those women who work  
nights, weekends, etc.), staffed by  
well-paid men and women, and in control  
of the parents whose children are in  
those centers is our major demand at  
present. Ultimately, however, this  
point entails the demand that all  
children participate equally in the  
wealth of our society; a recognition  
that all children are social wealth, not  
the private property of their parents,  
and thus are entitled to an equal share  
of the wealth of society; and the shar-  
ing of what is now virtually the mother's  
sole responsibility for her child, not  
only by the child's father, but by the  
community.  

(4) An end to economic discrimination  
against women. This means, obviously,  
equal pay for equal work, fair hiring  
and promotion policies, equal access to  
training programs, and, in order to make  
equality a reality, provision of such  
things as maternity leave with no loss  
of seniority, maternity benefits, and  
company supplied (but parent controlled)  
child-care. It also means dealing  
with the problems of the unpaid, unrec-  
ognized nature of women's work in the  
home, the accompanying economic depend-  
ence of the woman on her husband, and  
the often desperate economic situation  
of the woman without a husband---for  
whatever reason---who must support  
herself and her children.  

We see our struggle as part of a  
struggle for freedom going on all over  
the world. We feel the need to unite  
with all those who seek control over  
their own lives, and particularly with  
women.  

CHICAGO WOMEN'S LIBERATION UNION  

July 24, 1970