» 2  
THOUGHTS ON ME  

-  
Bay  
Right now my class consciousness is an all-over-the-place feel-  
ing, a sort of burst of identification with working class female  

resentment. I think I've just been through an absolution of guilt  
that I didn't have to have. Like being officially acknowledged as  

working class -- to myself mostly -- and the most real thing was  
the pain of realizing I didn't have the choices, the privileges;  
I thought I had just avoided them -- but they weren't ever avail-  
able.  

For a long time I assumed that I'd have the choices of a middle  
class lifestyle if I just got through college, just managed to  

stay in and live cheap until I could start making $7000 a year and  
see what it was like, and then I'd fuck that and be a freak and  
move back to the alley. Well, I got to be a freak and live on the  
alley all right but I missed the in-between part. I never got to  
go on that little spending spree. And now I know I never will. But  
all the time I was a freak I identified somehow with the middle-  
classness of that lifestyle -- the phony anti-materialism, the re-  
jection of financial security, the valuing of sensuality, spirit-  
ualism and intellectualizing, and the guilt of being reminded that  
we could go home to our parents and live in style if we wanted to.  
But I know I had more of the material things I wanted when I was  
on my own than when I was growing up. I didn't have much privilege  
to reject -- but I felt guilty anyway 'cause I thought I could make  
it in the straight world if I changed my lifestyle to get a job.  

I never stopped thinking about money. Maybe that's the key to  
it. My parents made me aware of it by the time I was seven at most.  
I knew money was important to think about because they asked me  
more questions about it than about what I did at school or who I  
played with or where I went or when I was going to be back or how  
I felt. Who what when where how -- why came when I got caught shop-  
lifting. I was eleven. My mother asked me why, why. I didn't want  
to talk about it. I was pissed off. She threatened not to let me  
go to Girl Scout camp. But I went anyway and I think my aunt paid  
for it. That was a real middle class trip and there wasn't anyone  
into shoplifting there. So I taught everyone in my unit how to play  
poker for chips and bottle caps. And I gave up shoplifting for ten  
years.  

I guess I'm trying to sound tough. Just keep remembering that  
every sanction was an economic sanction. Except maybe two other  
things about my parents that made me feel weird. One was that they  
always freaked out about my wanting to stay up late at night. They  
never really explained it any more than that it wasn't right not  
to live on their schedule. The other thing was that I felt they  
really lost track of where I was at by the time I was eight or so.  
I envied the easy-going relationships most of my girlfriends had  
with their mothers. My friends would say how they'd really get  
mad sometimes but they knew their mothers loved them anyway. I  
didn't feel like that. I don't know how they felt about me or about  
each other except antagonistic. I got it figured with my father  
when I was fifteen and told him I hated him. He accepted it. By  
that time I didn’t hate my mother, I felt sorry for her.  

PAGE 4  

VOL. I,  

THOUGHTS ON MIDDLE-CLASS GUILT  

Guilt reaction makes her focus on her-  
self, her (already done) behavior. The  
defensive reaction to a confrontation in-  
cludes an unacceptance of herself as she  
is: any white woman can be racist, any  
middle class woman can be class chauvinist.  
Unacceptance of herself--like the idealism  
of middle class: not dealing with reality  
but with what she wishes or would like to  
be. Being guilty for being middle class  
and not guilty for her class chauvinist  
action.  

Guilt is a protective reaction, makes  
her think of herself.  

Statement: Your chauvinist behavior/  
comment has hurt me.  
Reaction: I'm caught.  

I've failed to live up to my  
good self-image. I feel terrible. I  
want this person who has made me feel  
bad to listen to me and deal with my  
hurt.  
Result: The situation has been turned  
around to focus on the middle-class  
perspective. This happens in numerous  
situations; middle class experience is  
promoted as the norm, middle-class peo-  
ple are mostly more confident in articu-  
lating their feelings, etc.  

Working class women are sick of being made  
to feel responsible for class antagonism  
and being forced to relate to middle class  
guilt. Once we felt guilt for just being  
from a lower class. But feeling guilty for  
what you are is useless and destructive.  
Middle-class women were born there and will  
not understand lower class experience by  
becoming poor or stuff like that. Middle  
class women are responsible for their  
actions and statements, however; those can  
be dealt with. I don't like to suggest in-  
dividual solutions but it seems to me that  
overcoming guilt is a head trip that each  
woman must struggle through. But just the  
absolution of middle-class guilt is not  
going to do anything to fill the needs of  
working class women. Maybe it will un-  
paralyze some women to do necessary work  
which will relate to all of us.  

There is a myth about growing up in a working class family, a  
myth to the tune of "All You Need Is Love." The myth says that  
working class parents are strict but loving, given to displaying  
emotions, close to family people, unusually strong moralizers. I  
guess I was feeling like that's how some of my friends' parents  
were, but mine weren't, so mine weren't in the same class. It  
wasn't material. My parents related to cultural things that I iden-  
tified as middle class or upper-middle class -- classical art,  
classical or artsy music, "intellectual" books on history and re-  
ligion. And they didn't care about cars or interior decorating or  
the latest in house appliances.  

Back to the myth — one of my favorite songs says it too -- "I  
grew up in faded denims where love is a precious thing / You grew  
up in silk and satin where love is a game you play." My parents  
were uptight and cold. Middle class parents have no monopoly on  
making their kids feel unloved and isolated. So I felt little  
security on that score and on the economic score too. I was -- still  
am -- feeling insecure; it's my basic paranoid feeling -- the theme  
of my nightmares and bum trips. Roxanne Dunbar's poem that we prin-  
ted "Never having been sure of anything..." that says it, but how  
to change it is a struggle. How to deal with that feeling when it  
absolutely paralyzes me or distracts me so much that I spin my  
wheels and speed around and make impossible demands on people.  

Sometimes I have had the money to distract myself with a new  
toy. I made a down payment on my first guitar when I was really de-  
pressed, and I loved that thing for at least five weeks; it was all  
I needed. Then I went into a drinking thing. And I went out with  
whatever men would buy me enough to get drunk on and sometimes I'd  
leave and sometimes they wouldn't let me and most times I'd get  
screwed and hate them and hate myself and want to get drunk. I did  
that for eight or ten months continuously. Now I have a sort of  
fear about drinking. It makes me feel too vulnerable.  

Thinking of booze and drugs reminds me of this "look how bad I'm  
being" syndrome which may be a class thing -- like acting tough,  
showing off in self-destructiveness. I've done that and been around  
people who were doing it but it's like I would be real pissed off  
at privileged people who did it and kind of in sympathy and going  
along with people who did it out of desperation, out of oppression.  
Like one night when I was lost in San Francisco I met a black woman  
who was a hooker and wanted junk -- I couldn't call that thrill-  
seeking, not in that scene.  

I know I'm rambling but all these things remind me. Desperation--  
working class. Boredom -- middle class.  

Women have to deal with class in a way men don't. The whole  
social class mobility racket seems to apply only to white males.  
Maybe that's wrong. I don't know -- thinking about class in rela-  
tion to women attached to men is something I just don't know 'cause  
it's so hypothetical to me. I never lived with a man who financial-  
ly supported me (except my father).  

I think I'm feeling less schizophrenic about my class consciousness.  

NO 16 AIN’T I