to our psyches by them. And if I and my other friends felt it hap-

pening we'd leave; I mean, we know the difference. A child would
not. He'd be subjected to that and if we weren't around we would
not know what was happening to him in that center. People can't
help being white and being the kind of people they are. I'm not
saying that people are just mean and like driving black children
nuts, but the job gets done and intentions aren't nearly as import-
ant as the effect they're having on the children. And to have that
many--especially that place where you have 15 adults around a lot--
that many white people supervising black children--I think it'd be
bad. It's bad enough black children end up inevitably having to go
to school and having white teachers and start to get that later. I
guess we can put it off as long as we can--having white supervision.
Hopefully, we can send 'em to a school where they have black instruc-
tors but I don't think we can do that in Iowa City or even in the
state of Iowa. There are very few black instructors here. So the
possibility that you can do a lot for the child yourself before they
get to school is one out. You inevitably run into that authority
thing with white people but hopefully, by then, the child will have
some background about himself and about what to expect going to
school--things you couldn't warn 'em about when they go to daycare
at 2 or 3 years old. I guess the only relationship I can see with

white daycare centers dealing with third world children is that
it's likened to--and we can learn things from different systems--
dealing with black economic development where white people have all

the money and all black people have is human resources, you know,
and the ability, of course, to deal with each other that white
people don't have. White people can offer facilities and--when pos-
sible--financial arrangements. But most of the things they can of-
fer is usually never in the contact stage, where they come in dir-
ect contact with those people because that's just a hassle, you
know, white people haven't gotten to the point where they can deal
with black children or black people on a monetary basis without be-
coming very discriminating, and--especially monetarily--very rac-
ist. So the only thing that daycare centers that are white can
offer is space and offer some expertise--if there is any--how to
finance daycare centers, how to build them, how to apply for feder-
al funds. As far as populating the daycare center, in a position of
authority, I don't think that that should happen at all.

Q: Is there any black daycare at all in Iowa City?

A: No. They were talking about it. There is a group called

EBONY SISTERHOOD in Iowa City, of which I'm not a part 'cause
they're married. But they're talking about black daycare and
setting up something, perhaps. I'm not even sure how far they've
gone, even if they've left. Des Moines has a couple and they may
have gone down there to see how they run it (if they haven't they
should) but that's in the planning stage. Heretofore there haven't
been any black children at any age level enough to deal with it.
The transient population--here two to four years at the most--at
the time--there weren't more than 5 or 6 at any age. It's real
hard to set up a daycare center for two or three children. And the
other children who've been here forever have always participated in
staying home with their mother. (laughing) As far as black stud-
ents, other students with children, either the wife was at home or
they were both students and they would have to have a sitter be-
cause, you know, there was nothing they felt any confidence in.
With the black student population growing, I think the need for a
daycare center is becoming imminent. And they'll deal with it, but
before there hasn't been more than 10, I think, at one time, you
know, black children belonging to university students in any one
age group. So there've been very few babies around for people to
deal with. They were all either babies of a year or less or else
they were children in school.

a woman?

February 1973

Q: Do you have any feelings, being working class yourself, about
the supposed policies of Sparky to serve or give preference to
working class people? Sparky is not run by only middle class
people; there are a lot of working class people in it but I don't
know if you've ever heard anyone--like Sarah--talk about how she
was really offended when the idea came up of just serving working
class people. She thought that idea came just out of middle class
guilt and she thought that that was sort of messed up. Do you have
any feelings about that? Race may come into it so much that it may
make it an invalid question.

A: I guess to start off with I should make a statement about the
whole middle class guilt thing. It doesn't bother me so much that
middle class people feel guilty if that's not the level they stay
on. If we don’t get anything done because we think that it's
middle class guilt--that's where we get our money and that’s where
we get some ability to gather some knowledge so we can get rid of
'em. The thing is, if you're going to get as bogged down about
their guilt as they are, then, what the hell? They're bogged

down in being guilty and you don't want 'em to come over 'cause
they're guilty. You don't have no power! And that's one of the
major problems with working class and lower class people: they
don't have no power. And middle class people have some. They
don't have as much as the upper class people, but they have some
power, you know. If we could get all the power, that'd be great.
But I don't think that should stand in the way of working class
people being able to use middle class people to get the things
that they want. You don't have to stand around and hold their
hand because they're busy wanting to be flagellated because
they're guilty. The fact that they're usually very weak by the
time they get to that stage--you can channel their energies into
something useful. If they're going to stand around being guilty,
that takes up a lot of space. And the thing is, if they got
nothing better to do, then find something for them to do.

Q: So, like a daycare center would be finding something for

them to do...

A: The thing is that middle class people with little money can
volunteer their time. Working class people can't. They're gonna
starve if they don't work. So you can't say, “We don't want them
around 'cause they're guilty, we'll go off and start our own day-
care center." The problem is, any money working class peo-
ple can't do that 'cause they can't spare the time to sit around all
day watching their kids. They might as well be home if they're
going to watch their kids. And they could do that at home and
watch T.V. The thing is: you've gotta be able to use the re-
sources that are available. And, if you have to--just speaking
on a total level of white people: upper, middle, and lower class,
not coming in with a racial thing but just as a class thing--the
only thing the lower class has that it can use is manipulation.
And they've got to be able to manipulate those other classes to
get power, to get money, so they can survive. It's not just getting
money so you can count on it, but getting money so you can eat;
getting your fair share of the pie and the Gross National Product
that everyone's so proud of and that lower class people are getting
none of and making all of for those big people. If I could get some
rich person's money I'd feel good; I wouldn't turn my back and walk
away 'cause he was rich. Being poor, no matter what anybody says, I
don't think is very much fun. I see nothing to smile about when
you're hungry. Lower class people with children don't like to see
their kids go hungry, don't like to see every Christmas go by with
their children having nothing, and their days in school start
with nothing. That may look like a lot of fun and virtuous to
people who are middle class and are poor because they feel like
being it for 4 years in school. Turning your back on people be-
cause they're middle class is a real luxury in itself. It says
something about where your head is and that's just not where most
working class people are that are really working class. Because,
if you can manipulate those people, by God, do it. I think that
starting daycare centers and getting money from middle class
people and being able to use them, and if you're going to use

them in your daycare center and you don't like their politics,
get rid of the ones that you can, but talk to those other ones.
You should be able to tell 'em see what you want 'em to do

and let 'em do it, because if you're really working class--that's
it, you're off working--you're not sitting at a daycare center.
By all means, don't just say, "because they're there I'll let 'em
run my kids crazy because they're middle class." Manipulate 'em,
talk to 'em; there's an education level. Tell 'em exactly what
you want 'em to do with the kids, what you don't want 'em to do
and then, if they don't like that, fine. I think you should have
something to say over how they deal with your kids. They should
not have anything to say over how the money's spent. Use their
expertise, if they know something you don't. Working class people
and lower class people don't have resources because it's been kept
away from them. To throw away a chance at a resource, I think is
pretty foolhardy.

Breaking The Chain
Feminist buttons — black

and yellow or white

orders must be pre-paid

Calif. residents add 5% sales tax
10-24 —

25-949 -
100-> -

a 3

Order from:
Catol Sanders
P.O. Box 7790
San Diego, CA

Each

Each
12 oz. each
Calif. 42.107 min. order $1.60

page 25