Sa Sen Mea

Fae ic aparetene

‘
H
i

t

74
cad
ie

Kathie Cota Judy Heimel  
Ann McGee Mary Kuhry  
Joan Primeau Nancy Lohmann  
Mary Lotterman Am Clark  
Helen Sullinger Casey Higgins  
Susan Miler Karen Clark  

Sisters, having tripped over our own  
humility too many times since we were born,  
we write this to you because we want to  
share the discoveries we have made in our  
past year together. These reflections are  
written in four parts: first, a brief his-  
tory of our collective, how it was formed,  
and how it developed; second, how we have  
struggled together--and the insights our  
struggles have given us; third, the ongo-  
ing struggles and reoccurring problems we  
are attempting to deal with; and finally,  
why we believe that collective groups are  
essential to our development as individuals,  
as sisters, and as Female revolutionaries.  
(The emphasis here is on the word Female,  
not revolutionaries. We need collectives  
to build the Female Revolution.)

REFLECTIONS?

I. OUR HISTORY  
Our collective (sometimes called the  
Women's Collective because we can't think  
of a name) began meeting in early October  
of 1969. The first meetings were brought  
together by two sisters, who felt primary  
responsibility for keeping the group to-  

gether for much of its early existence.  
Twenty women were invited to the first  
meeting. We came from diverse political  
backgrounds. Some of us had been heavily  
involved with the "New Left"; others had  
no connection with it. Some were active  
in Women's Liberation; others were only be-  
ginning to examine our lives as women in  
American society. None of us knew every-  
one who came to the first meeting. Some of  
us knew only one or two people.  

The first question we dealt with when we  
began meeting was what we wanted the group  
to be. We decided we needed two things:  

a politically active group (which we called  
socialist) and a group which would respond  
to the needs of individuals, to help us de-  
velop the talents and skills we felt we  
needed.  

For five months the collective met reg-  
ularly with a core of eight to twelve  
women. An additional fifteen to twenty  
women came either sporadically or only  
once or twice. After we had been meeting  
for a short time we decided to start a med-  
ical referral service for women (now called  
the Women's Counseling Service). Our in-  
tent from the beginning was that once the  
WCS opened it would operate independent of  
our collective. We chose the Counseling  
Service as our political project for a  
number of reasons. We felt the need to re-  
spond to the immediate problems which  
women everywhere are facing. We felt that  
the Counseling Service would give us the  
opportunity to get together with women who  
had not been involved in Women's Liberation.  
It would also be a means of attacking the  
male supremacist medical establishment.  

We felt that this would be a good way to  
begin to develop the skills and talents we  
needed. Finally, we felt the need to ac-  
tively work on something together in order  
to build a collective identity and to ex-  
perience each other in ways that went be-  
yond our weekly meetings. We divided into  
committees to do the preliminary work nec-  
essary to start the Women's Counseling  
Service. At our regular meetings we would  
spend one week discussing our work on the  
Counseling Service and the next week dis-  
cussing topics ranging from our oppression  
as women to a Marxist view of history.  

In April of 1970, when the Women's  
Counseling Service was about to open, the  
collective split into two groups. Politi-  
cal and personal conflict had been building  
for several months and had reached the  
point where it could no longer be contained.  
The night we split was ugly. It was impos-  
sible to work out the anger and hostility  
and frustration that was there. Even yet  
we feel the reverberations of hurt and ten-  
sion from that night and the months before.  
When we look back and see how we have grown,  
we feel that the split was essential. (We  
discontinued meeting for two months to  

A Woman?  

work with each other.  

firmly establish the Women's Counseling  
Service and then began meeting again in  
June. The other group maintains the name  
Women's Collective, has added new members  
and continues to meet.) It was much bet-  
ter for the two groups to work out their  
different political approaches than to try  
to mesh them together. We hope that soon  
we can come together as sisters again and  
share what we have learned in the past  
months. (The character of the split will  
be further explained in the section on  
how we have struggled.) Of the original  
twenty sisters called together in October,  
seven are still in our collective. There  
are twelve of us now. We have chosen to  
keep the number small so that we are able  
to develop deep friendships, to get inside  
of each other, and to actively help each  
other grow.  

II. HOW WE HAVE STRUGGLED  

It has taken months of struggle to-  
gether for us to begin feeling like a co-  
hesive force. There were several times  
in the past year when we were not sure  
that our group would stay together or that  
the problems we had were worth trying to  
overcome. We say this to encourage sisters  
who are attempting to begin new collectives  
to keep struggling.  

When we began meeting we intentionally  
decided to call ourselves a collective  
rather than a consciousness-raising group,  
committee, society or other type of ga-  
thering. The word collective meant sev-  
eral very important things to us. It  
meant that we were going to attempt to act  
together as a unit, rather than in the in-  

dividualistic way we are taught to act by  
our society.  

We wanted to overcome the  
individuation that isolates us from other  
women and causes us to compete with each  
other. We believed that collectivity  
would give us political strength as women  
to deal with the oppression which none of  
us can conquer alone. We wanted to devel-  

op an interdependency with each other. We  
rejected the idea that we should strive,  
as men have, to be "self-made." We be-  
lieved that collectivity would give us  
strength both individually and as a group.  
With this definition of collectivity in  
mind, we began discussing various political  
and personal issues. As we talked con-  
flicts began to arise and we, in turn,  
tried to find out where they came from.  

As we shared with the group, we’d stir them  
up and many of the ideas took on new shape  
and meaning. All the things in the pot  
brought us closer together. We got to know  
each other not on a one-to-one or a one-to-two basis, but on a twelve-to-twelve basis.  

Our collective experiences, ideas,  
thoughts, (i.e., our collective history)  
were created not only by throwing things in  
the crock, but also by the work we did to-  
gether and the struggles we went through.  
As we look into the pot today, the bottom  
is barely full. We have a hunch the pot  
can never be filled--although it has over-  
flowed several times.  

Since we have begun throwing things in-  
to our crock, we have not noticed ourselves  
competing with each other (well, sometimes  
we slip backwards, but our sisters always  
pull us back). We have begun to think of  
our ideas as gifts to the group--to all of  
us. They can't possibly make any of us  
lesser but can only make all of us strong-  
er.  

Another discovery we have made through  
our struggles is the need for us to think  
out loud together. (Not only is it neces-  
sary, but it's fun!) The only time we  
(individually) used to have the guts to say  
an idea was when we had thought about it  
for several weeks or months and were sure  
it had no holes in it and that we could de-  
fend it against anyone's attack. Because  
after all, our ideas are OUR ideas! What  
we have come to see is that ideas can never  
belong to individuals and that in fact they  
are never created there either. They are  
the product of people's experiences toget-  
her, so it's pretty silly to covet an idea  
or to think that it's not valuable unless  
we can defend it. It's the experience of  
an idea, not its defense, that is import-  
ant. What we have strived to do in our  
collective is to think about ideas out  
loud; that is, to bring a glimpse of a new  
idea to the group and to work out the idea  
with each other. That way we experience  

the idea together, add to it with all our  
experiences. In the end the idea and the  
collective both gain from the experience.  

These insights came to us at a time of  
deep struggle, when we did not feel toget-  
her either personally or politically, i.e.,  
in our first five months together. It was  
not until the split in our collective took  
place in early April that we (in the pre-  
sent collective) began to feel united with  
each other. In fact it was the split that  

began discussing the ways in which we were  
relating to each other we noticed several  
things. We saw that we were competing with  
each other for knowledge. When one of us  
would put forth an analysis or idea, others  
would respond by saying, "I knew that al-  
ready", or "That's obvious" (only in much  
subtler terms). Each of us wanted to say  
that we knew it all before. We were  
threatened by the thought that other sisters  
could teach us something because that meant  
they were somehow above us. (Incidentally,  
we're pretty sure this is a very "male"  
pattern of relating to each other.)  
Recognizing this fact (and it was very  
important for us to be able to admit it to  
each other), we tried to find a new way to  
relate to each other. We saw that we had  
been responding to each other and to our-  
selves "individually". We thought about  
the fact that when we came together "we"  
(the collective we) knew nothing. There  
were no common experiences, thoughts or  
ideas which we all shared together. Al-  
though it was possible that all of us had  
had some of the same thoughts, until they  
were spoken aloud to the group they remain-  

ed unconscious and could not possibly give  
us a common identity. It became very  
clear to us that to have a collective we  
had to build a set of experiences, thoughts  
and ideas which we could hold in common.  
We had to build something outside all of  
us that was the product of all of us put  
together. A new concept of relating to  
each other began to emerge from our reflec-  
tions.  

Figuratively, it looked like this: We  
thought about all of us sitting around a  
big brown crockery pot (our collective  
identity--experiences, thoughts, ideas)  
and each of us throwing in all of the  
thoughts, experiences and ideas we wanted  

October 8, 1970  

self, the issues of it as well as the emo-  
tional traumas, that finally brought us to-  
gether. From the beginning there were con-  
flicts (both political and personal) be-  
tween members of the original collective.  
The division, as it was finally manifested,  
was between those women who were also act-  
ive members in SDS and those of us who were  
not. The split occurred at a time in which  
our minds were jumping with new ideas, the  
time in which we were at last able to say  
to each other and to ourselves that we did  
not "need" men. This was a liberating  
thing for us. At the same time we realized  
for the first time how much we needed  
women. This realization, in the face of un-  
resolvable differences in the collective  
was almost unbearable. (The differences  
are too extensive to go into here and are  
not important to the purposes of this  
paper.) We were discovering sisterhood,  
but at the same time had reached a point  
in which the only way that we could con-  
tinue to grow was to divide for a time.  
The political side of our break with the  
other women forced us to clarify our pol-  
itics to each other. The emotional side  
led us to unite our stomachs as well as  
our heads. From that initial union we  
have continued to grow together both per-  
sonally and politically.  

The next two parts of this essay will be  
printed in the next issue of Ain't LA  
Woman?  

for more information contact:  
THE WOMEN'S COUNSELING SERVICE  
808 East Franklin Avenue  
Minneapolis, Minnesota  

Phone 339-5479 or 339-3335