insane, the grain,  
in vain, in pain  

Innate qualities we have in common are  
surfacing in the process of our movement's  
growth. Growth sometimes has turmoil, dis-  
ruption, diffusion, ....  

Insane, in grain, in vain, in pain, de-  
spair, repair, unfair, despair  

After my journey west, I'm happy to be  
living in Iowa City, Iowa and not in San  
Francisco or Omaha or Berkeley because I'd  
be frustrated working there in our move-  
ment after all we're doing in I.C., and I  
wouldn't be nearly as far ideologically if  
I'd never lived in Iowa City.  

I'm supposed to write something about  
my impressions of our movement in SF and  
Berkeley and Omaha after spending several  
weeks with sisters there. And you'd think  
I could. And I'd think I could, too, be-  
cause I got a lot of impressions and have  
reached several conclusions about the  
movement there: as compared to the mid-  
west and Iowa City, just the movement  
there, sisterhood, politics. But I'm find-  
ing it extremely difficult.  

To make known the issues of women's liberation to the new students, Iowa City women's  
liberation front held two days of workshops entitled "Why Women's Liberation". The —  
morning sessions were with everyone. We broke at noon and ate lunch together and split up  
into smaller discussion groups in the afternoon on topics like: marriage, women's atti-  
tudes toward women, men's attitudes toward women, women's liberation as a revolutionary  
movement, lesbian consciousness, and sisterhood. The first Saturday's morning session was  
a beautiful success with both new and old people getting high from the experience. The  
second Saturday's morning session was deeply depressing to me and unsuccessful in general.  
The difference was the structure. In the morning session of the first Saturday the  

theme was to be why women's liberation and we began by going around the room--everyone tel-  
ling what they expected and wanted from women's liberation. The topic for the morning ses-  
sion of the second Saturday was the issues that have been important in women's liberation.  
We began by having everyone tell their name and how long they'd been in women's liberation.  
Both the topic and the way in which the workshop began set the stage for an elitist discus-  
sion in which no new people could take part. The manner in which we began clearly pointed  
out who was new and who had been in women's liberation for a while with the implication  
that we therefore knew everything and so the new people started asking questions of us  
instead of talking themselves. The topic lent itself to old people talking too because:  
what in hell do new people know about what we've been into when this is their first meeting.  

Since I'm going to be writing this for  
our midwest readers, I guess a comparison  
might be all right, though sisters on the  
coast won't believe or give credit to my  
impressions because regional elitism ex-  
ists--and as strongly as ever.  

To meet the needs of women must remain  
a primary task in our movement. I don't  
want to see any women ignored and neglect-  
ed. Something that made me very uncomfor-  
table on my trip (and I saw when I return-  
ed to I.C.) is how some of us are getting  
so involved with the movement in our area.  
I mean the menial, necessary tasks of pro-  
viding a center for exchange of informa-  
tion and communicating. Some groups have  
actually found it necessary to acquire an  
office worker, like one person to do shit  
work regularly. I've gotten the impres-  
sion sometimes that we're having fun play-  
ing in-the-name-of-the-revolution; that we  
can't stop ourselves from ignoring new  
faces around our centers because we're so  
busy with the phone and paper work.  

Whose needs are being considered by  

publishing a movement paper? I guess I'm  
in a mood of the-audacity-we-have-to—be-—  
so-flagrantly-privileged. Besides beating  
myself over the head for the privilege of  
putting out a paper, our audience also  
bothers me. Have we, and other papers, be-  
come inner-movement, full of heavy analy-  
sis and international news relevant to  
our beliefs but that no 'new' person can  
read? Or Chicano women or Black women or  
poor white women? Who will understand what  
I'm writing now? Who reads this paper?  
Are we competing with Rat and the Babe  
and other movement produced papers and  
magazines? Are they competing with us  
and each other? Why? Why?  

Those of us that are old people in this  
movement sometimes get off at new people's  
meetings on the good things that are said.  
New people don't know it, usually, but  
they're describing and recognizing dimen-  
sions of sisterhood: an elusive term  
supposedly describing our relationship to  
each other. I think the needs of long-  
term movement people are, can, and will  
only be met through sisterhood. Not com-  
petition. Not administrativeness. Not  
regional elitism that makes me defensive  
and makes you hypocritical and makes us  
not sisters but competitors--and not even  
that in your eyes. Good feelings are  
coming out between us as we're disrupting  
social norms. Let it happen. Sisterhood  
is spreading! And I love it.  

But I can't help thinking that many  
women, who do or don't read Ain't I  
A Woman?, wouldn't be very interested in  
what I feel about sisterhood, or care, for  
that matter, that it exists, when they  
have no tangible proof of it in their lives.  
And these same women also probably aren't  
interested in an analysis with all sorts  
of political points and heavy ideology  
that sounds preachy or do-this-do-that,  
which I don't feel has a place in a lead-  
erless, collective movement anyway al-  
though it happens. So how are their old  
crutches being removed? What's taking  
the place of old feelings?  

Should the women's liberation move-  
ment attempt to meet the needs of all wo-  

men in it? Those of us who devote all our  
time and energy to it do need to be con-  
sidered, I think. Yet I feel guilty be-  
cause I get wrapped in our office work,  
in putting out the paper, in going to  
meetings, that I don't and wouldn't and  
haven't had time to rap with a woman who  
must have made the effort to find our  
office or our collective in order to talk  
with someone. We have a lot of things to  
talk about and try and work out, don't we?  
Sometimes I feel like we've fought to  
get where we are in our movement---to do  
something fulfilling--without men. Then I  

see that I'm also doing things that men do.  

In an internal workshop the next day we agreed that our structure had been poor. We  
decided from past experiences that the best way  
to begin a discussion meeting is to go a-  
round the room with everyone giving an answer to a question.  
not one that points out the differences between people as the question we used to begin  
the second day of workshops did, but one that involves people in the discussion because  
they are giving their personal feelings about a subject.  
Like at one of our internal workshops when we began by everyone  
telling what they love in women and then recently with the question ‘what do you expect  
from women's liberation’. The unique thing about the last question was that  
people who had been involved in women's liberation for a while got excited by it just as  

The most successful tactic for workshops still remains our circle discussions. Most  
newcomers have said they immediately feel part of the group and experience an atmosphere  
of friendly exchange of ideas; whereas the other political groups they've belonged to  
are competitive and hostile during discussions.  
Despite other possible failures of our  
workshops and discussions, we do make use of a positive encounter situation conducive to  
emphasis on equal value of each woman's ideas.  

We've had good things happen  

SEPT. 19 10 AM  
WOMEN'S  

in their world--like not really communicating personally to other women or taking  
the time to try when there is an opportunity to--an ego trip in the guise of a news-  
paper being put out at the disregard of that harder task.  

Doesn't anyone else ever feel that way?  
Like we've set up our own culture, but  
that we're running it a little like the  
other? I feel it very strongly in things  
like competition, and elitism, coming  
down on married sisters, lesbians, hypo-  
crisy in life style and ideology, feeling  
satisfied and actually happy in our work  
and collectives doing our thing to bring  
on the revolution. Maybe I don't belong  
in the Women's Liberation movement anymore.