In Iowa City there is a Women's Liberation Front and everyone  
knows it, and most everyone knows we have an office and a phone.  
So what happens is that women call or write the office for a speak-  
er to come and tell them what Women's Liberation is. The only mes-  
sage that I've perceived anyone getting from this practice is that  
Women's Liberation is an organization that we belong to and they  
do not. That it is something you pay dues to and attend meetings  
of, and that women who don't have enough time to attend the meet-  
ings aren't in it.  

On just one such speaking trip to S.E. Jr. High in Iowa City,  

I met some women teachers whose bridge group had evolved into a  
consciousness raising group. I returned several times to speak to  
other classes and each time stayed longer in the teacher's lounge  
talking with those teachers. Even after we became friends, they  
would refer to me and the collective I live in as Women's Libera-  
tion--never conceiving of their rap group as such.  

But Women's Liberation isn't a national organization with chap-  
ters and dues and membership cards. Women's Liberation is where  
you find it. Wherever women have realized or accepted and are  
struggling to attain the loose set of goals or demands that would  
meet the minimal needs of all women. Women organizing day care;  
gay women getting together to talk about and do something about  
their oppression; women organizing around their particular job:  
secretaries, teachers, high school women, housewives, waitresses,  
etc; women doing consciousness raising about their lives, their  
privileges, their racism and homosexism.  

The media is a great deal to blame for creating a stereotype of  
a "liberated woman" that sets these women apart from other women.  
The image of a liberated woman is of a bra-less, well-endowed,  
middle class, naive looking woman, shouting obscenities as she  
snips the long hair of every woman she meets whether they want a  
haircut or not. This is an intimidating picture, but I do not  
intimidate women in this way. It is, if I do, a much deeper in-  
timidation than snipping hair-- it is the challenge of my life-  
style--unmarried and gay. Recently a married friend of mine came  
to our collective for dinner and after having a little wine ad-  
mitted to being very apprehensive about how we would accept her--  
because she was married. I accept her and love her completely,  
but that was not the acceptance she wanted. She wanted acceptance  
of her marriage and her husband as an exceptional male. That I  
would not accept something that I saw causing her pain was intim-  
idating. That I can do nothing about. I would like to make her  
life more comfortable, but there is only one way to make a married  
woman's life livable.  

There may be another way in which women who are overtly in  
Women's Liberation intimidate other women. That is by acting to  
correct things that other women realize are wrong, but are doing  
nothing about. This too is a necessary challenge. The liberation  
of all women will not occur by women merely realizing their oppres-  
sion. Power is never given; it is taken away.  

I know what you mean, the exclusiveness of WL organizations  
or at least exclusiveness in the terms of those women who feel  
excluded -- not a part, for whatever reasons -- from the organi-  

zations in their towns. I don't know what the reason really is  
for this sort of in-out thing between women who all have been  
raising their consciousness about being women. I think women  
not in local organizations (and maybe some of us that are) some-  
times see the organization as having very set ideas, a very tight  
ideology. Maybe we always think that about any group we're not  
a part of. The groups we are in we more accurately see as com-  
posed of people who grow and change.  

The stereotype of the "liberated woman" I would call more  
of a myth. The silliness of having to be liberated to join a  
fight for liberation. And the sadness of a new standard to live  
up to -- of women being embarrassed or defensive with other women  
about problems in their lives that come from the gut of being  
female in this world.  

It's so easy to say we are all women and WL is where you find  
it but things don't seem to happen that way. We are all so div-  
ided from each other not even considering political lines, but  

by our views of everything being molded by the situations we are  
in. The acceptance your married friend wanted was an affirmation  
of her life situation perhaps and none of us seem to be able to  
view ourselves outside of the confines of our lives. Being  

gay in this society has to cause some pain (understated) and  
relating to people at all can be painful for that matter. How-  
ever gay women want that situation they live in affirmed as  

good -- accepted. Since we find our minds and identities so mold-  
ed by the lives we must live to have chunks of our lives despised  
can be such a tremendous self-denial. I hope you realize I  
am not arguing right or wrong - we both agree marriage ain't such  
a hot deal but part of its horror (I think) is the difficulty for  
some of getting out of it (and the impossibility for others).  
Anyway, it's pretty depressing that the affirmation of one life  
style seems to deny the other. But that seems to be how it goes  
and I can't begin to think in terms of whether that's good or  
bad, just that I feel really bad that it is so difficult to re-  

late to women living very differently from ourselves. For proba-  
bly many complex reasons which I can't get together when I relate  
to some married women (something which I was once) they feel put  
down or feel I'm putting them down or vice versa. Well it's all  
pretty painful and I don't know how we all can come together on  
some kind of common ground to fight for common goals and/or if  
this means that women living lives outside that common ground  
will be left alone, isolated, pained.  

I agree, my married friend wanted acceptance of her life situ-  
ation as does everyone, but who was it that she wanted the approv-  
al from? It wasn't societal approval she was after for she al-  
ready has that--as the gay woman does not. She wanted the accept-  
ance of Women's Liberation, a movement which openly states that the  
institution of marriage is oppressive to women and should be abol-  
ished. She wanted resolution of the conflict within her: that  
here were women whom she liked and respected saying something that  
she had just begun to perceive as true about her marriage, but that  
what we were saying and what she was perceiving was too painful and  
disruptive to face. What she wanted was an understanding of all  
the forces controlling her and respect from us that she was facing  
and dealing with as much as she could as quickly as she could.  

You and I have come from opposite ends to meet at the middle of  
this question. You were married and have since attained gay con-  
sciousness. I have been gay for a long time and because of that  
and the way our society is structured, never until this year had  
any close friends that were married. You have seen the reaction of  
married women to your departure from them; I have seen the reaction  
of my married friends to my coming nearer to them. The polarity of  
our experience colors the way we see the relationship between gay  
and married women.  

I have often heard you say that since you moved into the living  
collective some married women in Women's Liberation have related  
to you differently, that you have trouble relating to these women  
because of a hostility you feel from them, that they envy and re-  
sent you for being out of a situation they themselves would like to  
be free of. So I can see how you feel the two lifestyles irrevoc-  
ably cut off from each other.  

I, on the other hand, for the first time in my life have friends  
that are married, and ironically, it was Women's Liberation which  
brought us into proximity. My friendships have progressed into  
closeness and I've learned of the daily pain of being married. It  
is so different from when I first got into Women's Liberation and  
decided very objectively that I should raise my consciousness about  
marriage so I could explain the end to the institution of marriage  
demand when I spoke. Now we are so close that I see the sorrow  
around her eyes and feel her pain in my own stomach.  

It was very important to me as a gay woman to hear women talking  
honestly about marriage and sex with men--it allowed me to see the  
psychiatrist's promises in the light of reality.  

My perception is that my married friends are coming to an under-  
standing of what it is like to love a woman and I now comprehend  
the forces acting upon a woman in marriage making it so difficult  
or impossible for her to change her situation.  

I know you will say, "Then why did you write in the last issue  
of AIAW in your reaction to Woman identified Woman, that married  
women are hypocrites if they are in Women's Liberation and not gay  
or at least dealing with it?" And as I expressed to you and the  
married women in AIAW, I am so sorry I used the word hypocrite  
lightly. I was being simplistic and talking in absolutes. I  
should have gone deeper into my thoughts and expressed the compas-  
sion I feel for the contradictions married women who are in Women's  
Liberation must feel.  

I guess I do feel the two lifestyles irrevocably cut off  
from each other. I don't want that to be the case, you know.  

And you may be right that seeing things that way comes from my  
experiences which have not been good and you see things differ-  
ently because your experiences at least recently have been. Still  
it seems we focus on one lifestyle or the other and haven't been  
able to deal with the totality of women's experience. Ironic  
that this dialogue is between the two of us who, coming from  
different experiences, still landed in the same place. I real-  
ize even working separately women with different lifestyles  
and perspectives can be both considered women's liberation, but  
I can't see any group coming up with the right answers. The  
answers we need that can speak to the totality of the female  
experience must be some kind of fusing. It is that that I am  
doubtful about or perhaps just impatient.