On Organization in

We (the AIAW Collective) have been discussing the issue
of organizational structures within the Women's Move-
ment prompted and influenced by the article below.
There are some things that the RF 28 talk about that
have not been our experience within our own group nor
with other groups in Iowa City and some things they

say that we agree with and have experienced. We hope
to have an article in the next AIAW on this subject.

The Theory Behind the Paper

The building of a social movement is a struggle, it is not an evo-
lutionary process. Conditions change rapidly, new ideas and con-
cepts emerge and we are forced to re-examine everything in light
of our new discoveries. Groups and organizations are born in mo-
ments of excitement when we are trying out new ideas. They sprout
quickly, then level off to a steady growth, and eventually they
die. Organizations and groups die when they outlive their func-
tion or when conflicts within them become too great to resolve
within their structure. The death of organizations reveals the
possibilities for new forms and allows opposing points of view to
struggle out their differences through practice. Different or-
ganizational forms make sense at different times. It is not as if
we were wrong to put ourselves into a certain structure at a cer-
tain time, it is all part of our history, of the development of
our revolution. Every step along the way is essential to reaching
our destination.

THE INTRODUCTION

The Women's Movement has experienced the death of many of its or-
ganizations. It has left many women disillusioned, cynical, and
even bitter. And yet, the Movement has never been more alive.
People everywhere are talking about "Women's Lib." Magazines are
filled with articles. Even President Nixon has been pressured to
explain why he didn't select a woman to serve as a Supreme Court
Justice. But if we intend to keep up the momentum of the Movement
and to see it continue to grow we must evaluate the past short-
comings of organizations, and begin to build the new structures
necessary to bring about the liberation of women. Without this
the strength of our Movement will dissipate. In attempting to
develop new structures to meet the needs of the movement at the
present time, we have developed the following analysis of our
past structures.

REVIEW OF OUR PAST

In the Radical Feminist Movement of the past few years, there have
been three primary forms of organization - Consciousness-Raising
Groups, Collectives, and Women's Centers. Each of these organi-
zational forms has served a vital function in the history of the
movement, but we have grown beyond them.

Consciousness-Raising Groups (CR Groups)
The most important function of CR-Groups has been bringing women

together - out of individual isolation into a consciousness of women
as a social group. When we began meeting with women only, we dis-
covered that our personal experiences were common to most women.
Patterns began to emerge. We began to see our lives in a greater
social and political context. The personal became political.

CR Groups served as a place for us to develop an understanding of
our oppression and to question the explanation of reality offered
to us by male society. We saw that our behavior was not "inevi-
table and natural" but a reaction to our powerlessness. We began
to confront men with what they were doing to us and to define in
limited terms what it means to have power over our lives. CR-
Groups also provided a place for women to vent and share frustra-
tions, fears, and rage, rather than continuing to blame ourselves
for our problems.

The main shortcoming of CR-Groups was that they were aimed simply
at CR. CR had a paralyzing effect because we had no method
through which to apply what we had learned. We spent time and en-
ergy examining and re-examining past experiences but did not use
them to create an analysis of our situation or to develop a theory
of how to proceed. Many women expected these groups to solve
their personal and psychological problems - to become personally
liberated. This was impossible and in fact, it denied what CR

had taught us; that is, our oppression is not in our heads.
CR-Groups were very loosely structured, usually composed of women
from many backgrounds and with different interests. Groups were
formed haphazardly. Women joined a particular group because of
personal relationships, because it was the only group around, or
because names happened to appear on the same list. This meant
there was no basis for action or for an ongoing group. CR-Groups
grew in isolation from each other and most stayed together for
only a short period of time.

Most of what was learned has been published in movement journals,
newspapers, and books. We know we are oppressed and have to pro-
ceed beyond that point.

Collectives

Collectives were an attempt to go beyond CR, to integrate personal
and political lives. They were defined as a combination of support,
action, and CR-Groups. Women came together from somewhat similar
backgrounds with a vague feeling for the politics of the other
members of the group. We began to piece together our experiences
into a political analysis and for a period of time, Collectives
served as action groups.

The main reason Collectives failed was the absence of a clearly
defined basis. The political basis of the Collectives began to be
discussed only after the groups had been formed. Some women want-
ed to have a political basis, others did not. Women were operat-
ing on different assumptions, different expectations, and differ-
ent levels of commitment. Some women had made Feminism the basic
commitment in their lives and assumed others in the group had made
the same commitment. These women acted and depended on this com-
mitment - a commitment which was lacking from others in the group
when it was badly needed. For others, weekly meetings were an
interesting intellectual endeavor, like a study group. Some drop-
ped out of the group when it was no longer interesting and more
important things interfered, and others developed hostility be-
cause things were expected of them that they were not able or
willing to provide.

Strong disagreements were apt to threaten the continuance of the
group. As a result, differences were often hidden under a facade
of collective agreement. When differences did emerge, as they
eventually must, they were cloaked in personal hostility against
other members of the group and were never articulated as political
disagreement. Groups just dissolved - often with bitterness.
Another reason Collectives were not viable as continuing forms of
organization is that their structure forced them to be closed.

The only alternative for new people was to start another group.
Equality in Collectives meant the lowest common denominator be-
cause there was no way to develop the potential of all members.
Any woman who attempted to take the initiative was attacked for
being dominating because everyone was not taking the initiative.

In the name of equality, Collectives tended to stagnate individual
development rather than teaching all women to assert themselves.
Our new organizational forms must develop the potential of all
women. Only in this way will equality be realized.

Women's Centers

Women's Centers have served as a public place for women to gather
and as a visible expression of the Movement. They were something
tangible that women could contact to find out about Women's Liber-
ation. Centers provided a neutral space for political activity.
Women from different groups could plan actions and services to-
gether. Their chief function was providing communication for the
movement in the form of telephones, bulletin boards, newsletters,
and literature. These Centers were also a beginning attempt to
develop a non-hierarchical structure.

Women's Centers were created as umbrella organizations with no
defined political basis. Since they were often the only public
expression of the Movement, they were expected to fill all the
needs of women. In response to this demand, they attempted to
fill needs it was impossible for them to fill.

Actions which grew out of Women's Centers tended to be sporadic
and haphazard. There was no collective understanding of how these
actions fit into an overall strategy for achieving liberation. As
such, there was no way to gauge our effectiveness and to use our
experiences to develop a direction.

The attempt to create a non-hierarchical structure failed because
the underlying assumption was that all women are equal. This was
false - a mistaking of our end goals for the present reality. We
cannot create a non-hierarchical structure without developing the
skills and potential of all members, sharing among us the know-
ledge we have.

The Movement has outgrown these amorphous structures. Our poli-
tics have developed beyond this point. It is now time for women
of like minds to form organizations which allow us to develop and
implement our politics.

Conclusion

Each of these forms of organization, CR-Groups, Collectives, and
Women's Centers have provided a space for women to grow and to
think through new ideas together. The very existence of a group
has provided minimal support for us to begin standing up for
ourselves and taking ourselves seriously. While the Women's Move-
ment has grown beyond these structures, they have made visible
what new forms are necessary.