A Graphite Notebook on Feminism  
Times Change Press, 1023 Sixth Ave.  
$1.26  

Graphic by Sue Negrin from  

NYC 10018  

While it is true that relating to children has its moments of  
ecstasy, it also has moments of hell. Mothers need support and  
aid from the community—especially from childless members of  
that community.  

Excuses  

Often childless adults will refuse to associate with children.  
"I just don't like being around them." "Sorry, I don't like  
children." They may as well say they don't like peaches or  
prunes. This attitude relegates children to the status of ob-  
jects that can be taken or left. By comparison, such statements  
as yet fail to evoke emotional reactions, as would "I don't like  
Blacks." Children, however, ARE people in the same sense as any  
adult category.  

Like adults, children need warming up to. When a person has been  
dependent on another for a long time, as is generally the case  
with children, they are threatened by advances from new people.  
This situation must be struggled with among child, new person,  
and whoever was the focus of the child's dependency.  

Others realize, dimly or clearly, that child care is a drag.  
They simply don't want to give.  

"I'm no good at it."  

"I'm so busy!"  

"I have more important things to do."  

"I don't want to hear about it."  

The underlying assumption here is that women choose to have child-  
ren and should want to take care of them.  

A Choice  

The "choice" attitude is based on consciousness of what child  
care involves. Many assume that because THEY at this time, know  
what child care involves, so did all the mothers, years ago, when  
they conceived. Therefore, they feel absolved from responsibility.  
Actually, it is largely a matter of chance which particular women  
conceive. Consciousness comes with changing social circumstances  
and experience. Biological ability to become pregnant usually pre-  
dates having much consciousness of any kind.  

Further, the attitude that women choose is both anti-feminist and  
class-biased. The "choice" depends on:  

- availability of general health and birth control information.  
- total effectiveness of birth control.  
- money for and access to abortions.  
- ability to project divorce, separation, and death.  
- time for and probability of contact with others conscious of  
  what child care involves.  
- support to withstand social pressure to conform to the mother-  
  hood role.  

All these factors decrease with class status.  

Problems of Daycare Co-ops  
How They Oppress Women  

Even in the most progressive of parent-controlled (none are yet con-  
trolled in any significant way by non-parents) day care co-ops,  
individual women definitely bear the consequences of their bio-  
logy. Volunteers, especially male volunteers, are hard to find  
and harder to keep. In families with two parents, women most  
often fill work requirements.  

Although child care is for women and children, decisions are not  
made by women. At general membership meetings, some women say  
nothing. At women's daycare meetings, these same women say plenty.  

Day care co-ops are white, middle-class, university affiliated.  
There are no child care centers for third-world, lower-class, or  
non-university women and children.  

Co-op membership has been reluctant to deal with issues of class-  
ism, racism, sexism, homosexism, and ageism. Consciousness  
raising, with its probing into personal values and activities,  
has been firmly resisted.  

The parent(s)-child unit remains the principal sub-unit of the  
co-ops. Childless persons are in a position of having to justify  
their actions to parents. Little is done to re-socialize child-  
ren. An illusion of dealing with sex roles is maintained by  
treating the children "equally." This means encouraging them to  
be passive. Once in school, boys will be expected to grow away  
from passivity, and girls will be reinforced in it. Re-socializa-  
tion of children cannot begin until adults deal thoroughly with  
their own socialization. This is a long way off.  

Women's Movement  

Child care is not yet considered a responsibility of the larger  
feminist community (gay and straight). Children who don't attend  
day care co-ops are left pretty much with their mothers. Day care  
was initiated as an important part of the women's movement, yet it  
is now virtually ignored by most non-mother feminists. Gay and  
straight women are both guilty. Many gay women have consciously  
made a choice not to have children as a part of their choice not  
to relate to men. This should not excuse them from child care  
responsibilities involving women. If any woman is not sharing  
child care, she contradicts herself as a feminist.  

The isolating quality of child care erodes a mother's ability to  
deal with other adults effectively. Losing self-confidence and  
speaking ability, she is easily intimidated by those with more  
practice.  

Women coming to the movement from a housewife/mother situation  
need encouragement as well as child care. Too often political  
women react with disgust at unsophisticated viewpoints. It is  
rare that any group of women considers child care for its member-  
ship an important initial concern.  

Child care problems must be dealt with by women at this point.  
This is not, however, the total solution. At such time when men  
deal with themselves and change (and as they do) child care will be  
their responsibility as well.  

Oppose Federally Sponsored Daycare  

Government sponsored and subsidized day care (as opposed to 24  
hour women and children controlled child care) maintains and in-  
creases exploitation. Females are "liberated" to work a low-  
paying job, but resume the mommy role once the job ends. The  
Family Assistance Plan (FAP) of the Nixon administration is such  
a cage work relief. Women using these centers are doubly bur-  
dened.  

Federally sponsored day care (already typified by Project Head  
Start) encourages the belief that biological mothers are respon-  
sible for biological children.  

Mandates  

A. Political priorities must include that 24 hour child care  
facilities be provided on a widespread basis, free of all cost,  
to women, particularly to women not yet served. (Non-white,  
lower/working-class, non-university.) All aspects of child care  
situations must be controlled by women and children.  

B. Collective living situations must be organized as a counter-  
institution to the nuclear family. Every adult must share equal  
responsibility for child care and housekeeping REGARDLESS OF COMMIT-  
MENT TO OTHER—INCLUDING POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC—ACTIVITIES.  

A part of every living situation should be discussion by all lead-  
ing to consensual agreement on how the children are to be socialized.  
To fight the children-as-property attitude, and encourage viewing  
children as people, collective child care should integrate physical,  
social, and political welfare.  

Toward these goals we must engage in the following:  

1. CONSCIOUSNESS is a prerequisite to taking direct action. All  
CR groups must include mothers and must provide child care. Meet-  
ings must be scheduled at times convenient for mothers. Groups  
should not be sedentary but lead to a program of action. Every  
group member must learn practical aspects of child care and find  
a situation to apply what she learns. This means taking care of  
children on a STRUCTURED, reliable basis in a communal living  
arrangement, in a child care center, or in the home of a woman  
who needs more help.  

2. CR groups must work toward community programs which transcend  
and incorporate problems of individual women.  

- 24-hour centers  
- collective living arrangements  
- paid time off for child care  
- further formulating and disseminating an analysis of the child  
  care struggle  

"Childless" persons already involved should do their own CR and  
take an aggressive role in this, especially in taking power and  
responsibility away from biological parents. Men have equal say,  
which is hardly equitable, since they have different interests from  
women and children.  

G Woman ? feb.'73 Z.