Pramp bd aud m cok  
y the RF-28 subcluxe  

A Fr EVOLUTION Wii. 7. ei  

in the community, yet publishing only our  
opinions or selected other women's writ-  
ing in the paper. This problem is mainly  
due to lack of clarity about the source  
of the paper, and to combat it we have  
published a definitive statement that  
material we publish reflects only the  
views of the collective.  

4) In relating to the gay community or  
participating in other women's groups in  
Iowa City, we often feel that we are not  
accepted as ourselves, but as a represen-  
tative of AIAW. Unless we are at a meet-  
ing specifically to function for the pa-  
per, our individual opinions are our own,  
yet we feel disagreements with our indi-  
vidual opinions are directed generally  
at AIAW. Also, disagreements with AIAW  
are sometimes directed at individuals in  
the collective as if they were solely re-  
sponsible for the article in question.  
This tendency to generalize or individu-  
alize us wrongly is understandable because  
there is no avenue for criticism of the  
paper by individuals in the community. In  
our first months of publication we did set  
up meetings to hear our critics' views,  
but ended them when we were the only ones  
coming. To reopen such meetings now would  
have to be thought about because to do so  
would be hypocritical if we weren't open  
to the possibility of community control  
of some kind, and in many ways we don't  
want to be. However, there may be some  
middle ground for discussion which we  
and the community should seek out.  

Although we have made small beginnings  
at better community relationships with our  
collective, we are presently fairly iso-  
lated from the community as a group. This  
isolation is in part unfortunate, but is  
also in part by design for reasons of ef-  
fectiveness, saving our energy, and mini-  
mal security.  

Other light political groups would not  
be open to much of the criticism we re-  
ceive which is due solely to our publish-  
ing function. However, if a goal of a  
tight political collective were to take  
part in a critical dialog within a com-  
munity or area they would have to deal  
early on with problems of community rap-  
port.  

Political collectives in the Women's  
Movement have a lot to learn from such  
groups as the Panthers and the Young  
Lords. Much of their activity is in com-  
munity service programs such as break-  
fasts and medical clinics for the people  
of their communities, yet they don't al-  
low the community to influence them to  
the point that their radical position is  
compromised, although their communities’  
needs influence and direct much of what  
they do.  

Of course the Women's Movement is in a  
much different relationship to the women  
it serves than either the Panthers or  
Young Lords are to the people they serve,  
and it would be arrogant to make a di-  
rect analogy. There is no real community  
of women in this country as there are com-  
munities of blacks, Puerto Ricans or other  
oppressed cultural groups. Nevertheless  
the political integrity of groups like the  
Panthers and Lords is to be respected and  
many of their organizational principles  
can be profitably used as models for poli-  
tical collectives in the Women's Movement.  

In our area there are many organiza-  
tions that fall into a few basic struc-  
tural forms. Women's centers, day care  
centers, free medical clinics, tenants’  
associations, legal rights groups, etc.  
fall into the category of service groups.  
Other basic structural forms are con-  
sciousness-raising groups, collectives,  
underground cells, and conferences.  

The purpose and function of service  
groups is to provide a service to the  
people. Presumably there was a need in  
the community for such a service and an  

A Woman 2  

organizational structure was worked out  
to best meet that need. One limitation  
of these groups is that it is often dif-  
ficult or impossible to have the organi-  
zation reflect a revolutionary ideology.  
For instance, groups that provide a skill-  
ed service such as medical or legal have  
to compromise their ideology in order to  
kow-tow to doctors and lawyers whose skill  
they need. These "professionals" know  
they have a skill that is needed and that  
they therefore have power within the or-  
ganization and they use it. The result  
is a watered-down liberal stance or no  
political stand at all. This causes  
problems within the organization. There  
are many different political stands with-  
in the group and it's not only difficult  
for people of differing politics to work  
together, but also difficult for any  
structure to accommodate everyone.  
However, the purpose of service groups  
is to meet a need in the community, so  
even if such a group could come up with  

a radical ideology and statement of pur-  

pose, political education comes second  
because people are attracted to these  
organizations initially to have a need met.  

Consciousness-raising groups obviously  
function to raise the political conscious-  
ness of its members through discussion  
and sharing of personal experience. Some-  
times the politics of the members don't  
develop beyond an understanding of the  
oppressiveness of their own situation i.e.  
middle class women if they are talking  
only amongst themselves without a working  
class woman in the group or the input of  
some class conscious articles will prob-  
ably not develop an understanding of class  
struggle, or their own oppressiveness and  
privileges, or CR groups structure can  
help formulate politics.  

It is possible for CR groups to do ac-  
tions but usually only if the politics of  
its members are compatible--this often  
limits action.  

Women in Iowa City turned from one  
large organization to a structure of small  
collectives because the large group was  
unwieldy, we couldn't talk to each other,  
and we couldn't get anything done. The  
collectives we developed centered around  
proposed action such as beginning a paper,  
a political study group, medical cell,  
revolutionary art cell, a daycare center,  
and a gay cell. These collectives served  
as both CR groups and a structure within  
which to carry out action. Within that  
structure AIAW and a daycare center were  
organized, an extensive speaking program  
was organized and carried out, and women  
taught several free university courses on  
women.  

One function that structure never  
really adequately served was organizing  
new people. We finally concluded that one  
reason was that it is difficult for women  
who have been into WL for a long time to  
come regularly to new CR groups with any  
amount of vital energy. This analysis was  
borne out when the women's center was be-  
gun by a group of women who had not been  
involved in the earlier central organiza-  
tion of WLF in Iowa City, and the W.C. has  
finally met the need of women wanting to  
find out about WL.  

Underground organizations are closed  
collectives functioning to overthrow the  
government. The identity of the members  
is unknown, their politics are consistent  
and they carry out action determined by  
their analysis of society. They are mainly  
a group organized to do political action;  
it is difficult for them to do education  
although the Weathermen tried to do both  
through their ‘letters from the under-  
ground.' It is up to groups functioning  
above ground who have the same political  
ideology to explain the actions of under-  
ground groups.  

Conferences function to get many dif-  
ferent people together at one time to  

Page 3