MORE ABOUT GRINNELL

The thing I liked best about Grinnell  
was the apple juice, the stew, the bread,  
and most of all the solidarity of the gay  
women.

The first night we all stayed in the  
same place and talked late. On Saturday  
we held two Lesbianism Workshops—one for  
gay women only and one for straight women.  
Although an hour and a half is hardly time  
for gay women to cover all that they have  
to say to each other, we began a discus-  
sion that we have continued intensely in  
Iowa City. In the first workshop a woman  
from Bloomington, Ind. acknowledged the  
importance of Women's Liberation in the  
final elimination of her guilt at being  
gay, but with some bitterness said she had  
been messed over by Women's Liberation  
seeing gay relationships in heterosexual  

Though the conference as a whole was  
disappointing to me, I met a lot of  
women who I felt an immediate close-  
ness with. In workshops on Saturday  
I began to realize just how a right-on  
sister was relating to the group; I  
recognized women who were struggling,  
questioning, changing. And I recog-  
nized those who were still relating  
in old untrusting structures, who  
were reacting as "liberals" but not  
really ready to change their minds.  
Confrontation

Late Saturday night, after our  
all-women party, two sisters were  
just outside the dorm, rapping,  
feeling intense, hugging each  
other. Four men walking together  
hassled them—and they reacted  
with vocal enough rage that five  
more of us came outside and  
screamed at them, told them to  
move on and FAST. They moved.  
We moved, kept yelling, stayed  
together. They shut up too; some  
of the women dropped back, and  
TWO of us marched four of them  
as far away as we wanted them to  
be, before we ran laughing back  
to the door where our sisters  
were watching. This is written  
with love to my beautiful sisters  
from Bloomington, Indiana who  
took that walk with me and  

in the cold air awoke to a feeling  
of strength I'd never known.

I feel a new confidence now in  
my perception, in relating to other  
women and in working in a group.  
We have all learned defenses and  
there are so many women with the  
same defenses against the same  
oppression. There are a lot of  
things to make us feel threatened  
anyway; we must struggle not to  
threaten each other. Only if I am  
really honest with myself can  
others trust me to be honest with  
them. If I say I'm relating to  
you and I'm actually relating to  
a category, I have categorized  
you and that is a racist-sexist-  
classist kind of structure. If I  
say "you" when I mean "what you  
represent in my eyes" I am being  
unfair to you the individual. We  
have grown up accustomed to wear-  
ing blinders like this. When we  
tear 'em all down we can maybe  
see each other as whole people.

I just realized that gay women were the only  
people in Women's Liberation who she felt  
could understand her experience and from  
whom she felt needed support. I don't  
think there needs to be a split between  
old and new gay women, but just that each  
get a chance to understand their different  
experience and the inter-relationships  
between the two.

During the first part of the workshop  
for straight women another moratorium was  
put on straight women talking. They list-  
ened while we talked and interestingly  
enough instead of being defensive we dwelt  
on the little cultural things that being  
gay we have and draw us together. I  
felt a real strength and solidarity that  
came out in a way surprising to me. I was  
prouder and more free to be myself with-  
out fear of judgment. I felt so free  
that I danced.

Before the conference I often  
didn't understand my sisters when  
they were offended by things to  
which I didn't react strongly.  
Now I have a clearer idea of what  
does rip off women. People who  
are making a new society, people  
who say they are revolutionary,  
cannot be excused for taking one  
single gain at the expense of  
other oppressed people; if they  
do they're not changing anything,  
just jockeying for position with-  
in the old cruddy structure. I  
won't make excuses for the male-  
identified movements that depend  
on the subservience of women to  
get their shitwork done and make  
their "gains."

Vol. 4 No. 3

Process

Being collective in this society is  
against everything we've been conditioned  
for. Collectivity is only a process right  
now. Ideally it will be honest sharing,  
gut-level trust of others, sincerely felt  
responsibility for the well-being of others.  
Presently, those intentions must  
stem from humanitarian instincts that our  
religious upbringing cultivated rather  
than based on any experience, since they  
are contrary to the sexist, imperialistic,  
capitalistic, racist, fascist, all-com-  
petitive societal standards that are per-  
meating our minds every minute of our  
lives. I haven't yet felt collectivity,  
but I can still differentiate between my  
intellectual, and partially gut-level  
belief in its rightness and the trusting-  
ness I think it's going to become.

Collective living is a means to raising  
our consciousness to a collective  
consciousness, which is not, in my opinion,  
completely possible within this antagon-  
istic society. It influences everything  
in our personal lives even though we  
attempt to shut it out of our dwelling  
places and meetings. In relation to our  
society, the atmosphere in and intentions  
of our living collective are true collec-  
tivity. Yet, we have not been truly col-  
lective, nor can we be, as long as we are  
only a microcosm in an alien environment,  
that environment having nurtured us and  
not failed in messing up our heads.

I don't mean we can't act collectively  
or think collectively or possibly even  
feel sincerely in that direction: I main-  
tain, however, that our attitudes are in  
the process of changing—the living col-  
lective is definitely a positive, neces-  
sary influence but we are not capable of  
total rejection of life-long influence  
of values and methods while functioning  
within the society that propagates the  
oppressive system we're undermining.

We can build our need for collectivity  
by practicing it. We explore its meaning  
by practicing it. We can start to know  
how it feels (as opposed to intellectually  
knowing it) by practicing it. We can  
practice it. Practice. Practice and prac-  
tice. It's all we can do within this  
system.

And when many, many women have come to  
understand as much as is possible about  
collectivity, and these women collectively  
feel the need to experience true sisterhood  
within a collective society (I believe it  
is called socialism), the oppressive sys-  
tem which has kept collectives functioning  
as microcosms will be overturned. In  
order to accomplish this, the collective  
living, collective acting, collective think-  
ing process will have to go on... and on...  
and on... toward the revolution we feel  
coming.