Lesbianism is one road to freedom — freedom from  
oppression by men.  

To see lesbianism in this context — as a mode of  
living neither better nor worse than others, as one which  
offers its own opportunities — one must abandon the  
notion that deviance from the norm arises from personal  
illness.  

It is generally accepted that America is a “sick so-  
ciety.” There is an inevitable corollary to this statement,  
which has not been generally accepted: that people with-  
in our society are all crippled by virtue of being forced  
to conform to certain norms. (Those who conform most  
easily can be seen as either the most healthy, because  
adaptable, or most sick because least spirited.) The black  
is struggling to free himself not only from white oppres-  
sion, but from the sickness of self-contempt and the sick  
roles he has been forced to play. Women are struggling to  
liberate their minds from sick sexual roles. It is clear  
that the self-abasing, suffering, shuffling black is not  
someone with a personal neurosis, but society’s victim —  
and someone who has been forced to learn certain tech-  
niques for survival. Few people understand that the same  
is true of the self-abnegating passive housewife. Fewer  
understand this truth about the homosexual.  

These techniques of survival help us meet certain  
needs, at the expense of others.  

For women, as for other groups, there are several  
American norms. All of them have their rewards — and  
their penalties. The nice girl next door, virginal until her  
marriage — the Miss America type — is rewarded with  
community respect and respectability. She loses her in-  
dividuality and her freedom to become a toothpaste  
smile and a chastity belt. The career woman gains inde-  
pendence and a larger margin of freedom — if she is willing  
to work twice as hard as a man for less pay, and if she  
can cope with emotional strains similar to those that be-  
set the black intellectual surrounded by white colleagues.  
The starlet, call-girl, or bunny whose source of income  
is directly related to her image as a sex object, gains some  
financial independence and freedom from housework.  
She doesn’t have to work as hard as the career woman,  
but she pays through psychological degradation as a sex  
object, and through the insecurity of knowing that her  
career — based on youthful good looks — is short-lived.  

The lesbian, through her ability to obtain love and  
sexual satisfaction from other women, is freed of depend-  
ence on men for love, sex and money. She does not have  
to do menial chores for them (at least at home), nor  
cater to their egos, nor submit to hasty and inept sexual  
encounters. She is freed from fear of unwanted pregnan-  
cy and the pains of childbirth, and from the drudgery of  
childraising.  

On the other hand, she pays three penalties. The  
rewards of child raising are denied her. This is a great loss  
for some women, but not for others. Few women aban-  
don their children, as compared with the multitudes of  
men who abandon both wives and children. Few men  
take much interest in the process of child raising. One  
suspects that it might not be much fun for the average  
person, and so the men leave it to the women.  

The lesbian must compete with men in the job mar-  
ket, facing the same job and salary discrimination as her  
straight sister. On the other hand, she has more of a  
chance of success since her career is not interrupted  
by childbirth.  

Finally, she faces the most severe contempt and  
ridicule that society can heap on a woman.  

A year ago, when Women’s Liberation picketed the  
1968 Miss America pageant, the most terrible epithet  
heaped on our straight sisters was “lesbian.” The sisters  
faced hostile audiences who called them “commies,”  
“tramps,” “bathless,” etc., and they faced these labels  
with equanimity; but they broke into tears when they  
were called lesbians. When a woman showed up at a fem-  
inist meeting and announced that she was a lesbian, many  
women avoided her. Others told her to keep her mouth  
shut, for fear that she would endanger the cause. They  
felt that men could be persuaded to accept some meas-  
ure of equality for women — as long as these women  
would parade their devotion to heterosexuality and  
motherhood.  

A woman who is totally independent of men —  
who obtains love, sex and self-esteem from other wom-  
en — is a terrible threat to male supremacy. She doesn’t  
need them, and therefore they have very little power over  
her.  

I have met many, many feminists who were not  
lesbians — but I have never met a lesbian who was not a  
feminist. Straight women by the millions have been sold  
the belief that they must subordinate themselves to men,  
accept less pay for equal work, and do all the shit work  
around the house. I have met straight women who would  
die to preserve their chains. I have never met a lesbian  
who believed that she was innately less rational or capa-  
ble than a man; who swallowed one word of the  
“woman’s role” horseshit.  

Lesbians, because they are not afraid of being  
abandoned by men, are less reluctant to express hostil-  
ity towards the male class — the oppressors of women.  
Hostility towards your oppressor is healthy — but the  
guardians of modern morality, the psychiatrists, have in-  
terpreted this hostility as an illness, and they say this  
illness causes and is lesbianism.  

If hostility to men causes lesbianism, then it seems  
to me that in a male-dominated society, lesbianism is a  
sign of mental health.  

The psychiatrists have also forgotten that lesbian-  
ism involves love between women. Isn't love between  
equals healthier than sucking up to an oppressor? And  
when they claim we aren’t capable of loving men, even  
if we want to — I ask you, straight man, are you capable  
of loving another man so deeply that you aren’t afraid  
of his body or afraid to put your body in his hands? Are  
you really capable of loving women, or is your sexuality  
just another expression of your hostility? Is it an act of  
love or sexual conquest? An act of sexual imperialism?  

I do not mean to condemn all males. I have found  
some beautiful, loving men among the revolutionaries,  
among the hippies, and the male homosexuals. But the  
average man — including the average student male radi-  
cal — wants a passive sex-object cum domestic cum baby  
nurse to clean up after him while he does all the fun  
things and bosses her around — while he plays either  
bigshot executive or Che Guevara — and he is my oppres-  
sor and my enemy.  

Society has taught most lesbians to believe that  
they are sick and has taught most straight women to  
despise and fear the lesbian as a perverted, diseased crea-  
ture. It has fostered the myth that lesbians are ugly and  
turn to each other because they can’t get that prize, that  
prince, a male! In this age of the new “sexual revolu-  
tion,” another myth has been fostered — the beautiful  
lesbians who play games with each other on the screen  
for the titillation of heterosexual males. They are not  
seen as serious people in love — but as performers in the  
“let’s try a new perversion” game.  

Freud founded the myth of penis envy, and men  
have asked me, “But what can two women do together?”  
As though a penis were the sine qua non of sexual  
pleasure! Man, we can do without it, and keep it going  
longer, too!  

Women are afraid to be without a man’s protec-  
tion — because other men will assault them on the streets.  
And this is no accident, not an aberration performed by  
a few lunatics. Assaults on women are no more an acci-  
dent than are lynchings of blacks in Mississippi. Men have  
oppressed us, and like most oppressors, they hate the  
oppressed and fear their wrath. Watch a white man walk-  
ing in Harlem and you will see what I mean. Look at the  
face of a man who has accidentally wandered into a les-  
bian bar.  

Men fear lesbians because they are less dependent  
and because their hostility is less controlled.  

Straight women fear lesbians because of the lesbian  
inside them, because we represent an alternative. They  
fear us for the same reasons that uptight middle class  
people fear hip people. They are angry at us because we  
have a way out that they are afraid to take.  

And what happens to the lesbian under all this  
pressure? Many of my sisters, confused by the barrage  
of anti-gay propaganda, have spent years begging to be  
allowed to live. They have come begging because they  
believed they were psychic cripples, and that other peo-  
ple were healthy and had the moral right to judge them.  
Many have lived in silence, burying themselves in their  
careers, like name-changing Jews and blacks who passed  
for white. Many have retreated into an apolitical domes-  
ticity, concerning themselves only with the attempt to  
maintain a love relationship in a society which attempts  
to destroy love and replace it with consumer goods —  
flowers, mouthwashes, diamond rings, automobiles —  
and which attempts to completely destroy any form of  
love outside the monogamous marriage.  

This, by the way, is an important point for all kinds  
of revolutionaries. If you love your brother, you are less  
willing to stand by and watch him get crushed under the  
relentless pressures of the rat race, of the doctor bills and  
the furniture bills. If you love your brother, you won’t  
try to swindle him. Restricting love to the immediate  
family group isolates each family from the community —  
each ethnic group from the others — and makes all  
these isolated frightened people more willing to settle  
for fancy furniture on the installment plan, for grudging-  
ly bestowed respectability, because they can’t get the  
real thing, real love.  

To return to the lesbian — because lesbian has be-  
come such a vile epithet, we have been afraid to fight  
openly. We can lose our jobs — we have fewer civil  
rights than any other minority group. Because we have  
few family ties and no children, for the most part, we  
have been active in many causes — but always in secret,  
because our name contaminates any cause that we work  
for.  

To the radical lesbian, I say that we can no longer  
afford to fight for everyone else’s cause while ignoring  
our own. Ours is a lifestyle born out of a sick society —  
so is everyone else’s. Our kind of love is as valid as any-  
one else’s. The revolution must be fought for us, too, as  
well as blacks, Indians, welfare mothers, grape pickers,  
SDS people, Puerto Ricans, or mine workers. We must  
have a revolution for human rights.  

Maybe after the revolution, people will be able to  
love each other regardless of skin color, ethnic origin, oc-  
cupation, or type of genitals. But if that’s going to hap-  
pen, it will only happen because we make it — starting  
right now.  

reprinted From Come Out!!  

Vol. L. No. 5 Nth?