community:

a casualty of

In the old days everyone was truly economically equal. Work
was divided only by sex in the religious, communistic settlement
that is my home. No wages were paid in return for work. Instead,
all needs were met by the community. A form of a merit system
existed only to allow credit at general stores for material things
that could not be manufactured by local ingenuity.

The formation and purpose of this group in the mid-eighteenth
century was to escape religious and political persecution in Ger-
many. The patriarchal group lived communally in several castles
until their rights to be isolated and independent from the govern-
ment were challenged. With strong threats to their religious moral-
ity they emigrated to America to settle in New York. By the mid-
nineteenth century the expanding population of New York threatened
to crowd the community and distract the younger members with
worldly ways, so the move to Iowa was made. After nearly two hun-
dred years of successful communal living, this final move proved
not enough to sustain their isolationism within a capitalistic
society.

Families were assigned to large, multi-family houses to live.
Living quarters were spacious and kept in repair by community work
crews. No one needed property insurance because the community re-
paired or rebuilt uninhabitable buildings.

Thirty to forty people ate together in a community kitchen, a
few in each of the several villages. Food was prepared by a wo-
men's kitchen crew in the same building as it was served. Hearty
meals and snacks numbered five a day.

The closest parallel to community elite were church elders,
because of their highly respected religious leadership responsibi-
lities. All men, they served as confessors, counselors, decision
makers in religious matters, and were generally looked upon as
leaders. Women were not expected to be elders.

Children, from one to thirteen, were taught and cared for by
women who volunteered for this type of work. Mothers stayed with
their children until they were able to walk and help themselves
somewhat, then sent them to the school and went back to work
themselves. At thirteen, having received all the education they
needed in the community, the young adults began working.

The community grew or made nearly everything it needed to
exist and remain isolated. Men did heavy work—plowing, planting
fields, carpentry, harness repair, toolmaking, construction. Wo-
men did the ascribed work of tending garden, canning, cooking,
cleaning, mending and sewing, and teaching children. The work
was rotated periodically. Crew bosses served as overseers of task
assignments and resource people for any questions or problems on
the job. Older people, if they weren't a crew boss, were given
the type of work they could do best physically and not forced to
rotate jobs.

Religion was the basis of the community and greatly influenced
what some would consider the sacrificial lives of the people in-
volved. The standard of living was not high—no one had cars,
televisions, electric appliances, or luxury personal possessions—
besides being forbidden on religious grounds of worldliness, there
wouldn't have been enough money to pay for them. But life was
healthily sustained, all the needs of the women, children and men
were substantially met including medical benefits: free dental
and medical care. (This seems a realistic post-revolution
standard!)

Women held a much more equal position economically within this
structure. Receiving equal benefits for their labor (although
work was segregated) made them economically independent. Not
having to rely on a man to support her financially because men
make better money, as is the case in capitalism, women must
have felt a greater autonomy. Marriage was, therefore, not an
economic compulsion for all women. Human qualities were empha-
sized when a couple decided on marriage. This was reinforced by
a one year's physical separation of the two, even if it meant
moving the male to another village. The theory was that if
their interest in each other was serious they would overcome the
hassles of seeing each other (a two to five mile walk after a
hard day’s work) and continue courting.

Volume X Number 8

capitalism

Punishment was doled out by hand (to children) or conscience
(appeal to religious humility of adults). No outside law en-
forcement operated within the community. The community, small
anyway, remained isolated and as self-sufficient as possible.

In 1932, when my parents were in their thirties, the communal
aspect was dissolved because the depression affected the sale
of products exported to the outside. Housing, childcare, food,
employment were no longer community concerns—people were on
their own. Depending on the number of years an individual had
served the community, he or she was given shares of the new Society
reimbursing her for the work done. These shares helped in the
purchase of a house (usually the one resided in).

My parents, along with everyone else in the community, had to
begin to take care of themselves and their own families. To my
father this meant taking on all the responsibilities of a family
man anywhere else—responsibilities he had never known or been
socialized to handle. To my mother it meant having her own gar-
den, taking care of her own children by herself, cooking for her
own family. Generally, she had to adjust to staying at home to
work alone as opposed to working with other women on community
projects. For both of them, it meant the American Way of com-
petitive isolationism was beginning—divide and weaken. Economic
stratification set in.

Class divisions were soon visible after economic equality ended.
My father took a job with the farm department, meaning hard man-
ual labor for $15 a month. Some men procured purely cerebral
jobs, for $50 a month. Depending on the size of a family, the
monetary resources from all working brought a car to provide
transportation to an even higher paying job outside the community.
Women mostly stayed home to keep house, or filled the few positions
open to women in the one factory in the community, if they had
transportation from their own village to the one factory.

Once the initial cultural shock of being thrown into competi-
tiveness with brothers and sisters (figurative) the struggle to
get ahead began. The type of job a person got depended on con-
nections more than ability, and the connections providing the
better job provided the higher income buying more personal advan-
tages. Traits of honesty, humility and sharing that were socia-
lized into my parents' generation were no longer going to be re-
inforced. Rewards of position and material wealth went to aggres-
sive individualistic, power-taking people.

The divisions are classist. They have become more entrenched in
the once tight community as the people become more competitive in
their isolated lives. My father didn't remain a farm laborer, he
moved to a factory job, eventually becoming a foreman, while some
of my friends’ fathers who were favorites of an earlier crew boss
became the executives of that factory. Intellectual class dif-
ferences didn't develop in my parent's generation it seems. Hav-
ing lived and been socialized in true communism before being
thrown into capitalism, they were still too close in spirit to
the camaraderie and equality once shared. Bonds still held the
community together, though within the community material class
differences came into existence.

As I grew up our house kept the original slate siding, patched
carpeting made during community work parties years earlier, and
we utilized the washhouse to do laundry and bathe, while some of
my friends' families moved to new houses or interior-decorated
their houses, and could afford electric washing machines, dish-
washers, and air conditioners.

An income like my father's only supported four adults and three
children (my grandparents, my parents, my brother and sister and,
later, me) because 1) the adults grew most of the food we ate, 2)
the adults were used to and knew how to, and did most of the re-
pair work and maintenance around the house which we shared, and
3) us kids were kept in the "old regime” and set to work around
the house when we could help. An income like my friend's father
easily supported four adults and two children because 1) he made
more than twice as much as my father as an executive in the fac-
tory my father worked in, and 2) the adults grew some food. They

didn't repair and do maintenance because the electrical gadgets