Looking back, from this point in the collective's life, we can  
see both benefits that we didn't anticipate when we formed and,  
also, some weaknesses in the ways we've been operating.  

Among the benefits, the first is that we've all found it much  
easier than we expected for us to begin making childcare a natural  
and basic part of our lives. Most of us are inviting children to  
be with us in our homes on a frequent, if irregular, basis in addi-  
tion to the scheduled institutional and non-institutional child-  
care we're doing.  

Second, we've found it to be true -- what AntiMass (see AIAW,  
Vol. 2, No. 9) writers say both about how politically critical it  
is for us to become Subjects instead of Objects (actors instead  
of those acted upon), and about the best work being that which you  
create out of your own needs. It was out of our needs that we ini-  
tiated Saturday afternoon, night and overnight care at the center.  
(The evening care provided by the group of gay and straight men,  
Monday - Friday, at our center made our plans for those of us who  
are employed 8-5 unnecessary.) The individual childcare we were do-  
ing on weekends made clear to us our own and others' needs for more  
regular care that would accommodate more children on Saturday af-  
ternoons and nights.  

Third, organizing ourselves has meant that we have a group  
voice/work in the daycare center's policymaking and operating.  
However, we would like to encourage other biologically childless  
volunteers who are not in a childcare-related collective to organ-  
ize themselves too, for their own good and the good of the daycare  
center. Our voices could easily get too loud or heavy among volun-  
teers in the daycare center if we're the only ones organized. (Bio-  
logical mothers are organized, and since this article was written  
another non-mothers group has formed.)  

Through this group also we've been collectively dealing with  
our financial responsibilities to childcare. The daycare center we  
all relate to needs money to run. When it began to get a lot of  
volunteers (about the time most of us got involved in it) the  
group organizing the center demanded pledges from all volunteers  
(not mothers) to be paid monthly on a regular basis. At first they  
were going to do it by taxing people on the basis of a voluntarily-  
prepared financial statement. People objected to what they called  
being "taxed" without having a say in how the "taxing" was done,  
so the group that was organizing/administering the daycare center  
decided to just ask people to pledge money out of their own sense  
of what they could afford. Both because accountability -- for how  
the books were being kept -- was unclear and sketchy and because  
some women in our collective were unable to contribute any money,  
we decided as a collective to contribute a set amount (from money  
we could hustle out of other people and from ourselves). It turned  
out later that we were able to get more than that amount together  
(when people weren't laid off from work) but it didn't seem nec-  
essary or desirable for us to put all of that into Sparky since,  
according to the budget set up and other incoming monies, they  
didn't need more than that on a regular basis. And, since our  
collective was organized to do childcare a lot of times and places  
besides the daycare center, we felt that money was needed for  
those other responsibilities (like getting equipment, toys, etc.).  

As with the time commitment thing, we've found that dealing  
with the money responsibility both to the daycare center and to  
each other (there are both working class and middle class women  
in our collective, women who live collectively and alone, women  
with debts and without, women employed and not) in a collective  
way has been better than leaving each woman to hassle with it in-  
dividually. It helps both in terms of confrontations (with people  
outside the group) and in terms of our helping deal with the class  
and time differentials amongst us within the collective.  

a woman ?  

February, 1973  

Another daycare need we found was pressing was transportation.  
Currently we pick up and take home three children regularly, ro-  
tating among those of us who have, or can hustle up, the time and  
a car.  

Finally, as a collective we've been doing physical maintain-  

ance -- cleaning, repair, and some of the building work -- for the  
daycare center. Childcare for us has meant not only spending time  
with the children, but also taking on other tasks -- including  

learning new skills related to their safety, health and develop-  
ment. Many of us had for some time wanted, for example, to do  
household repairs, electrical and carpentry work, but until the  
needs of the daycare center and other childcare commitments de-  
manded those skills we did not apply ourselves to them.  

There are at least two large criticisms that we have of our-  
selves and our work thus far. We have not yet (we've been a col-  
lective for four months) struggled enough with other biologically  
childless women and men to get them to begin to meet their child-  
care responsibilities. We see that everyone has childcare respon-  
sibilities and, in a society with an evolved political conscious-  
ness, childcare would be shared by everyone and so no burden for  
anyone.  

Also it has been difficult for us to make sure that the three  
women (of the ten of us) who live alone do not have to do child-  
care work alone (see #2 under Methods, above). The former are hes-  
itant to ask the women who live collectively for help out of fear  
that the latter will wind up having to do double their share. We  
need to do more to prevent this. Maybe going outside our group for  
childcare-sharing work is the answer. Clearly, being able to do  
childcare with the help of another adult is a luxury most biolo-  
gical mothers can't afford, so it may seem contradictory that we  
should try to meet that goal. But since we're trying to create a  
new way of raising/caring for children, we should try to live that  
new way as much as possible.  

X Doris and the Sparketes is the new name for our  
collective & new mothers dealing with childcare. We  
changed the name when we realized through our criticism,  
that the name was offensive to mothers because it  
sounded like we thought of ourselves as mothers.  

1973  

WOMEN’S  
CALENDAR  

ORIGINAL GRAPHICS PREPARED  
AND PRINTED BY WOMEN  
IN BALTIMORE  

$2.00 each for less than five  
$1.50 each for bulk orders  

All orders must be pre-paid.  

Send orders for  
1973 Women’s Calendar to  

OVANA  

12 West 25th St.  
Baltimore, Maryland 21218  

BRESS  

THE  
LESBIAN  

FIDE  

A VOICE OF THE  
LESBIAN/FEMINIST  
COMMUNITY  

Sisters subscribe now!  

$5.00 in California  
$6.00 elsewhere  
$0.50 sample copy  

Send to: Tide Collective  

ZEEZ  

1124½ N. Ogden  
Los Angeles, CA 90046  

Bulk rates available upon  
request  

Page 11