Conk dialogue...

You are right about privilege in relation to working-lower class women. We are not privileged in any sense that middle class women are, and our politics and working with middle class women doesn't change that position. I know that in ten years my politics will not have changed the way I live. I was saying, however, that our politics puts us in contact with Sparky—because of that position we have primary access to it. I think my being pissed off at what I saw happening at Sparky made that somewhat unclear.

My main concern is to provide childcare for women and children on as widespread a basis as possible. Lower-working class women have the least access to childcare. In my mind, these people come first. Children who have other options and more chance to be in childcare are not my concern. It makes no difference that Teri's group has more or as many working class women as middle class women. First, she has exposure to alternate childcare situations—and second, a seven adult to one child ratio doesn't rate anywhere near the need as a one adult (mother) to one child (or more) ratio.

You say you "got tremendously pissed at my desire to serve lower and working class women you don't yet know, when you refused to hear what lower and working class women, who you do know, wanted." There are a couple of points I want to make about that. First, I don't want to serve working-lower class women. "Serving" people is romantic bullshit used by privileged groups to relieve their guilt or add a little spice to their lives. As a working class mother, I don't want your service because that means you doing it on your terms. It's like if I hear one more middle class woman say, "Lower class people don't want charity"—I think I'll scream. You're damn right we don't want your charity—all those conditions and strings. Charity and service only are good for those dispensing it—ego trips. A good example of "service" or "charity" is what happened with Teri—no one would take her because they were supposed to—it was done to "save" her (social work attitude). But we do want you to do what you're supposed to do—in this case provide childcare because you have extra resources (from being childless). That means do it not because you want to for some reason but because you're supposed to. You have no right to hoard extra resources. In this society there's no name for that kind of giving but it's not "service" or "charity." It sounds real nice to say people should serve themselves first—it doesn't have much basis in reality, however, if you're a mother—and no basis at all if you're a lower-working class person and mother. What resources do these groups of people have to serve themselves?

A second point I want to make about your statement is about the point that I have refused to hear what lower-working class women I know want. You are wrong—that is all I have heard and I'm sick of it. Mothers have been systematically shut out of Sparky and any community dealings with motherhood. "Those women don't have time to come to meetings and anyway they'd freak out. They shouldn't be here." I want non-mothers to quit making decisions for mothers. The working-lower class non-mothers involved in Sparky fuck me over just as much as middle class non-mothers with their childless options. Which brings me to the point about who should have control over major decisions at Sparky.

I want to point out that we do not live in a revolutionary society. Almost every child at Sparky goes home to her mother every night and ten years from now that's where that child will still be. How childless women who have no concept of what childcare involves can presume to make decisions that affect those mothers is beyond me. And everything that happens in that center affects those mothers' lives—it doesn't work out that what happens in daycare and what happens at home are two separate entities. There are all kinds of carryovers from one to the other. At this point, mothers have no reason to trust non-mothers no matter how much childcare that non-mother has done. First, the childcare that non-mothers do is so minimal and on top of that it is pretty damn atrocious. I don't know any non-mother who does childcare that doesn't do things to or with the children involved that...

Dee. 27 was the first time I saw your response to my letter. I don't know how long it has existed and if you still feel the way you do on all counts, but I'd like to comment by paragraph and try to tell you how I felt about what you said. I think the key to our differences—yours and mine—I'm not speaking for the community, is over 2 points. One, you say, "My main concern is to provide childcare for women and children on as widespread a basis as possible." That is not my main concern for the obvious reason that it is not my main oppression. Two, daycare for me is hopelessly bound up with oppressive heterosexuality.

#2 (# means paragraph) We can justify where Teri is; you can criticize where she is. The reality is that she is in Sparky because the women who care for her are in Sparky where they can hope to have some input. In spite of the ratio, the women in her group have every reason not to do daycare in an environment any more hostile than Sparky.

#3 I think your breakdown about 'service' is very useful. I use that meaning and the bullshit meaning for the same work at different times. June describes that kind of ‘supposed to' as 'correct.' Over the issue of lesbians doing childcare, however, it is perfectly reasonable for lesbians to require correct behavior from mothers at the same time as gay mothers require effective childcare from lesbians. When the heterosexual privilege of all mothers begins to fuck me over, I'm not so sure it is correct for me to do institutional childcare for any reason, much less because I have ‘extra resources.’ It comes as a surprise to me that needing to create—but never getting it together—space to live safely and decently is an extra resource from being childless. I thought it was from being queer for 30 years. I would be very happy not to hoard that resource because as it is now I can count the number of hours a week I devote to shoveling the shit away—not even enjoying the space. Also, when I think of resources I...

| page 20

vol. 3 no. 2/3

doesn't increase the burden on the mother when the child returns. Of course, childless persons can afford to do this since they don't have to deal with the mess later (i.e., not giving children naps who need them, feeding them crap instead of balanced food, being careless with safety measures). Then there are the guilt trips laid on mothers by non-mothers. Childless persons who do childcare never have to deal with that—and they are often the ones who lay on the guilt. I could go on and on about why mothers have no reason to trust you.

It is misleading for childless persons who do childcare to call themselves non-biological mothers—the implication is that although biologically you are not mothers, in practice you are. You never will be because you'll never have to experience what mothers must—nor do I think you should have to—but non-biological mother implies that the person has struggled with her oppressiveness and come to a realization of what a mother's oppression is. No childless woman in this community has struggled. Childless women are reinforcing each other's oppressiveness and fuck-ups. You are defining how you oppress mothers and not listening to what mothers say. When you do struggle and mothers have reason to trust you, then control of major decisions should be yours too. But it is up to the mothers to define when that oppression has stopped. It's a long way off as far as I can see.

You have consistently ignored my motherhood in your criticisms. You talk rather glibly about my "hustling supports from middle class women." You can't see that my life and needs are not the same as yours precisely because of my motherhood. I am in the rather uncomfortable position of having to choose between: 1) living/dealing with lower-working class mothers and being oppressed because of my gayness and politics, 2) living/dealing with lower-working class, feminist, gay non-mothers and being oppressed because of my motherhood, 3) living/dealing with middle class mothers and being oppressed because of my class, or 4) living alone. Obviously, number one is out for several reasons (it is near impossible to live with only mothers with no help from non-mothers), two is out because I have yet to find a childless person of any class who wants to deal with children. Mothers already burdened with childcare are always the first and often the only ones to help out with children. I will never live alone with a child again if I can help it. The only alternative that has worked out in my life is living with a middle class mother and another woman who is middle class and dealing with childcare. It's not so easy as a pick and choose situation—when you have children it leaves you no room to be fussy. You must take what you can get. You cannot even see through to my oppression as a mother.

You can choose to ignore my needs and the needs of all mothers. And the structure is such in this community (as well as in society at large) that mothers have no power—because you have all the options to pull out anytime you wish. Mothers can do nothing without childcare. You talk about the money from our collective coming out of bounty with strings attached. Don't forget the threat you hold over every mother's head because of the bounty of energy that comes from your being childless and that you can put or not put into childcare as you choose. Mothers haven't forgotten it—it's been used on them too much.

One more thing—I'm sick of non-mothers telling me how I should think. "The reason she wants this or that is because she still wants control over the child. After all, she's a mother and mothers are possessive. Not that they don't have reasons to be possessive..., etc." If I say I don't feel like that you say or assume I'm lying and don't want to admit how I really feel. I can't have a valid reason for anything—I'm a mother. What it comes down to is my real reasons don't fit your plans.

As I was putting this together, it occurred to me this is a waste of time because everyone always says, "Well, she's not talking about me. I'm struggling really hard. How can she say that?"

I want to make it clear that I do mean you—no exceptions exist in this community.

I think of material resources. It's especially when resources are low that you must serve yourself first. When you talk about correctly serving working-class mothers I assume you are talking about your own needs. That's what I mean about serving yourself first.

#4 Saying you're sick of hearing from other working and lower class women who have been making criticisms about class and homophobia is a drag. Homophobia has been making me sick all my life. Speaking about this community alone, I am sure that in 10 or 15 years queers will be oppressed in the same ways that children will go home from daycare to their mothers. In 10 or 15 years we're liable to have 24-hour daycare and mothers will be able to go on to something else, like choosing to be gay when it's convenient and choosing not to exercise a gay consciousness when it's not convenient.

#5 Heterosexual mothers and gay mothers know nothing about what affects my life and they don't much care unless, as Mary said, it is affecting or will affect the quality of the childcare they're getting. It would be nice not to make any decisions that affected mothers. It would probably be nice if mothers didn't make any decisions that affected my life. Since that's not the reality, the decisions at Sparky must be joint. Mothers, by the way, have not been ‘systematically excluded’ from Sparky. There were mothers at every meeting, more at the most recent meeting than at any other. If your comment comes out of paranoia you might notice that the lesbians keep expecting to be thrown out, etc. as in the past. That is another reason for joint decisions. Trust cuts both ways.

It is not clear to me if you mean the Sparky care is minimal and atrocious. I don't think the specifics you gave are true of Sparky. There have been public struggles over mistakes and disagreements, but I wish you would clarify because it is a very serious charge. The a.m. naps (when I am there) are regular.