--continued from page three

share and spread ideas. Conferences serve
as a means to recruit new women and
spread ideas or to share ideas with people
of like commitment. For bigger cities it
may be different, but for our area con-
ferences are expensive and transporta-
tion and housing should be provided. In
order to keep vital energy in conferences
goals and purposes should be examined.
Often if the topic is specific like women
and work the analysis and ideas which come
out of the conference can't go beyond
those of a service group.

The nature of conferences has changed
in the past few years from dealing with
philosophical/ideological issues to or-
ganizing specific groups, spreading in-
formation about ways to fight within the
system, and generally meeting the needs
of women who have to exist in the capi-
talist society. Although holding a con-
ference has become somewhat the status
quo, the structure itself can continue to
be useful as long as the practical goals
of the conferences align with established
needs of women. Although the structure
has little revolutionary potential, some
political education might be accomplished
within it.

We believe that organizational struc-
tures, although often indicative of the
politics and purpose of a group, are ba-
sically second to the group's purpose and
only important in terms of whether they
aid or don't aid the group in accomplish-
ing their goals. Our concern for the e-
qual treatment and well-being of the mem-
bers of any group is a factor we weigh
always against what we are trying to ac-
complish.

What matters is the purpose of the
group, the goals it has, its political
analysis. The organizational form we choose
should be a tool to accomplishing our pur-
pose and because we see many different
purposes within any revolutionary movement
(even one with a rigid and disciplined
analysis which WL doesn't have at this
time). We see the need for different

forms of organization for different pur-
poses, different times, different areas.

Much of the talk centering around or-
ganizational structure comes from a lack
of direction and clearness of purpose
more than it comes from actual flaws in
the structure. There have been times in
all of our experience when we have been
unclear of our goals, didn't know what
we should be doing politically, lacked

a direction. Instead of dealing with that
problem (with the frustration of not see-
ing immediate change, with doubts about
our effectiveness) we devised new struc-
tures, new rules.

We think it has taken many of us a

long time to realize that our complaints
against the American political system are

A MAGAZINE PUBLISHED
BY LESBIANS

FOR LESBIANS

AND FOR ALL WOMEN
CONCERNED WITH FULL
HUMAN RIGHTS...

THE LADDER
P.O. BOX 5025
WASHINGTON STATION
RENO NEVADA 89503

A 56-PAGE BI-MONTHLY
MAGAZINE CONTAINING FICTION,
POETRY, NON-FICTION, ART COLUMN,
BOOK REVIEWS, LETTERS, ART, AND

A COMPREHENSIVE NEWS COLUMN.

Pog & Y

Sojourner Truth,
“THE LIBYAN SIBYL.”

not based on the fact that its organiza-
tion is bad, that the system doesn't work,
but are instead based on our belief in the
wrongness of its purpose—that imperialism,
that capitalism are wrong whether they
work or not.

The liberalism of thinking things just
“don't work right" leads people to work
at endless patchwork rules and amend-
ments and structures and organizations on
top of organizations. The purpose of the
system still remains the same but the
bureaucracy that develops makes it even
more difficult to find out what's really
going on.

When things are really bureaucratic
the form starts to dominate and you can
lose track of your purpose easily following
the correct channels of action, doing
things the way they're normally done. The
subject of bureaucracy seems like an out-
dated issue but we see it as important to
think about in terms of the women's move-
ment since it's so widespread now and
older and has already established inform-
ally some standard ways to do things.
Also, it is something to think about in
terms of the kind of society we want to
fight for. In this regard small groups
and collectives work well and when women
first got into such groups we did so to
avoid the bureaucracy and/or intimidation
that we found in relating to other or-

ganizations.
But many goals that we set for our-

selves like recruiting and service to the
community could not be accomplished with-
in the small group structure so other
forms had to be found. At this point in
development there are several standard
organizational structures in the women's
movement, and we can easily avoid creat-
ing structures that can help us, and are
the easiest way to accomplish our goals
by instead merely fitting ourselves into
what are accepted forms—just as we can
worry more about the correctness of the
form we work in more than the correctness
of our purpose and goals.

We can envision many fronts of a rev-
olution or a period leading up to revolu-
tion. Some people will have to be doing
underground work—will have to be work-
ing in closed cells until defeat or vic-
tory—but there will still be a need to
relate above ground to people, to gain
support for active revolution, to explain
their actions, and to establish service
for people as the established system is
attacked and ceases to supply care (med-
ical, food, etc.) to the people. We see
people working with a similar ideology
and similar goals but in different ca-
pacities, different kinds of structures.
It is the ideology and goal that seems
to be important and determine whether
actions and groups aid or interfere with
a revolution.

"That man over there says that a woman
needs to be helped into carriages, and
lifted over ditches, and to have the
best place everywhere. Nobody ever
helps me into carriages, or over mud
puddles, or gives me a best place...
And ain't I a woman? Look at me.
Look at my arm! I have plowed
and planted and gathered into
barns, and no man could head me...
And ain't I a woman? I could as much
work and eat as much as a man when I
could get it and bear the lash as well...
And ain't I a woman? I have born
thirteen children and seen them
most all sold off into slavery. And
when I cried out with a mother's grief
none but Jesus heard...
And ain't I a woman?"

Sojourner Truth: Speech before the Women's
Rights Convention, 1851.