WOMEN'S  
MEDICINE  

THINGS TO BE DONE  

1. Get a lot of practice in examining our-  
selves and each other.  

2. Teach other women to examine themselves.  

3. Look into the possibility of getting a  
doctor, medical student, or laboratory tech-  
nician to teach you how to do Pap smears  
and how to interpret the results (or con-  
nect up with lab workers who will process  
the smears for you).  

4. Keep good records of what you're doing—  
medical histories, detailed descriptions of  
problems you've encountered and how they  
were or weren't solved. Keep a notebook  
that will be open for any woman to write  
accounts of her experiences with hassles  
she's encountered with particular doctors,  
with methods of birth control, or any medical  
problems.  

In the last year and a half several of us have made some  
attempts to find a way to educate ourselves and other women about  
our bodies and health care. We knew enough to mistrust most medi-  
cal professionals, but we didn't really know where to begin in self  
education. We attempted to get a women's health course together,  
but it failed. Some of us took a civil defense medical self-help  
course which was O.K. for basic first aid, but that's all. I at-  
tempted to be involved in the free medical clinic which is run by  
some concerned and "hip" people, but I quit because I saw the same  
male professional bullshit controlling the clinic and continuing to  
neglect women's needs. I suppose the main reason our medical is-  
sues group didn't get off the ground was because none of us were in-  
terested in health care for women as our primary concern. There  
just weren't enough of us to do everything at once. But while we  
were knowing in our heads that there must be some way to deal with  
medical problems of women, there were women who were beginning to  
get into things in a productive way. Those women are now sharing  
the basic things they've learned with other women all over the coun-  
try...teaching us to learn about ourselves and other women and en-  
couraging us to do our own research about health and our bodies.  

It seems that with care and common sense we can begin to look after  
ourselves and other women and not depend on medical professionals  
who have a great deal less concern for our health and comfort than  
we do.  

The women who have been into medical self-help have found that  
the best place to begin to learn is with our own bodies and those  
of our friends. We can use our senses (sight, touch, and smell) in  
the same way a physician can to examine ourselves and each other—  
to learn to identify infection and disease, to begin to know our  
own anatomy and, in some cases, to learn to recognize early preg-  
nancies. Why should we continue to spend great quantities of money  
to be abused by doctors when we are quite capable of learning to  
care for ourselves and each other?  

The way we learned things from the self-help clinic women was  
as exciting as what we learned. It was like the perfect learning  
situation. Women who had spent time studying and learning about  
health care were really eager to share every bit of information  
they knew. They were encouraging us to build women's health care  
programs and to do research on our own. They trusted us and gave us  
confidence that we were quite capable of learning everything they  
knew—and we were trusting of their skill and knowledge. There was  
no atmosphere of elitism and inequality as in most learning-teaching  
situations. It was women sharing things they had learned, with no  
withholding of information in order to retain the power. The care  
that we took with each other in learning to do cervical and pelvic  
examinations was so great. There's just no comparison to being ex-  
amined by a doctor who is often careless, lacking understanding, and  
closed-mouthed about letting the woman know exactly what's being  
done and why.  

5. Do consciousness raising on every aspect  
of women's health that you can think of....  
how women have been messed over by the medical  
profession, why women are uptight about their  
bodies, how to support women and meet their  
needs so that they don't have to feel messed  
up and freaked out...so that they don't end  
up going to shrinks to get messed over more.  

Some Facts About Cancer  

Cancer of the cervix is most common among  
women in their 40's and 50's. It is un-  
usual in women under 30 and over 70.  

Cancer of the cervix is slow-developing.  
Researchers estimate that the time from  
early pre-cancerous stage to definite in-  
vasive cancer is ten years.  

BEDE THINGS TO KNOW The chances of having cancer of the cervix  

1. Plastic speculums are available in quan-  
tity from physician's supply houses (as are  
most other supplies you will need). Just  
try ordering what you need. If they hassle  
you about not being a doctor, get a free  
clinic or a sympathetic doctor to help you  
in general. Generally, you can order these  
kind of supplies with no questions asked.  

2. Hospitals keep large supplies of K-Y  
jelly, plastic gloves, q-tips, and other  
useful items. If you know of any women who  
are nursing students, nurse's aids, or have  
any contact with hospital workers, they can  
help you get these supplies.  

3. If each woman keeps her own speculum  
and glove to be used only on herself for  
every examination, it will cut down on the  
quantity you need.  

Symptoms of Cancer  

For women not examining themselves regu-  
larly:  

Bleeding  

For women who examine themselves regular-  
ly (once a week):  

A lesion or growth on cervix,  

Discharge from cervix of pus-like fluid.  

Pain  

Cramp-like or steady in low portion of  
the abdomen similar to menstrual cramps.  

MEDICAL SUPPLEMENT PAGE 1