‘

While C Cine (VC 20 Q me  
"sympathy and understanding" to their husbands and lovers. The  

The following article is excerpted from Marlene Dixon's  
WHERE ARE WE GOING? appearing in the February, 1970  
special issue on women of RADICAL AMERICA.  

(See page for information on ordering the magazine.)  

... The strength of the women's movement is rooted in the real  
oppression of women, while its future potentiality as a mass  
movement clearly depends upon the quality of the consciousness  
that women develop. Both the socialist and the consciousness-  
raising groups (in early meetings) were in this sense correct.  
Ultimately, the strength of the movement will rest upon the  
depth of women's understanding of the nature and origins of  
their oppression and upon the honesty with which they are able  
to face the psychological terrors of open rebellion. It is a  
fearful thing for a woman to be a rebel, as much for the  
Movement “wife as for the average housewife.  

Indeed, much of what passed for "ideological struggle" at  
the (Chicago, 1968) women's conference was in fact a disguised  
struggle between totally rebellious independent women and  
radical women who work primarily within women's caucuses. The  
tension that surrounded the unspoken fears of women concerning  
the consequences of open rebellion often took the form that  
women, and other oppressed groups, are most familiar with:  
turning upon each other. Much of the pathology of the confer-  
ence, particularly in terms of personal animosity and suspicion,  
could be directly traced to the degree to which each woman was  
still dependent upon men for her evaluation of herself. The  
boldest and most fearless women were clearly those who had  
bolted from, or never belonged to, established leftist organiza-  
tions; they were followed by those women still in such organi-  
zations, but active in women's auxiliaries. The unattached  
and curious women, newcomers to the movement, were the most  
timid and confused.  

The defensiveness that characterized the workshops and  
plenary sessions was the expression of an overriding anxiety  
about being able to justify the existence of a women's movement.  
The Invisible Audience present at the Chicago conference were  
the very "male heavies" who had done so much to bring about the  
existence of a radical women's liberation movement. The  
radical women had a prior history engraved upon their foreheads:  
Ruby Doris Smith Robinson presenting The Position of Women in  
SNCC (1964) provoking Stokely Carmichael's famous reply: ‘The  
only position for women in SNCC is prone"; Casey Hayden and Mary  
King rousing a storm of controversy for their articles in Studies  
on the Left and Liberation; and the December, 1965, SDS confer-  
ence greeting a discussion and floor demonstration on the issue  
of women with catcalls, storms of ridicule and verbal abuse.  
"She just needs a good screw", or (the all-time favorite) "She's  
a castrating female".  

Women had learned from 1964 to 1968 that to fight for or even  
to sympathize with women's liberation was to pay a terrible price:  
what little credit a woman might have earned in one of the Left  
organizations was wiped out in a storm of contempt and personal  
abuse.  

The strategy that the leftist women had adopted for the Chi-  
cago conference was to develop a "politics" with sufficient ana-  
lytical merit to force the men to recognize the legitimacy of the  
women's movement, a tactic which has paid off in the Movement by  
1969. Socialism, Revolution, Capitalism were thick in discussion.  
WITCH, Consciousness Raising and Radicals met head-on in debate,  
amid many hard feelings. The trouble was that none of these  
analyses, and this unfortunately especially applied to radical  
women, seriously linked theory and practice in such a way as to  
lead to strategies for action. For instance, the radical women  
had not yet begun to push for day care centers in working class  
organizing, although when they at last found an action, they were  
to become as fanatical and sectarian in rejecting all those whose  
minds remained unblasted by Truth as the non-Movement women.  

The "ideology" of the radical women was, by and large, an  
academic exercise in the art of the "intellectual male heavy" in  
the Movement. The radical women were decimated by the invisible  
male audience. Thus, the real split among the women hinged upon  
the significant audience that women addressed: other women, or  
Movement men. The audience determined not only ideology, but  
the role women took in workshops and debate. Also, most crucially,  
the choice of audience determined the ability of one woman to  
understand another. Yet, irrespective of the origin of stressing  
political analysis above all other elements of the women's move-  
ment, or even the rather vulgar Marxist-Leninist character of  
early attempts, the long range effect has had tremendous impor-  
tance to furthering the intellectual maturity of the women's  
movement.  

At the conference, and in later controversies, the basic  
division between women is usually referred to as "consciousness-  
raising" vs. "radical" or "bourgeois" vs. "revolutionary." The  
names are very misleading for understanding the division, but  
highly indicative of the nature of the misunderstanding between  
women.  

Women are trained to nuances, to listening for the subtle cues  
which carry the message hidden under the words. It is part of  
that special skill called "intuition" or "empathy" which all female  
children must learn if they are to be successful in manipulating  
others to get what they want and to be successful in providing  

10 VOL. 1  

NO. 9  

a  

skill is so central to communication between women and all others—  
women to women, women to men, women to children—that it is not  
surprising to note that intuition is also central to political  
communication among women. There are no words for communication  
which occurs on many complex levels, so that it is quite possible  
to have two complete communication processes going on at once—  

the articulated and the implicit levels. At the women's con-  
ference the overt process was all in a man's vocabulary of pol-  
itical rhetoric and analysis, while the covert level was alto-  
gether different...  

...the battle was waged in a political vocabulary, but  
the issues had really to do with basic orientations toward women.  
The wildcat groups took woman (as mystical, rebellious, expressive and mysterious, or as enraged) as their ideal, while the leftist women were using leader-intellectual (the role from which all rewards flow in  
the Movement) as theirs. The tragedy of this misunderstanding was that political polarization = needless polarization = was the result. The wildcat women, many of whom hate the movement bitterly because of the chauvinism they experienced in it, dismissed the leftists as unliberated spokeswomen for the submersion of the women's struggle in the "revolutionary" struggle; while the leftist women dismissed the wildcats as hopelessly a-political and counter-revolutionary. That each might have learned from the other, that all shared real conditions of oppression, was obscured.  

Another battle was waged on the level of sentiments, in the suspicion of leaders. The resentment against women who seemed in charge (such as experienced by Marilyn Webb and others who had worked hard, and thanklessly, to bring the conference about) was real, a product of all of the participants' experience with established organizations. Women had suffered so much from the oppression of 'male heavies', whether from a boss on the job or a boss in the movement or the boss at home, suffered from being forced to be camp followers, ignored in decision making and treated generally with contempt for their intellectual and moral qualities. Their resentment, therefore, of any woman who even appeared to be playing a typical male leadership role, whether true or not, bordered on the pathological.  

The women's movement, like the black movement before it (and most rebellious movements in their early stages of development), is torn by suspicion and rivalry: everyone wants to be a leader, or to be in a position to achieve recognition for which they are starved. But no one wants to admit it. Years of second class citizenship breeds in people an enormous hunger to be recognized. If one's hunger is to be once again frustrated, then, damn it!, no one else is going to enjoy the pleasures of recognition either. The result was that 'leaders' 'led' by virtue of doing hard, ugly work and then bent over backwards trying to appear to be 'non-leaders'. This, of course, fooled no one. The long nurtured secret hunger for recognition has been hidden for so long it had taken on a magical, fearful meaning—no one could talk about it. It remained, at the conference, unexpressed and sour, a slow acid eating at the women's movement, guaranteeing that it will remain segmentalized, split into tiny groups in every major city and region, unaware of its potential size and power. Thus the issue of leadership, of democratizing the structure of the movement, of fighting against the manifold corruptions of elitism is not only a major problem in political theory for women, it is the practical problem which must be solved before the movement can reach its maturity. The alternative is death through factionalism and disintegration...  

-- radical women, even in the face of a large, well-  
funded liberal or left-liberal organization such as  
the National Organization of Women, remain tied to a  
male audience, defining themselves in terms of men's  
organizations exclusively and continuing to regard  
women opportunistically, as another group to further  
the struggle. So long as women remain tied to the  
men's 'line', and blind to their own exploitation by  
white middle class male radicals, it will not be rad-  
ical women who do the organizing. The organizing will  
be done by politically unsophisticated, profoundly  
liberal women who address women's oppression directly.  
Unless the radical women get themselves together, in  
the interests of their own oppression and the oppression  
of all their sisters, a mass movement dominated by an  
ideology of ‘let us in' (and not 'set us free') will  
develop in the next few years.  

Women must face facts. Men will never, until forced  
by circumstances, place first, or even urgent, priority  
upon a struggle against the oppression of women...  

Men must carry the burden of ‘white middle class guilt';  
they cannot live with the growing recognition that in  
their daily lives they exploit and oppress; and so,  

they struggle against women and against the almost in-  
tolerable process of self-recognition women are now  
demanding they undergo.  

For example, it is not an accident that radical  
women have not been organizing. The energies of radical  
women have too long been deflected into arguing-pleading-  
justifying their cause, i.e. to fighting male chauvinism,  
male supremacy, in the movement. Theirs has been a pro-  
foundly a-political, personalized struggle, one devoted  
to personal liberation. It is ironic that radical women  
so wrapped up in their sex lives and Movement careers,  

continued on next page  

ADN'T <I  

women