The first

feminist movement I remember that we were
all really concerned with smashing unequal
oppressive dependent power relations. Then
Weathermen (a sexist male-dominated, mili-
tary-oriented organization) came out with
a smash-monogamy-of-any-sort line. And you
could see a real change in the politics

of the women's movement... cause I guess it
felt it had to top any line about women
that Weathermen put out.

I have urged women to smash their mono-
gamies lots of times. Their heterosexual
monogamies. I did that because it is

hard for me to conceive in this point of
history anything very liberated happening
between one man and one woman. I did that
because it's hard for me to understand why
women with generally high consciousness
spend their energies in intimate struggle
with men. But I didn't do it because the
form of monogamy is somehow inherently
destructive. Like I don't think I meant
smash those relationships, or smash the
bad parts of them. It's not the intensity,
the monogamy of a relationship that makes

or breaks it... it's the content of the
relationship.

When Weatherman said smash monogamy they
meant that each woman should put out for
lots of boys instead of just one. That's
not exactly my idea of the road to libera-
tion. What we really want to smash is dom-
ination, stifling possessiveness, manipu-
lation, brutality, etc. and those things
turn up all the time in all kinds of rela-
tionships from the most casual to the most
intense.

I guess dogma is a way not to deal with
the actualities of our lives. When your
main concern is smashing monogamy, that
leaves a lot of different kinds of rela-
tionships that don't get scrutinized and
criticized so much. When you attack women
for being macho because it scares you,

TAmy KALLE W

Tyo ther
When -
little she
ann lifejane wr ne
very hard she
lived very hard
oes j ys fo
Be tie 5 HE wes
Ga ant ee
2neN ie aed
ade eege Ov)
when Brows ih

her teens she
went Oh cates

you don't deal with your own timidity,
your own oppression.
I am involved, as you might guess, in a

very intense, close monogamous relationship.

And a lot of my friends in the movement
have been laying down subtle criticisms

of that. But so far, no one has really
been upset about the monogamy. It's an
excuse for other things. Like some peo-
ple have been upset because I haven't

seen them much and instead of saying they
miss me and feel rejected, they say smash
monogamy. Some of my sisters feel threat-
ened by my being closer to Wendy than
with them. Some straight women feel very
freaked out that two women can actually
love each other with such intensity...
These straight women are really uptight,
because they criticize us on the basis of
‘correct' ideas they got from their het-
erosexual experiences, as if those ideas
could possibly relate to our Lavender
Vision. Moreover, when they see two wo-
men really digging each other, then they
know lesbianism is for REAL and they get

a bit scared that it might zap in on them.
One of the reasons people give for their
‘smash monogamy’ line is that collectivity
is better than individuality. They say that
it is better to get your sense of identity
and security from a group of close sisters
than from just one person. Well, in the
last few years in the women's movement, I
have not seen too many collectives pro-
vide any kind of stable support for any
individual. I was in a very tight dis-
ciplined, close collective all last year
and looking back at it now, I can't remem-
ber a time in my life that I felt so weak
and so dependent. Instead of being de-
pendent on one person, I was dependent

on the 'collective'... not really on the
other women in the collective, just on the
collective. But the ‘collective' didn't

exist on its own, outside of being made
up of all of us. And because everything was
so fucking ‘collective’ we never really
were able to build relationships inside
it which gave us what we needed.

I also haven't seen many collectives

that last too long. The form is an ex-
perimental one... Although my collective
last year was the most important polit-
ical experience I ever had, second to
coming out, I took a lot of losses in it.
We all did. I'm not too sure how I feel
about collectives, but I'll never throw
myself, lose myself, in one again like

I did last year.

With Wendy I feel very secure. It gives
me a lot of strength to be very certain
of being loved. I have never done good
politics or lived a nice life except when
I was feeling good and strong. And being
a lesbian in this society requires a lot
of strength.

Until there is actually some form which
looks better to me, not in theory or
fantasy... but in concrete practice than

my monogamous relationship with Wendy,

I don't see why I should smash monogamy.
Although I shouldn't have said this last
year, I now foresee a post-revolutionary
situation where a whole spectrum of forms
exists, all sorts of numbers, all sorts
of different levels of collectivity. I'm
not going to give up the best relation-
ship of my life because in the context of
the straight women's movement I developed
a theory which gains the goods for me,
not one which requires I strip myself of
the few things which make me feel good.
Since I came out and since I got into
self-defense, I've never felt better about
myself. For me, macho and monogamy have
been the wonder drugs that my women's
consciousness has produced, to defend
against the virus of dogma.

Re ywinsesl Qvrom
i isigdec | Nisisn.

Re ernkel. Grom yes ac An
X Amica Cee oe — SOC"

Easkex Qey Recess

1H.