PAINFUL TIMES

Throughout the last year, people have been working hard at
all sorts of productive work, general political analysis, support
groups for gay women, child care, abortion, self-defense.
Feminist publications are flourishing and women's living collec-
tives and community centers have been growing in number. In
spite of all of our accomplishments, many women have gone through
some of the most difficult emotional struggles we've ever encoun-
tered, including the hassles we had in male-run politics and old
personal relationships. In thinking back to the time when we
were excitedly making plans for our new lifestyles and political
activities it seems incredibly naive not to have been more rea-
listic about anticipating hassles.

In planning our work groups and living collectives we envisioned
an environment relatively free from oppressive relationships,
(old left semantic arguments and other things that retard (or make
impossible) our struggle for radical change. Instead we found
other problems -- gay women feeling oppressed by straight women,
heterosexual and bisexual women feeling rejected by gay women,
hostility between women of different classes, women with children
feeling they have no place at all in women's liberation, charges
of racism, painfully standing in the middle of two sisters you
love who are fighting and feeling both of them are right (or
wrong).

I've begun to think over some of the mistakes we made that
have caused so many painful experiences. The only thing I'm sure
about is that we were much too idealistic. We expected far too
much from ourselves and our sisters in terms of how much we could
change. We were unaware of how tight a grasp this society has on
us. We were wrong in assuming we could all become perfect "post-
revolutionary people" even before we've decided just what that
might involve. We had such high expectations that every hurt
and disappointment and failure was multiplied several times over.

We must be careful not to give our sisters and ourselves false
hopes of utopia in a feminist movement. We thought that be-
cause we are all women sharing the same oppression we could be
easily united, that we were free from the pain we had felt before
we came together. But that is not the way it is. (I still feel
that as women with a feminist consciousness, we have the potential

"That man over there says that a woman
needs to be helped into carriages, and
lifted over ditches, and to have the
best place everywhere. Nobody ever
helped me into carriages, or over mud
puddles, or gives me a best place...
And ain't I a woman? Look at me.
Look at my arm! I have plowed
and planted and gathered into
barns, and no man could head me...
And ain't I a woman? I could work, as
much and eat as much as a man when I
could get it, and bear the lash as well.
And ain't I a woman? I have borne
thirteen children and seen them
most all sold off into slavery. And

when I cried out with a mother's grief,
none but Jesus heard...

And ain't I a woman?"

Sojourner Truth: Speech before the Women's
Rights Convention at Akron, Ohio in 1851.

We have the responsibility to build a revolution.) We have run into
some errors in our preconceptions about women working together.

We assumed that because we were all females everything would work
out well. Often, with that assumption in mind, we took less care
in dealing with our sisters than we should have. People were

hurt along the way. We were frustrated when we spoke with women
whose politics were far from ours. Are “liberal women our sisters
or will they definitely be our enemies? Where do we draw the line?
There may be a time when pacifism is definitely counter-revolu-
tionary if it isn't already. Yet there are many female pacifists
in the women's movement. We were angry when women from different
lifestyles and with different experiences didn’t understand us.

We started women's collectives to live, to do political analysis
together and to show other women (and ourselves) that it was
possible to exist outside of marriage, the nuclear family or com-
pletely alone. Then we started becoming out of touch from and
resented by women in other situations. The tension has grown to
be unbearably great between many groups of women.

I don't know that we can exist in splintered resentful factions.
Yet, I know we will never progress if we hesitate or avoid speaking
out against the politics of women we believe are wrong. There are
a few things I believe are important to do now in order not to
destroy the beginnings we have. I think people should continue
working in support groups. Gay women should continue meeting
together. People into child care should work to keep things to-
gether. Women into building and creating a women's culture (lit-
erature, lifestyles, art, music, etc.) should keep working. These
types of work and rap groups and others are important for political
development, support, and often survival. In addition, we have
got to begin talking and listening to women in every situation.

We have to try to make these discussions as open, yet as unthreat-
ening as possible. We have to do more consciousness raising about
class, race, marriage, gay women, children, education, money --
everything that has been an underlying or obvious cause for our

hassles. We haven't yet got the "perfect analysis". I think

we have got to do a lot more talking, listening and thinking before
we choose our sides.

COPIES OF THE POSTER ABOVE ARE AVAILABLE FOR $1.50 &
A SELF ADDRESSED, STAMPED ENVELOPE FROM:

THE WOMEN'S ACTION COMMITTEE

BOX 7193 POWDERHORN STATION
MINNEAPOLIS, MINN. 55407

I just hope we still have the energy to do it.