Ss; for our analysis

labels concerning To all women

These pages are written for women in the women's movement.  
These four pages may not be reprinted in part by anyone.

We are concerned about women reading this and wondering just  
where we're coming from. We are not making a pitch for some  
caucus of the male left. We are women who see working to-  
gether as women, loving and living together as women to hold  
primary importance. And to that end, we feel it necessary  

to deal with our class differences. Much that we say can be  
used by women in such organizations as the Socialist Workers'  
Party to put down the women's movement. We recognize that,  
but think it would be—has been—detrimental to the women's  
movement to shy away from class questions.

We consider ourselves very much a part of the women's  
movement and as a part of it wish to engage in self-criticism  
on the issue of class. We have not credited the excerpts from  
the women's media we have used as examples of middle-class  
bias in the women's movement because, while some are worse  
than others, we want to point out how the women's movement  
doesn't have much of a class consciousness. We are not  

disengaging ourselves from the women's movement. Nor do  

we feel that the women's movement can be singled out as middle-  
class or lacking a class consciousness. We see little class  
consciousness in political groups in this country, only groups  
that have adopted a Marxist analysis which is a far cry from  

America uses 40% of the world's raw materials. Will a woman  

president of the World Bank change that?  
America uses 40% of the world's raw materials. Will equal pay  
for women executives change that?  

America uses 40% of the world's raw materials. Will new role  
models (woman doctor, woman lawyer, woman Ph.D.)  
change that?  

Presently, in the women's movement these questions are  
illegitimate—met with hostile stares, evasive answers, out-  
right charges of being anti-woman. Most of these issues that  
middle-class women see as important don't have any real mean-  
ing for women who are struggling for material survival and it  
has been incredibly easy for middle-class women to charge lower  
class women with being anti-woman. The philosophy of sister-  
hood is a very neat way—has been a really effective way—to  
drive lower class women away from the women's movement.  
Working class and lower class women have not gained materially  
from the fruits of imperialism, but middle-class women certainly  
have. Their refusal to admit this and instead to declare a common  
oppression among all women makes it so easy to avoid class  
questions. But there are class questions and we're going to  
have to deal with them.

A despicable kind of middle-class mentality characterizes the  
women's movement now, where equal pay for equal work inevit-  
ably gets translated into how much less a university or profess-  
ional woman gets paid, where achievement is measured in terms  
of becoming a middle-class professional or a "free" woman  
traveling around the country soaking up sisterhood while living  
off that middle-class bank account. (Why do so many women  
travelers say it's easy to live without spending much money  
and flaunt their middle-class privileges while they've got the  
security of always getting bailed out by parents or savings  
accounts? Why do they look at you so strangely when you ask  
them how they live? Why do they treat you like some kind of  
freak when you don't have that kind of freedom? Those are  
class things, and they're the same things that happen to lower  
class women all their lives—being made to feel stupid and clumsy  
for not understanding how easy it is to be free. It happens all the  
time among sisters. It happens at every level of the women's  
movement.)

In the name of meeting the needs of all women much of the  
women's movement has become a vehicle for middle-class  
success stories. "I went to law school at 31" or "I'm getting my  

Ph.D. and going to teach women's studies," are not relevant to  
lower class women. This country could not be what it is, could  
not do what it does to anyone who is not middle-class without the  
active support of middle-class women. How will opening all those  
jobs, jobs that used to be reserved for middle-class males, help  
anyone but those individual middle-class women? They can and  
have functioned just as well as men to enforce the class system  

in this country and to uphold the international system that allows  
this country to exploit other countries. Until middle-class women  
recognize their place in the class system, really face it and not  
claim a phony powerlessness by always measuring their power  
against their male counterparts, sisterhood is a sham.

You only have to look at some of the women's newsletters and  
papers to really get the message that the benefits we want are  
available only for the middle class. I want to describe one that  
comes out of the Midwest. (Only because we live and work in  
the Midwest—the picture is the same in newsletters from every  
region of the country.) Top items included:

---Medical schools discriminate against women.

---Group health insurance excludes gynecological benefits for  
women.

---Disability insurance costs more for women.

---Women have more difficulty purchasing the deluxe insurance  
policies than men, (horror of horrors)

---An article on clinical depression that keeps citing Sylvia  
Plath and Virginia Woolf as examples.

---A report on children's books and "better role models."

---A report on women lawyers and how a woman was appointed  
as the magistrate of a court system.

---A report on activities for International Women's Day includ-  
ing the comment that "the most heartening fact was the  
announced participation of a wide variety of women's  
liberation groups, all working together."

Middle-class women should find all that heartening because  
all they need is teach-ins, rallies, and a feeling of unity. They  
have to prove we can all work together—to what end? Deluxe  
insurance policies? All of the concerns in this newsletter are  
examples of a real class antagonism, a class antagonism by  
omitting everything relevant to non-middle-class women. Equal  
pay for equal work means lots to middle-class women because  
they can imagine doing middle-class males' jobs. Let them  
imagine doing working-class males' jobs. Let them imagine  
equal work before we let them imagine equal pay.