Dear Sisters,

I was disappointed to read that the working class women who  
were with the paper are now gone. Reading what they wrote was a  
great help to me as a lesbian from the working class.

Each time I write, I promise to write up my thoughts on class  
and send them to you, but I haven't been able to do that yet. But  
I'm still promising, and I hope to try to do that soon.

Two things that I have recognized as class indicators in the  
past two years are bathrooms and grandfathers. One time I went  
to visit an out-of-town friend and was overcome by the size of her  
parents' house. It was larger than I ever imagined people really  
living in. There were two or three halls on the second floor, and  
I was sure if I allowed myself to wander around that I would get  
lost. Even though I knew it was very large, I had no way of know-  
ing by looking at it just what that meant, and I remembered the  
system we had when I was younger for telling just how rich some-  
one was, and that was by the number of bathrooms they had. And  
when I was told eight, I was in that state of childlike awe charac-  
teristic of someone who experiences a higher class.

An incident similar to that was when someone told me that  
their grandfather was born in the U.S. I was totally amazed, hav-  
ing never known anyone over about 60 who was born in this country.  
And I guess I just assumed that everyone's grandparents were immi-  
grants.

In both these incidents, I felt like a total fool after showing  
how surprised I was, and as if I had been extremely stupid not to  
have known that these things were realities for some people.

I thought you might find this interesting. I hope to send  
you something longer and more in-depth someday. Please keep  
sending and writing.

In sisterhood,

Sisters,

Just received the issue of ATAW you sent  
to us for the Women's Bookstore in Seattle.  
The discussion of class really got me think-  
ing -- about directions I/we are taking,  
about my own background.

I've had difficulty defining class. I  
know there are differences, but they rarely  
seem to divide in a way I could conceptually  
define as working class/middle class. The  
women I live with and I have been talking  
about our backgrounds and been amazed at  
how different we are and how misleading it’s  
been to assume that we have similar back-  
grounds just because we all went to college.

On the other hand, there are class differ-  
ences, and some of the ones you talked about  
I can really relate to. "The level of con-  
cern we feel for survival necessities also  
demarcates our class." And the whole thing  
of expressing anger vs. putting it into  
elaborate verbalizations.

Right now I'm the only one in our house  
working at a permanent job (it's part-time).  
I can't understand how the other women can  
go on talking about not liking work when I  
see it as such a necessity. I went to  
college; my parents paid for it, mostly by  
sending me money. I've had a lot of oppor-  
tunities most people wouldn't have for  
traveling and experimenting with lifestyles.  
But I see it all as a sort of temporary gift.  
(I guess I've always been aware of the  
tenuousness of material security because  
though my parents have had it most of their  
married life, they both came from very poor  
families.)

I see it as a temporary gift because I  
think that as a woman my class is determined  
by my parents until I am “of age" and after  
that by the class of my husband. But here  
I am without that husband and not expecting  
to get stuck to one. I think times are  
really different now in that there have  
never been so many women consciously deciding  
to stay single indefinitely. So what's my  
class? In spite of the privileges of my  
childhood, I find that to survive economi-  
cally, independently I have no choice but to  
work for a living, and that means (shudder)  
typing.

I have a love-hate feeling about typing.  
Sometimes it makes me feel independent--  
I've supported myself for a while doing  
freelance stuff. But that's just playing a  
game with myself, the kind of game where  
you say "let's see if I can type this  
paper in half the time” and feel good for  
"achieving the goal." Such bullshit--but  
a survival necessity.

I'm going to be late for work if I write  
any more, and I'll never mail this if I don't  
mail off what I've got here.

A worn?

Every Wednesday

Y-6:00 PM at

The Women's Center,  
Market Place near Me  
share el Singadish+A, DYKE

Wao (4) (AT

ver.

man You can Bevo DINN

Aay. Nonan W  
wo wont WO Qbowt  
ACT VARS in the Iowa.

MY MOTHER IS TOO TIRED

TO GO OUT TO EAT

WITH THE FAMILY

SHE HAS WORKED ALL HER LIFE

LIKE A DUMB CHILD

WITH LIFELESS EYES

BEYOND REPAIR

FOR TRYING HARD TO PLEASE

AND COMMONLY NOW

WE SPOON DOWN HER MEALS

AND PASS OFF HER MIND

UNTIL WE'RE REMINDED

SHE IS TIRED LIKE A DOG

AND WOULD RATHER

EAT ALONE

AND LISTLESS SMILES

PASTED ON HER FACE

SHE HAS BEEN RIDICULED  
P.K. Powell

reprinted from WINTER RAINBOW  
P.O. Box 13344, Sacramento, Cal.