The Critical Economy of Collectives —

Our collective began in early June,  
nearly one year ago. At that time our  
financial situation was quite good: four  
people out of eight had jobs and in addi-  
tion to that many of us put part of our  
savings in the collective checking account.  
Our monthly expenses did not exceed our  
income until fall when we found ourselves  
with only two people employed, one bring-  
ing in $273/mo. and the other $95/mo.  

We didn't feel the pressure of having our  
expenses be more than our income until  
November when our savings ran out.  

There were class differences between  
the individuals in the collective that  
resulted in feelings of inequality. These  
became worse when our financial situation  
became acute — power relationships between  
us deepened along economic and class lines.  
At a recent collective meeting when we  
were finally able to talk about the econo-  
mic relationships between us, we noted the  
prestige value attached to the work that  
each of us did within the frame of refer-  
ence of the collective. We concluded that  
the only work that had any prestige value,  
or brought to the doer collective respect,  
was work which furthered the existence of  
the collective, i.e., work which brought  
in money. This was obvious especially when  

money became a major concern to the life  
of the collective, then those of us who  
made money became more necessary or impor-  

done by the unemployed members of the  
collective, which should have entitled  
them to some respect, did not because it  
was not basically important to the life  
of the collective. We found that we  
could not escape the prestige value of the  
outer culture.  

One of our original intents in picking  
a collective, socialist way of life was  
that it would free some people to do po-  
litical work. Periodically we planned on  
switching and those doing political work  
would get jobs giving those that had been  
employed the opportunity to spend their  
time on political things. Now we see this  
idea as very naive, a decision made with-  
out considering the economic reality of  
society. It was idealistic of us not to  
consider our class differences and realize  
that because of them some of us would have  
access to jobs that pay more, or to consi-  
der that in the middle of hard times it  
would be impossible for someone who was  
working as a teacher to be replaced by  
someone who could only get a secretary's  
salary. Also that in this society the jobs  
one can quit or that are defined within a  
time limit like a year or nine months are  
those obtainable by people with certain  
economic privileges. Secretaries and wait-  
resses just can't quit and expect to be  
rehired later. Jobs for people who haven't  
had class privileges like education are al-  

We now realize that there are many things  
that we should have done differently. We  
should have done more planning, budgeted  
our expenses for each week, and done more  
discussion of our financial situation so  
that everyone was informed of it. Finan-  
cial decisions should have been more col-  
lective and there should have been more  
discussion of class. During one collec-  
tive meeting we discussed the different  
ways we had power over each other, for  
instance, who could drive and who had to  
be driven and how it felt to be tied down  
to the house unless someone could drive  
you. That discussion was very helpful  
to all of us, making us more sensitive to  
each other. Hopefully discussions of class  
would also be so helpful.  

Another thing we should have been more  
regimented about was getting jobs. We were  
aware that eventually our savings would  
run out, but we left it up to individuals  
to get jobs -- no collective decision was  
made like a date by which certain people  
had to have jobs. As a result of the un-  
sureness, individuals haphazardly looked  
for jobs and felt guilty when they weren't  
looking. The work of looking for a job  
was given no collective prestige value.  

If each woman had a certain date by which  
she had to be employed, and when the time  
came she was still unable to find a job,  

we would have been forced then to deal with  

In other words, the political work  

tant, so hard to find:  

our economic reality.  

- From the Perspective of one of the Residents  

From the very beginning of the collective, I worried about  
money. I worried about having enough money; I worried about being  
in the position of dependence; I worried about the resentments I  
had toward the other women because they came from middle-class  
backgrounds. Everyone else seemed so confident that everything  
would work out that I finally stopped worrying to some extent and  
started to trust everyone, feeling less class resentment than I  
ever have. I knew that if everyone worried as much as I did, we  
never would have even tried to live collectively so I began to  
trust the good intentions and financial confidence of my sisters.  

After living in the collective only a short time my job was  
terminated and for the first time in my life I didn't have to  
immediately look for a new job. I suddenly had lots of time and  
could spend it on women's liberation activities. However, I felt  
really guilty not working and couldn't believe no one was going  
to get on my back about it. I never really did get over feeling  
that way but still changed more than I ever thought I could. I  
began to really trust my sisters and not resent them for the  
privileges they had had. I started to almost believe I had a  
right not to work, a right to free time.  

When our financial situation became obviously bad, I felt all  
the old resentments and guilt feelings again. I started to feel  
like a dependent that people had to take care of. I resented the  
fact that I would have to get a shit job again - that I would  
have to work full time to earn what some of my sisters could  
earn part time; that I would have to be phony and straight at  
any job I could get; that I didn't have any extra money or money  
from my parents so I could not escape on vacations or buying  
sprees. Some of the other women could. If the collective had no  
money, I had no money. I started to feel guilty for any expenses  
I had separate from expenses we all had, e.g. cigarettes. I  
really resented the options the other women had.  

When I couldn't find a job, I got more resentful, depressed,  
and scared. Scared because if the collective ended I had nothing  
to fall back on; resentful because others did; depressed because  
looking for jobs was awful. I think I started to feel embarrassed  
because I couldn't find one, embarrassed because I had to look  
for shit jobs, had little education, etc. I started to feel that  
I had to do any extra tasks around the house since I wasn't work-  
ing, that I had to justify my time, that if anyone mentioned some  
temporary job I could do or a job that I could apply for that I  
had to do it. I felt that I had no choices. I also started to  
really feel resentful about the work I did politically (mostly  
shit work for the paper) because it wasn't valued.  

Mostly I felt useless and embarrassed.  

From the perspective of the  
Note Along, here (III-A)  

We now realize that to have a collective supported mainly by  
one person's salary is destructive both to the breadwinner and the  
other women in the collective. It is so hard to free oneself from  
the pigshit of individual ownership or private property. We all  
at one time or another have felt guilty for using collective money  
to buy something we needed--like a pair of jeans, etc. But I be-  
lieve I didn't feel it as much because it was my salary that sup-  
ported us, and I knew I had a right to a pair of pants. I'm sure  
my sisters who did not have jobs, however, felt no such right. It  
is almost impossible to get away from the ethics of society, but  
budgeting and collective financial decisions would have made each  
of us feel we had more of a right to our money.  

About the time our economic crisis set in, I began to feel  
like the father of a family, the sole breadwinner. I felt I had  
too much responsibility, and began having resentments against the  
inequality of things. I felt that anyone else could leave the  
collective except me, because then it would have no means of sup-  
port. They resented me for having a job that would enable me to  
leave if I wanted to. I felt put upon that I earned the money and  
still had to clean house on Saturday, cook and wash dishes. This,  
of course, was pigshit. I was not giving the political work of  
my sisters any prestige value, but I felt too economically respon-  
sible for the collective to be able to see value in work that  
brought in no money. I was amazed at how male and fatherly I felt  
and I didn't like it.  

At one collective meeting when we were discussing solutions  
to the problem of the non-working sisters feeling no prestige val-  
ue from the collective, we considered going back to role playing.  
That housework which is necessary labor and therefore would have  
prestige value, should be done by the sisters who did not earn  
money for the collective. The reaction of everyone was that  
housework was still shit work and didn't have that much prestige  
value (especially to the sisters who don't value neatness) and  
that it would be terrible to relegate one person to that role.  

I had the opposite reaction knowing this solution would lessen  
my resentment and knowing also that being a person that values  
neatness I would give housework and the woman who did it a lot  
of appreciation and prestige value. But this was awful! Now I  
was reacting the way a husband must react to the little woman who  
cleans up his house. I've been very mixed up by the whole thing.