THREE WOMEN

The Revolutionary People's Constitu-
tional Convention was called by the
Black Panther Party for November 27-29
in Washington DC and people from all
over the country came. At the last min-
ute James Cheek, President of Howard
University, refused to allow the people
to use the buildings at Howard for the
convention. Cheek had agreed to rent
facilities at Howard to the Black Panther
Party with a $1,000 deposit and the
balance of $7,000 to be paid later. When
Cheek received the deposit, he wanted
all of the money in one payment by Tues-
day morning and denied the Panthers the
space.

All Souls Church and Saint Stephen's
Church were used as a last minute sub-
stitute, but their facilities were in-
adequate for holding the workshops and
larger assembly meeting. The women also
had a center at Trinity College, a Cath-
olic Women's College, where space for
workshops, meetings, and sleeping was
provided.

LNS women went to the convention un-
clear about what to expect. They return-
ed with new questions, and the realiza-
tion that these questions are a long way
from being resolved.

The following discussion focuses on
three women's experiences at the Con-
vention:

BARBARA: Friday night on the way to St.
Stephen's Church we met a lot of movement
people we knew who seemed to be wander-
ing around—they told us that the agen-
da we were looking for wasn't there.
Sure enough, when we got there, there
wasn't any agenda—there were old Huey
movies and other Newsreel flicks. That
was pretty grim, so we went back to All
Souls Church to register.

SALLY: But when we got there registration
had closed so we went to eat at a fried
chicken place. And at dinner we ran into
other problems—of white people being in
a Black community and being very uncon-
scious of that while they were there.
Black people lined up behind us to eat.
And we were sitting at the counter laugh-
ing and talking and we didn't even real-
ize that those people were there until
we turned around and they said, "We've
been waiting here for 45 minutes."

KAREN: I think it's typical of the situ-
ation over the weekend that while we were
sitting there talking about the revolu-
tion we didn't even bother to think that
there was a whole room full of Black peo-
ple who regularly ate there who wanted to
sit down and have their meal. Same goes
for all the trash people threw around the
sidewalks and lawns around the church
neighborhood.

BARBARA: Then we walked over to the rally
and the first nice thing happened. We met
some women who told us that there were
lots of women rapping at the women's cen-
ter at Trinity College. They told us to
go over there. At the rally, nothing hap-
pened for a long time and then, finally,
the Panther band, "The Lumpen," played.
We started dancing and singing songs and
continued to wonder when the convention
would start. A lot of gay women and men
danced in a snake dance and shouted "Ho,
Ho, Homosexual, the ruling class is inef-
fectual."

SALLY: Big Man spoke finally and said we
were all supposed to go to St. Stephen's
Church at 9 in the morning. He intimated
that it might be a good idea if some
buildings could be liberated; he also
said we were going to stay in Washington
as much as five months to have the con-
vention. We all stared at each other in
disbelief because we knew we weren't go-
ing to do that. The implication was that
we whites were to liberate Howard, a
Black school. That would have been a pol-
itical disaster.

BARBARA: We were talking about specific
actions women could take against imperi-
alism which would pull out a lot of women
and educate people—we had just split from
a group who were into a more theoretical
discussion about women and imperialism.
People described their plans for celebra-
tions around December 20, the 10th anni-
versary of the founding of the NLF, and
a women's march against imperialism on
International Women's Day.

TALK ON THE

BARBARA: I finally got over to the wo-
men's center after the rally. The at-
mosphere was a cheerful change. People
were sitting around on sleeping bags,
rapping and getting to know each other.
Some women were hanging around a lit-
erature table, and others poured them-
selves coffee and tea, and made sand-
wiches in one corner of a huge meeting
room. It would have been pleasant and
politically productive as well to have
continued the evening that way; or per-
haps to have broken into small random
groups to find out where other people
were coming from.

Instead people decided to have a
meeting to discuss "What to do about the
Convention." I knew there was going to
be trouble. Most of us bitterly remem-
bered Huey's preamble in Philadelphia
where he never mentioned womankind—
just mankind. Lots of us are turned off
to calling Huey the "Supreme Commander"
especially when the whole movement is
so disorganized—it sounds absurd. We
remembered that women had been promised
a lesbian speaker at the final meeting
in Philadelphia, and that the speaker
had never materialized. Some women felt
that the Panthers were so hopeless we
should not be part of the convention at
all, but should simply have a women's
conference. Though most of us agreed
with their criticisms of the Panthers,
still we had come to Washington to help
write the Revolutionary People's Consti-
tution and we did want to show our sup-
port for the Panthers—200 of them are
now political prisoners. Most of us were
planning to go to the church the next
day as Big Man requested and see what
could be done to pull the weekend to-
gether.

Finally, it was decided that those who
wanted to go to the church would and
those who wanted to stay at the women's
center would do that. Next morning most
of us went to St. Stephen's Church.

SALLY: When we got there in the morning,
there was nothing to do—people were just
wandering around. Black and Brown people
were signing up for community organizing
and leafletting but it was hard to fi-
gure out how whites were supposed to do
that in the middle of a Black community
in a strange town. Nothing else was sche-
duled until five that afternoon, when ac-
cording to a leaflet the constitution would be read. That seemed weird to me—
I thought we were supposed to be writing
the constitution. We went back to the wo-
men's center where people were breaking
into workshops.

KAREN: When I got to the women's center
in the afternoon, there were a number of
workshops going on, as well as a lot of
women milling around. There seemed to be
no organized way to find out who was dis-
cussing what. I finally found Barbara at
the imperialism workshop.

KAREN: For me, the projects workshop was
the best moment at the convention. I got
a sense of women all around the country
who are beginning to think about and plan
concrete actions. In addition to the things
that Barbara talked about, other people are
doing work on organizing women to go to the
Canadian conference in March to meet with
the Vietnamese women. Some women from Chi-
cago have been working on plans for day
care and medical facilities for women and
children. Some women from Vermont are work-
ing on setting up a loan company for women.

The projects workshop was just gather-
ing steam when someone came up to our group
to announce that there was going to be a
mass meeting to decide whether or not to
try and liberate Trinity College and give
it to the Panthers. On our way downstairs
we thought about how groovy it would be to
liberate Trinity—a ritzy Catholic girls
school on a beautiful campus—which we had
gotten only because the priests thought
we were all harmless middle-class white
girls.

There must have been close to 1,000 wo-
men in the hall. I had never seen so many
women in one place—it was an up, visually,
to see throngs and throngs of us. But be-
fore most of us got any information at
all about the feasibility of liberating
Trinity, the discussion broke down with
people shouting at each other and not let-
ting each other speak.

Some women from Trinity tried to point
out that the building was too small to
hold all the people at the convention and
that the Panthers had rejected it the night
before. But other women felt that the Pan-
thers might have changed their minds by now,
since they hadn't been able to get any other building. This was one point where if
the Panthers had sent someone over to talk
to us we could have avoided a lot of hassle.
But no Panthers ever came to the women's
center all weekend.

BARBARA: But obviously the hostility wasn't
just about tactics. Some women who were an-
gry at the Panthers for all the reasons
they laid out at the Friday night meeting
didn't want to turn over the women's cen-
ter to the Panthers, whether it was a pra-
ctical action or not. And some women who
felt committed to supporting the Panthers
despite their mistakes weren't willing to
listen to anything from these women, even
perfectly logical reasons why taking the
building wouldn't be cool—mainly, that it
was too small.

SALLY: One depressing thing about the ar-
gument at Trinity was that so many women
viewed it so much as turning the building
over to the Panthers—not to the People's
Convention. A Black sister pointed out
that women tend to view the Panthers as the
only group of third world revolutionaries.
And then when we have disagreements with
the Panthers the tendency is to feel at
opposite poles from the whole third world
liberation struggle.