The following is an important Tart Message:

Lots of new plans and positions on where-it's-at, where-it-was, what-to-do, how-to-do-it, etc... are coming up in what some may call the women's movement. What we're all hearing is dialogue and arguments between women in our community and in other cities based on the subject matter of books and long essays. Basically, these are *Lesbian Nation* by lesbian Vi e Voice columnist and feminist Jill Johnston; *The First Sex* by Elizabeth Gould Davis and *Mother Right: A New Feminist Theory* by Jane Alpert, a former Weather affiliate and political fugitive feminist. We have been trying to get information and other women's opinions about the issues created by these books, and mostly have been pretty confused and not often satisfied. Only recently it began to dawn that all these new issues are part of an academic haze parading as the going politics and correct direction for lesbians, feminists, and separatists. We have all been arguing and searching for arguments about lesbian nation, mother right, gynarchy, and matriarchy in the name of an idea, and are failing to examine the source and its cover.

*Ain't I A Woman?* has been concerned about finding out about all these new issues so that we could sort out what should be criticized and what should be pursued. We haven't been objectively interested, either; lots of things put us off. Talk and plans of lesbian farms, goddesses, breeding out men, emphasizing culture and art, glorifying motherhood, and other such things all leave some women out in the cold, with their needs consistently ignored. Most of these women are the same women that get fucked over by the racist, male class system, consistently. We are some of those women, and that's where we're at.

We hear about lesbians being pitted against each other over the presence of a male transsexual at their conference (or somebody's conference), and for sure some women are getting fucked over there, and incorrect lines plus repressive tactics means getting fucked over as much as a male presence does. Women called the Los Angeles conference a lot of things, including the birth of the lesbian nation, which seems presumptuous. What do conscious women expect, anyway, in the middle of a big university campus, under the close, opportunistic eye of the press and with Ronald Reagan's permission? Subversion, division, and exploitation are never accidents, and the state of California is never going to allow the birth of a revolution (which is what we need), let alone finance it and house it. Neither is Random House, Doubleday, Simon and Schuster, CBS, PBS, the Washington Post, or *Ms.* magazine.

We hear about lesbians who have enough money, property, and credit starting to buy land for rural communes and calling themselves "nations," as if the fight has already been won and there is all this "free land" for "free people." How the fuck do women who are, for the most part, naive city-dwellers, dependent on urban services and the labor of other human beings, expect to handle droughts, insects, flooded fields, and all the other trials and labors of a farmer? With hired hands? Servants? How do these women, even if they learn modern methods and get all that expensive machinery, survive in the face of agribusiness and Nixon's economy? Farmers who are not big-money guys get their crops in and their animals to market with the help of other farmers and sharing equipment. And they suffer harder losses every year until they sell, against their will. There aren't going to be any bunches of lesbians next door, and primitive agriculture will not suffice. Not since the Industrial Exploitation has this been possible, and not without the deaths of six billion human beings could it ever be done again, especially considering all the healing this planet needs. Short-sighted separatists determined not to relate to men would die quickly (unless supported by those of us "sell-outs" who have to work for a living), though true to their principles, in rural America. The grain elevators, railroads, stockyards, service co-ops, and markets are all owned and controlled by pig, capitalist men. And certainly these women would be forced to defend "their" land and lifestyles against the rural people (who become the police when they are threatened) because isolating oneself totally from oppression can only be achieved by suicide.

We hear about *The First Sex* and Jane Alpert's new theory and how women are into a return of Matriarchal Rule, goddess worship, honoring motherhood, etc. Many of us cannot relate to ancient history in very many concrete ways, maybe because it's so academic and irrelevant to our lives in the here and now. Motherhood is a frightening and complex thing to glorify. To many women, motherhood only means pain and hardship, and is something to escape, destroy, or at least de-emphasize. Motherhood as a woman's basic identification and role-to-be-respected is part of the heterosexual sexist rap we want to beat. Childcare is an issue for women, and we want to relate to it and deal with it because it is a need of women. However, in lots of cases, being allowed to do childcare, as lesbians, is another trip. Restrictions, rip-offs, and repression are being laid on us by the people who want to glorify mothers and motherhood, be they feminist or lesbian mothers, or state investigators, acting as agents of those who prefer heterosexuality, sexism, and the nuclear family.

We hear about cloning and XY chromosomes and how if women stopped having male children that men would die out in 68 years. It's been said that women have poured energy into our history and our future, but that no one is dealing with the present and the war we need to change things. It would take much longer than 68 years to get women to stop producing male children, unless dykes are talking about taking control of people's lives to institute such a fucked-up priority dream. No men suits us fine, but for a white, middle-class-dominated movement to talk so glibly about exterminating all men is genocidal, because most men and most women are not white and are disenfranchised and oppressed by the ruling classes and governments that were the first to think of killing off undesirables, anyway, including lesbians. We know that women of color who are feminists, lesbians, and separatists are man-haters. We know that poor and working-class white feminists, lesbians, and separatists are man-haters because we are some of those women. It is not outrageous to hear Third World women condemn the power and pigshit of men of their races. Those women are under those men in this society; white middle-class women are not. The rage of those of us who are working-class against men is real; it is our right. It's painful and infuriating to think of those well-fed women taking pride in beating or murdering, at random, men whose bodies are possibly sick, tired, and weak from being overworked and undernourished. This is not to say that women should not begin making immediate, violent retaliations against male institutions and male attackers, in whatever way we see fit. And it is not to say that we should not kill men if that is what it takes to blast away this shit pile once and for all.

I'm thinking that many women are going to attack or dismiss what is said here as male left ad nauseum, etc., that being such an effective threat against feminists; but I'll wager that most women with their shit together, especially about class or race, will understand exactly what is being talked about. If all this pre-revolutionary energy for genocide were refocused on trying to start the fights that will lead to being able to eat, live, and have the right of self-determination (important idea, there), life'd be bearable. But maybe this energy isn't really energy, but more haze and distraction. It's increasingly obvious that even in the women's movement, even in radical lesbian groups, that poor and Third World women are invisible; we do not exist to the Amazons, artists, Matriarchists, and media-pushers. Women do not have to read *Lesbian Nation* or *The First Sex* to "know where it's at in the women's movement," and should not have to hear any woman tell us we do. Academic and literary world women should not push culture, art, and their intelligentsia standards down any more throats. These things are not a part of most women's lives and selves. Lesbians should not palm off the heterosexual "mother right" on other lesbians, mothers, and non-mothers alike.

Coming up with a realistic analysis of things starts with recognizing who we are and what our needs are. All of us, and all of our real needs. Being "uncultured," "uneducated," and isolated from hip trips is not the pitiful life. Being hungry and dependent and sick in our bodies from being denied even minimal unoppressive medical care is the lot of most women and most lesbians and most female children, and these needs should be paramount to revolution-minded dykes. Let's stop eating up media traps and tempting professional interests. Let's find real meat to sink our teeth into, literally.

Dear women and sisters,

I just wanted to write you to tell you how important *Ain't I A Woman* has been to me. When I first started subscribing, I was in a small women's college in rural New York, had never met or read a lesbian woman, and was having an incredibly difficult time accepting my own gayness though I'd been gay my whole life. Not only did *Ain't I A Woman* put me in touch with anger and sense of oppression, but more than anything else I read clear headedness, working things out, a sense of commitment, community, joy, even love. That was important, for besides finally admitting and getting in touch with pain and anger, it gave me something to move towards - yes, some lesbians are really, really getting it together - and that gave me courage. I was so, so afraid of moving, but I began to dream of moving out and helping you write the paper, and in the meantime I came out as the only open lesbian on campus. I faced great hostility, rejection, denial, sex objectification, and built some tenuous, mistrustful relationships with some closeted women who came to me.

I lay awake nights, amazed by what you said, scared I could never be the kind of revolutionary I knew I had to be. You gave me a handle on the revolution, a way I could grab it, grapple with it, use it.

A woman?

I never admitted how much hatred there was there (at school), never admitted my courage, but saw the struggle as beginning when I left. What finally helped me leave was your articles on class. I saw how college perpetuated in me class values which didn't belong to me - I left.

I'm in an eastern city now. It's so nice being with gay women that the worst struggle seems past, even though the stakes and the anger are higher. There are so many gay women here, and such security, and we even have a women's center, but no radical gay collective working on politics and action. At first, I felt intimidated - that the reason I was more restless was that they'd already been through solidarity, organizing, talking, action, and I hadn't, that the reason I felt the gay community/solidarity still had to be built was because I wasn't a part of it. But reading your paper yesterday, I realized that though that's partly true, there still is a need for the solidarity, real communication, and clarity of vision I see in your paper.

I'm beginning to talk to women about that, seeing they feel the same way, beginning to have the courage and initiative to gather a collective to go deeper than the comfortable place we've fought to put ourselves in.

I don't mean to idealize you, but I do have profound respect for you. I respect that you write about your community of women and yourselves, and detail that struggle, because I believe that is the level where politics, action, and revolution are made. I respect you for putting revolution in such a concrete form that I can really grapple with it. I respect you for not compromising what you say. I disagree with people who don't think your paper speaks to those new to feminism. I came to your paper as politically naive as any, and as scared, confused, and self-hating as any, and I saw the clarity of it, and it may have kept me awake nights, but thank god for that. With me at least, your paper succeeds in that it helps me clarify directions and goals and stirs me to action. It shakes me up.

I've wanted to write to you a long time, but felt inadequate, inarticulate. Doing tae kwon do has helped me put my anger into good solid fighting and somehow that has helped the words flow. I think I would like to have a relationship with you, writing to and for you as my writing gets better if you want. You can do with this letter what's useful to you, publish it if you want.

I'd like your complete volumes #1 & 2. I've had some of those copies I think, but I keep giving them away to women sitting next to me on buses and so on...

Best of my hopes for you. With deep felt thanks and love,

Kathy P.