a

ite Sa

CONSTITUTIONAL

KAREN: The meeting really brought out the
political splits in our movement, but what

was even more discouraging in a way was the

total chaos and confusion and lack of dis-
cipline and organization. People screaming

at each other, ignoring the poor chairwoman

it turned so many women off. The only way
you could preserve any sanity was to com—
pletely retreat from the discussion. A

whole lot of people left. I don't think

CONVE

our movement can survive too many more
meetings like that. We've got to get our-
selves together and provide structures
for organization and leadership, and
that's not a male trip--anarchy is just
as oppressive as authoritarianism.

SALLY: I know for a lot of people like

me it was the first time we'd been in a
national gathering of women. A lot of
other women from the Midwest were there
also. It was very discouraging for us
that the meeting was so bad. The only
good thing I can remember from that meet~-
ing was when one girl got up to speak

and right in the middle of a political
rap she saw a friend across the room and
she got really excited and stopped right
in the middle of her speech and said
"Hello". Everyone in the room just roared
laughing because something had finally
broken the tension. I know that a number
of women from the Midwest were so totally
discouraged they wanted to leave and not
come back. They just wanted to go back

to their own cities where they had organ-
izations built up that they knew and
could work with, because they felt it is

“just impossible to work in this kind of

We couldn't even get a resolution
passed in support of the Panthers and
other revolutionary people gathered in
Washington, even though most of the wo-
men really did want to express their sup-
port. If we'd been more organized we
could have gotten the resolution written
up in a way that most women would have
agreed with, and that would have been
a positive thing we could have done as
women.

BARBARA: We failed to do that small thing
because we were so busy arguing and get-
ting mad at the Panthers and each other.
And of course we totally failed to do the
necessary work of forging a movement that
would be able to present our criticisms
to the Panthers and negotiate with them
from a position of strength so we could
all get down to the business of fighting
the real enemy.

TION

SALLY: We all felt pretty down when we
left the women's center to go over to the
church to hear Huey's speech. He was still

talking about "mankind"--"A man is less of

a man if he can't pick up a gun to defend
himself, or he's not a man at all"; “It's
not a matter of Marxism, it's a matter of
manhood." For him to be so insensitive is

really bad, even when he does criticize

himself and say well it's a bourgeois

fuck-up of his.

BARBARA: It wasn't just Huey talking about

mankind, it was the real male supremacy of

that event at the church. All the guards

were men. All the speakers were men--

Huey, Michael Tabor, and Robert Scheer.
Robert Scheer went on a trip to North Kor-
ea on which there were a majority of wo-

SALLY: Another thing--we'd gotten the leaf-
let in the morning saying the constitution
was going to be read. Now here was Huey
talking about how we couldn't hold a con-
stitutional convention in America because
we hadn't liberated the territory yet. How
come the people didn't get to decide that?
Why did they call the convention in the
first place then?

KAREN: I thought that it was kind of weird
for Huey to lay down this hour-long abstract
rap to people who were waiting to be told
what the fuck was going on. I don't feel
like I want to comment right now on his
theory of vast numbers of unemployed Lum-
pen making the revolution, or about inter-
communalism. I think a lot of people have
serious questions about these things.
Particularly the “nations don't exist any
more" theory-- I wouldn't like to lay that
on the Vietnamese or the Palestinians who
are waging wars of national liberation.
But whether we agree with them or not,
these ideas don't seem to relate to the
immediate problems of the movement in
America. And he only briefly mentioned

the Panther political prisoners, the

fact that Bobby and Ericka might die.

SALLY: After Huey's speech I went back to
the women's center, but not many women
were there. Some women just came back

and went to sleep, some of us just talked.
The discussion I was in centered around
our discontent with Huey's speech and

our experiences at this convention. None
of us felt like we had gotten any unity
or strength from the weekend.

Sunday morning was better; a few re-
gional meetings which had been planned
the day before were still held, and ideas
and plans for the NLF anniversary on Dec.
20 were exchanged. Women from New En-
gland made plans for a January regional
meeting to exchange ideas and plans for

SHEN men. So why was it Scheer who was picked future projects. The meetings Sunday 7
to report on the trip? A lot of us would seemed to be the most positive and con-
have been really interested in hearing crete things that happened the whole
from the women. Also, it would have been weekend, yet they had almost no connec-
good to hear Panther women speak. tion to the Revolutionary People's

Constitutional Convention.
‘ LNS
By Karen, Barbara, and Sally
Of Ann

She crossed her arms
in sleep or wakefulness,
which, it doesn't matter.

She must have been aware
of the decision her fingers had made 5

by the grace with which she placed them

over the strong part of her arm,

If I lie beside her,

will her hands forget their conclusion

and reach out to me instead?
Will I, sometimes, be able
to cross them back again.
And will she.

A Woman ?¢

is an easy thing.
I do it naturally.

high comedy

the mirrors

24 January 1914

But leaning across to you

——

%
Closing my arms across my chest ‘

I wish I could reach out
and simply hug you;

Let go of all the crystal palaces
the bright edges and clear corners
of the words we live in.

I wish I could reach across

brush away the tinsel

So we could see each other as we are.

Ann Wagner

face 41