A mother is anyone who accepts responsibility for children and  
helps care for them. You don't have to have given birth to a child  
or legally own one, or live with a child to be a mother. Mothers  
don't need just babysitters (although that's a good start), they  
need people who will relate to their children on every level—who  
will become mothers themselves. Many women are afraid to really  
share their kids because they believe, with good reason, that their  
children will be hurt by people relating to them in inconsistent  
ways. Also, for many women, their children's love is the only re-  
lationship they are sure of and they fear losing that to any degree.  
Non-mothers should be sensitive to that and not relate to children  
out of martyr feelings. I live with 2 children and 3 other women  
and we all think of ourselves as having equal responsibility. We're  
all committed to the children until they are grown—we're all moth-  
ers. It was scary to me at first because I hadn't been around kids  
all that much, especially that age group (9-12) and I thought I'd  
be incompetent. But we've been doing this for a year now and it's  
the most important part of my life. I think it's really possible  
to share all the different levels of responsibility and joy that  
living with children entails. I think it's easy for women who  
haven't been around children and feel scared and incompetent to  
get over those feelings and I think children can trust and love a-  
dults who they know are genuinely committed to them. Perhaps if  
we were all mothers, that oppressive word "mother" wouldn't be nec-  
essary.  

Gay women who have children have much bitterness towards that  
majority of gay women who don't. One friend of mine, who has a  
9-year-old son, recently told a group of lesbians that she had al-  
ways taken sole responsibility for her child because she was con-  
vinced that if she expected any of her lovers to help her they would  
leave her, and that she was convinced that mothers would be the  
last group to be liberated. She, like many other mothers, is just  
beginning to connect with the strong anger she feels. Lesbians  
who are mothers know that most non-mothers will not relate to their  
children, will be afraid to get really involved with a woman who  
is a mother, and will refuse to admit that they are oppressive to  
mothers. I know that I'm finding it increasingly difficult to re-  
late to women who refuse to share responsibilities for children—  
I trust those who are aware of and share my survival needs.  

Kids are not just a hassle. They are not oppressive—the in-  
stitution of parent/child is oppressive. Kids mean a lot of work,  
physical and emotional, an economic burden—but they also mean  
so many good things and I feel sorry for women who, because of  
fear, don't relate to children. I was in a gay women's small  
group once and one of the women in the group had 2 small children  
whom she often brought to the group. Several of the women in the  
group didn't want the kids there, complained that it was noisy and  
distracting and why didn't she do something with them. She got  
furious and started crying—"Why do you see children as just an-  
noyances? It's like they are less than animals. These 2 people  
are my friends, they share their joy with me and teach me so much,  
I pity you for being so blind."  

I see children as such an important part of our community.  
I know it sounds corny but they are part of our future. Kids  
give a real stability to your life, they are more whole than adults  
in many ways, and when they love you it's a real emotion—they  
rarely fake that. We all talk about how we don't want to be iso-  
lated. Well, isn't it isolating to just relate to your own age-  
group? Our community should—must—consist of all ages, all of us  
teaching each other.  

The majority of women with children did choose consciously  
to have children, but to brush off their oppression with a shallow  
"Well, it was your choice. Live with it. Act grown-up." over-sim-  
plifies the situation. The fact is that even though we may "choose"  
to have children, we do not really have a choice. Not to choose to  
have children either never occurs to most women or makes us feel  
guilty because of society's socialization process. ("ALL good wo-  
men get married and have children. A woman's ultimate fulfillment  
comes from having children.")  

Another over-simplification laid on mothers who have children  
and don't get out as much as they'd like suggests babysitters or  
daycare. And these are solutions, but there are a few complica-  
tions. For example, a woman who works all week long is likely to  
feel guilty taking her child to a daycare center. This guilt is  
taught to women and shouldn't exist; nevertheless, it does—so that  
solution isn't as simple as it seems on the surface. Babysitters  
might be easier to deal with, assuming they are friends or exten-  
sions of the family, but very often they cost money. Obviously,  
not everyone has money.  

I've always hassled with parents, (including my own,) a-  
bout their adult and parent chauvinism—and am constantly told  
that no one can or has the right to replace a child's own par-  
ent, that children love their own parents best, (and vice ver-  
sa,) and, in effect, that I don't know what I'm talking about  
because I've never given birth to a child myself, let alone  
ever been married...  

I grew up as the oldest of a large working-class family  
and have had child-rearing responsibilities since fourth grade,  
half of my life. I've done as much shit work growing up as the  
women from the daycare centers here have had to do for their  
own children—and I've certainly done more than the men. What  
I've done has included house responsibilities like cleaning,  
running appliances, organizing work, repairing things, and deal-  
ing with people coming around for things, and childcare, in-  
cluding shit work, discipline, loving them, and hassling with  
problems for children close to my age all the way down to in-  
fants. Most importantly, to me, I did these things, not as a  
parent, but as another child, subject to the same hassles from  
parents. My parents are far from permissive, and they stopped  
treating me like a mindless fool when I moved out of their  
house a year ago. When I go home things are still the same, so  
I'm not very far away from being an oppressed child.  

It's likely that the mothers from the co-ops where I work  
don't trust the capabilities of workers like myself because  
they're unaware of our experiences. Most of them have led mid-  
dle-class lives and except for token babysitting, didn't re-  
late to children much until they were married, except as a sib-  
ling. However, I do realize the position women are stuck in by  
a society that dictates parental ownership and superiority. My  
interest is in relieving a burden, as well as challenging au-  
thority. Recently a woman from one of the centers wanted to go  
on a two-week trip and I offered to take her children. I'd of-  
fered this before to her and other women, and their reactions  
were always surprise at someone willing to share or take over  
the responsibilities of caring for their children. Being a non-  
parent amazed them doubly.  

When women without children that I work with heard about  
me taking care of these kids for a measly two weeks they all  
immediately offered all kinds of services and help. My gut re-  
action was to reject their aid and criticize them for not doing  
the same for women who are constantly saddled with children.  

I was also miffed and defensive about the inference that I  
couldn't handle two toddlers for such a short period of time.  
This reaction was my own doing, I realize, because I've been  
getting shit from daycare parents about threatening their au-  
thority. I don't think their criticisms are completely valid,  
but it's still a pain in the neck to hear it, and it's made  
me defensive. Anyway, these women didn't intend any insult,  
and apparently they're trying to get into dealing with their  
failure to relate to kids in the past. I may sound skeptical  
or critical, but I'm just waiting to see what happens. Good  
grief, is this what the women with kids around me feel?