K. and I sort of agreed on not having  
commitment to each other, not being ex-  
clusive or monogamous, not being posses-  
sive. That involved some struggle for me.  
I began it feeling I had a right to make  
demands on her because we had a sexual  
relationship but she didn't agree and  
didn't want to make those demands on me.  
I don't think either of us derived much  
sense of identity through each other.  

What the hassle was, was that other  
women who knew me, and her (a little),  
assumed that our relationship because it  
was sexual, was or should have been deep,  

intense, more involving on levels that it  
wasn't. We were not a "couple" like they  
were "couples." During this same time I  
was involved with another woman whom I  
loved and was struggling with on levels  
that were important to us. But that re-  
lationship was not legitimized by the  
community like mine and K.'s was, though,  
because we didn't go to parties together or  
have sexual relations.  

Both of these women are (I think) (they  
think) bisexual. I don't know what that  
means, in this context.  

I feel like there is a mystique around  

lesbian sexual relations that must be  
questioned. Having sex is not heavy for  
me. Celibacy is heavy - the idea of celi-  
bacy, and the reality of not having sex  
with someone but wanting to but it's too  
heavy for her.  

The whole tie-up of the sex mystique,  
monogamy, the assumption of personal com-  
mitment, seems too straight to belong in  
our community.  

Afterthought: The general uptightness and  
unavailability of easy sexual scenes makes  
people protective of the one dependable  

sexual relationship they may have.  

Sex is heavy for me and celibacy is  
at least less heavy and that is probably  
the reason I wanted to have a dialogue with  
you on this subject. It isn't that I dis-  
agree with the community you envision --  
it's more like I could not easily fit in--  
it would be a hard struggle for me.  

It is not coincidental that all of us  
envision/fantasize about personal or com-  
munity relationships that would best suit  
us. The community you write about is one  
you could adapt to well -- it seems to  
be really based on how you, in fact, do  
relate to people. And because it is dif-  
ficult for me to handle sexual relations  
I want to tell you where I'm coming from  
because you seem to have some assumptions  
(maybe not incorrect as much as over sim-  
plified) about women who don't "support  
the new idea" by their actions.  

From the time I can remember I was  
afraid and embarrassed about sex. Perhaps  
if I had really experienced a lot of sex-  
ual desire I would have gotten over this  
fear but I never did -- not until I was  
convinced by friends, shrinks and the  
world in general that I was sick. Then I  
suddenly became hornier than all hell.  
But not really -- it was very forced. I  
still don't feel the desire very often  
and even less do I feel a sexual attrac-  
tion to anyone. When I do it reaches  
horrendous proportions of importance. And  
that makes any level of rejection heavy  
and really hard to handle. In a way it's  

like you often want relationships for sex  
whereas I almost always want sex because  
of relationships. I don't know as either  
way is right. I'm sure I don't think  
either way is wrong but they are differ-  
ent. And because of that difference both  
of us come to dealing with this problem  
(monogamy and personal relationships in  
our community) from different places with  
different abilities as far as change goes  
and perhaps different needs we want met. I  
somehow don't see you or your idea vs  
couples. I think a lot of us are in many  
different places on this subject and I do  
see people question the great monogamous  
assumption at least in terms of trying  
not to interpret all relationships in  
terms of their process in or out of mono-  
gamy. But we have a lot to struggle out  
to create ways of relating that are freer  
and that will take some amount of patience  
and kindness with each other's fears and  
uptightness. We'll also need to learn to  
take rejection on some levels. Somehow I  
don't think the answer to the heaviness  
of being rejected is that no one should  
be able to reject relating to someone.  

I don't know as I think this is such a  
hot answer to what you wrote. I guess I  
feel very defensive because I felt you were  
callous about anyone not being as sexually  
free as you -- and assuming that if some-  
one isn't they think monogamy and exclu-  
sive relationships and the mystification  
of sex are the only roads to heaven.  

It worries me that I didn't see that  
callousness to you. It's a real struggle  
for me to understand feelings that are a  
lot different than mine. But my feelings  

of isolation and insensitivity to how some-  

one feels in a situation, to their mood,  

want a relationship for sex. That's  
especially threatening to say in the con-  
text of the relationship, usually. And  

I question my sexual feelings too, be-  
cause I'm not so sure that it's what I  
want, that I identify emotional needs as  
also it  

make love and how our satisfaction/frus-  
tration affects us emotionally and phy-  
sically. And it's not easy to feel out  
a situation when you feel like there's  
something at stake, with all the romantic  
bullshit of "this is supposed to be spon-  

things like that, - it's a whole other  
article. And I want to respond to you,  
and it's not easy because there's a cru-  
cialness about sexual relations that comes  
into play in just talking about it. The  
pressures on us most of our lives - do it,  
don't do it, do it only under these condi-  
tions, do it all the time - are so perva-  
sive that I feel even my fantasies are  
unoriginal, really romanticized. Your  
honesty breaks through. I was afraid to  
admit even to myself that I really did  

level.  

sexual cause it seems simple,  
seems easier to take rejection on that  

All this points out to me that we really  
have needed to raise our consciousness  
together about sex and it seems we are  
only now ready to deal with it.  
sort of confident, just because of recent  
experiences of very upfront discussions  
with women I was sexually relating to.  

It seems a really necessary breakthrough  
for me, being able to talk about how we  

spontaneous." Physical communication is pos-  
sible but so often we exaggerate or force  
it.  

Feeling sexually free, or freely sexual,  
is possible when it's a shared feeling.  
It's hard to trust your perceptions when  
you only want to pick up on the positive  
ones. But we've got to be upfront with  
ourselves or we'll be moving backwards  
into mystification, and away from each  
other.  

I feel  

I'm really interested in what both of you have said in your dia-  
log. Right now I'm confused about the concept of monogamy. I  
guess I'm more comfortable talking about 'primary relationships'  
because I believe things change between people and almost never  
is a relationship going to last a lifetime. What I mean by 'pri-  
mary relationship' is when most of my emotional priorities cen-  
ter around one person. Naturally a one to one relationship may  
be monogamous for a time, but so often that doesn't work out be-  
cause it's so possible to have strong feelings about more than one  
person and nice feelings for a whole lot of people. And in theory  
anyway a firm primary relationship should be able to encompass  
other relationships for each of the people in it.  

But it's an idealistic theory and really difficult to have operate  
smoothly and happily. When I am putting a lot of energy into a  
relationship with one person and that person begins to relate  
heavily with someone else as well as me, it's real hard to keep  
from feeling emotionally rejected and to keep on believing that  
our relationship is really all that primary to the other person.  
Her energies are being divided and since mine aren't it seems  
like an unequal relationship.  

The fallacy in that is caused, I think, because I equate/interpret  
time spent with emotional dedication. It doesn't logically follow  

A Woman ?  

August QT, 197|  

that just because the woman I love spends time with and relates  
sexually to another woman that she isn't just as committed to our  
relationship as I am. (Easy to say but hard to feel.) The other  
fallacy is that I can imagine myself relating to another woman  
and still keeping my primary feelings intact. Or can I? Again,  
it's a good theory but hard to practice. The only way I can see  
it working for me is for the secondary (or tertiary...etc.) rela-  
tionships to happen when there is a large block of time spent away  
from No. 1. Also unrealistic.  

The obvious self-criticism already to what I have written is that  
I operate monogamously on an emotional level despite my theory  
or even practice. I do cling to a "happily ever after" ideal, even  
with enormous change staring me in the face. I suppose that's  
normal for a lot of people, but it really does have to be struggled  
with.  

One reason I know I'm conservative about relating to more than  
one person sexually is that for me there is just not that much to  
be gained from a brief sexual relationship. I think it usually takes  
a really long time and a lot of care and effort for me to understand  
another woman sexually - her likes, her needs - and for her to  
understand mine. It's just real risky to expose those things about  
myself without first building up a trust level that depends so much  
on time spent gradually learning each other's responses.  

Page 3