After three issues of Ain't I A Woman? the publications collective decided it was time for self-criticism. The politics reflected in the paper have been less than we hoped they would be but, because we have been so busy learning the technical end of publishing a newspaper we had not taken the time to discuss the political meaning behind articles we've written and published. We then discovered we really didn't know where each other's heads were at so we went off together to talk about class, the media, The Red Women's Detachment's position on the Gay Liberation Front, the relationship of Women's Liberation to the Third World, and what it means to live in the heart of the monster.

Mostly we talked about economic classes. So far Ain't I A Woman? has reflected middle-class individualism. We have indulged ourselves in writing about personal solutions and white skin privileges. We have written from the perspective of only one group of women instead of concerning ourselves with the needs of all women. In dealing with day care we were too occupied with the beauty of the experience of the children instead of the political necessity of freeing all women from sole responsibility in rearing society's children. Our article about women's collectives concentrated more on how we were getting along with each other than on the fact that we were all driven to try a new lifestyle by the horrible state of lives in Amerika or the fact that most women aren't privileged.

Letters Letters Letters

Dear Sisters,

I disagree in part with the story "Don't Go" in your July 24th issue of Ain't I A Woman?. I have been involved in psychotherapy in the last three years and feel that whether a psychiatrist tries to make one conform to society or not depends upon the individual psychiatrist. I don't think all shrinks try to do this as much as the writer of "Don't Go" believes.

In 1968 I was taken out of the university by Dr. R.A. Wilcox of Student Health after a ten-minute interview in which he only asked about my political activities on this campus (S.D.S., among other political organizations). Because I was removed from school in this manner, and because reports of other students who had also been removed from school by Wilcox, an investigation on Student Health took place, but was later dropped by the university.

I don't think all shrinks try to force people to conform to society or destroy their lives if they fail to conform.

After the experience with Wilcox, I had a mild emotional breakdown. Before the Wilcox thing I was having some emotional problems, particularly a lot of extreme depression, lack of self-confidence, and little control of my emotions. So during and after my breakdown I sought help at Psychopathic Hospital, and was put in a group therapy for out-patients, which I have attended for the last two years.

At first I was extremely distrustful of the shrinks in group therapy, but knew my emotional problems were serious, so I very slowly decided to try to trust them and work with them. I still take drugs, and my shrinks are aware of it.

About a year ago we had a lesbian in our group who later moved east and left our group. Rather than try to force her to become heterosexual, the group tried to make her accept herself as a homosexual and satisfy her emotional needs, and not try to mess herself up by having relationships with men, as she had done in the past. Because of the group I learned to better understand and to accept homosexuals.

I feel now that because I have more emotional control, and trust my decisions, I can do more for the movement now than before I started therapy. I feel if one has extreme depression and anxiety, and problems that are slipping out of control, one should seek psychiatric help, but one should be extremely careful in choosing one's psychiatrist; every time I hear or read about people who have been badly hurt and messed up by shrinks I feel very sorry for them. I was shocked to discover they felt Wilcox had done me an enormous injustice, and that what I did politically, as well as whether I took drugs or not, was my business; my shrinks never spoke against these things, nor tried to make me change what I was doing. The only changes I had to make were emotional ones: how to express anger more appropriately (in the past I turned on myself when I was angry rather than properly let it out), to learn to accept myself (I used to hate myself and "punish" myself for things I thought were "bad" in me), to get rid of a lot of my inhibitions, to control my emotions, to rid myself of depression and unnecessary anxiety, and to help me reach emotional stability. And I've managed to do those things and will be released from therapy soon. I am more stable and have a better opinion of myself, and more self-control, but I have not changed politically or morally. 

The shrinks in my group therapy have told me a number of times that their purpose is not to change me morally or socially, but to help me. Perhaps my shrinks are exceptions to the rule that all shrinks try to force one to conform to society, but they have never tried to make me fit into society. I am still a radical and it is very easy to be messed over badly in our sex lives. The same does not seem to be true of homosexuals, or at least I personally don't understand the relationship between institutional exploitation/oppression and lesbianism.

In your July 10 issue, one writer said that "if women can live without men then they cannot be dominated by them" (p.11). I think this is a misunderstanding of the nature of our oppression: If men still control the political power and have the power to economically exploit women, and if women are denied certain educational options and are given primary responsibility for child care, then it doesn't matter whom we are sleeping with, we are still being dominated by men and men are still profiting from our oppression (and this includes homosexual men).

I see a real danger in the fact that Gay Liberation may lead us to divert our attention from the necessary politico-economic revolution toward a socio-sexual one. We aren't going to bring the system down merely by choosing women instead of men for sex partners; in fact, the whole matter of sex preferences seems pretty irrelevant. There may be some personal advantages in abstaining from sexual relationships with men and there are probably some sound political reasons for not participating in a conventional marital arrangement, but women's collectives and other alternative lifestyles may or may not include lesbian arrangements without altering in either case their political meaning. Even if we were all to become lesbians, we would still suffer economic, political, educational, and social discrimination under the present system because we are women. (In this regard—as in so many others—our position is analogous to that of Blacks and, in this case, Black homosexuals.)

Well, didn't mean to go on such a long rap, but it's obvious that your paper has me thinking. Keep those copies coming and great good luck on the venture.

Barbara J. Bank

We have often devoted attention to experiences common to women in an unpolitical way at first until we could grasp their place in our political situation. We don't think the failure to make a subject political always means it isn't political.