The reason I and other women were able to go to the College for Human Services and not to a regular four-year college was that we were able to combine school and work there and get a stipend for both. A lot of funds seem to have recently been made available for these kinds of programs. I wonder why there aren't programs with the same stipends for low-income women that would train us for jobs that aren't so low paid and dead-end.

When I finished at the College for Human Services I got a job working nights and weekends as a barmaid and entered Hunter College. I was able to make more as a barmaid than as an educational assistant.

When I started Hunter I was very excited and anxious to learn. I thought the courses would be very exciting and I would learn, but as time went by, I hated it more and more because the professors are very boring and I'm not learning anything. Every semester I have to buy seven to ten books which I don't even look at unless I really have to. I really can't wait to get out of college.

I want to teach in the near future but I feel that nothing that is being taught at Hunter will help me do this. I want to teach in the ghetto and the courses at college are not relevant to what I want or need to learn.

I think this is one of the reasons why so many teachers are failing to teach our children. Not too long ago I was sitting in a science class when the professor said, "When you start to teach science in the schools you will not have any problems because your students will have all the equipment they need at home." I couldn't believe what he had said because he said that he had been teaching in an elementary school for 20 years. I wanted to tell him that the first time I saw a microscope I was 14 years old, but I knew it wouldn't have made a difference to him.

At first I didn't take being an educational assistant seriously. I saw it was a way to get money—I thought it was a more decent way than being a barmaid or a go-go dancer. Then I became part of it.

I stopped thinking about just the pay and I started thinking about the future. I got very interested in the kids in the school; I used to cry about them. I saw me in every single kid, and I'd rather be dead than be a child again. I began to become aware of things around me and wonder what I could do about them. I knew that black and Puerto Rican children in ghetto schools don't want to hear about two plus two—they want to get out of the bad conditions they live in. When I finish school I might go to Puerto Rico. I will probably have to live on fresh air because the pay there is very low. I feel Puerto Rico is being taken over by the same upper-class whites like Nixon and Rockefeller who have messed up the United States and the rest of the world.

They are the ones who decide what happens. I want to go to Puerto Rico and teach—but I want to teach what I feel should be taught.

I think our people have got to get together in organizations like the Young Lords. When the Young Lords first started to organize to help in the Puerto Rican communities they were doing a lot of good things for the people. A lot of junkies and prostitutes say, "I have to kick my habit so I can be with the Young Lords."

I think it is the best organization Puerto Ricans ever had. I know they helped me to realize a lot of things.

One of the things the Young Lords tried to do was to bring Community Control to Lincoln Hospital. Lincoln Hospital is in the Southeast Bronx and serves mostly Puerto Rican people. One day I was at the hospital waiting to be called on so I could have some stitches taken off my elbow. I was sitting there for about two-and-a-half hours and nobody called me. That was the day the Lords came to the hospital. When I saw them come into the Emergency Room I jumped up off my seat and I went up to the desk and asked the woman why I was not being called on. Some of the Lords were standing next to me. She apologized and took my file to the doctor and in a few minutes I was called on. I knew the reason was because the Lords would have done something about it. I think it is a strong and united organization and there should be more like it.

I have trained my son to feel a little of what I feel—for himself, for people, for life. If I can't get a good babysitter for him, I may have to drop out of school. I'm trying to keep my son from going through what I went through. I go to bed and cry sometimes because I yell at him for no reason. I have to answer his questions. He knows his father is an addict but he still loves him. One day he went to see his father and when he returned he said, “Daddy said he's sick and he needs a needle. I know it's not because he's sick, it's because he's a junkie." I tell him it's not his father's fault; New York City did that to him.

My son is six now, and if I keep living here I might not be able to change him. A lot of people try to bring up their kids differently, but you can't keep them locked in the house. So, no matter how hard you try in your own house, if the conditions and the drugs and the schools don't change, the people can't change either. I want to stay with my people and change things with them, but I worry that my son will get messed up.

I want to make more people aware of our struggle. What changed me was being aware of what was going on in the neighborhood. I don't want just a beautiful home or car or things for my own comfort. I want to help change things for my son and kids like him so they turn to each other and not to drugs. Right now I'm still changing. At the end I might not know who I was. But the only way that things can really change for anyone is if they change for everyone.

Norma Ortiz

"Somehow We Survive" is reprinted from Up From Under, Volume 1, Number 4. A copy costs 60¢ and can be ordered from 339 Lafayette Street, New York, N.Y. 10012. The subscription rate is $3.00 for five issues.

Woman ? 30 March 1972 Rage II

Gilda Kuhiman