VD in the US:

how it concerns women

Venereal disease in the US has been labelled by the medical
profession and the news media as an epidemic. And certainly the
numbers of reported cases of gonorrhea have risen sharply in the
last few years. In this country VD is called a “social disease,"
and as such is thought of as the fault of those in society who
suffer from the disease and spread it. Similarly, the detection
and treatment of VD is left in the hands of a proportionally
small medical elite and a relatively powerless government depart-

ment of health.

In reality VD can be stopped only by a massive political effort:
that is, strong direction, funding, and education of paramedics
provided by a government concerned about great numbers of its
people; and an educated people enthusiastic about the dedicated
work needed to bring VD to an end. (See the excerpt from Away With

All Pests.)

What is gonorrhea?

Gonorrhea is a disease caused by an or-
ganism called gonococcus. It can enter the
body through the skin; it does not need an
open sore or cut to penetrate into the
system. Unlike syphilis, which involves
the entire body, gonorrhea often remains
localized on or near the reproductive
system or rectum. If it goes unchecked it
can cause irregular periods, cystitis in
the bladder (inflammation and infection of
the bladder and urinary tract), proctitis
of the rectum (an inflammation), and ster-
ility as a result of built-up scar tissue
in the Fallopian tubes.

What are the symptoms in women?

More than one-half of all women with
gonorrhea have no symptoms at all in the
beginning. Generally the symptoms are like
other vaginal infections. There is usually
a slight discharge, yellow or yellow-green,
and minor irritation when urinating. The
glands in the genital area may swell and
cause pain. Symptoms of later stages in-
clude severe lower abdominal pain, vomit-
ing and fever.

If you regularly examine your cervix
with a speculum, light, and mirror (see
Vol. 2, No. 4, of AIAW), you probably will
not notice much change. The cervix usually
appears normal, but there may be a slight
film across the cervix or a pus-like ex-
cretion.

In any case, DO NOT DEPEND ON SYMPTOMS.
If you believe you've come in contact with
gonorrhea, GET TREATMENT. If you have sex
with someone who has VD, you will get VD.

How is gonorrhea transmitted by gay women?

If a woman has had numerous sexual
partners, none of whom have had bisexual
partners, then the chances of VD are al-
most non-existent. If a bisexual enters
the cycle then the possibility exists but
the probability depends upon the number
of women participating in the cycle.

The organism for gonorrhea is transmit-
ted by sexual contact. Fomite transmission
(that is, contact with towels, toilets,
etc. previously used by someone with VD)
is exceedingly rare. The organism lives in
the mucous membranes of the urethra, cervix
and vagina, rectum, mouth and throat.
Therefore, gonorrhea can be transmitted
by these contacts: genital-genital, oral-
genital, genital-rectal, or oral-oral (via
the penetrating tongue). The transmission
by hand would have to be almost immediate.
This is hand to the infected part, where
it picks up the infected mucous, and then
hand to susceptible genitalia or mouth.

page ten

volume two

society.

Although we could easily expect enthusiasm from the people to
help get rid of VD, there is no indication that the needed pro-
grams have any priority in the US government. Capitalism would
show no profits from such an undertaking, and human benefit never
weighs much when balanced against the dollar in a capitalist

So we must do what we can ourselves, understand how to recog-
nize and prevent the spread of VD among ourselves, and learn how
to go about getting proper treatment.

The information in this article concerns gonorrhea in women,
and contains specific information for gay women. We have concen-
trated on gonorrhea and the following discussion of VD refers only
to gonorrhea, not syphilis. Syphilis is not as widespread as gon-
orrhea because of a relatively simple blood test, called the VDRL,
which is done routinely and catches many cases. Gonorrhea is much
more difficult to detect in women.

What should I do if I think I've been ex-
posed to gonorrhea?

Go to a clinic or doctor. Tell them you
believe you have been exposed to gonorrhea.
They should do a “Thayer-Martin" test,
which involves taking a culture from the
cervix and/or the throat. If both partners
in lovemaking have performed both roles in
the oral-genital act, then the cervical
swab probably will be sufficient. However,
if you performed only the oral role, then
a throat culture must be taken. Generally
it is best to have BOTH cultures taken.
When a throat culture is taken this must
be noted on the record the doctor makes
to avoid misdiagnosis because of other
bacteria (meningococcus) which are usually
found in a normal throat.

If you have questions for your doctor
about VD in gay women you probably won't
get absolutely reliable answers. Most
doctors are going to be embarrassed by
your questions and aren't going to have
the answers. They don't know what gay wo-
men do when they make love, so they don't
know much about how gay women can communicate VD. Because of this they'll be con-
fused and try to cover for themselves.

If you want a test for VD, demand the
test. You know more about yourself in this
regard than most doctors.

What about treatment?

If you are convinced you have been ex-
posed to VD the doctor may go ahead and
treat you without taking a culture. Treat-
ment consists usually of 4.8 million units
of penicillin (2.4 million in each buttock).
This dose is large enough to be 100% ef-
fective in most cases. If you are allergic
to penicillin, a substitute drug will be
administered.

Be sure to check back with your doctor
for the results of your test. Don't trust
your MD or clinic to let you know. If a
doctor tests you and doesn't treat you,
says "If it's positive I'll let you know,”
don't wait around. Call back and ask, be-
cause doctors can forget or medical records
can get waylaid. You owe it to your lovers
and your peace of mind to get an answer.

What happens after I've been treated?

If you've been treated without a cul-
ture, or if you had a positive culture
and then were treated, you should have
another test in two weeks to make sure no
VD remains in your system (there may be
resistant strains of VD which were not
eliminated by the treatment). Doctors and
clinics don't always say to come back, and
the request for follow-up testing may be
met with some resistance or down-playing
of the necessity. Nevertheless, insist
upon it, because it is important to know
no gonococcus remains in your system.

To be sure you don't infect someone
else, you should not have sexual contact
with anyone until you have your second
test.

number six

Does drinking affect VD?

There is no valid reason why alcoholic
beverages, in moderation, cannot be taken
when a person has VD or is undergoing
treatment for a VD infection.

SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS

1. When you have a VD culture made and
are given treatment, your name will be
given to a state health agency. This is
required by law. Also, social workers will
probably interview you and ask the names
of your "contacts." You should expect this
and decide before you go what you will do.
You can easily register under an assumed
name either at a doctor's office or clinic.
You should pay your bill in cash to avoid
identifying yourself with a check or home
address. You can pay at the time of the
visit, or arrange to bring the money in
later. (A check with a straight gynecolo-
gist's office revealed that the whole pro-
cess, including office visit, two cultures
and treatment, would cost around $30. You
can call beforehand to find out exactly
what the cost will be at your doctor or
clinic so you can get the cash together
beforehand.)

Another reason to use a fake name is
that state boards of health can demand
medical records from doctors or clinics,
and courts can subpoena them. So don't
trust a place just because it's free or
hip. Even "free clinics” must follow state
health regulations.

2. Again, you should decide beforehand
whether or not to give the names of your
contacts. YOU CAN REFUSE TO GIVE ANY IN-
FORMATION.

We think gay women should refuse to
give this information to social agencies.
But if someone gets VD, the gay community
should take the responsibility of alerting
its members and taking the necessary steps.
You could call a meeting of the gay com-
munity -- this means everyone, because
everyone deserves to be alerted and make
her own decisions and conclusions about
whether or not she has possibly been in-
fected. If a large meeting is impossible,
those women who are aware of the presence
of the infection in the community should
conduct a thorough follow-up, attempting
to alert any women who might have been
exposed. This will take a lot of work, but
it is extremely necessary. You should no-
tify all the women who have been lovers
with the infected person, and notify each
of their lovers, and so on, until you are
convinced that you have done everything
possible to alert the entire web of people
involved.

We must organize this way both for our
own security and protection. We should be
prepared to take responsibility for our-
selves and our gay sisters.

The Decter

is probably
out of it.