What are arrangements made up?

Six months. One half of a year away from home. Never before have I been away from my hometown for so long. Never have I been on my own for so long. As Bob Dylan says, "How does it feel -- to be on your own -- no direction home -- a complete unknown -- like a rollin' stone!" Six months of freedom, a new lifestyle, digging sisterhood, happy times, new experiences, and, best of all, finding out that I am capable of taking care of myself. Also, six months of tears, confusion, loneliness, homesickness, unhappy times, yearning for "someone from back home," going hungry, the searches for a place to spend the night, and the new horror of being very poor. I have encountered all of these things, good and bad, in my short experience as a runaway.

I've definitely changed a great deal. Let's see -- what has happened to me? Since I've left home, I've: been to the Revolutionary Peoples’ Constitutional Convention (and found out what a drag it was to follow men around at a male-oriented event), did shit work for a radical, male-oriented organization, made love with men and didn't dig it, learned to rip off, went on my first feminist demonstrations, learned about sharing and communal living (the good and the bad aspects), stopped shaving, learned not to trust people so much after being turned in to a Welfare-type agency and pulling out of that (a shitty experience), went to the Women's March on the Pentagon, learned to drive a car, finally realized that men don't respect women as people (especially fifteen-year-old women), started relating to being a runaway as a political thing, stopped believing in free schools, read The Dialectic of Sex, seriously considered the oppressiveness of babysitting after living with a family for a while, made love with a woman and really dug it, and radically changed my outlook on things from the Third-World-and-White-Male-Adult Freak to a Feminist-Youth Revolution. The rate at which I'm changing amazes -- even scares me sometimes. Sometimes I think it's happening too fast and sometimes I know that I have a long way to go.

Occasionally I miss the luxuries of middle-class living. Recently, though, I've begun to look at things differently. We middle-class people are entirely too dependent on material wealth. It's just another part of our conditioning -- and of course, it's very profitable to business. This conditioning to luxury helps to keep our bodies weak and pampered. I mean, it's amazing when one stops to think of it -- from eating three good-sized meals a day and discarding enough to feed many people in Appalachia to preferring beds to sleep in. WHY must one possess so much -- cars, tables and chairs, televisions, radios -- all these articles could be shared -- while human beings could learn to live in a way much closer to nature. For the dainty, well-taken-care-of person I was, I realize how unrealistic this sounds. But the facts are that there are too many people on this planet, too little time to deal with it, too much poverty, and too much waste. When will it stop? It is high time people gave more thought to this kind of conservation.

About school. Hardly a day passes that I am not asked by some well-meaning stranger if I go to college or not. Or people ask if I've considered finishing my “education.” One gets pretty sick of it after a while. The assumption is made that in order to be a legitimate person, I must attend classes. Drop-outs are supposed to experience a tremendous guilt-dumb complex. Of course, it's more acceptable for women to drop out than for men -- we're just going to get married and have children right away anyways -- but still it would be better to be a little brainy so our men could show us off with a bit more pride. Anyways, when I first left home, I viewed the situation as that I was giving up an education to work for social change. I no longer feel that way.

Now I understand that learning about sisterhood, Children's Liberation, strength, and survival is a much more relevant education. It is true that I may be forced to return to school -- just to learn a skill necessary for getting bread. But it won't be because of any incomplete feelings.

I have some hints for sister-runaways. The first thing any fugitive must do in order not to attract attention is to assume a respectable identification. This is a very simple task. To begin, there are a number of foolproof ways of obtaining proof of age. The first is to look up the name of, say, a baby that was born in 1953 (which would make you 18) and died soon after -- and send away for their birth certificate. This is possible, since birth and death certificates are kept in separate places. From a birth certificate, most anything can be obtained. The second method is to get a phony ID from some underground producer. However, I wouldn't recommend this too highly, since there's more chance for a slip. The last way that I know of is to ask a friendly priest to fill you out a Baptismal certificate. That isn't accepted as readily as a birth certificate, but it can be helpful. After that you can get some everyday street ID, such as a Library card, credit cards, youth fare, social security, and a DRIVER'S LICENSE. A driver's license is very good to have. And the more middle-class you appear, the more convincing you will be.

“When you desperately want food, clothing, and other little necessities -- merely the everyday musts for survival, for Christ's sake, it's impossible to heed warnings to cease ripping off. When I started out, I just assumed I'd have to learn how to rip off WELL in order to survive and that I just wouldn't (or couldn't) get caught. Friend after friend warned me not to take the risk -- that THEY'D help me meet my needs. However, one can't depend on others all the time, and the wish to provide for oneself comes on strong. Especially if you never think you'll get caught. Well, I got caught.

I had never heard of the kind of security the store had. It had windows on the ceiling which looked like mirrors. They filled out a confession form, which I had to sign, and released me without the police. Maybe I'll never rip off again. I don't know. I wouldn't encourage my sister-runaways to rip off.

It would take a book to pass along all the little Golden Rules for being a safe runaway. However, I shall just speak briefly about being cool. No proper amount of advice could be given in this respect -- it has to be learned by long and hard experience. First, if you must have communication with home, don't make any direct contacts. Either send letters via a different city than the one you're staying in (so the postmark won't give you away) or ask someone to make important calls for you FROM A DIFFERENT STATE, in a pay phone.

Nobody should know you're a runaway. Have a good story made up and stick to it -- you've graduated from high school and you're traveling around looking for jobs, your parents are retired, etc. From my experience, telling even the coolest person can be a wrong move. Knowing a runaway is an exciting thing to relate to a close friend -- and pretty soon you get to be the best-known runaway in town, that isn't too good. Then, there will always be people who think they know what's best for you. It's hard to explain. I think twice now before I ask a stranger the where-are-you-from-what-do-you-do-how-old-are-you kind of questions. In the first place, it’s not REALLY important to know those things. Second, I know how it feels: the what-category-do-you-fall-in check-over. (Especially the chauvinistic "how old are you?") Now, I'm not saying that you shouldn't try to check out someone who's acting piggish. I'm just saying that in general I wish people weren't so curious.

It's not a good idea to risk going to demonstrations, large meetings, etc. Also, consider that even if some underground pig knew you were under 18 he/she probably wouldn't turn you in and blow his/her cover -- they'd probably just keep an eye on you. (Another good reason to keep your mouth shut.) So, sister-runaways, play it cool.

A young man once commented that it must be easier for me as a runaway because I'm female. What bullshit! I immediately sent him an angry letter about sex roles and I've been thinking about it ever since. What came to my head right away, of course, was to ask him if HE had ever been hassled on the street, get-

Says place to stay, etc. Later the legal angle occurred to me. I haven't studied the laws much, but I know there are a great many states in which men are legally independent before women. Of course, parents give their male children more freedom in general, in the first place. That may explain why the majority of runaways are women. Running away from home is considered more of a crime for women than for men. We aren't supposed to be so uppity. Sometimes I get so sick and tired of the questions people ask me concerning my parents -- like, "It must have been REALLY bad, huh?" My parents were extremely liberal -- in fact, a bit radical at times. We went to moratoriums together. My father was not too down on grass and certainly not long hair. My mother neither. And I did pretty good in school. But the thing is that even though the attitudes of my parents were somewhat radical, they still had to control me. And they sure did. As soon as I became a bit more radical than they, I would be prevented from going to meetings, demonstrations, etc. that went along with my radicalization -- these things were all "too dangerous" for one reason or another. Well, I soon became convinced that goddam it, it was MY ass and therefore my business what I was doing with it. Suddenly, I started applying all that radicalization to myself and concluded that I shouldn't allow anybody to rule my life like that. So I split.

Then there are those who never have to be convinced that I was justified in leaving my parents -- runaways are always groovy, although they don't know just why. But these characters will eventually start bugging me about, "Do you let your parents know if you're all right --" Bullshit.

When I'm of “legal age” I shall go back to visit my old friends. I miss them often. Because of safety measures, I can't have any communication with them. All I can do is write them letters. It's all one way. How I would love to talk with them -- to know what they are thinking. I know that some -- in fact, most -- of them approve and maybe even admire what I'm doing. I wonder if they ever think in terms of themselves. And some of them, of course, don't think what I've done was such a good idea. But I can't wait to see my friends when I return. I love them all so much.

As for now, I have many good friends too. The atmosphere is different, though. Before, I was simply another schoolgirl among my friends. With the friends I have now, however, I'm a bit of a novelty, Somebody Different. I'm much younger than everybody else. At first I thought I could combat that ageism so that it wouldn't interfere. But although my friends realize that I'm sensitive about being treated differently on account of my age, I still get the vibes sometimes that there's a tiny weeny difference between us. Often I get angry when, in conversation, someone makes some innocent comment about something (like: "He was being so childish --" or " -- and she's doing so good FOR HER AGE.") that escapes everyone but me for its offense to age.

I have learned a great deal about independence in these past months. Having been used to complete emotional and physical dependence on two people who controlled my life for fifteen years and trying constantly to fit the roles set up by a sick society makes it difficult to radically adjust myself to a whole new lifestyle sometimes. There's a lot of loneliness and the frustration that comes when one thinks nobody understands her. Now, of course, this is exactly what the psychiatrists and psychologists want to read. They want runaways (especially runaway Lesbians) to be frustrated. Because I'm not happy with the roles society has laid out for me (as obedient child, sex object, etc.) to ensure its survival, there must be something WRONG with ME -- therefore I should have trouble striving to adjust to another culture. I've violated a lot of rules, so I know that the System's out to get me. I'm a left-winger, a Women's Libber, a Gay Libber, and a fatherfucker. So the System will keep on devising ways to make me pay for my violations. No education = no job = no bread. And the constant fear of any fugitive -- being caught -- is no longer too much fun to live with. It's there, every day. The paranoia. The things that other people can do but I can't because they'd make me too obvious. In general, there are all the guilt and pressure trips that are always laid on Lesbians, independent women, runaways, and drop-outs.

Living within such a destructive society, how can one escape all the traps? It's a constant fight. We need each other. As Beverly Grant says, "But if any of you got another plan then, let's get together and give each other a hand!" We got to keep on truckin'. But I think it takes a special kind of inner strength, too. Sometimes I wonder what strong women are made of. Maybe it'll take a long time to figure out. In the meantime, we each have to have faith in ourselves. We can't let ourselves be molded into anything. That's the only way we'll win. Sisterhood is powerful!!

Cre printed from cob)

by Mary, a runaway