Raa ae, ee

This year I taught junior high part time  
in Iowa City. It's my 4th year teaching  
but it was the only job open in the city  
and I was happy to get it because the  
school system has a reputation for being  
"liberal" in the state, and the last time  
I taught was in a small town 40 miles away  
where my politics and lifestyle (at that  
time a lot more moderate) were threatening  
to the people and made a situation that  
was constantly upsetting to me.

So teaching in Iowa City was going to  
be fantastic. People, I thought, are used  
to a lot of different lifestyles and are  
more tolerant. That the year was anything  
but fantastic has made me realize a lot  
about the reality of public education in  
this country -- that it's an institution  
grounded in the middle class (no matter  
how "liberal") with all the sexism, homo-  
sexism and middle class moralizing that  
one could expect built right in.

One reason that the schools here have  
this liberal rep is that kids and teachers  
enjoy a lot of visible privileges. Teachers  
can run their classes pretty much any way  
they want. There's no dress code for stu-  
dents so they dress comfortably in what-  
ever image they choose. The freedom of  
dress has helped cut down on the basic sex  
role stereotyping that was forced on girls  
having to wear dresses, and therefore sit-  
ting primly, not doing strong or uninhib-  
ited things, etc. In addition, the super-  
intendent said early in the year that  
pants were OK for teachers to wear too. I  
don't think I wore a dress more than a  
half dozen times between October and May,  

when the hot weather came. Teaching in  
pants is real freeing -- just knowing you  
can climb on a desk to reach something or  
break up a fight without exposing yourself  
leads to a lot more confidence in relating  
to kids and feeling equal to any situation.  
If they want to learn yoga, we get on the  
floor and do yoga. Simple.

I guess if teaching meant just relating  
to kids I wouldn't have much to say that  
was negative. But schools are much more  
complex than that for everybody involved:  
kids have a whole bunch of teachers, there  
is a lot of diversity among kids them-  
selves, and teachers are expected to get  
along, "work like a team" -- or at least  
not make waves.

The dress issue is a good example of the  
split between what seems free on the sur-  
face and the traditional, rigid sex role  
values that are applied with pressure by  
the institution. By now most people are  
aware that the reading materials and his-  
tory taught in schools is overwhelmingly  
male-identified. Teachers with an awareness  
of the problem can provide a balance in  
their class, but what the kids get in other  
classes (and have gotten for years) is  
pretty hard to overcome. Girls who wear  
pants to school can still expect to be  
warned to "act like a lady," and many male  
teachers assume the right to comment neg-  
atively on the way individual kids dress,  
if what they wear is in some way too far  
out for the teacher's tolerance. Kids usu-  
ally aren't cowed by that pressure into  
changing their style -- their clothes are  
a pretty handy rejection of straight teach-  
ers -- but nevertheless they get the mes-  
sage about the compromises required to make  
it in a straight world where people have  
more power than teachers.

Courses and sports are two other obvious  
institutionalized sex-role channeling de-  
vices. There's been some loosening of  
courses at my school -- a few girls take  
mechanical drawing, there's a "chef's club"  
for boys to learn to cook "convenience  
foods," but the home ec/shop split is  
pretty absolute. And by the time girls  
reach junior high they've been pretty so-  
cialized into the values they're supposed to  

A Woman 2

have as far as courses go. But it's a lot  
harder for many girls to accept the over-  
whelming bias in favor of boys' sports.  
Until this year there was no way for a  
girl to get athletic recognition at school  
unless she was a cheerleader -- a function  
to rally the female students to support  
the heroic male athletes. Of course the  
cheerleaders were fantastic, since cheer-  
ing was the only outlet for athletically  
talented girls. But in gym and through the  
intramural games held the girls knew they  
loved basketball. So last year 500 girls  
in the city signed a petition saying they  
wanted girls’ basketball (it's an enor-  
mously popular sport in the state). But  
the administration said no -- the facili-  
ties were booked solid by boys' basketball,  
there was no money for it, and anyway they  
doubted there was really enough interest.  
The message was clear -- girls weren't as  
important as boys.

So this year the gym teachers were de-  
termined to do something with girls'  
sports and established a girls' track pro-  
gram. They got the support of other women  
teachers who read up on track and helped  
coach, time and measure. The other two  
junior highs worked with us and set up  
their own programs, and the participation  
was overwhelming. A lot of girls went out  
whether they were "good" or not, because  
they knew this was the one chance for  
girls' sports to get anywhere. There were  
individual school meets and then a city-  
wide junior high meet.

But it wasn't easy. We had to mark out  
a track on the playing fields because the  
boys used the regular track. We couldn't  
use starting blocks because the boys got  
them and there was no money for more. High  
jumpers had to wait to practice until af-  
ter the boys went to the showers. In addi-  
tion the women who helped got hassled by  
lots of the male teachers -- jokes about  
not knowing what we were doing, the usual.  
One male told his classes that we couldn't  
coach because we'd never been trained, and  
besides it wasn't official unless you got  
paid. That really messed over some girls --  
they got real upset that after all they  
wouldn't be allowed to have track, because  
in the men's eyes it wasn't "official."  
And of course a lot of boys picked up on  
that line and put down the girls. Dig it:  
you can wear pants and be strong but try  
to horn in on male privileges and the heat  
is on.

Needless to say there was a pretty sharp  
split between my educational philosophy  
and personal lifestyle and that of many  
other teachers. But most of the friction  
I met was from the male staff. I refused  
to joke around with them the way most of  
the women were forced to do to keep things  
going smoothly, and I suppose my wearing  
pants became symbolic of that. I wasn't  
hassled in any really overt ways, but the  
subtle pressure of disdain and dislike was  
constant. I chalked it off to just that,  
but the husband of the woman I shared a  
classroom with had a perspective that was  
probably pretty accurate. He said that the  

men hated me because I refused to relate  
to them with any sexual presence; because  
I wouldn't go along with the role of wo-  
man-as-sex-object that most women are  
forced to give in to, they were infuriated,  
threatened, and had to reject me.

It would've been a fruitless task to try  
to change them. But it was neat how much  
educating of kids got done about sexism  
and WL politics. During the year Women's  
Liberation speakers discussed with Family  
Living (sex ed) classes, most of the 9th  
grade English classes, and speech classes.  
Those of us on the faculty who were into  
WL were up front about it, and called kids  
on their sexism. A whole lot of kids  
learned to be really sensitive to the ex-  
istence of sex bias -- they experience a  
lot of examples every day so there's no  
lack of exposure. It got to the point that  
a boy would start to say or do something,  
catch himself, look around guiltily and  
say “Oops, that's sexist." A girl could  
call a guy a “male chauvinist" and know  
it meant something both for her and him.

It was a lot harder to fight the homo-  
sexism that is rampant at the junior high  
level. It's real in to put down anyone  
who's different with homosexist slurs, and  
there's no one who's up front about being  
gay in school so there's no ready situa-  
tions on a personal level. When minority  
experience was discussed in civics and  
English classes some kids would say liber-  
al things about homosexuals having a right  
to live as they choose, but that had little  
effect on the routine homosexism that went  
on outside of class. (And naturally a lot  
exists among the faculty, especially the  
males.) But in the Spring a sex ed class  
invited two men from Gay Liberation to  
speak, and that really made radical chan-  
ges in many kids and teachers, and brought  
out the deep homosexist bias of many other  
teachers and parents. One of the sex ed  
teachers nearly lost his job over it (he  
was removed from the Family Living pro-  
gram as a compromise, but only after he'd  
been fired and had a hearing that brought  
about his reinstatement). The GLF visit  
was the biggest topic of conversation of  
the year, and the main response among kids  
was relief. A lot of their fears and mis-  
conceptions were aired, there was specific  
oppression of gay people for them to re-  
late to, and they saw first hand how much  
danger there was in even supporting the  
rights of homosexuals when one of the best  
and most popular teachers was nearly ru-  
ined by such action. Also, and most impor-  
tantly, kids who have secret fears that  
they are gay themselves saw some positive  
support for that lifestyle, and I think  
it eased their minds a bit.

I have mixed feelings about this article  
because I am so down on public schools,  
but I know a lot of people have to work in  
a lot shittier situations without the pri-  
vileges I had working in Iowa City. In a  
way that's part of my point -- if it's  
this bad here, then public education is  
really diseased, and trying to change it  
from within is a real disheartening task.