Somehow analyze the structure of dissension....

One lesson well learned through childcare hassles is that the only produc-
tive confrontation is in groups and in person. (That's not to say learning
doesn't go on in other ways than by confrontation.) Confrontations have
to do with politics and politics are never simple. Talking one-to-one
after a confrontation tends to so simplify the politics because no one
person can represent the variety of struggles in a group. So no headway
is made, issues are muddied, and everyone hears 2nd or 5th hand what's
been said--open range for gossip and backbiting.

among ourselves

One-to-one talking, like working out your politics alone and outside of
any collective has the disadvantages of (1) not representing the variety
of struggles in a group; (2) of not allowing the people involved to hear
the different ways a certain event in time has been perceived (factual
clarity). Collective or public talking's disadvantage of possibly not
exposing all those varieties of political struggle and fact perception
--because of the time limits, shyness or intimidation individuals may feel--
can be rectified by careful attention to the matter of hearing everyone.
Whereas, when only 2 people speak to each other -- no amount of trying to
consider other points of view, life situations, can adequately represent them
if those who experience them are absent. The need for collective and public
group struggle is clear, but we must do it in a context which does not
exclude women with less time (because of work and/or children) from partici-
pating--one of the main failings of the women's community in Iowa City.

One of the big problems is having to speak with a loud, urgent voice in
order to be heard. We've all learned that in order to get people to under-
stand and/or deal with our oppressions, we have to first convince them we
have a voice at all. So when you have to be loud and dramatic and overcome
your being used to never having a voice, not everything comes out the way
you'd want it to. Not to mention the anger. I don't see any way around
that. And people who get blown over a little by such voices should be
aware of why and give space to the women speaking. (Unless, of course,
their own space is being totally confiscated by the women speaking.

(continued)

Unless these women say things that are so blatantly racist, classist,
sexist or homosexist that it threatens whatever space other women have
for themselves.) If we only hear the "incorrect" thinking the oppressed
are doing, we never hear their oppression.

Postscript: Dissension with a genuine attitude of struggle (oppressed people strug-
gling together to unite without oppressing each other) is not destructive.

What is destructive is anything which prevents or inhibits that struggle,
including assuming that the other is either unwilling or unable either
to listen or to change and taking part of the facts or issue for the
whole (by listening to gossip instead of verifying the facts, by isolating
oneself from others while making judgments and/or taking actions which
affect them).

On this issue in this community-- up until very recently--these wrong
practices have been the rule rather than the exception. That is beginning
to change now and already the benefits are beginning to show. In the most
recent daycare meeting there was some indication on many sides for willing-
ness to struggle.

a lesbian mother

Here are a few viewpoints on childcare, based on my experience
as the lesbian mother of a four year old girl.

1. Female children need care from dykes, starting from an early
age. Development of a child's sexuality and body image starts at
infancy, and is much influenced by her physical contact with
adults. In the nuclear family, a woman has the status of an object,
not an autonomous being and her body communicates this concept of
femaleness to her daughter. The child is taught to be passive,
feminine, and heterosexual before she reaches school.

A dyke is a better mother than a straight woman in that respect,
because a dyke's concept of herself and other women offers the
child much more space for the growth and development of aggressiveness,
initiative, self-confidence and other dykey qualities.

2. Male supremacy is very uptight about lesbians raising girls;
we threaten them. The courts view a lesbian mother as an unwholesome
influence on a child, similar to an alcoholic or a prostitute. So a lesbian
stands a small chance of keeping custody of her child if her ex-husband,
family, or any male institution takes the slightest interest in removing
the child. The threat can be used to force a lesbian to raise her daughter
“normally” -- that is, to meet male approval. Some women have been driven
to desperate lengths to keep their children, such as changing their names and
moving out of state.

3. A female child needs good quality care from several women to
develop a strong sense of self-worth and independence from her
mother. It's real weird for a child to feel that one person cares
intensely for her and no one else gives a shit. She wonders what
would happen to her if her mother disappeared, and why no one else
bothers with her much. A child who regularly gets positive feedback
from several directions is much less easily defeated by a blast of negative
energy than is a child who is totally dependent on her mother.

A WOMAN?

speaks

4. Mother's commitment to her child.

There is, I believe, an element of choice in motherhood (although I did not
"choose" to be oppressed and the choice I made does not justify my oppression),
and that is that any mother can choose at any time to abandon her child. A year ago, I did abandon my daughter to the care of her father. I was working and living alone with her and constantly fatigued; I knew no women who would do childcare for me (her?). So he took custody of her and she got real messed up. After much soul searching, I realized that I had to try to regain custody of her; I felt that no political involvement could be more meaningful or productive than caring for her. But then I hit the lesbian-mother stumbling block; my chances in court were poor, according to several lawyers. So finally I had to disappear with her. The alternative was to abandon her to the mutilation of a "straight" upbringing -- Barbie dolls, makeup, skirts, kissing up to "Daddy."

In response to the “old gay" view that children are products of
hetero relationships and so no responsibility of gay women:

No other woman would do this for her. I regard my decision to
care for my daughter as a lesbian-feminist commitment. She is not
a leftover from a heterosexual relationship; she is a four year
old woman, as worthy of my time and energy (and anyone's) as any
other woman.

5. Males are unfit to care for female children.

6. I will take no responsibility for the care of male children,
and question the motives of women who do take that responsibility.

feb. 73 17