Also when I came back to town the women who had been most in-
volved with the center were angry as all shit and ready to kick ass
over the fact that many women did not do enough daycare and/or were
irresponsible about the daycare that they did do or said they'd do. The
real gut of the issue I think, where the anger came from, was the
anger of women who were responsible for children (in most cases
their own) toward those of us who had the option of doing daycare
or not -- who had not been much of any help in the past and who at
the most had a pretty superficial understanding of childcare.

The first general meeting that was called of all volunteers and
women who wanted to work in the center was almost totally consumed
with putting all of us who are not mothers and who hadn't done much
daycare up against the wall. The meeting began with two women leav-
ing to go get another woman who hadn't shown up and eventually
physically fighting with her, and from there on the meeting only
got worse with the issues of daycare, class, violence versus non-
violence, getting thrown around in confusing and sometimes really
incorrect ways.

It wasn't the first time I really disagreed with what was com-
ing down over daycare and it wasn't the first time I felt really
offended by some of what mothers were saying in regard to gayness
and class. People were so angry over other people's laxness on day-
care and so self-righteous about it that much was thrown out that
I found offensive to gay women and particularly to working class
women. It was really hard for me to listen to middle class women
(who had children) tell me (working class) about the needs of work-
ing class mothers since I felt there was a lot of classist stereo-
typing expressed in their ideas. It was also hard to listen to
middle class women talk to me about how privileged I was because
I didn't have children.

The women who were planning the center issued financial state-
ments to be filled out and used as a basis for taxing the volun-
teers and thus financially supporting the center. I found that
pretty threatening since there was an atmosphere of classifying
women without children as privileged in regard to childcare with-
out being sensitive to their class backgrounds or other oppressions
they may have suffered. In the same way, mothers were labeled op-
pressed seemingly without regard to their class positions. However
it was the first time I knew I could not correctly choose to not
deal with daycare because I disagreed with the politics of the
women involved. Despite how incorrect in some ways I think the
anger was directed and used, it was that anger and being put up
against the wall that forced me to deal with an issue I had ignored
for so long.

The daycare issue in this town has always been complex, but in
the past when contradictions developed between people, the child-
less women would split. I think our political consciousness has
grown higher now and does not allow us that option. Doing child-
care is now respected political work that is expected of women
active in the women's community. There is social pressure put on
women who refuse to do childcare and this, I think, is as it should
be. The complexities of the issue have increased by the number of
women who have to deal with it and the contradictions between gay
women and straight women, mothers and non-mothers, women of dif-
ferent classes.

I don't see any easy direction -- I know I'm not sure of what
is the absolute way of dealing with it. Right now there are hassles
between the needs of mothers and the needs of gay women who work
in the center. The only way I know to deal with that is to deal
with it -- not ignore it and for all of us to be sensitive to
everyone's needs and oppressions. As regards childcare I think
mothers must be listened to because it is they who best understand
the issue and work involved. I realize that what I say could
sound like wishy-washy liberalism -- everybody should be listened
to, etc. But I think we have long passed the stage of seeing things
in simplistic contradictions and as regards contradictions between
women (lesbian/straight, working class/middle class, etc.) I don't see
that any contradiction is primary or any oppression is primary.

I am only sure that no oppression should be ignored.

..d million memories |
that make me sick...

When I was eleven I started babysitting.
I enjoyed it and children liked me; often
they would come and ask me to "babysit
them" without their parents’ knowledge. I
was tall, skinny, and not very articulate
(my mother was beautiful and intelligent
and never could understand how she'd got-
ten this dumb and ugly daughter) but child-
ren didn't seem to mind, and I didn't care
that they were little and not very articu-
late.

By 18 I had filled out enough to fit the
emaciated vogue and my mother, being a
realist, often told me I'd better get
married before I lost my figure and could-
n't find a husband. I was just 19 when I
followed that advice to her relief.

In the next eight years my husband some-
how taught me that my whole worth was in
my body which began to betray me with age
and pregnancies. I remember wanting my
first child, but I also remember crying
and freaking out, wanting to leave my hus-
band, wanting to stay pregnant and not
have the baby, wanting not to be pregnant,
angry screaming sessions when I would
threaten to leave knowing that I had no-
where to go, no way to get there, and no
money that was not his. Money was what
kept me with him, and guilt, and a feeling
that I was a rotten person and all these
feelings were evil, and anyway I was cer-
tainly not capable of taking care of my-
self. I used to wish he would die and
fantasize about how I should react when
they came and told me.

For years I stayed up until two and
three a.m. then crept quietly into bed
trying not to squeak the springs so he
wouldn't wake up, and when he did lying
quietly, responding as little as possible,
trying to keep my mind on other things,
feeling inadequate and not wanting him to
know. At first it did hurt to fuck; after
the children it was mostly just degrading
and a time-consuming bore which kept me
from getting enough sleep. I was always
tired.

Our second child was an unfortunate
mistake. By this time I knew enough to be
terrified of giving birth, and of having
the responsibility of children; and my
husband was in Viet Nam doing his macho
adventurer, and at that time glorified,
thing; so I was alone with this one.

Smiling male lab technicians gave me the
good news that I was indeed five months
pregnant and were shocked when I started
crying and couldn't stop (after all I was
married!). I felt like a selfish sub-hu-
man. I cried every night for months and
it was my first child who often climbed
into bed with me patting my back saying
“don't cry mommy." I felt guilty for that
too. That child was my only reason for
surviving. We, together, dealt with what
was happening without words, without ex-
planations — with hugs and smiles and rag-
ing screaming tantrums. I began to deny the
pregnancy and in that way with the support
of a two-year-old I coped. But when the
undeniable happened and the new baby came
I didn't love her, I didn't even like her,
I didn't want her. And now a new problem
set in. You can't go anywhere with a tod-
dler, an infant, two diaper bags and a
purse. About once a week my mother babysat
(more often if I begged) and I had enough
money for a babysitter once in a while,
other than that I took out the garbage and
talked to the mailman. Three months later
my husband arrived home, in a wheelchair,
having been seriously injured in Viet Nam.
So now I had to push him around and wait
on him as well as always be cheerful so as
not to make him feel depressed. The only
thing he could do was fuck. The first month
he was out of the hospital I had to bundle
up the children and drive him to the hospi-
tal for shots every six hours.

I began to go through depressions that
lasted for months, only getting drunk
helped, which I did as often as possible. I
thought constantly of death, the look he'd
have when he found me, what others would
feel -- bad, I hoped. I began to resent,
hate the children. My daughter was into
smearing the walls of her room with shit
once or twice a day, she screamed, fussed,
cried, or was into something all the time
and was generally unpleasant to be around.
My best escape was sleep, but with the
children I couldn't sleep in the daytime,
and at night there was my husband to con-
tend with. I didn't even think about leav-
ing at first; all that talk about broken
homes and juvenile delinquents and how
could I support two children and what I
owed everybody else, especially the child-
ren and my duty and responsibility, somehow
I was stuck forever and it was their fault.
I had no friends; married women seldom do,
their husbands carefully see to that. I had
only him to talk to and over the years I
had learned that he was always right in the
end until I could barely formulate an opin-
ion much less make a decision; to say what
I thought was to have it changed into some-
thing else until I only thought his thoughts
(that still happens, after all those years
it’s hard to change). It took me three
months to decide to leave, then it was six
more months before I left, six months of
me begging for money and him being cool and
logical and reasonable, telling me how I
couldn't manage and me explaining that it
wasn't him but me, that I was all messed up
and needed a little time away to get it to-
gether, then I'd surely be back if he'd
only be patient. He let me go out of fear
I think, fear that I would kill myself or
go insane. I had the nerve to leave because
of that same fear.

The next two years were almost as bad as
before with me hoping for an empty mail
box rather than the guilt of letters from
him and well-meaning friends and family al-
ways telling me why I should return ("think
of the children"), him being sick from his
Viet Nam injuries, he was going to die he
kept saying, he was only asking for two
years of my life, it was the least I could
do. And there were the other men each worse
than the last. In the end I felt like a
headless body ("shut up and get in bed").

I was lucky, I was only forcibly raped
once.

It goes on and on, a million memories
that make me feel sick, screaming at the
children until my head ached then panicked
with guilt; fucking with man after man
that I disliked, it was enough if they
would talk to me and would put up with the
children; trying to teach the kids to be
polite and quiet and not scare people away.

But I don't like people touching me now.
And I have little patience with children.
I'm terrified of the gay women's community
because there seems to be no place to go
if I can't be there. But women start tell-
ing each other what mothers would want as
though I don't exist, or talking and tell-
ing me I'm wrong about everything I think
or feel and it doesn't matter if I'm right
or wrong and I'm probably wrong, but I'm
starting to understand where I've been and
what it's done to me. I don't think you
realize that you can't erase those years
simply by doing childcare now. That being
a mother like every other form of oppres-
sion, goes deeper than the physical reality.