Once upon a time in a town where sugar

plums bumped from the trees to the

ground lived a black-eyed princess named
Snowshoe. She was called Snowshoe be-
cause of the tale they tell of her birth.
One evening, in the winter of a dark
year when the king was returning to his
palace on his way back from a hunt, he
spied a bundle wrapped in soft fern at
the mouth of a great cave. Not ventur-
ing to go in beyond the mouth of the
cave and anxious to see if the bundle
was a baby or not, the king picked it up.
The king saw that it was indeed a baby,
a baby girl in fact, strung to a snow-
shoe. Now it so happened that in the
palace bedroom just nine months before
the queen had said to the king:

Henry (for that was his name),

Henry, if you don't give me a
baby girl this time I will never
love you again,

The story of the king and queen's
children is a strange one, often talked
about in this town. The queen after
nine long years of a tedious marriage
(not to mention other more inflamma-
tory adjectives) had borne nine sons
and not one daughter. Although she had
no inkling of it, there was a reason
for this. You see, the king was a wick-
ed man, as wicked as most men go, and
had given the queen a potion in their
earlier years that had made her have
but sons.

Now, when she at last threatened
the king, he grew pale and frightened
at her words:

Snowshoe, Rupp said affectionately when
they were at last alone together on
a thick fur in one far corner of
the room. I've felt so much for you.
Having to live in that horrible
castle with those men and no sister
beside you. We tried to rescue you
several times but we needed a hopeful
spirit besides.
Snowshoe kissed her full on the mouth.

The palace with nine brothers, a father with
a belly like the plum pudding she ate for
dessert, and a mother much out of touch.
But Snowshoe grew up quite different
from the way that the king had conceived.
Her manner was tough and burly, she as-
sociated only with street people and
she came home smelling like dirt and
dung. Though he yelled and whipped her
every night, it was to no avail. When she
began to beat up his sons, he decided to
call the final halt.

The air was lightly pulping the year's
first snowfall but the heat of rage in
Snowshoe's body kept her warm and pumping and snugged her head into Rupp's neck
strong. She could only think of the mal-
feasance of men that roamed far and wide
in the town. That evil prevailed and dom-
inated like a nest of snakes that squirmed
and struck. Remembering the king's words about the
place of her birth, Snowshoe felt an even
greater anger. She had been told she was
the king and queen's daughter though she
often had doubted it very much. And so
Snowshoe came to the cave in the forest
where thick thistles now bordered the en-
trance. The mouth of the cave was locked
in musty black but beyond the seventh
perspiring stalactite, Snowshoe rounded
a bend. There the light opened and a full
room, warm and solid with the goings on
of more than a dozen women strong, beam-
ed its greeting upon Snowshoe. She was
hugged and welcomed by all but her special
attention was drawn to Rupp. Rupp was a
tough-bodied, wild-eyed woman who kissed
Snowshoe longer and more languorously than
the others.

She meant to get her due revenge.
Now the king could not think of such
a thing. It might ruin his kingly manner
for life. Good heavens, what would the
servants say when they peek through the
keyhole at night? For he knew the servants al-
ways peeked when the king and queen
went to bed and the king rather liked
the thought.

In actuality, no one watched the king
and queen in their bedroom at night.

Anyway, when the king came upon the
baby wrapped in soft fern upon a snow
shoe, he felt quite relieved and hence
brought the babe back to his wife.

We will call her Snowshoe, the queen said.

Enough! Enough! I've had enough! the
king bellowed. Out! She goes out!
I've just about had my fill of this
derelict dyke with her foul mouth
and antagonistic fist. She's not
my child and I want nothing more to
do with her. I should have left her
by the old cave where I found her.

Henry, Henry, calm yourself please.

Snowshoe was only defending herself
against your wicked sons. Why, you
know yourself they're wicked. You
heard Mary Hanswell tell Martha
Bushwick how they roam around nights
in the old carriage they rigged up
and "sexually assaulted and violated
young maidens." Henry, you heard
her say that. You know it's true.
The queen then began sobbing from fear
and anger. By this time the king was
livid pink with rage. He stammered and
sputtered as he spoke.
Why—why—those sluts ought to
be punished and whipped! What were they doing—

The king never finished his sentence
for Snowshoe threw the rest of her plum
pudding in his face. With a defiant look
on her mug, out she stomped. This time
she meant to get her due revenge.

Snowshoe, you're going to have to
stop this immediately, he roared
that night at the dinner table.
Already the princess had smashed three
of her brothers’ noses, knocked two of
them unconscious and threatened to castrate
little Willie at breakfast.
Sure Henry, my sons are OK but I
want a daughter, goddammit
me and hear me good. If I don't
have a baby girl in nine months
you're going to have to do your
jerking off yourself!

August 29, 1971