There's a record album that I'm waiting  
to hear--I'm imagining it 'cause it hasn't  
come out yet. It will be songs of love and  
revolutionary feminism by the best musical-  
lesbian group that ever was. It will be  
written, sung, played, arranged, recorded,  
engineered, produced and distributed by  
women. It will be dancing music; it will  
be a total high for us; it will be incom-  
prehensible to men. It will help bring all  

“the woman-identified musicians out of the  
woodwork. I feel it's coming; the direc-  
tion is shown by women's music in the last  
few years....  

...I'm thinking of what music brought me  
out of the woodwork to where I am with sev-  
eral other sisters, getting a band together.  

Where'd we get the idea that we could do it?  

...There's music drifting through my head:  
"I can't go back there any more/ you know  
my keys don't fit the door/ you know my  
thoughts don't fit the man/ they never can,  
they never can..." Joni Mitchell--her first  
album was an inspiration, a source of find-  
ing strength; she had it all together in  
herself--composer, arranger, performer--she  
even did the artwork on the jacket. Total  
effect.  
do this and now they're being allowed to.  

That sense of being in control comes  
through the music of some really strong wo-  
men...not all...like I really love the  
sound of Judy Collins' "Wildflowers", but  
I feel her being crowded by a dozen arrang-  
ers, instrumentalists, directors--she's  
being handled, put on a pedestal and it's  
not her show. Control... is Laura Nyro,  
stopping, starting, wailing and crashing  
on the piano as she feels like it...music  

follows the unsteady rhythm of her breath-  
ing. Sometimes I can't distinguish the  
words but her feeling comes through  
clearly and I don't miss the sense of it.  
From Nyro I've picked up on using a word  
for its sound more than just its meaning  
...in the course of a song she can change  
the meaning of a word.  

The powerful feeling: Nina Simone has  
really got it down. When she plays there  
is no wondering who runs it. I saw her  
once, years ago, but I know that feeling;  
no ambiguity, no explanations, like she's  
saying yeah, you heard me right, you have  
to handle how you feel about that. I do  
not think I'd ever felt a woman's con-  
sciousness of herself that strongly; her  
self-awareness as female, as black, as  
someone who would be listened to.  

Being listened to is this incredible  
breakthrough. Some people have a hard  
time getting those two things together:  
female musician--like you have to be one or  
the other. Some recognition. Like when I  
played blues harp in a coffeehouse jam ses-  
sion and a man came up to me with “uh, gee  
I never saw a chick who could play harmon-  
ica before." He was so impressed. I was  
so disgusted. Of course women can. The  
only big group I've heard with a female  
harp player, though, is Ten Wheel Drive:  
Genya Ravan, a strong-voiced woman hanging  
in there with nine male instrumentalists.  
What does a woman have to go through?  

The professional music world is so de-  
humanizing, and since women are dehuman-  
ized in so many contexts, it's doubly hard.  
Melanie spells it out in a song I really  
dig, called "Tuning My Guitar": "You  
stand behind my curtain and hope I'll be  
a star/ You say get out and sell them/ but  
selling's not my aim/ I'm gonna sing the  

life I'm living/ and try and ease the pain.”  

A lot of Melanie's songs are written out of  
pain, especially her last album, "The Good  
Book"...the pain of saying goodbye, the  

pain of lost childhood, the pain of mis-  
understanding. Women sing about their feel-  
ings in real, unexaggerated images while  
men seem to look for stereotypes. I always  
felt those "my woman left so I'll kill my-  

I thought, sure, I knew women could  

EU S.eU es A NBO2S  

chy  

self" songs to be phony--like men were say-  
ing how they thought they should feel, go-  
ing to extremes.  

Some songs that really stay with me are  
those which question our feelings and re-  

actions: this doesn't happen often in mus-  
ic because the tendency is to simplify  
ideas in short phrases. The questioning  
songs really make me think--you know how  
a line or two will run through your head  
all day. A big discovery in this was an  
album by Linda Ronstadt and the Stone Poneys,  
called "Evergreen Vol. II". Remember "You  
and I travel to the beat of a different  
drum?" Instead of the usual romantic bull-  
shit about lifelong love affairs, Linda  
ends it “So long I'll be leavin'/ and I see  
no sense in this cryin' and grievin'/ We'll  
both live a lot longer if you live without  
me." Another song centers around the line  
"Is it true that there's just one for one  
like I've been told?" The song "New Hard  
Times", which doesn't deal with love at all  
seems to be addressed to aging liberals:  
"When eating comes too easy/ Nothing makes  
you think/ There's too much time to sun  
yourself/ and too much wine to drink."  
Linda Ronstadt has a clear, really feeling  
voice. Her music is the country western  
sound with a rock rhythm. I used to hate  
country music; what turned me around was  
her record called "Hand Sown/ Home Grown",  
(I'm not usually up for plugging records  
but Ronstadt isn't very well known and we  
need to hear more of her kind of vibra-  
tions.)  

Women's music is changing, women's music  

Music cell is a refuge--complete refuge  
from all male music. The cell is into  
women's music. Everything we do seriously,  
is written by women, for women, and pre-  
ferably, increasingly about women. Most  
established music is written about love and  
it is more important for us to deal with  
women we are loving, or trying to love,  
(including ourselves) than the man that  
"done us wrong" or that we're "going to  
get" (even not for any loving purpose).  
Blatant, harsh "cock rock" is not the only  
kind of male music. (Songs about the past  
...dealings with men....message songs  
directed to men... waste of time..)  

When we practice we do some songs that  
are written by men and some by women that  
do not deal with woman-identified-woman  
politics. This is a source of hassle and  
frustration, but as our skill improves and  
the number of worthwhile songs that we all  
know increases, this will change. Most of  
our best woman songs have been written by  
members of the cell.  

As I get more and more into making wo-  
men's music my tolerance for other music  
decreases. I still listen to everything  
from Fanny to the Rolling Stones, but not  
without definitely increasing feelings of  
frustration and contradiction.  

Music cell is definitely involved in  
consciousness-raising--constant analyzation  
of our music.  

has changed my head and my music. The  
latest in a series of highs are Carole  
King coming into full view--we heard her  
songs for years and now that she's record-  
ing it sort of brings it together; and the  
appearance of an all female rock band from  
Berkeley, four women who call themselves  
"Fanny", have one album out and another  
coming soon. I feel these people are the  
beginning of a rush of women musicians  
whose presence will become a regular, en-  
during force in our culture. Our voice is  
growing stronger.  

LESBIAN NATION FEMALE CULTURE/LESBIAN NATION FEMALE CULTURE/LESBIAN NATION FEMALE CULTURE/LESBIAN NATION