Recently here in Iowa City, a Free Med-
ical Clinic was set up. It was mainly put
together by a woman who is a social work
graduate. Medical students, social work
students, pharmacy and nursing students
from the university all help staff the
clinic. Also, there are several doctors, a
licensed pharmacist, and a nurse there.

I was introduced to the clinic when I
went one evening with four other women.
Three wanted to see doctors and the other
two of us went to support them. We ended
up spending the entire evening there and it
turned out to be a real far-out experience.

Personally, I am scared to death of
doctors. Until I was 18, I had a woman
pediatrician, and at that time I was tossed
out to fend for myself at the university
student health. Believe me, they were not
anything like the woman doctor I'd always
had. She had explained things to me, show-
ed me how to insert a tampax, and generally
made me not ashamed to come for physicals.
I was used to going to her whenever I was
sick and getting prompt medical treatment.

Then came four years of unlearning every-
thing I'd learned about doctors as a child.
At student health, they couldn't even give
you a physical. To have a physical, I would
have to go to the hospital and spend at
least $50. Also, I soon learned that you
don't go there until you're practically on
your deathbed. Otherwise, you're told
that you're burning the candle at both
ends and what you really need is to go home,
sleep, and stop your outside school activ-
ities. Sometimes when I came in to make
sure I didn't have strep throat, I'd have to
ask several times before they'd take a
throat culture. Then came my most humili-
ating experience with student health. As
traumas started pouring in on me, I couldn't
sleep, was nauseated, felt dizzy, had head-
aches, and was a general mess. After so
much, I finally got up the nerve to go over
to student health only to be told it was
all in my head. I had my days and nights
mixed up, "young lady," and I would have to
cut out my outside activities. Of course,
I received nothing to help calm me down,
and I went away furious and totally intim-
idated.

With this background, the next Friday my
friends convinced me to go to the Free
Clinic and get some medications. I was
really scared to death about what I was
going to say when the doctor asked me why
I needed tranquilizers. I didn't want to
tell him my life story, and I knew he could
easily convince me that I wasn't really
bad enough to need meds. Like the Friday
before, we all went together and my sisters
sat there with me while he asked me quest-
ions. I was still scared, but I knew my
sisters were there and would help me.

As it happened, I think the doctor was
intimidated by so many of us to support
each other. He just wasn't used to five
women coming and staying with each other.
He was an okay doctor and didn’t hassle me in
the least about the way I was feeling. He
gave me a prescription and told me to come
back in two weeks so he could talk with me
again to see how things were.

I imagine we'll spend a lot of time in
the future at the Free Clinic. This sum-
mer I may even work there. I hope that our
example of coming together, supporting each
other, and supporting women we meet at the
clinic encourages other women to come to-
gether.

It is yet to be seen how the clinic will
turn out. There are several really con-
cerned people working there. However, the
clinic is mainly staffed by medical students
as always on ego trips and into the doctor
thing. This is always a bummer. Also, an
ad hoc committee has been formed with five
medical people and seven people from the
community. We have yet to see what they
will do also.

WHERE ARE YOU ELIZABETH?

Two weeks ago Friday from 7:30 to 11,
five of us women spent a delightful and
reassuring evening at the Free Medical
Clinic above the River City Non-Free Trade
Zone. I say delightful because there
wasn't a big frosty-glassed door to walk
through with a buzzer to announce our
entrance, or piped-in Musac which nobody
listens to anyway, and no gigantic pile
of magazines which everyone thumbs through
but really doesn't read. The first thing
you see is a small-tall table with a file
on one end under a bed-stand type lamp
with a very nice woman passing out infor-
mation sheets. (Not life history, name,
birth, etc.) There were plenty of fold-
out chairs and benches for people to sit
on and no one had to stand for very long.
There weren't very many small children,
but there were stuffed toys and people
to play with. A short while later another
woman came around and asked about previous
medication and allergic reactions to
certain drugs. Everyone's temperature &
blood pressure was taken in one corner of
the waiting area. There is a big room in
back where people not requiring physical
exams may talk with the examiner or talk
to them before a physical examination.

There are also free birth control hand-
books, pap smears, and equipment to test
for VD.

Since the space for private physical
examinations is limited, one might have
to wait a little while and this is where
the reassuring part comes in. We de-
cided that none of us would talk to or
be examined by anyone alone. If two of
us were called at once, one would wait
and accompany the other. Two of us went
who didn't need to be examined at this
particular time, but it was very reassur-
ing to know that when we did it wouldn't
be alone. Tensions often mount when you
don't know what to expect or know your
body is going to be examined by someone
you don't know. Not being alone and hav-
ing someone who knows and cares about you
is so important during these times. Take
a friend with you and take them in with
you. It was a good feeling to know we'd
helped each other and we'd grown a little
closer because of it. Sisterhood IS
Powerful?

The only thing that bothered me was the
seemingly overabundant supply of medical
students, (male) with female nursing stu-
dents to assist them. Where are the Eliz—
abeth Blackwells of the 70's?

Looking back on the evening, I felt par-
ticularly glad that I didn't have to be
examined. I didn't think this attitude of
“what's 0.K. for you might not be for me"
was fair at all. I thought about it quite
a while and tried to decide exactly what
would have made me feel more secure there
and decided I would have had no objection
to being examined by a woman, either med-
student, nurse, or any woman that could
have helped me. I realize the problems
involved in setting up an all-women med-
ical clinic, and I think the Free Medical
Clinic is a fantastic move, BUT I also know
that there are women medical students,
nurses, social workers, all women that
know much more than they are given credit
for or allowed to do by written or un-
written law. There is no reason, in my
opinion, to set up a duplicate hierarchy
in a free medical clinic that already
exists in the medical profession today.
Surely there can be more ingenuity, crea-
tivity, and human awareness in a free med-
ical clinic than a hospital or like insti-
tution. There are people struggling to
keep the clinic from turning into a toy
hospital and they need our support!

Help keep the clinic free and ask to see
a WOMAN!

WHERE ARE YOU ELIZABETH?

I decided that my nervousness and depression had reached
its peak but was afraid to go to the free clinic. Whenever I
really lose control I'm terrified of being committed. I've been
through that psychiatry scene before and it's for shit. I finally
expressed this to some of the women I live with although I felt
ridiculously paranoid. They were wonderful and went to the clinic
with me and supported me. The clinic was a real high. I didn't
have to face a med student or doctor alone. Someone always
stayed with me. The doctor I saw did suggest I see a counselor
but when I refused he didn't push it. I felt I was listened to and
that what I said was accepted as valid. I received some pills
free. It was like a fantasy -- being treated respectfully and for
free.

Sometimes I enjoy work when I can pretend it’s after the
revolution and what we're producing is what will meet people's
needs and that all of us on the assembly line had an equal say in
what we did and how. The clinic was like that the first night and
just the experience of decent care and support from other women
made me feel much better. But just as I must come to and see
what I'm helping produce on that line is worthless shit that no one
needs but will make a profit for someone and pay me a minimum
wage, I came to the clinic the next week and saw how nothing is
free and the med students and doctors had no intention of treat-
ing us on any other than their own terms.

One of us went to get her prescription for a mild tranquilizer
refilled. This time she was really pressured about seeing a
counselor and some of us intervened to explain the real material
conditions that were upsetting us all and how we could talk to each
other about them but we had no power to change them and neither
did any fucking counselor. After that, we were told in effect that
we could not get prescriptions if we continued to come to the
clinic together. We would each have to see a doctor alone. Our
support of each other was a threat to the unchallenged power of
the doctor. It seemed like we could continue to get help there
but only by allowing ourselves to be intimidated by seeing a
doctor alone or possibly seeing a counselor we didn't want to see.

Medical students and doctors are not generally poor (to say
the least) and seem freaked out by how many people have come to
them for some kind of tranquilizer. They don't understand how
natural that is -- that people without money are as nervous about
poverty as those who can afford to go to a private physician, that
people are freaked out over having no homes or no jobs or jobs
they're constantly afraid of losing. How the hell they think going
to some damn counselor once a week to tell him you're pretty
upset living in this shit pile, that being a woman in this world is
hard, that being poor in America is rough, that being a radical
woman in America can mean your extinction kinda scares you
sometimes, that being gay in a straight world takes courage
you don't always have -- how they think that's gonna change things
for you, I don't know. But then they don't have to think very hard,
They're men, they're privileged, they're Gods.
Anyway, I wouldn't go to the free clinic expecting better
care. It's the same shit, you just don't have to lay any cash
down.