scussion continued from pages 8 & 9

The Red Women's Discussion of Feminism,  
Women's Liberation and Gay Liberation  
creates a dichotomy between the necessity  
of waging an armed struggle and the neces-  
sity for desired cultural changes, many of  
which women's liberation has been con-  
cerned with. Red Women seem to be saying  
that waging a cultural revolution is to  
wage a counter-revolution to the armed  
struggle for the creation of a socialist/  
communist society. They see no hope for  
Gay Liberation to be anything but counter  
revolutionary and they view feminism and  
women's liberation as divided into two  
camps. The revolutionary feminists ally  

themselves with the proletarian women to  
wage an armed struggle. Women's oppres-  
sion they define at the point of work,  
at the point of production, and in terms  
of females as workers. The Women's Lib-  
eration Movement, as they see it, is nar-  
row political reformism, "...that pro-  
poses to tack on an extra point or two  
to a world already long accepted."

I question their conception of the wo-  
men's liberation movement as one they can  
exemplify by electoral campaigns waged by  
the Socialist-Workers Party/Young Socia-  
list Alliance. Is an electoral campaign  
waged by the YSA indicative of the women's  
liberation movement? Most of women's  
liberation has not spent their time on  
such obvious examples of Amerikan libera-  
lism, or cooptation. Clearly, the Red  
Women's Detachment are not dealing with  
women's liberation but with obvious ex-  
amples of campaigns waged by others in  
the name of the rights of women, in this  
case, a campaign by a group which has not  
even begun to understand the validity of  
the issues raised by women's liberation.

We have spent time questioning the  
cultural position of women and in doing  
this recognize that not only must the  
labor of women be valued and women be in  
control of the means of production (along  
with men) but that certain cultural ster-  
eotypes and power relationships be de-  
stroyed. A wife is a subordinate, paid  
or unpaid.

Revolutionary feminists, say the Red  
Women's Detachment, are concerned with  
the fundamental question of marriage as  
an institution based on slave labor  
while women's liberation can see marriage  
only in terms of rights and legal pro-  
visions. Again, the Red Women have drawn  
a false dichotomy, implying that women's  
liberation simply wants to make marriage  
a more equitable relationship. We also  
see the need to do away with marriage.  
Doing that is a necessary step in free-  
ing women but it is only part of the  

overall relationship women as a class have  
to men as a class, and we want that whole  
relationship questioned. Marriage is an  

institutional relationship which rein-  
forces cultural roles. Such institutions  
must go, but the relationships of weak  
over strong, leader over follower, power-  
ful over powerless, are what we want to  
end. To attack only a symptom of such  
relationships is to avoid the hard ques-  
tions revolutionary feminists should be  
asking. If the essence of feminism can  

be gotten to by being against marriage,  
there are plenty of male feminists  

around. If that's all revolutionary  
feminists want to fight for as women, they  
have simply tacked on an extra point or  
two to a revolutionary scheme already  

long accepted.

The Red Women's Detachment and many  
other political groups apparently see a  
real danger in giving attention to how  
people relate to each other, in question-  
ing the heterosexual norm, in exploring  
the cultural image of women, an image we  
have been socialized into believing. At-  
tempting to work collectively and attack  
elitism and hierarchical structures, to  
question the family structure or to try  
to understand the role sex plays in our  
lives is viewed as liberal and reformist.  
Giving attention to any of this is often  
seen as a privileged indulgence when  
there is a revolution to be waged. Us-  
ually this criticism comes from leftist  
men who have lost their typists, but we  
should treat this criticism differently  
when it comes from other women.

Most of us active in Women's Liberation  
have questioned our priorities. We want  
the liberation of all people and have been  
afraid of the tendency we have to deal with  
all these issues by proposing personal so-  
lutions or fighting for reforms which could  
be granted under a capitalist society and  
would benefit an already privileged class  
of women. We are painfully aware that  
there is the tendency to forget that the  
questions we raise do not always speak to  
the immediate needs of the poor women  
struggling to exist, not having the free-  
dom or time to seek the solutions that  
many of us find available through class  
privileges. But we must insist that women  
in any class have special problems and wo-  
men in any revolution will have special  
problems, that sexism and racism will not  
simply disappear by defining women and  
blacks as workers.

There is a lot to be said on how we  
bring about a revolution to establish the  
society we want. There really is no  
choice to be made between waging an armed  
struggle based on the needs of the prole-  
tariat and fighting to destroy a culture  
dependent on sexism and racism. One is  
irrevocably tied to the other. We do not  

see the possibility of poor women waging a  

revolution unless they are somehow freed  
to do so. Just as they do not have the  
time to opt for middle class privileges,  
they do not have the freedom or time to  

Militant militia women of the People’s Republic of China.

train for self-defense or revolutionary  
leadership. This freedom is a preliminary  
step to the real battle unless of course  
we believe in the cliché of the inevitable  
proletarianization of women. (A point I  
would like to see the Red Women address  
themselves to--what does it mean, how does  
it relate to past Marxist theory in which  
the household work of women has never been  
related to the means of production? Do  
women become proletarian by magically pas-  
sing into the labor force?) In that case  
we don't have to do much of anything but  
train to fight when the inevitable mass  
revolt of proletarians occurs and be pre-  
pared to join them (or lead them).

We see revolution as not something that  
just happens, but as something we must be  
bringing about. Some things are probably  
necessary steps to waging a revolution,  
for example, day care free to women for  
releasing them from the sole responsibility  
for child raising. And we do not accept  
the bourgeois definition of human nature  

that would have us content and placid once  
granted those things we see as necessary  
for women before they can even begin to  
fight for the society they envision.

(Why is it so many of those revolutionary  
women who were fighting in the early labor  
battles turn out to be middle class "drop-  
outs" or women who were past the age of  
caring for their children?) Does dealing  
with these cultural issues incapacitate us  
for armed struggle? The Red Women's  
Detachment seems to think it does while  

we think it can aid us. Perhaps it does  
incapacitate if armed struggle is an end  
in itself or if women's needs can be met  
so easily. But if meeting the needs of  
the people is to mean anything it begins  
before armed struggle, it prepares you for  
it, it provides a meaning to your revolu-  
tion, it threatens the status quo and  
power relationships, and increases your  
understanding of the place in history in  
which your revolution will occur.

If we are committed to wage a revolu-  
tion to establish a society we see as de-  
cent, we must be concerned with what kind  
of society we want. If we see a revolu-  
tion that happens because people whose  
needs are not being met now make it hap-  
pen, we must constantly attempt to define  
that society--a society that a mass base  
of people will fight for. There is no  
question that much will have to be de-  
stroyed as a necessary step to creating  
that society, just as the Chinese found  
that much had to be destroyed in the cul-  
tural realm even after many years of a  
continuing revolution. But we do not see  
the possibility of creating a society out  
of only the knowledge of what we reject.  
We must begin to define what we want.

The problems we seek solutions to are  
real. The sexual revolution did not arise  
only as some imperialist plot to further  
the oppression of women. It arose in part  
because there was a need people felt for  
freedom from the repression we all suffer.  
It is not at all surprising that a male  
dominated society trying to bring about a  
sexual revolution would do so without  
considering the needs of women. For women  
the sexual revolution was a sham and  

therein lies the sadness--it was a sham--  
a failure which is not to say a real sex-  
ual revolution, a real coming to grips  
with our sexuality is not needed. We  
can't dismiss it as an imperialist plot,  
but should attempt to understand it along  
with our understanding of imperialism which  
is an outward manifestation of the control  
of the means of production by a class and  
not vice versa.

We will learn much about how to wage a  
revolution once we begin waging one. It  
is impossible to think a fixed theory on  
how to wage a revolution is available--all  
real revolutions that have occurred in this  
century have done so by breaking at impor-  
tant points with Marxist theory--Russia  
by making a revolution in an industrially  
backward country, China by making the pea-  
sant the base of the revolution and Cuba  
by making a revolution without a Marxist-  
Leninist party apparatus. We need to read  
Marx, Lenin, Mao, Guevara, Fanon, and all  
other revolutionary inspirations and aids,  
but we will never be in the position to  
recreate their revolutions. Only as we en-  
large our struggle will we begin to know the  
means necessary and the society we are  
struggling for.

Vol. 1, No. 4 Ain't